Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Environmental psychologist 2 Orientations Toggle Orientations subsection 2.1 Problem oriented 2.1.1 Personal space and territory 2.2 Systems oriented 2.3 Interdisciplinary oriented 2.4 Space-over-time orientation 3 Concepts Toggle Concepts subsection 3.1 Nature restoration 3.2 Place identity 3.3 Place attachment 3.4 Environmental consciousness 3.5 Behavior settings 4 Natural environment research findings 5 Applications Toggle Applications subsection 5.1 Impact on the built environment 5.2 Emerging of Technology 5.3 Organizations 6 Challenges 7 University courses 8 Academic and professional bodies 9 Academic journals 10 Other contributors 11 See also 12 References Toggle References subsection 12.1 Notes 12.2 Bibliography 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Environmental psychology 32 languages Afrikaans العربية Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kurdî Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Academic study of the mind's relationship to one's immediate surroundings Part of a series on Psychology Outline History Subfields Basic psychology Abnormal Affective neuroscience Affective science Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Behaviorism Cognitive / Cognitivism Cognitive neuroscience Social Comparative Cross-cultural Cultural Developmental Differential Ecological Evolutionary Experimental Gestalt Intelligence Mathematical Moral Neuropsychology Perception Personality Psycholinguistics Psychophysiology Quantitative Social Theoretical Applied psychology Anomalistic Applied behavior analysis Art Assessment Aviation Biography of famous people Clinical Coaching Color Community Consumer Counseling Critical Educational Ergonomics Fashion Feminist Food Forensic Health History Humanistic Industrial and organizational Legal Media Medical Military Music Occupational health Pastoral Peace and war Political Positive Photography Psychometrics Psychotherapy Religion School Sex differences Space Sport and exercise Suicidology Systems Trading Traffic Concepts Behavior Behavioral engineering Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Cognition Competence Consciousness Consumer behavior Emotions Feelings Human factors and ergonomics Intelligence Maslow's hierarchy of needs Mental state Mind Psychology of religion Psychometrics Sex differences Terror management theory Lists Counseling topics Disciplines Organizations Outline Psychologists Psychotherapies Research methods Schools of thought Timeline Topics Psychology portal v t e Environmental psychology is a branch of psychology that explores the relationship between humans and the external world.

[ 1 ] It examines the way in which the natural environment and our built environments shape us as individuals. Environmental psychology investigates how humans change the environment and how the environment influences humans' experiences and behaviors.

[ 2 ] The field defines the term environment broadly, encompassing natural environments , social settings , built environments , learning environments , and informational environments . According to an article on APA Psychnet, environmental psychology is when a person thinks to a plan, travels to a certain place, and follows through with the plan throughout their behavior.

[ 3 ] Environmental psychology was not fully recognized as its own field until the late 1960s when scientists began to question the tie between human behavior and our natural and built environments. Since its conception, the field has been committed to the development of a discipline that is both value oriented and problem oriented , prioritizing research aimed at solving complex environmental problems in the pursuit of individual well-being within a larger society .

[ 4 ] When solving problems involving human-environment interactions , whether global or local, one must have a model of human nature that predicts the environmental conditions under which humans will respond well. This model can help design, manage, protect and/or restore environments that enhance reasonable behavior, predict the likely outcomes when these conditions are not met, and diagnose problem within the environment. The field develops such a model of human nature while retaining a broad and inherently multidisciplinary focus. It explores such dissimilar issues as common property resource management , wayfinding in complex settings, the effect of environmental stress on human performance, the characteristics of restorative environments , human information processing , and the promotion of durable conservation behavior . Lately, alongside the increased focus on climate change in society and the social sciences and the re-emergence of limits-to-growth concerns, there has been an increased focus on environmental sustainability issues within the field.

[ 5 ] This multidisciplinary paradigm has not only characterized the dynamic for which environmental psychology is expected to develop, but it has also been the catalyst in attracting experts and scholars from other fields of study, aside from research psychologists. In environmental psychology, geographers , economists , landscape architects , policy-makers , sociologists , anthropologists , educators , and product developers all have discovered and participated in this field.

[ 4 ] Although "environmental psychology" is arguably the best-known and most comprehensive description of the field, it is also known as human factors science , cognitive ergonomics , ecological psychology , ecopsychology , environment–behavior studies, and person–environment studies. Closely related fields include architectural psychology , socio-architecture , behavioral geography , environmental sociology , social ecology , and environmental design research.

Population density and economic disparities shape mental health History [ edit ] The origins of the field can be traced to the Romantic poets, such as Wordsworth and Coleridge who drew attention to the power of nature intersect with the significance of human interaction.

Darwin pointed to the role of the environment in shaping evolution. This idea was quickly applied to human interactions with the surroundings. An extreme Victorian acceptance of this were 'environmental determinists' who insisted the physical environment and climate influenced the evolution of racial characteristics.

Willy Hellpach is said to be the first to mention "environmental psychology". One of his books, Geopsyche , discusses topics such as how the sun and the moon affect human activity, the impact of extreme environments, and the effects of color and form (Pol, E., 2006, Blueprints for a history of environmental psychology (I): From first birth to American transition . "Medio Ambiente y Comportamiento Humano", 7(2), 95-113). Among the other major scholars at the roots of environmental psychology were Jakob von Uexküll , Kurt Lewin , Egon Brunswik , and later Gerhard Kaminski and Carl Friedrich Graumann .

[ 6 ] The end of World War II brought about a demand for guidance on the urgent building programme after the destruction of war. To provide government planning requirements many countries set up research centered around the studies on how people used space. In the U.K. the Building Research Centre studied space use in houses leading to further study around noise levels, heating, and lighting requirements in a living space. Pilkingtons, a glassmaker company, set up a daylight research unit, led by Thomas Markus to provide information on the influence of natural lighting in buildings and guidelines on daylight requirements. In the 1960s, Peter Manning further developed the study at the Pilkington Research Unit at the University of Liverpool. He studied offices and employed Brian Wells, one of the first people to obtain a Ph.D in environmental psychology. Markus set up the Building Performance Research Unit at the University of Strathclyde in 1968, employing the psychologist David Canter, whom Wells and Manning had supervised for his Ph.D with the Pilkington Research Unit. Canter then went to the University of Surrey to set up an Environmental Psychology program in 1971 with the Department of Psychology. The head of the department was Terence Lee, who had conducted his PhD on the concept of the neighborhood under the supervision of Sir Frederick Bartlett at the University of Cambridge.

In parallel with these developments, people in the US had begun to consider the issues in environmental design . One of the first areas was the consideration of psychiatric hospitals. Psychiatrists worked with architects to take account of the experience of patients who experience mentally ill and discomfort. Robert Sommer wrote his book on 'Personal Space,' and Edward T Hall, an anthropologist, commented on how people relate to each other spatially. Amos Rapoport caused considerable interest amongst architects with his book 'House Form and Culture', showing that the form of buildings was not solely functional but had with all sorts of cultural influences. The idea was contributed to the emergence of ' post-modernism ' architecture , which took the symbolic qualities of architecture very seriously. These early developments in the 1960s and 1970s were often seen as part of 'architectural psychology'.

When Harold Proshansky and William Ittelson set up the Environmental Psychology program at the City University of New York Graduate Center , the term Environmental Psychology replaces Architectural Psychology, the study of the ways in which people made sense of and interacted with their surroundings. When Canter established The Journal of Environmental Psychology in 1980 with Kenneth Craik a personality psychologist at the University of California at Berkeley, it became institutionalized to use the term environmental psychology. President Nixon's campaign to deal with depredations of the environment gave impetus to a change of direction in the field from aspects of buildings and making sense of cities to the broader issues of climate change and the impact of people in the global environment.

Environmental psychologist [ edit ] Environmental psychologists are the ones who study the relationship between human behavior and the environment that surrounds them. These psychologist study any type of environment, even the ones who are "built" such as peoples homes. They study how we as humans behave and interact in the world. As of May 2020, the annual salary of an environmental psychologist is $82,180. The two sub-disciplines are conservation psychology and ecopsychology . Conservation Psychology is the study of the development of attitudes in the environment. Ecopsychology is close to the same as conservation psychology, but it focuses on the ties of environmental and societal degradation.

Orientations [ edit ] [ clarification needed ] Problem oriented [ edit ] Environmental psychology is a direct study of the relationship between an environment and how that environment affects its inhabitants. Specific aspects of this field work by identifying a problem and through the identification of the said problem, discovering a solution. Therefore, it is necessary for environmental psychology to be problem-oriented.

One important aspect of a problem-oriented field is that by identifying problems, solutions arise from the research acquired. The solutions can aid in making society function better as a whole and create a wealth of knowledge about the inner workings of societies. Environmental psychologist Harold Proshansky discusses how the field is also "value-oriented" because of the field's commitment to bettering society through problem identification.

[ 7 ] Panyang discusses the importance of not only understanding the problem but also the necessity of a solution.

Proshansky also points out some of the problems of a problem-oriented approach for environmental psychology. First, the problems being identified must be studied under certain specifications: they must be ongoing and occurring in real life, not in a laboratory. Second, the notions about the problems must derive directly from the source – meaning they must come directly from the specific environment where the problem is occurring.

[ 7 ] The solutions and understanding of the problems cannot come from an environment that has been constructed and modeled to look like real life. Environmental psychology needs to reflect the actual society, not a society built in a laboratory setting. The difficult task of the environmental psychologist is to study problems as they are occurring in everyday life.

[ 8 ] It is hard to reject all laboratory research because laboratory experiments are where theories may be tested without damaging the actual environment or can serve as models when testing solutions. Proshansky makes this point as well, discussing the difficulty in the overall problem oriented approach. He states that it is important, however, for the environmental psychologist to utilize all aspects of research and analysis of the findings and to take into account both the general and individualized aspects of the problems.

[ 9 ] Environmental psychology addresses environmental problems such as density and crowding, noise pollution , sub-standard living , and urban decay .

[ 7 ] Noise increases environmental stress. Although it has been found that control and predictability are the greatest factors in stressful effects of noise; context, pitch, source and habituation are also important variables [3]. Environmental psychologists have theorized that density and crowding can also have an adverse effect on mood and may cause stress-related illness or behavior.

[ 10 ] To understand and solve environmental problems, environmental psychologists believe concepts and principles should come directly from the physical settings and problems being looked at.

[ 7 ] For example, factors that reduce feelings of crowding within buildings include: Windows – particularly ones that can be opened and ones that provide a view as well as light High ceilings Doors to divide spaces (Baum and Davies) [ full citation needed ] and provide access control Room shape – square rooms feel less crowded than rectangular ones (Dresor) [ full citation needed ] Using partitions to create smaller, personalized spaces within an open plan office or larger work space.

Providing increases in cognitive control over aspects of the internal environment, such as ventilation, light, privacy, etc.

Conducting a cognitive appraisal of an environment and feelings of crowding in different settings. For example, one might be comfortable with crowding at a concert but not in school corridors.

Creating a defensible space (Calhoun) [ full citation needed ] Personal space and territory [ edit ] Proxemics is known as the study of human space. It also studies the effects that population has on human behavior, communication, and social interaction. Having an area of personal territory in a public space, e.g., at the office, is a key feature of many architectural designs. Having such a 'defensible space' can reduce the negative effects of crowding in urban environments. The term, coined by John B. Calhoun in 1947, is the result of multiple environmental experiments conducted on rats. Originally beginning as an experiment to measure how many rats could be accommodated in a given space, it expanded into determining how rats, given the proper food, shelter and bedding would behave under a confined environment .

Under these circumstances, the males became aggressive, some exclusively homosexual. Others became pansexual and hypersexual, seeking every chance to mount any rat they encountered. As a result, mating behaviors were upset with an increase in infant mortalities. With parents failing to provide proper nests, thoughtlessly ditching their young and even attacking them, infant mortality rose as high as 96% in certain sections. Calhoun published the results as "Population Density and Social Pathology" in a 1962 edition of Scientific American .

[ 11 ] "Get out of my personal space" Creating barriers and customizing the space are ways of creating personal space, e.g., using pictures of one's family in an office setting. This increases cognitive control as one sees oneself as having control over the competitors to the personal space and therefore able to control the level of density and crowding in the space. Personal space can be both good and bad. It is good when it is used as stated above. Creating "personal space" in an office or work setting can make one feel more comfortable about being at work. Personal space can be bad when someone is in your personal space. In the image to the right, one person is mad at the other person because she is invading her personal space by laying on her.

Systems oriented [ edit ] The systems-oriented approach to experimenting is applied to individuals or people that are a part of communities, groups, and organizations. These communities, groups, and organizations are systems in homeostasis . Homeostasis is known as the "state of steady conditions within a system." [ 12 ] This approach particularly examines group interaction, as opposed to an individual's interaction and it emphasizes on factors of social integration. In the laboratory, experiments focus on cause and effect processes within human nature.

[ 13 ] Interdisciplinary oriented [ edit ] Environmental psychology relies on interaction with other disciplines in order to approach problems from multiple perspectives. The first discipline is the category of behavioral sciences , which include: sociology , political science , anthropology , and economics . Environmental psychology also interacts with the other interdisciplinary specialization field of psychology, which include: developmental psychology , cognitive science , industrial and organizational psychology , psychobiology, psychoanalysis , [ 14 ] and social neuroscience . This multidisciplinary approach allows for a more comprehensive understanding of human-environment interactions. For instance, sociology provides insights into how social structures and cultural norms influence environmental behaviors, while economics helps analyze the financial incentives and barriers to sustainable practices.

[ 15 ] Cognitive science contributes to our understanding of how people perceive and process environmental information, which is crucial for developing effective environmental communication strategies.

In addition to the more scientific fields of study, environmental psychology closely connect with the build environment. For instance, the green building designs promoting well-being and urban planning initiatives encouraging social interaction.

[ 16 ] Environmental psychology works with the design field which includes: the studies of architecture, interior design, urban planning, industrial and object design, landscape architecture, and preservation.

[ 17 ] This collaboration between environmental psychology and design fields has led to innovative approaches in creating spaces that enhance human well-being and environmental sustainability. For example, research in environmental psychology has informed the design of restorative environments in healthcare settings, improving patient outcomes.

[ 18 ] Additionally, insights from the field have contributed to the development of urban spaces that encourage pro-environmental behaviors, such as recycling and energy conservation.

Space-over-time orientation [ edit ] Space over time orientation highlights the importance of the past. Examining problems with the past in mind creates a better understanding of how past forces, such as social, political, and economic forces, may be of relevance to present and future problems.

[ 19 ] Time and place are also important to consider. It is important to look at time over extended periods. Physical settings change over time; they change with respect to physical properties and they change because individuals using the space change over time.

[ 20 ] Looking at these spaces over time will help monitor the changes and possibly predict future problems.

Concepts [ edit ] Nature restoration [ edit ] Environmental health shows the effects people have on the environment as well as the effects the environment has on people.

[ 21 ] From early studies showing that patients with a view of nature from their hospital recovered faster than patients with a window view of a brick wall, [ 22 ] how, why, and to which extent nature has mental and physical restorative properties has been a central branch of the field. Although the positive effects of nature have been established, the theoretical underpinning of why it is restorative is still discussed. The most cited theory is the Attention Restoration Theory , which claims nature is a “soft fascination” which restores the ability to direct attention. It is said that being in nature can reduce stress. Studies show that it can reduce anger, improve mood, and even lower one's blood pressure.

[ 23 ] Secondly, Stress reduction theory [ 24 ] claims that because humans have evolved in nature, this type of environment is relaxing, and more adjusted to the senses. Newer theoretical work includes the Conditioned Restoration Theory, [ 25 ] which suggests a two-step process. The first step involves associating nature with relaxation, and the second step involves retrieving the same relaxation when presented with an associated stimulus.

Place identity [ edit ] Main article: Place identity For many years Harold Proshansky and his colleagues at the Graduate School and University Center of the City University of New York, explored the concept of place identity. Place identity has been traditionally defined as a 'sub-structure of the self-identity of the person consisting of broadly conceived cognitions about the physical world in which the individual lives'.

[ 26 ] These cognitions define the daily experiences of every human being. Through one's attitudes, feelings, ideas, memories, personal values and preferences toward the range and type of physical settings, they can then understand the environment they live in and their overall experience.

As a person interacts with various places and spaces, they are able to evaluate which properties in different environments fulfill his/her various needs. When a place contains components that satisfy a person biologically, socially, psychologically and/or culturally, it creates the environmental past of a person. Through 'good' or 'bad' experiences with a place, a person is then able to reflect and define their personal values, attitudes, feelings and beliefs about the physical world.

Place identity has been described as the individual's incorporation of place into the larger concept of self; a "potpourri of memories, conceptions, interpretations, ideas, and related feelings about specific physical settings, as well as types of settings".

[ 27 ] Other theorists have been instrumental in the creation of the idea of place identity. Three humanistic geographers, Tuan (1980), Relph (1976) and Buttimer (1980), [ full citation needed ] share a couple of basic assumptions. As a person lives and creates memories within a place, attachment is built and it is through one's personal connection to a place, that they gain a sense of belonging and purpose, which then gives significance and meaning to their life.

Five central functions of place-identity have been depicted: recognition, meaning, expressive-requirement, mediating change, and anxiety and defense function. Place identity becomes a cognitive "database" against which every physical setting is experienced.

[ 27 ] The activities of a person often overlap with physical settings, which then create a background for the rest of life's interactions and events. The individual is frequently unaware of the array of feelings, values or memories of a singular place and simply becomes more comfortable or uncomfortable with certain broad kinds of physical settings, or prefers specific spaces to others. In the time since the term "place identity" was introduced, the theory has been the model for identity that has dominated environmental psychology.

Place attachment [ edit ] Main article: Place attachment According to the book, "Place Attachment", place attachment is a "complex phenomenon that incorporates people-place bonding" [ 28 ] Many different perceptions of the bond between people and places have been hypothesized and studied. The most widespread terms include place attachment [ 29 ] and sense of place .

[ 30 ] One consistent thread woven throughout most recent research on place attachment deals with the importance of the amount of time spent at a certain place (the length of association with a place). While both researchers and writers [ 31 ] have made the case that time and experience in a place are important for deepening the meanings and emotional ties central to the person-place relationship, little in-depth research has studied these factors and their role in forging this connection.

[ 32 ] Place attachment is defined as one's emotional or affective ties to a place, and is generally thought to be the result of a long-term connection with a certain environment.

[ 33 ] This is different from a simple aesthetic response such as saying a certain place is special because it is beautiful. For example, one can have an emotional response to a beautiful (or ugly) landscape or place, but this response may sometimes be shallow and fleeting. This distinction is one that Schroeder labeled "meaning versus preference". According to Schroeder the definition of "meaning" is "the thoughts, feelings, memories and interpretations evoked by a landscape"; whereas "preference" is "the degree of liking for one landscape compared to another".

[ 34 ] For a deeper and lasting emotional attachment to develop (Or in Schroeder's terms, for it to have meaning) an enduring relationship with a place is usually a critical factor.

[ 35 ] Chigbu carried out a rural study of place-attachment using a qualitative approach to check its impact on a community, Uturu (in Nigeria), and found that it has a direct relationship to the level of community development.

[ 36 ] Environmental consciousness [ edit ] Leanne Rivlin theorized that one way to examine an individual's environmental consciousness is to recognize how the physical place is significant, and look at the people/place relationship.

Environmental cognition (involved in human cognition) plays a crucial role in environmental perception.
All different areas of the brain engage with environmentally relevant information. Some believe that the orbitofrontal cortex integrates environmentally relevant information from many distributed areas of the brain. Due to its anterior location within the frontal cortex, the orbitofrontal cortex may make judgments about the environment, and refine the organism's "understanding" through error analysis, and other processes specific to the prefrontal cortex. But to be certain, there is no single brain area dedicated to the organism's interactions with its environment. Rather, all brain areas are dedicated to this task. One area (probably the orbitofrontal cortex) may collate the various pieces of the informational puzzle in order to develop a long term strategy of engagement with the ever-changing "environment". Moreover, the orbitofrontal cortex may show the greatest change in blood oxygenation (BOLD level) when an organism thinks of the broad, and amorphous category referred to as "the environment".

[ 37 ] Research in this area is showing an increase in climate change related emotional experiences that are seen to be inherently adaptive. Engagement with these emotional experiences leads to a greater sense of connection with others and increased capacity to tolerate and reflect on emotions.

[ 38 ] Because of the recent concern with the environment, environmental consciousness or awareness has come to be related to the growth and development of understanding and consciousness toward the biophysical environment and its problems.

[ citation needed ] Behavior settings [ edit ] The earliest noteworthy discoveries in the field of environmental psychology can be dated back to Roger Barker who created the field of ecological psychology. Founding his research station in Oskaloosa, Kansas in 1947, his field observations expanded into the theory that social settings influence behavior. Empirical data gathered in Oskaloosa from 1947 to 1972 helped him develop the concept of the "behavior setting" to help explain the relationship between the individual and the immediate environment. This was further explored in his work with Paul Gump in the book Big School, Small School: High School Size and Student Behavior .

[ citation needed ] One of the first insightful explanations on why groups tend to be less satisfying for their members as they increase in size, their studies illustrated that large schools had a similar number of behavior settings to that of small schools. This resulted in the students' ability to presume many different roles in small schools (e.g. be in the school band and the school football team) but in larger schools, there was a propensity to deliberate over their social choices.

In his book Ecological Psychology (1968), Barker stresses the importance of the town's behavior and environment as the residents' most ordinary instrument of describing their environment. "The hybrid, eco-behavioral character of behavior settings appear to present Midwest's inhabitants with no difficulty; nouns that combine milieu and standing behavior are common, e.g. oyster supper, basketball game, turkey dinner, golden gavel ceremony, cake walk, back surgery, gift exchange, livestock auction, auto repair." [ 39 ] Barker argued that his students should implement T-methods (psychologist as 'transducer': i.e. methods in which they studied the man in his 'natural environment') rather than O-methods (psychologist as "operators" i.e. experimental methods). Basically, Barker preferred fieldwork and direct observation rather than controlled experiments. Some of the minute-by-minute observations of Kansan children from morning to night, jotted down by young and maternal graduate students, may be the most intimate and poignant documents in social science. Barker spent his career expanding on what he called ecological psychology, identifying these behavior settings, and publishing accounts such as One Boy's Day (1952) and Midwest and Its Children (1955).

[ full citation needed ] Natural environment research findings [ edit ] Environmental psychology research has observed various concepts relating to humans' innate connection to natural environments which begins in early childhood.

[ 40 ] One study shows that fostering children's connectedness to nature will, in turn, create habitual pro-ecological behaviors in time. Exposure to natural environment may lead to a positive psychological well-being and form positive attitudes and behavior towards nature.

[ 41 ] Connectedness to nature has shown to be a huge contributor to predicting people's general pro-ecological and pro-social behaviors. Connectedness to nature has also been shown to benefit well-being, happiness, and general satisfaction. "Nature-deficit disorder" has recently been coined to explain the lack of connectedness to nature due to a lack of consciousness identification and nature disconnect.

[ 42 ] Further research is required to make definitive claims about the effects of connectedness to nature.

These positive mental health effects of environmental exposure and connection continue through adulthood and can be applied to work and other settings.

[ 43 ] One study found that nurses who weren't exposed to any natural elements throughout their work day would obtain a significantly lower score on scales measuring mental health, job satisfaction, and overall well-being.

[ 43 ] Additionally, the nurses who were not exposed to any natural elements were more likely to show signs of depression and anxiety than those who were exposed to natural elements throughout their work day.

[ 43 ] Applications [ edit ] Impact on the built environment [ edit ] Environmental psychologists rejected the laboratory-experimental paradigm because of its simplification and skewed view of the cause-and-effect relationships of human behaviors and experiences. Environmental psychologists examine how one or more parameters produce an effect while other measures are controlled. It is impossible to manipulate real-world settings in a laboratory.

[ 4 ] Environmental psychology is oriented towards influencing the work of design professionals (architects, engineers, interior designers, urban planners, etc.) and thereby improving the human environment.

On a civic scale, efforts toward improving pedestrian landscapes have paid off, to some extent, from the involvement of figures like Jane Jacobs and Copenhagen 's Jan Gehl . One prime figure here is the late writer and researcher William H. Whyte . His still-refreshing and perceptive "City", based on his accumulated observations of skilled Manhattan pedestrians, provides steps and patterns of use in urban plazas.

The role and impact of architecture on human behavior is debated within the architectural profession. Views range from: supposing that people will adapt to new architectures and city forms; believing that architects cannot predict the impact of buildings on humans and therefore should base decisions on other factors; to those who undertake detailed precedent studies of local building types and how they are used by that society.

Environmental psychology has conquered the whole architectural genre which is concerned with retail stores and any other commercial venues that have the power to manipulate the mood and behavior of customers (e.g. stadiums, casinos, malls, and now airports). From Philip Kotler 's landmark paper on Atmospherics and Alan Hirsch 's "Effects of Ambient Odors on Slot-Machine Usage in a Las Vegas Casino", through the creation and management of the Gruen transfer , retail relies heavily on psychology, original research, focus groups, and direct observation. One of William Whyte's students, Paco Underhill , makes a living as a "shopping anthropologist". Most of this advanced research remains a trade secret and proprietary.

Environmental psychology is consulted thoroughly when discussing future city design. Eco-cities and eco-towns have been studied to determine the societal benefits of creating more sustainable and ecological designs . Eco-cities allow for humans to live in synch with nature and develop sustainable living techniques. The development of eco-cities requires knowledge in the interactions between "environmental, economic, political, and socio-cultural factors based on ecological principles".

[ 44 ] By increasing the focus on applying environmental psychology principles to urban planning and policy-making, we can create more livable and sustainable communities.

Emerging of Technology [ edit ] As new technologies emerge, environmental psychologists research how these technologies are changing human-environment relationships. Smart home and city technologies are reshaping the human-environment relationship by creating more responsive and interactive living spaces. In many urban cities, technology was leveraged to promote sustainable behaviors, such as energy conservation and waste recycling, influencing individual daily habits. The urban design allow a living environment to be more adaptive and responsive to human behavior patterns. Smart home and city technologies open up opportunities for nudging sustainable behaviors but introduce corresponding privacy concerns.

[ 45 ] Environmental psychologists engage in research on the potential benefits, but also the risks, that these technologies have to promote well-being and environmental sustainability. As these technologies continue to evolve, they are doing far more than merely changing the environments we inhabit, they are also changing the ways in which we study and understand human-environment interactions.

Organizations [ edit ] Project for Public Spaces (PPS) is a nonprofit organization that works to improve public spaces, particularly parks, civic centers, public markets, downtowns, and campuses. The staff of PPS is made up of individuals trained in environmental design, architecture, urban planning, urban geography, urban design , environmental psychology, landscape architecture, arts administration and information management. The organization has collaborated with many major institutions to improve the appearance and functionality of public spaces throughout the United States. In 2005, PPS co-founded The New York City Streets Renaissance, a campaign that worked to develop a new campaign model for transportation reform. This initiative implemented the transformation of excess sidewalk space in the Meatpacking District of Manhattan into public space. Also, by 2008, New York City reclaimed 49 acres (200,000 m 2 ) of traffic lanes and parking spots away from cars and gave it back to the public as bike lanes and public plazas.

[ citation needed ] The Center for Human Environments at the CUNY Graduate Center is a research organization that examines the relationship between people and their physical settings. CHE has five subgroups that specialize in aiding specific populations: The Children's Environments Research Group, the Health and Society Research Group, the Housing Environments Research Group, the Public Space Research Group, and the Youth Studies Research Group.

[ 46 ] The most relevant scientific groups are the International Association of People-Environment Studies (IAPS) and the Environmental Design Research Association (EDRA).

Urban Ecology , The Urban Ecologist, and the International Eco-City Conference were some of the first collectives to establish the idea of eco-cities and townships.

[ 44 ] Challenges [ edit ] The field saw significant research findings and a fair surge of interest in the late 1970s and early 1980s, but has seen challenges of nomenclature, obtaining objective and repeatable results, scope, and the fact that some research rests on underlying assumptions about human perception, which is not fully understood. Being an interdisciplinary field is difficult because it lacks a solid definition and purpose. It is hard for the field to fit into organizational structures.

[ 47 ] In the words of Guido Francescato, speaking in 2000, environmental psychology encompasses a "somewhat bewildering array of disparate methodologies, conceptual orientations, and interpretations... making it difficult to delineate, with any degree of precision, just what the field is all about and what might it contribute to the construction of society and the unfolding of history." As environmental issues become increasingly urgent, environmental psychology is likely to play a more prominent role in addressing global challenges. A grand challenge in the field of environmental psychology today is to understand the impact of human behavior on the climate and climate change. Understanding why some people engage in pro-environment behaviors can help predict the necessary requirements to engage others in making sustainable change.

[ 48 ] Environmental psychology has not received nearly enough supporters to be considered an interdisciplinary field within psychology. Harold M. Proshansky was one of the founders of environmental psychology and was quoted as saying "As I look at the field of environmental psychology today, I am concerned about its future. It has not, since its emergence in the early 1960s grown to the point where it can match the fields of social, personality, learning or cognitive psychology. To be sure, it has increased in membership, in the number of journals devoted to it, and even in the amount of professional organizational support it enjoys, but not enough so that one could look at any major university and find it to be a field of specialization in a department of psychology, or, more importantly, in an interdisciplinary center or institute".

[ 49 ] University courses [ edit ] University of Groningen offers a graduate program in environmental psychology focusing on the interactions between people and their environment. The program is taught by the world-leading Environmental Psychology group at the University of Groningen.

[ 50 ] University of Victoria offers general and advanced undergraduate courses in environmental psychology, and graduate courses in Psychology and Nature, as well as Environmental Psychology of the Built Environment. The psychology graduate department also offers individualized master's and PhD programs in Environmental Psychology under the supervision of Dr.

Robert Gifford .

[ 51 ] Antioch University New England Graduate School offers graduate programs involving environmental education through a planning approach. With environmental psychology being such a diverse field with many different approaches, students have a variety of programs to choose from.

Arizona State University offers a master's in Environmental Resources, which takes more of a planning approach to the field.

The Environmental Psychology Ph.D program at the CUNY Graduate Center takes a multidisciplinary approach to examining and changing "the serious problems associated with the urban environment with a view towards affecting public policy" using social science theory and research methods. The GC-CUNY was the first academic institution in the U.S. to grant a Ph.D. in Environmental Psychology. As discussed in detail on the program website, "recent research has addressed the experiences of recently housed homeless people, the privatization of public space, socio-spatial conflicts, children's safety in the public environment, relocation, community based approaches to housing, the design of specialized environments such as museums, zoos, gardens and hospitals, the changing relationships between home, family and work, the environmental experiences of gay men and lesbians, and access to parks and other urban 'green spaces'." [ 52 ] See also The Center for Human Environments.

Cornell University 's department of Design and Environmental Analysis offers undergraduate and graduate (Master of Science in Human Environment Relations, Master of Arts in Design, and Ph.D in Human Behavior and Design) studies in environmental psychology, interior design, sustainable design studies, human factors and ergonomics, and facility planning and management.

[ 53 ] Drexel University offers a Master of Science degree in Design Research. Of two degree paths, the Environmental Design and Health path includes study with community practitioners and researchers in design and related fields, including health, community design, and public policy. Research typically includes data collection and engaged research practices of design thinking and participatory design. This area of investigation has the potential to create innovative health and educational partnerships, economic opportunities and neighborhood initiatives and relates to the strategic mission of the university to be highly engaged in civic sustainability.

[ 54 ] Inland Norway University of Applied Sciences offers a Masters in Environmental psychology. The focus is on how people are affected by both physical and virtual environments, as well as how people affect nature. The program offers courses on environmental behaviour, environment and neuroscience, human factors, virtual environments and cognitive design, change management and greening organizations and architecture and aesthetics.

The Ohio State University City & Regional Planning Program, in the School of Architecture, offers a specialization in environmental psychology (urban design/physical planning and behavior) at both the master's and PhD level. Dissertations have examined such topics as environmental aesthetics, spatial cognition, ethnic enclaves, neighborhood decline, neighborhood satisfaction, restorative and livable places, and behavior change.

Prescott College offers a master's program that incorporates a number of the foundations of environmental psychology as well. The sub-fields in which the program provides includes environmental education, environmental studies, ecology, botany, resource policy, and planning.

University of California, Irvine offers a doctoral specialization in Design & Behavior Research within the Department of Planning, Policy, and Design in the School of Social Ecology , and undergraduate coursework in Environmental Psychology offered jointly by the Departments of Psychology and Social Behavior, Planning, Policy, and Design, and the Program in Public Health.

[ 55 ] The University of Michigan offers Master of Science and Master of Arts degrees in its new School for Sustainability and Environment (SEAS) . The focus is on how people affect and are affected by environments, and includes a pragmatic approach to promoting environmental stewardship behavior, as well as a focus on how "nearby nature" affects people's mental vitality, physical health and well-being. An emerging theme is helping people to remain optimistic while learning to respond well to increasingly difficult biophysical circumstances.

Another strain of environmental psychology developed out of ergonomics in the 1960s. The beginning of this movement can be traced back to David Canter 's work and the founding of the "Performance Research Unit" at the University of Strathclyde in Glasgow, Scotland, in 1966, which expanded traditional ergonomics to study broader issues relating to the environment and the extent to which human beings were "situated" within it (cf situated cognition). Canter led the field in the UK for years and was the editor of the Journal of Environmental Psychology for over 20 years, but has recently turned his attention to criminology.

The University of Surrey was the first institution that offered an architectural psychology course in the UK starting in 1973. Since then, there have been over 250 graduates from over 25 countries. The Environmental Psychology Research Group (EPRG) within the University of Surrey, of which students on the M.Sc in Environmental Psychology are automatically members, has been undertaking research for more than thirty years. EPRG's mission is to gain a better understanding of the environmental and psychological effects of space, no matter the size, with help from social sciences, psychology, and methodologies. There are four categories under which the research projects fall: sustainable development, environmental risk, architectural assessment and environmental design, and environmental education and interpretation. Other universities in the UK now offer courses on the subject, which is an expanding field.

See the APA 's list of additional environmental psychology graduate programs here: http://www.apadivisions.org/division-34/about/resources/graduate-programs.aspx Academic and professional bodies [ edit ] The main academic and professional organizations for the discipline of Environmental Psychology are Division 34: Society for Environmental, Population, & Conservation Psychology of the American Psychological Association (APA), the International Association of People-Environment Studies (IAPS) , Division 4: Environmental Psychology of the International Association of Applied Psychology (IAAP), the Environmental Psychology Section of the German Psychological Society (DGPs), and the Environmental Psychology Section of the British Psychological Society.

Academic journals [ edit ] There are several peer-reviewed psychological journals that publish academic work on environmental psychology: Journal of Environmental Psychology , Environment and Behavior , Umweltpsychologie , Global Environmental Psychology , Current Research in Ecological and Social Psychology , Frontiers in Psychology: Section for Environmental Psychology.

Academic work also appears in interdisciplinary journals that have a broad thematic focus: Global Environmental Change , Journal of Environmental Communication , Energy Research & Social Science , Nature Climate Change , Nature Human Behaviour , or PLOS One .

Journals in the related field of Ecopsychology may also publish environmental psychological research. These journals include Ecological Psychology (journal) , PsyEcology , Journal of Ecopsychology , and European Journal of Ecopsychology .

Other contributors [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( July 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Other notable researchers and writers in this field include: Linda Steg , Professor of Environmental Psychology. Lead author of the IPCC special report in 2017 and awarded the Stevin Prize in 2020.

[ 56 ] David Canter , Emeritus Professor at The University of Liverpool. Developed the Environmental Psychology Program at the University of Surrey in 1971 and established, with Kenneth Craik The Journal of Environmental Psychology in 1980. Best known for his "Psychology of Place" theory and his development of building evaluations as part of the Building Performance Research Unit at The University of Strathclyde.

Irwin Altman , Distinguished Professor Emeritus, University of Utah Robert Gifford , Ph.D. Department of Psychology University of Victoria. Current Editor of the Journal of Environmental Psychology and author of Environmental Psychology: Principles and Practice (5th edition, 2014).

James J. Gibson , Best known for coining the word affordance , a description of what the environment offers the animal in terms of action Roger Hart Professor of Environmental Psychology, Director of the Center for Human Environments and the Children's Environments Research Group, The Graduate Center, City University of New York Rachel and Stephen Kaplan , Professors of psychology at the University of Michigan, the Kaplans are known for their research on the effect of nature on people's relationships and health , including Attention Restoration Theory and are renowned in the field of environmental psychology Cindi Katz , Professor of Environmental Psychology, The Graduate Center, City University of New York Setha Low , Professor of Environmental Psychology and Director of the Public Space Research Group, The Graduate Center, City University of New York Kevin A. Lynch and his research into the formation of mental maps Francis T. McAndrew , Cornelia H. Dudley Professor of Psychology at Knox College and author of "Environmental Psychology" (1993).

Bill Mollison , developed the Environmental Psychology Unit at the University of Tasmania , and also Permaculture with David Holmgren Amos Rapoport , Distinguished Professor Emeritus Department of Architecture Leanne Rivlin , Professor of Environmental Psychology, The Graduate Center, City University of New York Susan Saegert , Director of the Environmental Psychology PhD Program and of the Housing Environments Research Group at the City University of New York Perla Serfaty , Moroccan-born French and Canadian academic, sociologist, psychosociologist, writer; 2018 inductee into the International Association of People-Environment Studies Hall of Fame Robert Sommer , a pioneer of the field who first studied personal space in the 1950s and is perhaps best known for his 1969 book Personal Space: The Behavioral Basis of Design , but is also the author of numerous other books, including Design Awareness , and hundreds of articles.

Daniel Stokols , Chancellor's Professor, School of Social Ecology, University of California, Irvine; edited Handbook of Environmental Psychology with Irwin Altman; author, Perspectives on Environment and Behavior ; co-author, Health, Behavior, and Environmental Stress with Sheldon Cohen, Gary Evans, and David Krantz Allan Wicker , who expanded behavior setting theories to include other areas of study, including qualitative research, and social psychology.

Gary Winkel , Professor of Environmental Psychology, The Graduate Center, City University of New York James A. Swan , professor, media producer and writer who authored one of the first popular articles on environmental education, produced symposiums on the Gaia Hypothesis and the significance of place, produced several documentary films on environmental topics and Co-Executive Producer of the Wild Justice TV series on the National Geographic Channel.

David Uzzell , first Professor of Environmental Psychology in UK, University of Surrey.  Research on public understandings of climate crisis, behaviour change and environmental practices, environmental labour studies, environmental risk, heritage interpretation.

See also [ edit ] Environment portal Psychology portal Aesthetics Architectural psychology in Germany Biophilia hypothesis Children, Youth and Environments (journal) Climatotherapy Cognitive geography Conservation psychology Crime prevention through environmental design Deep ecology Eco-anxiety Ecological empathy Environmental dependence syndrome Evolutionary psychology Feng shui Healing environments Healthy building Hostile architecture Interior design psychology Journal of Environmental Psychology Mental environment Nidotherapy Situational strength Social psychology References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ "Environment | Psychology Today" .

www.psychologytoday.com . Retrieved 2022-06-02 .

^ "What is environmental psychology? | APS" .

www.psychology.org.au . Retrieved 2021-07-30 .

^ Russell, J A; Ward, L M (January 1982).

"Environmental Psychology" .

Annual Review of Psychology .

33 (1): 651– 689.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.ps.33.020182.003251 .

ISSN 0066-4308 .

^ a b c Proshansky 1987 ^ DeYoung 2013 ^ Allesch 2003 ^ a b c d Proshansky 1987, p.1477 ^ Proshansky 1987, p.1478 ^ Proshansky 1987, p.1479 ^ Bafarasat, Abbas Ziafati (2017).

"Invisible Travels in the Compact City: Is Density the Way Forward?" .

Journal of Urban Planning and Development .

143 (3).

doi : 10.1061/(ASCE)UP.1943-5444.0000390 .

^ Calhoun, John B. (February 1, 1962).

"Population density and social pathology" .

Scientific American . Vol. 206, no. 2. pp.

139– 148 . Retrieved June 28, 2016 .

^ "Introduction to Systems Theory" .

CORP-MSW1 (OMSWP) . Retrieved 2022-06-16 .

^ Proshansky 1987, p.1481 ^ Hendrix, John Shannon (April 12, 2013). "Architecture and dream construction".

Center .

17 (Space & Psyche). Center for American Architecture & Design.

ISBN 978-0-934951-17-3 .

^ Longo, Stefano B.; Isgren, Ellinor; Clark, Brett; Jorgenson, Andrew K.; Jerneck, Anne; Olsson, Lennart; Kelly, Orla M.; Harnesk, David; York, Richard (October 27, 2021).

"Sociology for sustainability science" .

Discover Sustainability .

2 (1) 47.

doi : 10.1007/s43621-021-00056-5 .

ISSN 2662-9984 .

^ Zitars, Jillian; Spadafore, Brittany; Coulombe, Simon; Riemer, Manuel; Dreyer, Bianca C.; Whitney, Stephanie (November 2021).

"Understanding the psycho-environmental potential functions of a green building to promote employee health, wellbeing and productivity: A theoretical perspective" .

Building and Environment .

205 108268.

Bibcode : 2021BuEnv.20508268Z .

doi : 10.1016/j.buildenv.2021.108268 .

^ Proshansky 1987, p.1482 ^ von Lindern, Eike; Lymeus, Freddie; Hartig, Terry (2022). "The Restorative Environment and Salutogenesis: Complementary Concepts Revisited". In Mittelmark, Maurice B.; Bauer, Georg F.; Vaandrager, Lenneke; Pelikan, Jürgen M. (eds.).

The Handbook of Salutogenesis . Cham: Springer International Publishing. pp.

371– 385.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-79515-3_35 .

ISBN 978-3-030-79514-6 .

^ Rivlin 1990, p.175 ^ Proshansky 1987, p.1485 ^ Inauen, Jennifer; Contzen, Nadja; Frick, Vivan; Kadel, Philipp; Keller, Jan; Kollmann, Josianne; Mata, Jutta; van Valkengoed, Anne M. (2021-07-01).

"Environmental Issues Are Health Issues" .

European Psychologist .

26 (3): 219– 229.

doi : 10.1027/1016-9040/a000438 .

ISSN 1016-9040 .

S2CID 237750643 .

^ Ulrich, Roger S. (1984-04-27).

"View Through a Window May Influence Recovery from Surgery" .

Science .

224 (4647): 420– 421.

Bibcode : 1984Sci...224..420U .

doi : 10.1126/science.6143402 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 6143402 .

S2CID 37180267 .

^ "Ecopsychology: How Immersion in Nature Benefits your Health" .

Yale E360 . Retrieved 2022-06-12 .

^ Ulrich, Roger S.; Simons, Robert F.; Losito, Barbara D.; Fiorito, Evelyn; Miles, Mark A.; Zelson, Michael (September 1991).

"Stress recovery during exposure to natural and urban environments" .

Journal of Environmental Psychology .

11 (3): 201– 230.

doi : 10.1016/s0272-4944(05)80184-7 .

ISSN 0272-4944 .

^ Egner, Lars Even; Sütterlin, Stefan; Calogiuri, Giovanna (2020-09-17).

"Proposing a Framework for the Restorative Effects of Nature through Conditioning: Conditioned Restoration Theory" .

International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health .

17 (18): 6792.

doi : 10.3390/ijerph17186792 .

ISSN 1660-4601 .

PMC 7558998 .

PMID 32957693 .

^ Proshansky et al. 1983, p.59 ^ a b Proshansky et al. 1983 ^ Place Attachment . Irwin Altman. S.l.: Springer US. 2012.

ISBN 978-1-4684-8753-4 .

OCLC 1256696697 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ Low & Altman 1992, Williams et al. 1992 ^ Cantrill 1998; Hay 1998; Shamai 1991; Steele 1981; Williams & Stewart 1998 ^ Low & Altman 1992; Moore & Graefe 1994; Relph 1976; Tuan 1977 ^ Smaldone 2006 ^ Low & Altman 1992 ^ Schroeder 1991, p. 232 ^ Smaldone, 2007 ^ Chigbu 2013 ^ "Orbitofrontal Cortex" . wrongdiagnosis.com . Retrieved 14 July 2011 .

^ Kieft, J.; Bendell, J (2021).

"The responsibility of communicating difficult truths about climate influenced societal disruption and collapse: an introduction to psychological research" .

Institute for Leadership and Sustainability (IFLAS) Occasional Papers .

7 : 1– 39.

^ Barker, Roger G. (1968).

Ecological Psychology: Concepts and Methods for Studying the Environment of Human Behavior . Stanford: Stanford University Press. p.

94 .

ISBN 9780804706582 . Retrieved 2 February 2017 .

^ Whitburn, Julie (2020).

Children's environmental psychology, behaviour and education and wellbeing: The role of connection to nature (PhD). Victoria University of Wellington.

^ Hinds, Joe; Sparks, Paul (2008-06-01).

"Engaging with the natural environment: The role of affective connection and identity" .

Journal of Environmental Psychology .

28 (2): 109– 120.

doi : 10.1016/j.jenvp.2007.11.001 .

ISSN 0272-4944 .

^ Barrera-Hernández, Laura Fernanda; Sotelo-Castillo, Mirsha Alicia; Echeverría-Castro, Sonia Beatriz; Tapia-Fonllem, César Octavio (2020).

"Connectedness to Nature: Its Impact on Sustainable Behaviors and Happiness in Children" .

Frontiers in Psychology .

11 : 276.

doi : 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00276 .

ISSN 1664-1078 .

PMC 7054437 .

PMID 32174866 .

^ a b c Tavakkoli, Sodeh; Asaadi, Mohammad Mahdy; Pakpour, Amir H; Hajiaghababaei, Marzieh (June 2015).

"Environmental Psychology Effects on Mental Health Job Satisfaction and Personal Well Being of Nurses" .

Iranian Journal of Psychiatry .

10 (3): 158– 164.

ISSN 1735-4587 .

PMC 4749685 .

PMID 26877749 .

^ a b "Eco-innovations in Designing Eco-cities and Eco-towns" .

The Smart City Journal . 13 September 2016 . Retrieved 2021-07-30 .

^ Zhu, Yiqing; Li, Nan (March 2021).

"Virtual and augmented reality technologies for emergency management in the built environments: A state-of-the-art review" .

Journal of Safety Science and Resilience .

2 (1): 1– 10.

doi : 10.1016/j.jnlssr.2020.11.004 .

^ Center for Human Environments , CUNY Graduate Center website ^ Proshansky 1987, p.1476 ^ Sörqvist, Patrik (2016).

"Grand Challenges in Environmental Psychology" .

Frontiers in Psychology .

7 : 583.

doi : 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00583 .

ISSN 1664-1078 .

PMC 4843758 .

PMID 27199818 .

^ Proshansky 1995 Sammy Sum ^ "Environmental Psychology at the University of Groningen" . 7 October 2015 . Retrieved 2 March 2022 .

^ "Individualized programs" .

University of Victoria's Psychology Department . Retrieved July 6, 2019 .

^ "Environmental Psychology at the CUNY Graduate Center" . Retrieved 11 October 2016 .

^ "Design and Environmental Analysis" . Retrieved 11 October 2016 .

^ "Curriculum - Westphal College of Media Arts & Design" .

Westphal College of Media Arts & Design . Retrieved 2016-11-08 .

^ "Welcome to Environmental Psychology" . Retrieved 11 October 2016 .

^ "Linda Steg, University of Groningen" . 22 November 2010 . Retrieved 2 March 2022 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Allesch, Christian G. (2003). "Person and Environment: Reflections on the roots of environmental psychology".  In 22nd Annual Conference of the European Society for the History of the Human Sciences .

Barker, Roger Garlock (1968). "Ecological Psychology: Concepts and Methods for Studying the Environment of Human Behavior". Stanford University Press.

Barrera-Hernández, Laura Fernanda; Sotelo-Castillo, Mirsha Alicia; Echeverría-Castro, Sonia Beatriz; Tapia-Fonllem, César Octavio (2020). "Connectedness to Nature: Its Impact on Sustainable Behaviors and Happiness in Children".

Frontiers in Psychology .

0 .

doi :10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00276.

ISSN 1664-1078.

Barrera-Hernández, Laura Fernanda; Sotelo-Castillo, Mirsha Alicia; Echeverría-Castro, Sonia Beatriz; Tapia-Fonllem, César Octavio (2020). "Connectedness to Nature: Its Impact on Sustainable Behaviors and Happiness in Children".

Frontiers in Psychology .

0 .

doi :10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00276.

ISSN 1664-1078.

Bell P., Greene T., Fisher, J., & Baum, A. (1996).

Environmental Psychology . Ft Worth: Harcourt Brace.

Canter D., (1977) "The Psychology of Place" London: Architectural Press. available as an eBook Chigbu, U.E. (2013). "Fostering rural sense of place: the missing piece in Uturu, Nigeria", Development In Practice 23 (2): 264-277.

doi : 10.1080/09614524.2013.772120 De Young, R. (2013). "Environmental Psychology Overview". In Ann H. Huffman & Stephanie Klein [Eds.] Green Organizations: Driving Change with IO Psychology.

(Pp. 17-33). NY: Routledge.

"Eco-innovations in Designing Eco-cities and Eco-towns".

The Smart City Journal . Retrieved 2021-07-30.

Gifford, R. (2014).

Environmental Psychology: Principles and Practice (5th ed.). Colville, WA: Optimal Books.

Gifford, R. (Ed.)(2016).

Research Methods for Environmental Psychology . New York: Wiley.

Ittelson, W. H., Proshansky, H., Rivlin, L., & Winkel, G. (1974).

An Introduction to Environmental Psychology . New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. Translated into German and Japanese.

Proshansky, H. M. (1987).

"The field of environmental psychology: securing its future".

In Handbook of Environmental Psychology, eds. D. Stokols and I. Altman. New York: John Wiley & Sons.

Proshansky, Harold, Abbe Fabian, and Robert Kaminoff. (1983). "Place Identity: Physical World Socialization of the Self", Journal of Environmental Psychology 3 (1): 57-83.

Rivlin, L. G. (1990). "Paths towards environmental consciousness". pp. 169–185 in Environment and Behavior Studies: Emergence of Intellectual Traditions, eds. I. Altman and K. Christensen. NY: Plenum.

Sörqvist, Patrik (2016). "Grand Challenges in Environmental Psychology".

Frontiers in Psychology .

0 .

doi :10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00583.

ISSN 1664-1078.

Stokols, D., and I. Altman, eds. (1987).

Handbook of Environmental Psychology . New York: John Wiley & Sons.

"What is environmental psychology? | APS".

www.psychology.org.au . Retrieved 2021-07-30.

Whitburn, Julie (2020). "Children's environmental psychology, behaviour and education and wellbeing: The role of connection to nature".

Zube, E.H., and G. T. Moore, eds. (1991).

Advances in Environment, Behavior, and Design, Volume 3.

New York: Plenum Press.

External links [ edit ] Library resources about Environmental psychology Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Learning materials related to Environmental psychology at Wikiversity Environmental Psychology at Classification of Instructional Programs v t e Environmental social science Fields Ecological anthropology Ecological economics Environmental anthropology Environmental crime Environmental economics Environmental communication Environmental history Environmental politics Environmental psychology Environmental sociology Human ecology Human geography Political ecology Regional science Related Agroecology Anthrozoology Behavioral geography Community studies Demography Design ecological environmental Ecological humanities Economics energy thermo Environmental education ethics law science studies justice racism Ethnobiology botany ecology zoology Forestry Industrial ecology Integrated geography Permaculture Political representation of nature Rural sociology Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Sustainability science studies Systems ecology Urban ecology geography metabolism studies Applied Architecture landscape sustainable Ecopsychology Engineering ecological environmental Green criminology Health environmental epidemiology occupational public Management environmental fisheries forest natural resource waste Planning environmental land use regional spatial urban Policy energy environmental Environment portal Category Concepts Degrees Journals Research institutes Scholars v t e Sustainability Outline Index Principles Anthropocene Environmentalism Global governance Human impact on the environment Planetary boundaries Development Consumption Anthropization Anti-consumerism Circular economy Durable good Earth Overshoot Day Ecological footprint Ethical Green consumption Micro-sustainability Over-consumption Product stewardship Simple living Social return on investment Steady-state economy Sustainability Advertising Brand Marketing myopia Sustainable Consumer behaviour Market Systemic change resistance Tragedy of the commons World population Control Demographic transition Dependency ratio List Family planning Intergenerational equity Population ageing Sustainable population Technology Appropriate Environmental technology Natural building Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable industries Sustainable packaging Biodiversity Biosecurity Biosphere Conservation biology Endangered species Holocene extinction Invasive species Energy Carbon footprint Renewable energy Sustainable energy Food Civic agriculture Climate-smart agriculture Community-supported agriculture Cultured meat Sustainable agriculture Sustainable diet Sustainable fishery Water Air well (condenser) Bioretention Bioswale Blue roof Catchwater Constructed wetland Detention basin Dew pond Footprint Hydroelectricity Hydropower Infiltration basin Irrigation tank Marine energy Micro hydro Ocean thermal energy conversion Pico hydro Rain garden Rainwater harvesting Rainwater tank Reclaimed water Retention basin Run-of-the-river hydroelectricity Scarcity Security Small hydro Sustainable drainage system Tidal power Tidal stream generator Tree box filter Water conservation Water heat recycling Water recycling shower Water-sensitive urban design Accountability Corporate environmental responsibility Corporate social responsibility Environmental accounting Environmental full-cost accounting Environmental planning Generational accounting Sustainability Accounting Measurement Metrics and indices Reporting Standards and certification Sustainable yield Economic Debt Sustainability Analysis Fiscal sustainability Applications Advertising Art Business City Cultural sustainability Climate finance Community Disinvestment Eco-capitalism Eco-cities Eco-investing Eco-socialism Ecovillage Environmental finance Green economy Construction Fashion Finance Gardening Geopark Green Development Infrastructure Marketing Green roof Greening Impact investing Landscape Livelihood Living Market Organic movement Organizations Procurement Refurbishment Socially responsible business Socially responsible marketing Sanitation Sourcing Space Sustainability organization Tourism Transport Urban drainage systems Urban infrastructure Sustainable management Environmental Fisheries Forest Humanistic capitalism Landscape Materials Natural resource Planetary Recycling Waste Agreements and conferences UN Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm 1972) Brundtlandt Commission Report (1983) Our Common Future (1987) Earth Summit (1992) Rio Declaration on Environment and Development (1992) Agenda 21 (1992) Convention on Biological Diversity (1992) Lisbon Principles (1997) Earth Charter (2000) UN Millennium Declaration (2000) Earth Summit 2002 (Rio+10, Johannesburg) UN Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20, 2012) Sustainable Development Goals (2015) UNESCO MONDIACULT conferences Category Lists Science Studies Degrees Authority control databases : National Japan Czech Republic Israel NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐9sx9f
Cached time: 20250812014819
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.975 seconds
Real time usage: 1.128 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4968/1000000
Revision size: 68818/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 178223/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6329/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 171948/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.631/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9652723/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  935.652      1 -total
 35.28%  330.130      1 Template:Reflist
 22.62%  211.599      1 Template:Psychology_sidebar
 22.39%  209.462      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 14.35%  134.279     12 Template:Cite_web
 12.70%  118.829     15 Template:Cite_journal
 11.64%  108.872      3 Template:Excerpt
  8.66%   81.034      1 Template:Short_description
  5.33%   49.852      2 Template:Pagetype
  4.94%   46.241      2 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1639997:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812014819 and revision id 1300943616. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Environmental_psychology&oldid=1300943616 " Categories : Environmental psychology Environmental social science Hidden categories: CS1 maint: others Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2014 All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from July 2014 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2013 Articles needing additional references from July 2010 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 07:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Environmental psychology 32 languages Add topic

