Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 History 3 Copyright 4 Trademarks 5 Right of publicity 6 Categories 7 Cases 8 See also 9 References Toggle the table of contents Entertainment law 6 languages العربية Español فارسی Lietuvių Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Legal services provided to the entertainment industry Entertainment law , also known as media law , encompasses legal services provided to the entertainment industry . These services often overlap with intellectual property law , which includes key components such as trademarks , [ 1 ] copyright , [ 2 ] and the right of publicity .

[ 3 ] However, the practice of entertainment law frequently extends into other legal areas including employment law , contract law , torts , labor law , bankruptcy law , immigration , securities law , security interests , agency , right of privacy, defamation , advertising, criminal law , tax law , International law (especially private international law ), and insurance law.

Much of the work of an entertainment law practice is transaction based, i.e., drafting contracts, negotiation and mediation. Some situations may lead to litigation or arbitration .

Overview [ edit ] Entertainment law covers an area of law that involves media of all different types (e.g. TV, film, music, publishing, advertising, Internet & news media, etc.) and stretches over various legal fields, which include corporate, finance, intellectual property , publicity and privacy , and the First Amendment to the United States Constitution in the US.

Although entertainment law and media law are seen as the same thing. It is important to know the difference between the two.

For film, entertainment attorneys work with the actor's agent to finalize the actor's contracts for upcoming projects. After an agent lines up work for an actor, the entertainment attorney negotiates with the agent and buyer of the actor's talent for compensation and profit participation. Entertainment attorneys are under strict confidentiality agreements, so the jobs of their clients are kept top secret. But, some entertainment attorney's job descriptions have become comparable to those of a star's agent, manager or publicist . Most entertainment attorneys have many other roles as well such as assisting in building a client's career.

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] As the popularity of media became widespread, the field of media law became more in demand, enticing certain corporate professionals wanting to participate more in media. As a result, many young lawyers fledged into media law for the opportunity to build more connections in media, to become a media presenter, or even land an acting role. As technology continues to make huge advancements, many lawsuits have begun to arise, which makes the demand for lawyers extremely necessary.

Copyright [ edit ] Copyright law in regards to entertainment law is the foundation of intellectual property protection in the entertainment industry.

[ 5 ] When someone creates a piece of work whether it be a script, film, painting, photograph or some sort of original piece, the creator of this work has exclusive rights to their work. This makes them a copyright owner of their piece. To make sure that your piece of work is under copyright protection, the U.S. Copyright Office provides a public record of ownership, helping the creator establish rights in case of disputes.

[ 6 ] Without the creator registering with the copyright office, they may experience trouble being able to sue [ 7 ] another individual or company if someone else tries to take credit for their work or use it without consent.

Trademarks [ edit ] Trademarks role in entertainment law is to protect a person or company's ability to brand and market a product or service.

[ 8 ] A trademark can be anything from a word, phrase, symbol design, of a combination of these things all together that lets consumers identify your company or brand.

[ 9 ] By being able to identify a brands trademark, consumers are able to distinguish between brands and knowing which one may be higher quality. Companies are able to register their trademarks with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, which helps protect the company's identity or from others using their logo without permission.

[ 6 ] Right of publicity [ edit ] In entertainment law, the right of publicity is a right to legal action.

[ 10 ] This helps protect against the misappropriation of a person's name, likeness, and other things like a nickname, pseudonym, voice of signature, likeness, or photograph for commercial benefit.

[ 11 ] It's important to note the difference of right of privacy and right of publicity. When it comes to the right of privacy, this is designed to guard an individual's personal rights against emotional distress vs. the right of publicity being seen protecting a property right.

[ 10 ] Categories [ edit ] Entertainment law is generally sub-divided into the following areas related to the types of activities that have their own specific trade unions, production techniques, rules, customs , case law , and negotiation strategies: F ILM : option agreements , chain of title issues, talent agreements ( screenwriters , film directors , actors, composers , production designers ), production and post production and trade union issues, distribution issues, motion picture industry negotiations, distribution , and general intellectual property issues especially relating to copyright and, to a lesser extent, trademarks ; I NTERNET : Censorship , Copyright , Freedom of information , Information Technology , Privacy , and Telecommunications issues; M ULTIMEDIA : software licensing issues, video game development and production, Information technology law , and general intellectual property issues; M USIC : talent agreements ( musicians , composers), producer agreements, and synchronization rights , music industry negotiation and general intellectual property issues, especially relating to copyright (see music law ); P UBLISHING and P RINT MEDIA : advertising , models , author agreements and general intellectual property issues, especially relating to copyright; T ELEVISION and R ADIO : broadcast licensing and regulatory issues, mechanical licenses , and general intellectual property issues, especially relating to copyright; T HEATRE : rental agreements and co-production agreements, and other performance oriented legal issues; V ISUAL ARTS AND DESIGN : fine arts , issues of consignment of artworks to art dealers, moral rights of sculptors regarding works in public places; and industrial design , issues related to the protection of graphic design elements in products.

Defamation ( libel and slander ), personality rights and privacy rights issues also arise in entertainment law.

Media law is a legal field that refers to the following: Advertising Broadcasting Censorship Confidentiality Contempt Copyright Corporate Law Defamation Entertainment Freedom of information Internet Information Technology Privacy Telecommunications Cases [ edit ] Copyright : In Golan v. Holder , the Supreme Court ruled, in a 6–2 vote, the judges dismissed contentions in light of the First Amendment and the Constitution's copyright provision, stating that the general population was not "a class of sacred centrality" and that copyright insurances may be extended regardless of whether they did not strive for new attempts to be made.

[ 12 ] Internet : In 2007, Viacom, a media aggregate that possesses MTV and Comedy Central TV, sued YouTube for $1 billion in light of copyright infringement claims for the unapproved posting of Viacom copyrighted material. In May 2008, YouTube began utilizing its advanced fingerprinting innovation to secure copyright-ensured content.

Television : In an 8-0 choice, the Supreme Court held that in light of the fact that the FCC rules at the time did not cover "short lived exclamations," the fines issued against Fox were unethical and subsequently discredited as "illegally unclear".

[ 12 ] Music : Kesha v. Dr. Luke – In 2014, singer Kesha filed a civil suit against music producer Lukasz Sebastian Gottwald , also referred to some as Dr. Luke for gender-based hate crimes and emotional distress. This civil suit caused Gottwald to in return sue Kesha for defamation and breach of contract. This case ended with a judge declining to release Kesha from her binding contract that prohibited her from continuing her career effectively. The judge took note that Kesha had entered an agreement after she had sworn under oath that no harassment was taking place. Many celebrities such as Miley Cyrus, Lady Gaga, and Demi Lovato have shown support for Kesha in an attempt to broadcast the injustice contract laws have played in the outcome of this case. Singer-songwriter Taylor Swift donated $250,000 to relieve Kesha of any financial obligations.

[ 13 ] Right of publicity: [ 10 ] Haelan Laboratories, Inc. v. Topps Chewing Gum, Inc.- in 1953 Haelan Laboratories held an exclusive legal right to use the baseball players’ photographs—beyond simply avoiding liability—which Topps Chewing Gum violated by persuading the players to break their contracts with Haelan. The U.S. Court of Appeals held that Haelan Laboratories had the legal right, being right of publicity, to the exclusive use of the baseball player's photographs and that Topps Chewing Gum infringed this right by causing breaches in Haelan's contracts.

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Communications law – Regulation of electronic communications Engineering law Intellectual property – Ownership of creative expressions and processes Media reform Media regulation – Laws on mass media Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Morals clause – Contractual provision Music law – Legal aspects of the music industry Performing arts – Art forms involving live performance Performing arts education Safe listening – Avoiding hearing damage from intentionally heard sounds Sports law – Law and regulations that relate to Sports Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Sunshine in the Courtroom Act Theater law – 2012 Japanese legislation References [ edit ] ^ "Trademark" , Wikipedia , 2025-04-13 , retrieved 2025-04-13 ^ "Copyright" , Wikipedia , 2025-03-18 , retrieved 2025-04-13 ^ "Personality rights" , Wikipedia , 2025-03-21 , retrieved 2025-04-13 ^ Wasko, Janet (2008).

Hollywood Film Industry . Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing. pp.

176– 178.

^ Law, Ameri (2024-03-01).

"Copyrights and Trademarks in the Entertainment Industry" .

Ameri Law . Retrieved 2025-05-04 .

^ a b "Understanding Intellectual Property in Entertainment Law" .

Pitt Law MSL Online Program . Retrieved 2025-05-04 .

^ Law, Ameri (2024-03-01).

"Copyrights and Trademarks in the Entertainment Industry" .

Ameri Law . Retrieved 2025-05-04 .

^ Law, Ameri (2024-03-01).

"Copyrights and Trademarks in the Entertainment Industry" .

Ameri Law . Retrieved 2025-05-04 .

^ "What is a trademark?" .

www.uspto.gov . Retrieved 2025-05-04 .

^ a b c "Right of Publicity" .

The Free Speech Center . Retrieved 2025-05-04 .

^ "Right of Publicity" .

International Trademark Association . Retrieved 2025-05-04 .

^ a b "Top 5 Media & Entertainment Cases Of 2012 - Law360" .

www.law360.com . Retrieved 2018-04-23 .

^ Swenson, Kyle (2017-12-13).

"A singer spoke up about sexual harassment in country music. Now she's being sued" .

Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 2018-04-23 .

^ Agency, BB.

"Haelan Laboratories, Inc. v. Topps Chewing Gum, Inc" .

Studicata . Retrieved 2025-05-04 .

v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Entertainment_law&oldid=1298128978 " Categories : Entertainment law Mass media Media law Entertainment Performing arts Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 30 June 2025, at 17:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Entertainment law 6 languages Add topic

