Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Views and reception 2 References 3 External links Toggle the table of contents Southern Partisan 1 language Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Neo-confederate political magazine This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Southern Partisan" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Southern Partisan is a neo-Confederate online magazine based in Columbia, South Carolina , United States . It is focused on the Southern region and states that were formerly members of the Confederate States of America . Founded in 1979 as Southern Partisan Quarterly Review , its first editor was Thomas Fleming . From 1999 to 2009 it was edited by Christopher Sullivan. After 2009 it ceased print publication and is now only online. It has been called "arguably the most important neo-Confederate periodical" by the Southern Poverty Law Center .

[ 1 ] The magazine generally espouses a pro-southern perspective on political issues and the American Civil War . The magazine features commentary on southern culture, history, literature, the Southern Agrarians , the Civil War and Confederacy, and current political issues. Its news section "CSA Today" covers stories from each of the eleven former Confederate states, as well as Missouri and Kentucky, which the Confederate States claimed to have admitted.

The magazine is harshly critical of what it describes as "politically correct" policy-making, such as the removal of Confederate historical monuments. It also gives out a " Scalawag Award" in each issue to Southerners who act contrary to the magazine's editorial position.

Reviews of books about the southern United States appear in each issue, as do general political opinion pieces from conservative and libertarian perspectives. The magazine has carried columns by syndicated opinion commentators including Walter Williams , William Murchison , Joseph Sobran , and Charley Reese .

Views and reception [ edit ] The SPLC dates the earliest contemporary usage of the term " neo-Confederate " to a 1988 Southern Partisan article.

[ 1 ] The New York Times in 2000 described Southern Partisan as "one of the (southern) region's most right-wing magazines," noting its disapproval of Abraham Lincoln and the Union during the Civil War, and tendency to "venerate the rebel soldiers who fought to secede from the United States." It also noted that the magazine features "high-minded historical reviews in the tradition of the Southern agrarian movement, which glorified the South's slow-paced traditions of farms and small towns." [ 2 ] Ed Sebesta has written that Southern Partisan and Chronicles are the "major publications" of the Confederate movement.

[ 3 ] Slate described Southern Partisan as a "crypto-racist, pro-Confederate magazine." [ 4 ] In 2000, the president of the progressive advocacy group People for the American Way called Southern Partisan "racist", pointing to columns that criticize Martin Luther King Jr.

and Nelson Mandela , and alleged that it views slavery favorably.

[ 5 ] The Times report noted a Southern Partisan article describing white slave traders as being better to slaves than African warlords. According to the Times report, Southern Partisan "takes the position that the Civil War was fought not over slavery, but over the preservation of a Southern way of life that to this day is worth preserving." [ 2 ] Southern Partisan received national attention in 2001 during the confirmation hearings of U.S. Attorney General John Ashcroft , who had praised Robert E. Lee in a 1998 interview with the magazine.

[ citation needed ] The magazine's editor Christopher Sullivan has said that critics take "quotes out of context to paint a picture of racial and historical bigotry in the Partisan ". Sullivan pointed out that the magazine publishes articles by African-American writers such as Walter E. Williams .

[ 6 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Euan Hague (January 25, 2010).

"The Neo-Confederate Movement" .

Southern Poverty Law Center .

^ a b David Firestone (February 8, 2000).

"THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE STRATEGIST; McCain Aide's Conservatism Runs Deep" .

The New York Times .

^ Edward H. Sebesta (2000).

"The Confederate Memorial Tartan" .

Scottish Affairs (31): 55– 84.

doi : 10.3366/scot.2000.0019 . Archived from the original on July 17, 2012.

^ Joshua Micah Marshall (December 26, 2000).

"John Ashcroft's Rebel Yell" .

Slate Magazine .

^ "McCain Urged to Fire Top Campaign Adviser – New Material on Richard Quinn" .

People for the American Way . February 17, 2000.

^ "The Never Ending Struggle" by Christopher Sullivan, Southern Partisan 1999 4th Quarter External links [ edit ] The Southern Partisan magazine website NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐vzcnb
Cached time: 20250815223437
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1]
CPU time usage: 0.373 seconds
Real time usage: 0.470 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2021/1000000
Revision size: 6310/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 89889/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4819/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 30254/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.202/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5902021/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  335.739      1 -total
 32.86%  110.327      1 Template:Conservatism_US
 27.60%   92.654      1 Template:Reflist
 20.29%   68.127      3 Template:Cite_web
 14.73%   49.449      1 Template:Short_description
 14.33%   48.114      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 13.37%   44.872      1 Template:Ambox
  8.43%   28.317      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.22%   17.533     24 Template:Small
  5.16%   17.316     21 Template:Nowrap Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1981146:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815223437 and revision id 1292703131. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Southern_Partisan&oldid=1292703131 " Categories : Conservative magazines published in the United States Online magazines published in the United States Defunct political magazines published in the United States Lost Cause of the Confederacy Magazines of the Southern United States Magazines established in 1979 Magazines disestablished in 2009 Online magazines with defunct print editions Magazines published in South Carolina Mass media in Columbia, South Carolina Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2022 All articles needing additional references Use mdy dates from March 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2022 This page was last edited on 28 May 2025, at 10:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Southern Partisan 1 language Add topic

