Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 IUCN Categories and Criteria version 2.3 2 Gallery 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Near-threatened species 48 languages Afrikaans العربية বাংলা Български Català Čeština Dansk Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Kurdî Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia IUCN conservation category Conservation status by IUCN Red List category Extinct Extinct (EX) ( list ) Extinct in the Wild (EW) ( list ) Threatened Critically Endangered (CR) ( list ) Endangered (EN) ( list ) Vulnerable (VU) ( list ) Lower Risk Near Threatened (NT) ( list ) Conservation Dependent (CD) ( list ) Least Concern (LC) ( lists ) Other categories Data Deficient (DD) ( list ) Not Evaluated (NE) Related topics International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) IUCN Red List NatureServe status Lists of organisms by population Comparison of Red List classes above and NatureServe status below v t e A near-threatened species is a species which has been categorized as " Near Threatened " ( NT ) by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) as that may be vulnerable to endangerment in the near future, but it does not currently qualify for the threatened status.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The IUCN notes the importance of reevaluating near-threatened taxa at appropriate intervals.

The rationale used for near-threatened taxa usually includes the criteria of vulnerable which are plausible or nearly met, such as reduction in numbers or range. Those designated since 2001 that depend on conservation efforts to not become threatened are no longer separately considered conservation-dependent species .

IUCN Categories and Criteria version 2.3 [ edit ] Diagram of Lower Risk / near threatened in the older IUCN version 2.3, beside the former Lower Risk / conservation dependent subcategory.

Before 2001, the IUCN used the version 2.3 Categories and Criteria to assign conservation status , which included a separate category for conservation-dependent species ("Conservation Dependent", LR/cd). With this category system, Near Threatened and Conservation Dependent were both subcategories of the category "Lower Risk". Taxa which were last evaluated before 2001 may retain their LR/cd or LR/nt status, although had the category been assigned with the same information today the species would be designated simply "Near Threatened (NT)" in either case.

Gallery [ edit ] The near-threatened Eurasian otter The maned wolf is near-threatened largely as the result of habitat loss.

The gray bat was moved from "endangered" to "near-threatened" due to successful conservation efforts. It has now been moved to vulnerable.

[ 3 ] Plains zebras (or Equus quagga ) are listed as 'near threatened' by the IUCN.

The ball python , formerly a common species, had become near-threatened as a result of illegal trade and poaching .

The Chilean flamingo is “Near-threatened” in 2018 See also [ edit ] IUCN Red List near threatened species , ordered by taxonomic rank .

Category:IUCN Red List near threatened species , ordered alphabetically.

List of near threatened amphibians List of near threatened arthropods List of near threatened birds List of near threatened fishes List of near threatened insects List of near threatened invertebrates List of near threatened mammals List of near threatened molluscs List of near threatened plants List of near threatened reptiles References [ edit ] ^ "What are The IUCN Red List Categories and Criteria?" .

IUCN Red List . IUCN.

Archived from the original on 11 August 2020 . Retrieved 11 August 2020 .

^ "SUMMARY OF THE FIVE CRITERIA (A-E) USED TO EVALUATE IF A TAXON BELONGS IN AN IUCN RED LIST THREATENED CATEGORY (CRITICALLY ENDANGERED, ENDANGERED OR VULNERABLE)" (PDF) .

IUCN Red List . IUCN.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 August 2020 . Retrieved 11 August 2020 .

^ Solari, S. (2018).

" Myotis grisescens " .

IUCN Red List of Threatened Species .

2018 : e.T14132A22051652.

doi : 10.2305/IUCN.UK.2018-2.RLTS.T14132A22051652.en . Retrieved 20 May 2025 .

External links [ edit ] List of Near Threatened species as identified by the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species v t e Threatened species Template: Threatened species by region IUCN Red List Categories 1 Extinct Extinct (EX) Extinct in the Wild (EW) Threatened Critically Endangered (CR) Endangered (EN) Vulnerable (VU) Lower risk Near Threatened (NT) Least Concern (LC) Lower Risk (LR) Conservation Dependent (LR/cd) Not fully assessed Data Deficient (DD) Not Evaluated (NE) Species Lists Extinct Extinct in the Wild Critically Endangered Endangered Vulnerable Near Threatened Least Concern Data Deficient WP categories Extinct Extinct in the Wild Critically Endangered Endangered Vulnerable Near Threatened Least Concern Data Deficient CITES Appendix I Appendix II Appendix III By taxa Threatened arthropods / Endangered arthropods / spiders / Decline in insect populations Decline in amphibian populations Threatened Banksia / rays / sharks / Fungi / Chromista The World's 25 Most Endangered Primates The world's 100 most threatened species Conservation Biodiversity action plan Biodiversity threats Conservation biology CITES ARKive Bird conservation Conservation status Conservation-reliant species Ecoregion conservation status Habitat destruction Latent extinction risk Rare species Vulnerability and susceptibility 1 Pre-2001 categories and subcategories shown in italics .

v t e Threatened species by region By region Blue-listed Environmental Vulnerability Index Regional Red List Australasia Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 ROTAP Threatened Species Protection Act 1995 Threatened ecological community Trade in Endangered Species Act 1989 Canada Species at Risk Act Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada Europe EAZA Ex-situ Programme Funds for Endangered Parrots South Africa Endangered Wildlife Trust United States Distinct population segment Endangered Species Act of 1973 Endangered Species Act Amendments of 1978 Endangered species recovery plan Endangered Wolf Center National Wildlife Refuge NatureServe conservation status The Nature Conservancy Lists Asia List of endangered and protected species of China Endangered mammals of India List of endangered animals in India List of endemic and threatened plants of India List of endangered species in Pakistan List of threatened species of the Philippines List of endangered species in Vietnam Europe Threatened mammals of Europe Endangered plants of Europe Bulgaria Italy Lithuania Russia Ukraine United Kingdom North America List of endangered plants of North America List of endangered animals of North America Endangered mammals and birds of the United States List of threatened mammals of the United States List of threatened birds of the United States List of threatened reptiles and amphibians of the United States Elsewhere Threatened fauna of Australia List of threatened flora of Australia List of endangered flora of Brazil List of threatened mammals of Brazil List of threatened birds of Brazil Portals : Ecology Biology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Near-threatened_species&oldid=1291372082 " Categories : Near threatened species Near threatened plants Biota by conservation status IUCN Red List Environmental conservation Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2022 This page was last edited on 20 May 2025, at 20:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Near-threatened species 48 languages Add topic

