Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Training 3 Scottish Gamekeepers Association 4 The National Gamekeepers' Organisation 5 Criticism 6 In fiction 7 See also 8 Further reading 9 External links 10 References Toggle the table of contents Gamekeepers in the United Kingdom Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Gamekeeper ) Person who manages an area of countryside and ensures there is game or fish Gamekeeper in the late 19th century In the United Kingdom , a gamekeeper (often abbreviated to keeper ) is a person who manages an area of countryside (e.g., areas of woodland , moorland , waterway or farmland) to make sure that there is enough game for hunting , or fish for fishing , and acts as guide to those pursuing them.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Description [ edit ] Typically, a gamekeeper is employed by a landowner or by a country estate , to prevent poaching , to rear and release game birds such as common pheasants and French partridge , eradicate pests, encourage and manage wild red grouse , and to control predators such as weasels, to manage habitats to suit game, and to monitor the health of the game.

[ 6 ] Today, some three thousand full-time gamekeepers are employed in the UK, [ 7 ] compared to as many as 25,000 at the beginning of the 20th century.

[ 8 ] In addition, there are many people who spend their leisure time and money rearing game and maintaining habitats on their own small shoots.

There are several variations in gamekeeping: Stalkers : keepers who specialise in the stealthy pursuit of deer , mainly in the uplands of Scotland .

Lowland keepers: rearing pheasant and partridge and managing lowland habitats.

Gamekeeper (left) with a shooter on a driven grouse shoot in the Highlands, ca. 1922 Upland keepers: managing moorland for grouse in upland areas.

Gillie /river keepers: keepers who manage rivers such as the River Spey for trout and salmon .

Controlled burning of heather , one of the countryside management duties of gamekeepers The most senior individual dealing with wildlife on a particular estate is often called the head keeper or head stalker .

Gamekeepers and country sports enthusiasts hold that gamekeeping is an essential part of countryside conservation. Two thirds of the UK rural landmass is managed for shooting. The shooting industry creates £1.6 billion. £250 million is spent on conservation as a result of shooting.

[ 9 ] Training [ edit ] Some colleges in the UK now offer courses in gamekeeping up to and including diploma level. Two of these include the Northern School of Game and Wildlife at Newton Rigg College , Cumbria [ 10 ] and Myerscough College , Lancashire .

[ 11 ] The Elmwood Campus of Scotland's Rural College (SRUC) in Cupar , Fife is Scotland's main gamekeeping college. The main campus for attaining both NC and HNC levels in gamekeepeing for south Scotland is borders college.

[ 12 ] Easton and Otley college: Easton Campus also provides a course on gamekeeping level 2 and 3.

Scottish Gamekeepers Association [ edit ] In 1997, as a result of months of adverse media criticism of gamekeepers, the Scottish Gamekeepers Association (SGA) was formed with a goal of promoting the work of gamekeepers and developing training in the area of law and best practices in the field of game management. The SGA chairman is Alex Hogg, a gamekeeper from Scotland.

[ 13 ] The National Gamekeepers' Organisation [ edit ] In 1997, the National Gamekeepers' Organisation (NGO) was set up for the same reasons and in addition they felt that the main shooting association was not representing the keepers properly. The NGO now has some 15,000 members. The NGO run industry-based training for keepers and were the first organisation to react to EU legislation with regard to game meat hygiene, producing a course for experienced keepers and stalkers which had approval from the Food Standards Agency . The NGO continue to promote gamekeeping, stalking, shooting, and fishing. Its chairman is Lindsay Waddell, a gamekeeper from Co. Durham. The NGO also have dedicated moorland and deer branches.

[ 14 ] Criticism [ edit ] The League Against Cruel Sports estimates some 12,300 wild mammals and birds are killed on UK shooting estates every day and sees gamekeepers as playing a key role in the destruction of wildlife.

[ 15 ] On the other hand, the shooting industry says that gamekeepers are vital wildlife conservation workers in the countryside.

[ 16 ] The National Gamekeeper's Organisation (NGO) claims that nine times as much of the British countryside is looked after by gamekeepers as is in nature reserves and National Parks.

[ 17 ] The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds has criticised the persecution of birds of prey on some shooting estates. 68% of those convicted of raptor persecution are gamekeepers. "We’ve seen evidence linking gamekeepers to bird of prey persecution, and moorlands empty of raptors imply that much more illegal killing goes on undetected".

[ 18 ] In fiction [ edit ] Alec Scudder in Maurice by E. M. Forster Mellors in Lady Chatterley's Lover by D. H. Lawrence Rubeus Hagrid in the Harry Potter series Tom Redruth in Treasure Island by Robert Louis Stevenson Phillip White in Lark Rise to Candleford Several characters past and present in the BBC Radio 4 soap opera The Archers e.g. Andrew Gach Joseph in Hautot and His Son by Guy de Maupassant William Crowder in The Boscombe Valley Mystery by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle The Gamekeeper by Barry Hines Kincade in Skyfall Golly Mackenzie in Monarch of the Glen The Gamekeeper at Home by Richard Jefferies - 1878 Robert Muldoon in Jurassic Park Jocelyn Greedon in Doctors Nield in Downton Abbey Geoff Seacombe in The Gentlemen See also [ edit ] Professional hunter Hunting Game preservation Gamekeeper's thumb Further reading [ edit ] Norman Maclean : A Less Green and Pleasant Land: Our Threatened Wildlife . Cambridge University Press, 2015, ISBN 9781107673236 .

External links [ edit ] Gamekeeping as a career - BASC National Gamekeeper's Organisation References [ edit ] ^ "GAMEKEEPER | meaning in the Cambridge English Dictionary" .

dictionary.cambridge.org . Retrieved 9 November 2020 .

^ "Definition of GAMEKEEPER" .

www.merriam-webster.com . Retrieved 9 November 2020 .

^ "Gamekeeper definition and meaning | Collins English Dictionary" .

www.collinsdictionary.com . Retrieved 9 November 2020 .

^ "Definition of STALKER" .

www.merriam-webster.com . Retrieved 9 November 2020 .

^ "Deerstalker definition and meaning | Collins English Dictionary" .

www.collinsdictionary.com . Retrieved 9 November 2020 .

^ "Gamekeeper" .

UCAS . 22 February 2016 . Retrieved 9 November 2020 .

^ "About Gamekeeping" .

www.nationalgamekeepers.org.uk . Retrieved 7 February 2019 .

^ Edward, Bujak (18 October 2018).

English Landed Society in the Great War: Defending the Realm . Bloomsbury Studies in Military History. London. p. 71.

ISBN 9781472592163 .

OCLC 1049577685 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Shooting Politics.

"Shooting Politics, episode 1, 19th August 2009" . fieldsportschannel.tv. Archived from the original on 8 July 2013 . Retrieved 31 October 2012 .

^ webmaster.

"Welcome to Gamekeeping.org!" .

Gamekeeping.org.uk . Archived from the original on 22 April 2003 . Retrieved 14 December 2018 .

^ "Olympic dreams of sharp shooter Lucy | Myerscough College" .

www.myerscough.ac.uk . Retrieved 17 July 2019 .

^ SRUC.

"Elmwood Campus - SRUC" .

www.sruc.ac.uk .

^ "Scottish Gamekeepers Association (SGA) - Scottish Gamekeepers" .

www.scottishgamekeepers.co.uk .

^ "NGO website" .

^ League Against Cruel Sports - Consequences of the Shoot Archived 22 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ BASC - The Gamekeeper: Professional Countryside Manager Archived 9 May 2007 at the Wayback Machine ^ "NGO Educational Trust - Nurturing Countryside Knowledge" .

www.gamekeeperstrust.org.uk .

^ In praise of the wildlife crusaders. People have just about had enough of raptor persecution. Jenny Shelton. 9 Feb 2018 https://community.rspb.org.uk/ourwork/b/investigations/posts/ed-hutchings-rspb-interview-license-driven-grouse-shooting- accessed 18.5.2020 v t e Hunting topics History Ancient Egypt Hunter-gatherer Medieval hunting Imperial hunt of the Qing dynasty North American hunting technologies Forms Bat-fowling Beagling Bowhunting Big-game hunting Coursing Game stalkering Gigging Green hunting Falconry Eagles Field sports Fowling Handgun hunting Internet hunting Layout hunting Montería Muttonbirding Persistence hunting Pest control Plume hunting Spotlighting Trophy hunting Trapping Trail hunting Treeing Upland hunting Varmint hunting Venatio Waterfowl hunting Equipment Camouflage Game call Duck call Ghillie suit Hunting bag Hunting weapon Air gun Assegai Bow and arrow Bear spear Boar spear Boomerang Blowgun Crossbow Pistol Punt gun Rifle Spear-thrower Shotgun Sword Throwing stick Silencer Shooting brake Shooting sticks Game Alligator Bear Big five Bison Boar Raccoon Deer Stalking Fox Hare Human Headhunting Jackal Mink Plains game Rabbit Rook Tiger Turkey Turtle Lion Quail Wolf With dogs Seal Squirrel Poaching Whale Aboriginal Dolphin drive hunting Subsistence hunting of the bowhead whale Infrastructure Buffalo jump Buffalo pound Chase (land) Deer park (England) Deer forest Desert kite Game larder Game reserve Game farm Guest ranch Hunting blind Bird hide Salter Sporting lodge Jagdschloss Wolf trap By location Australia Dugong Kangaroo Azerbaijan Tiger Cambodia Chad Elephant Greenland Reindeer India Tiger poaching Rhino poaching in Assam Kenya Elephant New Zealand Helicopter-based hunting in Fiordland Pakistan Trophy hunting Russia Romania Spain Switzerland Federal hunting reserves Tonga Pigeon United States Alaska United Kingdom Driven grouse shooting Regulation and conservation Bag Bag limits Conservation officer Deer management Game Act 1831 Game law Game preservation Hunting license Hunting Act 2004 Hunting season Poaching Sustainable hunting Culture Bambi effect Blooding Canned hunt Car hawking Duck ague Falconry training and technique Fair chase Field dressing Gamekeepers in the United Kingdom Gillie Hunting dog Gun dog Hunting magic List of hunting deities List of big-game hunters Opposition to hunting Parahawking Professional hunter Killing of Cecil the lion Raptor persecution Safety orange Safari Take Tracking Wild Hunt White hunter Organizations Boone and Crockett Club Countryside Alliance Ducks Unlimited Federation of Associations for Hunting and Conservation of the EU Finnish Hunters' Association Hunt Saboteurs Association Humane Society of the United States League Against Cruel Sports North American Falconers Association People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Safari Club International Other Bowfishing Bounty hunter Blood sport Drag hunting Field trial Fur trade Ghost hunting Hunting hypothesis Hunting strategy Honey hunting Insect collecting Mushroom hunting Orchid hunting Overview of gun laws by nation Pearl hunting Spearfishing Wildlife farming v t e Game animals and shooting in the United Kingdom Game birds Common pheasant Grey partridge Red-legged partridge Red grouse Rock ptarmigan Black grouse 1 Eurasian woodcock Common snipe Quarry species Mallard Teal Wood pigeon Golden plover Canada goose Greylag goose Pink-footed goose Eurasian wigeon Tufted duck Northern shoveler Northern pintail Gadwall Common pochard Common goldeneye Common moorhen Eurasian coot Deer Red deer Roe deer European fallow deer Sika deer Reeves's muntjac Water deer Other quarry European hare Red fox European rabbit Opponents League Against Cruel Sports Animal Aid Law Game Act 1831 Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Act 2002 Hunting Act 2004 See also British Association for Shooting and Conservation Hunting and shooting in the United Kingdom Game & Wildlife Conservation Trust Countryside Alliance Driven grouse shooting Glorious Twelfth Gamekeepers in the United Kingdom Deer stalking Deer forest 1 Rarely shot because of declining numbers.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gamekeepers_in_the_United_Kingdom&oldid=1302772824 " Categories : Animal care occupations Animal husbandry occupations Hunting and shooting in the United Kingdom Sports occupations and roles Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2013 This page was last edited on 27 July 2025, at 11:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gamekeepers in the United Kingdom Add languages Add topic

