Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 First World War 2 Second World War Toggle Second World War subsection 2.1 Power line disruption 2.2 Target identification 3 Post-war nuclear weapon tests 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Barrage balloon 23 languages العربية Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Large balloon tethered with metal cables US Marine Corps barrage balloon, Parris Island , South Carolina , in May 1942 A barrage balloon is a type of airborne barrage , a large uncrewed tethered balloon used to defend ground targets against aircraft attack, by raising aloft steel cables which pose a severe risk of collision with hostile aircraft, making the attacker's approach difficult and hazardous. Early barrage balloons were often spherical. The kite balloon , having a shape and cable bridling that stabilizes the balloon and reduces drag, could be operated at higher wind speeds than a spherical balloon. Some examples carried small explosive charges that would be pulled up against the aircraft to ensure its destruction. Barrage balloons are not practical at higher altitudes due in large part to the cable's weight.

First World War [ edit ] France, Germany, Italy, and the United Kingdom used barrage balloons in the First World War . While the French and German forces developed kite balloons , early British barrage balloons were spherical.

[ 1 ] Sometimes, especially around London, several balloons were used to lift a "barrage net" length: a steel cable was strung between the balloons, and more cables hung from it. These nets could be raised to an altitude comparable to the operational ceiling (15,000 feet or 4,600 metres) of the bombers of the time. By 1918 the barrage balloon defences around London stretched for 50 miles (80 km), and captured German pilots expressed great fear of them.

[ 2 ] Second World War [ edit ] Landing ships putting cargo ashore on one of the invasion beaches during the Battle of Normandy . Note the barrage balloons, raised by the 320th Barrage Balloon Battalion .

Balloons could be launched from specialised vehicles.

In 1938, the British Balloon Command was established to protect cities and key targets such as industrial areas, ports, and harbors. Balloons were intended to defend against dive bombers flying at heights up to 5,000 feet (1,500 m), forcing them to fly higher and into the range of concentrated anti-aircraft fire: anti-aircraft guns could not traverse fast enough to attack aircraft flying at low altitude and high speed. By the middle of 1940, there were 1,400 balloons, a third over the London area.

While dive-bombing was a devastatingly effective tactic against undefended targets, such as Guernica and Rotterdam , dive-bombers were very vulnerable to attack by fighter aircraft when pulling up after having completed a bombing dive. Due to the effectiveness of the Royal Air Force fighters' tactic of waiting for a dive bomber to complete its dive and then pouncing when it was pulling up—a moment when it was slow and vulnerable—the use of dive bombers against the UK was discontinued by Nazi Germany. Balloons proved to be of little use against the German high-level bombers with which the dive-bombers were replaced, but continued to be manufactured nonetheless until there were almost 3,000 in 1944. They proved to be effective against the V-1 flying bomb , which usually flew at 2,000 feet (600 m) or lower but had wire-cutters on its wings to counter balloons. 231 V-1s are officially claimed to have been destroyed by balloons.

[ 3 ] The British added two refinements to their balloons, "Double Parachute Link" (DPL) and "Double Parachute/Ripping" (DP/R). The former was triggered by the shock of an enemy bomber snagging the cable, causing that section of cable to be explosively released complete with parachutes at either end; the combined weight and drag bringing down the aircraft. The latter was intended to render the balloon safe if it broke free accidentally. The heavy mooring cable would separate from the balloon and fall to the ground under a parachute; at the same time a panel would be ripped away from the balloon causing it to deflate and fall independently to the ground.

[ 4 ] The 320th Barrage Balloon Battalion , a Very Low Altitude barrage balloon battalion of the United States Army, participated in the June 1944 Normandy landings , raising barrage balloons on Omaha Beach and Utah Beach . They remained stationed at Normandy until October 1944.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] In January 1945, during Royal Navy Fleet Air Arm raids on the Palembang oil refineries, the British aircrews were surprised by the massive use of barrage balloons in the Japanese defences. These were spherical and smaller than the British type. One Grumman Avenger was destroyed, and its crew killed, from striking a balloon cable.

[ 8 ] Barrage balloons were partly filled with highly flammable hydrogen.

[ 9 ] "The top of the balloon was filled with hydrogen, the bottom half was left empty, so when it was put up at a certain height it filled with natural air", according to Dorothy Brannan, barrage balloon volunteer in Portsmouth, England.

[ 10 ] Power line disruption [ edit ] In 1942, Canadian and American forces began joint operations to protect the sensitive locks and shipping channel at Sault Ste. Marie along their common border among the Great Lakes against possible air attack.

[ 11 ] During severe storms in August and October 1942 some barrage balloons broke loose, and the trailing cables short-circuited power lines , causing some localised disruption to mining and manufacturing .

[ citation needed ] In particular, metals production was disrupted. Canadian military historical records indicate that one of the more serious incidents, known as "The October Incident", caused an estimated loss of 400 tonnes (440 short tons ; 390 long tons ) of steel and 10 tonnes (11 short tons; 9.8 long tons) of ferro-alloys.

As a result, balloons were stored during the winter months and training was improved.

[ citation needed ] Lessons learned from breakaway balloons led to Operation Outward , intentional release of balloons trailing conductive cables to disrupt power supplies on the occupied European mainland.

Target identification [ edit ] On the road to Aachen in west Germany in 1944, the British 2nd Tactical Air Force floated barrage balloons along the American First Army sector front line (a.k.a. "bomb line") to designate the location of friendly troops during the air assault preceding the advance of ground forces, which took Aachen on October 21, 1944. Conversely, during the First Army advance past Aachen to nearby Düren , barrage balloons were floated eastward to mark the location of enemy troops to be bombed.

[ 12 ] Post-war nuclear weapon tests [ edit ] After the war, some surplus barrage balloons were used as tethered shot balloons for nuclear weapon tests throughout most of the period when nuclear weapons were tested in the atmosphere. The weapon or shot was carried to the required altitude slung underneath the barrage balloon, allowing test shots in controlled conditions at much higher altitudes than test towers. Several of the tests in the Operation Plumbbob series were lifted to altitude using barrage balloons.

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Aerostat – Lighter-than-air aircraft Observation balloon – Military crewed balloon Tethered balloon – Hot air balloon attached to the ground References [ edit ] ^ Sadd, F. Russell; "Eyes for the Artillery", Aeroplane Monthly ,  June 1976, pp.298-301.

^ Ege, L. "Balloons and Airships", Blandford (1973).

^ "Barrage Balloons for Low-Level Air Defense" .

Air & Space Power Journal . Summer 1989. Archived from the original on 2007-08-12 . Retrieved 2007-04-16 .

^ [1] Archived 2011-02-11 at the Wayback Machine RAF Museum online exhibition "Air Diagrams" ^ Sherman, Ben (May 1, 2014).

"All-black balloon unit served with distinction on D-Day" .

Army.mil . Retrieved July 9, 2024 .

^ Hervieux, Linda (2015).

Forgotten: The Untold Story of D-Day's Black Heroes, At Home and at War . United States: HarperCollins.

ISBN 978-0-06-231379-9 .

^ Choker, Michael D. (2013).

"320th Anti-Aircraft Balloon Battalion" . In Bielakowski, Alexander M. (ed.).

Ethnic and Racial Minorities in the U.S. Military: An Encyclopedia . Vol. 2.

ABC-Clio . p. 591.

ISBN 978-1-59884-428-3 .

^ Iredale, W.

The Kamikaze Hunters 2015 pp189-208 ISBN 9780230768192 ^ "#VEDay75: How thousands of gas-filled balloons helped defend the UK from enemy attack" .

Cadent Gas . 2020-05-09.

Archived from the original on 2020-08-07 . Retrieved 2021-06-07 .

^ Young, Wendy (2005-07-26).

"Barrage Balloons" .

BBC WW2 People's War .

Archived from the original on 2013-08-11 . Retrieved 2021-06-07 .

^ "Protecting Steel Lifeline / Barrage balloon goes aloft at Sault Ste. Marie, Mich., to protect Soo canal against possible air raids..." [photo caption], The Lima News [Lima, OH], 9 Apr. 1942, p. 3.

^ Keeney, L. Douglas (2020).

"WWII Liberation of Europe - Into Nazi Germany" .

Amazon . Retrieved 2021-06-07 .

^ "Operation PLUMBBOB" (PDF) .

Defense Threat Reduction Agency .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2016-10-19.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Barrage balloons .

Barrage Balloon Reunion Club Popular Science , August 1943, British Barrage Balloon Secrets BBC's WW2 People's War: Barrage Balloons RAF Barrage Balloon Squadrons Barrage Balloon in the WWII Authority control databases National Germany Other NARA Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Barrage_balloon&oldid=1293569083 " Categories : Balloons (aeronautics) Civil defense Engineering barrages Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2016 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 June 2025, at 12:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Barrage balloon 23 languages Add topic

