Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Suspension of admissions 2 Program 3 Production history Toggle Production history subsection 3.1 2016-2017 3.2 2015-2016 3.3 2014-2015 3.4 2007-08 4 Alumni 5 External links 6 References Toggle the table of contents Institute for Advanced Theater Training Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( November 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) American Repertory Theater/Moscow Art Theatre (ART/МХАТ) Institute for Advanced Theater Training Type Drama School Established 1987 Founder Robert Brustein Affiliation Harvard University Postgraduates 22 Address Loeb Drama Center 64 Brattle St , Cambridge , Massachusetts , United States Website Official website The American Repertory Theater / Moscow Art Theatre (ART/МХАТ) Institute for Advanced Theater Training at Harvard University was founded in 1987 as a training ground for the new American Theater by Robert Brustein .

The institute has been resident for thirty years at Harvard University in the Loeb Drama Center . It lasts for two years (five semesters) including a three-month residency at the Moscow Art Theatre School in Moscow, Russia. The most recent program director was Scott Zigler .

[ 1 ] New York University director and acting teacher Marcus Stern and Julia Smeliansky , alumnus of the Moscow Art Theatre School, administer the Harvard master classes with Russian master teacher and film star Igor Zolotivitsky (Esteemed Artist of Russia) and dean of the Moscow Art Theatre School and Bulgakov scholar (People's Artist of Soviet Union) Anatoly Smeliansky .

The program accepts about 22 students per year in acting, dramaturgy/theatre studies, and voice and speech who learn both through classroom activities and numerous opportunities for stage-experience including Institute productions as well as direct involvement in American Repertory Theatre productions. As of September 2016 [update] , recent Institute productions have included Young Jean Lee 's The Shipment , Moira Buffini 's Dying for It , and a stage adaptation of They Shoot Horses, Don't They?

. In addition to performances during the students' academic year, graduating second year students also put on a set of showcase performances to aid their transition into professional work. As of 2016 [update] , they are presented in New York City , and Los Angeles .

Up until 2003, the institute also hosted a directing program, and formerly offered a Playwriting program as well.

History [ edit ] Lacking a department of drama or even a drama concentration, Harvard was understandably reluctant to accept a graduate professional school of drama on the Yale model. When the A.R.T. came to Harvard from Yale in 1979, Robert Brustein originally proposed such a model for actors, directors, and dramaturgs connected to the theater and were quickly advised that the idea would never fly. It wasn't until 1987, after noting the incidence at Harvard of institutes (e.g. the Nieman and the Bunting Institutes), that Brustein submitted the proposal again, under the name of the American Repertory Theater Institute for Advanced Theater Training. Brustein was permitted to develop a training program in acting, directing, and dramaturgy. Current students receive a Master of Liberal Arts from Harvard Extension School and a Certificate of Achievement from the Moscow Art Theater School , which became associated with the school in 1997. Until 2016, students received a Master of Fine Arts .

[ 2 ] The institute's acting program is an intensive combination of classroom exploration and practical production experience. Acting students follow a two-year sequence carefully designed to help them incrementally increase their knowledge of and facility with text analysis, character development, spontaneity and impulse, period and aesthetic style, and overall expressiveness.

Suspension of admissions [ edit ] In January 2017, the institute announced they would not be taking on any new admissions for the next academic year after the United States Department of Education gave the graduate program a failing grade due to the oppressive levels of student debt .

[ 3 ] In June 2017, the institute's director, Scott Zigler, announced he was taking the job as the dean of the School of Drama at the University of North Carolina School of the Arts .

[ 4 ] In July 2017, the graduate-level theater training program announced they would be taking a three-year hiatus of accepting new admissions and they would be working on a strategic plan for the school. In the announcement, Director Zigler said, “What we’re looking at is taking a three-year hiatus so we can come back stronger, better, and with better funding.” [ 5 ] Harvard University reported that the median debt for a student graduating from the two-year program in 2016 was approximately $78,000 with an average starting salary of $36,000 a year.

[ 5 ] Program [ edit ] In July of the first year, students study the Stanislavsky System as a foundation for their graduate acting training. This early training with teachers from the Moscow Art Theatre School focuses on concentration, imagination, observation, relaxation, and action analysis of a text. Classes combine extensive exercises, structured improvisations (also known as études), and textual analysis to help students form a cohesive whole out of their training. The Russian teachers also discuss the artistic and professional ethics of acting, sharing the philosophies of theater that have come to characterize the Russian tradition. In the fall of the first year, students focus on the work of Sanford Meisner and the acting theory developed by David Mamet and William H. Macy known as Practical Aesthetics . This work is designed to help students replace intellectual ideas with impulsive and spontaneous choices engendered by focus on and responsiveness to the actor's partner within an analytic framework. Classes also explore approaches to freeing the students’ creativity and imagination and expanding their range of behaviour in order to create the capability to play a broad range of characters and styles. Fall and winter classes involve extensive scene study, with the primary focus on contemporary work. In the winter, students are introduced to “outside/ in” work: generating character through physical and vocal choices first, followed by internal character choices. Also in the first year, students are encouraged to hone their time management skills. By taking on the demanding conservatory schedule of the institute, students are readied for the scheduling demands of life as a working actor. All acting classes and workshops are closely integrated with training in voice, speech, and movement. These combined skills provide each actor with a number of approaches for conquering the myriad challenges they are likely to encounter as professional actors.

In the spring of the first year, students travel to Moscow for a three-month residency at the Moscow Art Theatre School developing a play to be performed on the Moscow Art Theatre stage. In Moscow, students continue their training in acting, movement, ballet, fencing, acrobatics, singing and voice with Russian master teachers. They have the opportunity to see world theater and immerse themselves in the Stanislavsky System. They also continue studying speech and verse with their Harvard teachers. Students present and perform weekly their first production, an ensemble piece at the American Studio of the Moscow Art Theatre School.

In the second year, back in residence at the A.R.T., students focus on applying skills learned in the first year to a wide variety of styles and genres both on stage and in the classroom. Classes focus on a variety of acting challenges presented by writers such as Tennessee Williams , August Wilson , and Samuel Beckett . Students also focus on contemporary heightened text by playwrights such as Suzan-Lori Parks and Mac Wellman , and spend three weeks on intensive Shakespearean scene study with acting teacher David Hammond . Students perform in Institute productions directed by faculty members and guest artists. In some instances, students will also have opportunities to perform and understudy in A.R.T.’s professional productions. Students may also perform in staged readings or workshops of new scripts being developed by the theater and the Radcliffe Institute at Harvard University.

Because both the American Repertory Theater and the Moscow Art Theatre School are major international institutions, Institute students gain a unique perspective on world theater. Students are encouraged to use this perspective to define their own place in the professional community. As part of an ongoing curriculum on the business of acting integrated into their entire two-year program, students are trained in on-camera and voice-over techniques, as well as having meetings with agents, casting directors, and other entertainment professionals. In the spring of the second year, graduating actors give a showcase presentation in New York and Los Angeles for artistic directors, freelance directors, casting directors, and agents.

Production history [ edit ] 2017-2018 Macbeth, written by William Shakespeare , directed by Melia Bensussen Charlotte's Web, dramatized by Joseph Robinette, based upon the story by E.B. White , directed by Dmitry Troyanovsky Familiar, written by Kirsten Greenidge , directed by Rebecca Bradshaw Assistance, written by Leslye Headland , directed by Scott Zigler Our Town, written by Thornton Wilder , directed by Marcus Stern 2016-2017 [ edit ] Middletown, written by Will Eno , directed by Marcus Stern James and the Giant Peach, adapted for the stage by David Wood, from the book by Roald Dahl , directed by Dmitry Troyanovsky Violet, music by Jeanine Tesori , book and lyrics by Brian Crawley, based on The Ugliest Pilgrim by Doris Betts , directed by Sammi Cannold Carmen, conceived, directed, and choreographed by Alla Sigalova 2015-2016 [ edit ] The Shipment, written by Young Jean Lee , directed by Marcus Stern The Pirate Princess, music and lyrics by Mike Pettry, book by Lila Rose Kaplan, directed by Allegra Libonati A Big Mess, created by Daniel Passer and the A.R.T. Class of 2016, directed by Daniel Passer Dying For It, written by Moira Buffini , directed by Scott Zigler They Shoot Horses, Don't They?, written by Horace McCoy , directed by Wojtek Klemm The Bard for Bryan, Artistic Coordinator: Scott Zigler 2014-2015 [ edit ] A Bright New Boise, written by Samuel D. Hunter , directed by Marcus Stern The Light Princess, music and lyrics by Mike Pettry, book by Lila Rose Kaplan, directed by Allegra Libonati Bridge*Widow*Hag, written by Kim Rosenstock, directed by Shira Milikowsky Silent Rage, a double bill of two plays – Heroin/e (Keep Us Quiet), written by Carson Kreitzer and Dutchman, written by LeRoi Jones , directed by Scott Zigler The Lonely Voice, directed by Ilya Bocarnikovs, inspired by the short stories of Nobel Prize winner Ivan Bunin Much Ado About Nothing, written by William Shakespeare , directed by Anya Saffir Desdemona: A Play About a Handkerchief, written by Paula Vogel , directed by Melia Bensussen 2007-08 [ edit ] Gray City, written by Keith Huff, directed by Lindsay Allbaugh Expats, written by Heather Lynn MacDonald, directed by Jonathan Carr Trigger, written by Kyle Jarrow , directed by Marcus Stern The Lacy Project, written by Alena Smith , directed by Scott Zigler The Room and Celebration, written by Harold Pinter , directed by Roman Kozak Alumni [ edit ] Jon Bernthal – Acting (2002) Betsy Brandt – Acting (1997) Ron Burch – Playwriting (1991) Debora Cahn – Acting (1998) Peter Cambor – Acting (2005) Samrat Chakrabarti – Acting (2002) Anthony Cistaro – Acting (1997) Celeste Ciulla - Acting (1991) Bart DeLorenzo – Directing Maggie Flecknoe – Acting M.A. Fortin – Acting (2003) Jessalyn Gilsig – Acting (1995) Katori Hall – Acting (2005) Ellen Idelson – Acting Tim Kang – Acting (2001) Tina Landau – Directing (1989) Gideon Lester – Dramaturgy (1997) Careena Melia – Acting (2009) Ajay Naidu – Acting (1996) Kristin Proctor – Acting (2000) Mark Setlock – Acting (1992) Zuzanna Szadkowski – Acting (2005) Faran Tahir – Acting (1992) Kate Whoriskey – Directing (1998) Allen Zadoff – Directing (1991) Steve Zahn – Acting (1990) Jeff Zinn – Directing (1990) External links [ edit ] Institute for Advanced Theater Training at the American Repertory Theater A.R.T. Institute for Advanced Theater Training on Facebook The graduating classes of 2008 [ usurped ] – class members: Adam Kern Megan Hill Delance Minefee 2007 2006 [ permanent dead link ] References [ edit ] ^ "Harvard's Scott Zigler named Dean of UNCSA's School of Drama" .

^ "A.R.T. Institute to Shutter for 3 Years After 'Failing' Debt Grade | News | the Harvard Crimson" .

^ Gay, Malcolm (2017-01-18).

"Harvard's ART Institute suspends admissions" .

The Boston Globe . Retrieved 2017-07-17 .

^ Felder, Lynn (2017-06-24).

"UNCSA hires new Drama dean from Harvard" .

Winston-Salem Journal . Retrieved 2017-07-17 .

^ a b Gay, Malcolm (2017-07-16).

"Harvard theater school to go on 'three-year hiatus' " .

The Boston Globe . Retrieved 2017-07-17 .

v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Institute_for_Advanced_Theater_Training&oldid=1296618218 " Categories : 1987 establishments in Massachusetts Drama schools in the United States Harvard University Theatre companies in Massachusetts Educational institutions established in 1987 Hidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from November 2014 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles using infobox university Articles containing potentially dated statements from September 2016 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2016 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2020 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 21 June 2025, at 03:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Institute for Advanced Theater Training Add languages Add topic

