Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Implementation Toggle Implementation subsection 2.1 1996 Protocol 3 Parties 4 Cases 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents London Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter 22 languages العربية Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Hausa Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter ) 1972 multilateral environmental agreement "Marine dumping" redirects here. For other uses, see Ocean dumping .

London Convention signatories The Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter 1972, commonly called the " London Convention " or "LC '72" and also abbreviated as Marine Dumping , is an agreement to control pollution of the sea by dumping and to encourage regional agreements supplementary to the convention. It covers the deliberate disposal at sea of wastes or other matter from vessels, aircraft, and platforms. It does not cover discharges from land-based sources such as pipes and outfalls, wastes generated incidental to normal operation of vessels, or placement of materials for purposes other than mere disposal, providing such disposal is not contrary to aims of the convention. It entered into force in 1975. As of September 2016, there were 89 Parties to the convention.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Background [ edit ] The convention was called for by the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment (June 1972, Stockholm), the treaty was drafted at the Intergovernmental Conference on the Convention on the Dumping of Wastes at Sea (13 November 1972, London) and it was opened for signature on 29 December 1972. It entered into force on 30 August 1975 when 15 nations ratified. As of 1 October 2001, there were 78 Contracting Parties to the convention. International Administration of the Convention functions through Consultative Meetings held at International Maritime Organization (IMO) headquarters in London.

The London Convention consists of 22 Articles and three Annexes. It follows a "black list/grey list" approach to regulating ocean dumping; Annex I materials (black list) generally may not be ocean dumped (though for certain Annex I materials dumping may be permissible if present only as " trace contaminants " or "rapidly rendered harmless" and Annex II materials (grey list) require "special care". Annex III lays out general technical factors to be considered in establishing criteria for issuance of ocean dumping permits.

The main objective of the London Convention is to prevent indiscriminate disposal at sea of wastes that could be liable for creating hazards to human health; harming living resources and marine life; damaging amenities; or interfering with other legitimate uses of the sea. The 1972 Convention extends its scope over "all marine waters other than the internal waters" of the States and prohibits the dumping of certain hazardous materials. It further requires a prior special permit for the dumping of a number of other identified materials and a prior general permit for other wastes or matter.

[ 3 ] Implementation [ edit ] Since its entering into force in 1975, the convention has provided a framework for international control and prevention of marine pollution within which the contracting parties have achieved continuous progress in keeping the oceans clean. Among its milestones are the 1993 ban on ocean disposal of low-level radioactive wastes and the resolutions to end the dumping and incineration of industrial wastes. The efforts of the Parties are supported by a permanent secretariat hosted by the International Maritime Organization (IMO). The consultative meeting of the contracting parties to the London convention is the governing and political decision-making body of the convention. It takes advice on issues needing multidisciplinary expertise from the Joint Group of Experts on Scientific Aspects of Marine Environmental Protection (GESAMP) which is composed of specialised experts nominated by the IMO , FAO , UNESCO , IOC , WMO , WHO , IAEA , UN , and UNEP . A scientific group on dumping, composed of government experts from the parties to the convention a responsible to address any scientific requests from the consultative meeting, including the preparation of lists of hazardous substances, developing guide-lines on the implementation of the convention, and maintaining awareness of the impacts on the marine environments of inputs from all waste sources.

The convention is implemented in the United States through Title I of the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act (MPRSA) which directs that implementing regulations are to apply binding requirements of LC to the extent that this would not relax the MPRSA.

1996 Protocol [ edit ] On 17 November 1996, a special meeting of the Contracting Parties adopted the "1996 Protocol to the Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter, 1972" which is to replace the 1972 Convention, subject to ratification. In line with UNCED's Agenda 21, the 1996 Protocol reflects the global trend towards precaution and prevention with the parties agreeing to move from controlled dispersal at sea of a variety of land-generated wastes towards integrated land-based solutions for most, and controlled sea disposal of few, remaining categories of wastes or other matter.

[ 4 ] Among the most important innovations brought by the 1996 protocol is the codification of the " precautionary approach " and the "polluter pays principle." Reflecting these principles, the protocol embodies a major structural revision of the convention the so-called "reverse list" approach. Now, instead of prohibiting the dumping of certain (listed) hazardous materials, the parties are obligated to prohibit the dumping of any waste or other matter that is not listed in Annex 1 ("the reverse list") of the 1996 protocol. Dumping of wastes or other matter on this reverse list requires a permit. Parties to the protocol are further obligated to adopt measures to ensure that the issuance of permits and permit conditions for the dumping of reverse list substances comply with Annex 2 (the Waste Assessment Annex) of the protocol. The substances on the reverse list include dredged material; sewage sludge ; industrial fish processing waste; vessels and offshore platforms or other man-made structures at sea; inert, inorganic geological material; organic material of natural origin; and bulky items including iron, steel, concrete and similar materials for which the concern is physical impact, and limited to those circumstances where such wastes are generated at locations with no land-disposal alternatives. In addition, the 1996 protocol prohibits altogether the practice of incineration at sea, except for emergencies, and prohibits the exports of wastes or other matter to non-Parties for the purpose of dumping or incineration at sea.

The 1996 protocol has effectively moved the scope of the original London convention landwards, relating it to the policy and management issues of land as well as sea wastes disposal. Indicative for this shift are such elements as the codification of the precautionary approach and the establishment of requirements such as the "waste prevention audit," the identification and control of the sources of contamination for certain materials, and the collaboration with relevant local and national agencies that are involved in point and non-point source pollution control . In this context, integrated coastal management (ICM) comes as a natural framework for effective implementation of the objectives of the protocol. Relaying on its vast ICM technical expertise, the National Ocean Service (NOS) is to contribute to the creation of the necessary foundation for the US accession to the 1996 Protocol and, further on, to the protocol's implementation. Through its International Program Office, NOS would also contribute to the international co-operation efforts towards meeting the objectives of the 1996 Protocol.

The legal interpretation about carbon capture and storage (CCS) is uncertain. The sub-seabed wastes fall within the scope of the treaty, which can prohibit CCS projects like the injection of CO 2 into offshore platforms built into sub-seabed geological formations.

[ 5 ] Parties [ edit ] State parties – (87 as of 2013) Afghanistan, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Azerbaijan, Barbados, Belarus (ratified as Byelorussian SSR ), Belgium, Benin, Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, People's Republic of China, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Finland, France, Gabon, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Iran, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan (ratified but w/ exclusion), Jordan, Kenya, Kiribati, South Korea, Libya, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Russia (ratified as the Soviet Union ), Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Serbia (ratified as Serbia and Montenegro ), Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syria, Tanzania, Tonga, Tunisia, Ukraine (ratified as Ukrainian SSR ), United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, United States, and Vanuatu. (Insert Reference).

Cases [ edit ] Japan's 2023 release of water from a damaged nuclear power plant into the Pacific Ocean raised questions for the Governing Bodies of the London Convention (LC) and its Protocol (LP) and the Fukushima District Court as to whether the action constituted dumping under Article 4. In 2021 the Governing Bodies received concerns about the release from Greenpeace International, South Korea, as well as Japan asking whether the prohibition to dump radioactive materials from "man-made structures at sea" bans discharges from land-based pipelines protruding into the sea. The London Convention Secretariat explained on 29 July 2022 that "man-made structures at sea" is not currently defined by treaties, but interpretations including those based on the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea seem to exclude pipelines as land-based. On the other hand, the Legal Affairs Office of the International Maritime Organization said that parties to the LC/LP could decide whether protruding pipelines count as "other man-made structures at sea". This allows a teleological interpretation of the convention such that the goal of protecting the marine environment determines what is allowed or prohibited, even if the specific polluting pathway may vary.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Barcelona Convention Convention for the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping from Ships and Aircraft Environmental agreements MARPOL 73/78 Operation CHASE Oslo Convention for the North-East Atlantic (OSPAR) References [ edit ] ^ "London Convention" .

International Maritime Organization . Archived from the original on 3 March 2019 . Retrieved 30 September 2016 .

^ "Status of Conventions" .

International Maritime Organization . Archived from the original on 14 September 2019 . Retrieved 30 September 2016 .

^ "London Protocol; why is it needed?" (PDF) .

International Maritime Organization . Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 May 2018 . Retrieved 30 September 2016 .

^ "1996 Protocol" .

International Maritime Organization . Archived from the original on 1 October 2016 . Retrieved 30 September 2016 .

^ Dixon, Tim; Greaves, Andy; Christophersen, Oyvind; Vivian, Chris; Thomson, Jolyon (1 February 2009).

"International marine regulation of CO2 geological storage. Developments and implications of London and OSPAR" .

Energy Procedia .

1 (1): 4503– 4510.

doi : 10.1016/j.egypro.2009.02.268 .

ISSN 1876-6102 .

OCLC 4934390933 .

^ Nishikawa, Grace (16 January 2024).

"Fukushima Nuclear Waste Water Disputes Continued: International Law in Japanese Court?" .

EJIL: Talk!

.

External links [ edit ] IMO summary of London Convention and amendments Archived 3 March 2019 at the Wayback Machine Information on treaties.un.org EPA summary of convention NOAA summary of convention CIA World Factbook , as of 2003 [update] edition v t e Biosolids , waste , and waste management Major types Agricultural wastewater Biodegradable waste Biomedical waste Brown waste Chemical waste Construction waste Demolition waste Electronic waste by country Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Heat waste Industrial waste Industrial wastewater Litter Marine debris Mining waste Municipal solid waste Open defecation Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Radioactive waste Scrap metal Sewage Sharps waste Surface runoff Toxic waste Processes Anaerobic digestion Balefill Biodegradation Composting Durable good Ecological design Garden waste dumping Illegal dumping Incineration Landfill Landfill mining Mechanical biological treatment Mechanical sorting Photodegradation Reclaimed lumber Recycling appliance recycling battery recycling bottle recycling fluorescent lamp recycling land recycling plastic recycling textile recycling timber recycling tire recycling water heat recycling water recycling shower Repurposing Resource recovery Reusable packaging Right to repair Sewage treatment Urban mining Waste collection Waste sorting Waste trade Waste treatment Waste-to-energy Countries Afghanistan Albania Armenia Australia Belgium Bangladesh Brazil Bosnia and Herzegovina Egypt Georgia Hong Kong India Israel Japan Kazakhstan New Zealand Russia South Korea Sri Lanka Switzerland Syria Tanzania Taiwan Thailand Turkey United Kingdom United States Agreements Bamako Convention Basel Convention EU directives batteries Recycling framework incineration landfills RoHS vehicles waste water WEEE London Convention Oslo Convention OSPAR Convention Occupations Sanitation worker Street sweeper Waste collector Waste picker Other topics Blue Ribbon Commission on America's Nuclear Future China's waste import ban Cleaner production Downcycling Eco-industrial park Extended producer responsibility High-level radioactive waste management History of waste management Landfill fire Sewage regulation and administration Supervised injection site Toxic colonialism Upcycling Waste hierarchy Waste legislation Waste minimisation Zero waste Environment portal Category: Waste Index Journals Lists Organizations v t e Wastewater Sources and types Acid mine drainage Ballast water Bathroom Blackwater (coal) Blackwater (waste) Boiler blowdown Brine Combined sewer Cooling tower Cooling water Fecal sludge Greywater Infiltration/Inflow Industrial wastewater Ion exchange Leachate Manure Papermaking Produced water Return flow Reverse osmosis Sanitary sewer Septage Sewage Sewage sludge Toilet Urban runoff Quality indicators Adsorbable organic halides Biochemical oxygen demand Chemical oxygen demand Coliform index Oxygen saturation Heavy metals pH Salinity Temperature Total dissolved solids Total suspended solids Turbidity Wastewater surveillance Treatment options Activated sludge Aerated lagoon Agricultural wastewater treatment API oil–water separator Carbon filtering Chlorination Clarifier Constructed wetland Decentralized wastewater system Extended aeration Facultative lagoon Fecal sludge management Filtration Imhoff tank Industrial wastewater treatment Ion exchange Membrane bioreactor Reverse osmosis Rotating biological contactor Secondary treatment Sedimentation Septic tank Settling basin Sewage sludge treatment Sewage treatment Sewer mining Stabilization pond Trickling filter Ultraviolet germicidal irradiation UASB Vermifilter Wastewater treatment plant Disposal options Combined sewer Evaporation pond Groundwater recharge Infiltration basin Injection well Irrigation Marine dumping Marine outfall Reclaimed water Sanitary sewer Septic drain field Sewage farm Storm drain Surface runoff Vacuum sewer Category: Sewerage v t e Law of the sea Sources of law of the sea Global Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907 Geneva Conventions Second Geneva Convention Third Geneva Convention Fourth Geneva Convention Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees UNCLOS I Conventions Convention on the Territorial Sea and the Contiguous Zone Convention on the Continental Shelf Convention on the High Seas Convention on Fishing and Conservation of the Living Resources of the High Seas United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS III) United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea OPRC Convention MARPOL 73/78 Seabed Arms Control Treaty SOLAS Convention STCW Convention London Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter Ballast Water Management Convention International Plant Protection Convention International Health Regulations Aquatic Animal Health Code Terrestrial Animal Health Code Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures Hague–Visby Rules Rotterdam Rules Specific international straits Copenhagen Convention of 1857 Treaty of Versailles, Part XII, Section VI (1919) Montreux Convention Regarding the Regime of the Straits (1936) Egypt–Israel peace treaty (1979) Treaty of Peace and Friendship of 1984 between Chile and Argentina Maritime canals of global significance Convention of Constantinople Torrijos–Carter Treaties Other regional and local Treaties establishing UN FAO regional fisheries bodies and arrangements UNEP regional seas conventions and action plans List of maritime boundary treaties Main and related concepts Contiguous zone Continental shelf Custom of the sea Exclusive economic zone Freedom of navigation Innocent passage Internal waters International piracy law International waters Law of carriage of goods by sea Law of salvage Territorial waters Transit passage International courts International Seabed Authority International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea History Geneva Naval Conference Admiralty law International law Law portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=London_Convention_on_the_Prevention_of_Marine_Pollution_by_Dumping_of_Wastes_and_Other_Matter&oldid=1299005106 " Categories : Waste treaties International Maritime Organization treaties Ocean pollution Treaties concluded in 1972 Treaties entered into force in 1975 1975 in the environment Treaties of the Republic of Afghanistan Treaties of Antigua and Barbuda Treaties of Argentina Treaties of Australia Treaties of Azerbaijan Treaties of Barbados Treaties of the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic Treaties of Belgium Treaties of Benin Treaties of the military dictatorship in Brazil Treaties of Bolivia Treaties of Bulgaria Treaties of Canada Treaties of Cape Verde Treaties of Chile Treaties of the People's Republic of China Treaties of Zaire Treaties of Costa Rica Treaties of Ivory Coast Treaties of Croatia Treaties of Cuba Treaties of Cyprus Treaties of Denmark Treaties of the Dominican Republic Treaties of Egypt Treaties of Equatorial Guinea Treaties of Finland Treaties of France Treaties of Gabon Treaties of East Germany Treaties of West Germany Treaties of Greece Treaties of Guatemala Treaties of Haiti Treaties of Honduras Treaties of Hungary Treaties of Iceland Treaties of Iran Treaties of Ireland Treaties of Italy Treaties of Jamaica Treaties of Japan Treaties of Jordan Treaties of Kenya Treaties of Kiribati Treaties of South Korea Treaties of the Libyan Arab Republic Treaties of Luxembourg Treaties of Malta Treaties of Mexico Treaties of Monaco Treaties of Montenegro Treaties of Morocco Treaties of Nauru Treaties of the Netherlands Treaties of New Zealand Treaties of Nigeria Treaties of Norway Treaties of Oman Treaties of Pakistan Treaties of Panama Treaties of Papua New Guinea Treaties of Peru Treaties of the Philippines Treaties of the Polish People's Republic Treaties of Portugal Treaties of the Soviet Union Treaties of Saint Lucia Treaties of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Treaties of Serbia and Montenegro Treaties of Seychelles Treaties of Sierra Leone Treaties of Slovenia Treaties of the Solomon Islands Treaties of South Africa Treaties of Francoist Spain Treaties of Suriname Treaties of Sweden Treaties of Switzerland Treaties of Syria Treaties of Tanzania Treaties of Tonga Treaties of Tunisia Treaties of Ukraine Treaties of the United Arab Emirates Treaties of the United Kingdom Treaties of the United States Treaties of Vanuatu 1972 in London Treaties extended to the Faroe Islands Treaties extended to the Netherlands Antilles Treaties extended to Aruba Treaties extended to Guernsey Treaties extended to Bermuda Treaties extended to the British Indian Ocean Territory Treaties extended to the British Virgin Islands Treaties extended to the Cayman Islands Treaties extended to the Falkland Islands Treaties extended to the Isle of Man Treaties extended to Montserrat Treaties extended to the Pitcairn Islands Treaties extended to Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Treaties extended to the Turks and Caicos Islands Treaties extended to Akrotiri and Dhekelia Treaties extended to Jersey Treaties extended to British Hong Kong Treaties extended to the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Treaties extended to the Crown Colony of Seychelles Treaties extended to the British Solomon Islands Treaties extended to Portuguese Macau Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from May 2013 Use dmy dates from November 2022 Webarchive template wayback links Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2003 All articles containing potentially dated statements This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 01:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents London Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter 22 languages Add topic

