Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Ministry 3 Resistance 4 Arrest and trial 5 Execution 6 Posthumous honours 7 Beatification process 8 Writings 9 Quotes 10 Works 11 See also 12 Notes 13 Sources Toggle Sources subsection 13.1 Sources in English 13.2 Sources in German 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Alfred Delp 21 languages Български Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Italiano עברית Latina مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German Jesuit resistance fighter (1907–1945) The Reverend Alfred Delp SJ Alfred Delp, SJ Born Alfred Friedrich Delp ( 1907-09-15 ) 15 September 1907 Mannheim , Grand Duchy of Baden , German Empire Died 2 February 1945 (1945-02-02) (aged 37) Plötzensee Prison , Berlin, Nazi Germany Occupation Catholic priest Movement Kreisau Circle Part of a series on Persecutions of the Catholic Church Overview Historical persecution of Christians Catholic Church persecutions 1939–1958 Eradication of the Church under Stalinism Eastern Catholic persecutions Persecution of Christians in the modern era Roman Empire Persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire Diocletianic Persecution Neo-Persian Empire Sasanian conquest of Jerusalem Byzantine Empire Massacre of the Latins Japan Martyrs of Japan India Violence against Christians in India 2008 attacks on Christians in southern Karnataka China Martyr Saints of China Vietnam Vietnamese Martyrs Canada Canadian Martyrs United States Know Nothing Oregon Compulsory Education Act Pierce v. Society of Sisters Philadelphia nativist riots Ursuline Convent riots Norway Anti-Catholicism in Norway Great Britain and Ireland Anti-Catholicism in the United Kingdom List of Catholic martyrs of the English Reformation Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Irish Catholic Martyrs Dissolution of the Monasteries Penal Laws Cromwellian conquest of Ireland France Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution War in the Vendée Martyrs of Compiègne Massacre in the Rue Haxo Expulsion of congregations Spain Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Red Terror Dilectissima Nobis Martyrs of Turon Martyrs of Daimiel Bartolomé Blanco Innocencio of Mary Immaculate José María of Manila 233 Spanish Martyrs 498 Spanish Martyrs 522 Spanish Martyrs Burning of convents in Spain (1931) Germany Nazi persecution of the Catholic Church in Germany Mit brennender Sorge Kulturkampf Poland Nazi persecution of the Catholic Church in Poland Polish anti-religious campaign 1945–1990 108 Blessed Polish Martyrs Russia Martyrs of Pratulin Conversion of Chelm Eparchy Anti-Catholicism in the Soviet Union Eastern Catholic victims of Soviet persecutions Mexico Cristero War Saints Anti-clericalism in Mexico El Salvador Four U.S. missionaries 1989 murders of Jesuits Catholicism portal v t e Part of a series on the Society of Jesus History Regimini militantis Congregatio de Auxiliis Suppression Ratio Studiorum Hierarchy General Congregation Superior General Spirituality Spiritual Exercises Ad maiorem Dei gloriam Training Magis Works Educational institutions List of sites Jesuit Refugee Service Bollandists Notable Jesuits Ignatius of Loyola Francis Xavier Peter Faber Pedro Arrupe John Berchmans Francisco Suárez Robert Bellarmine Peter Canisius Edmund Campion Pierre-Jean De Smet Augustin Barruel Aloysius Gonzaga Frederick Copleston Karl Rahner Pope Francis Jesuit saints Jesuit theologians Jesuit philosophers v t e Part of a series on Christian mysticism Theology and philosophy Apophatic Ascetical Cataphatic Catholic spirituality Hellenistic Mystical theology Neoplatonic Henosis Practices Monasticism Monasticism New Silence Asceticism Mendicant Spiritual direction Meditation Meditation Lectio Divina Invoking of Mystic Saints Active asceticism Contemplation Hesychasm Jesus Prayer Quietism Stages of Christian perfection Hesychia Divinization Catharsis Theosis Kenosis Spiritual dryness Religious ecstasy Passive asceticism Abstinence Esoteric Charismatic Esoteric People (by era or century) Antiquity Ancient African Origen Thomasines Gregory of Nyssa Pseudo-Dionysius Desert Fathers Paul of Thebes Anthony the Great Arsenius the Great Poemen Macarius of Egypt Moses the Black Syncletica Athanasius John Chrysostom Hilarion John Cassian 11th · 12th Bernard of Clairvaux Guigo II Hildegard of Bingen Symeon the New Theologian Saint Sava of Serbia 13th · 14th Dominican Dominic de Guzmán Franciscan Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Bonaventure Jacopone da Todi Angela of Foligno English Richard Rolle Walter Hilton Julian of Norwich Margery Kempe Flemish Beatrice of Nazareth Lutgardis Hadewijch John van Ruysbroeck German Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Henry Suso Female Beatrice of Nazareth Bridget of Sweden Catherine of Siena Mechthild of Magdeburg Marguerite Porete 15th · 16th Spanish Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Others Catherine of Genoa 17th · 18th French Margaret Mary Alacoque Pierre de Bérulle Jean-Jacques Olier Louis de Montfort Charles de Condren John Eudes John of St. Samson Others Mary of Jesus of Ágreda Anne Catherine Emmerich Veronica Giuliani Francis de Sales 19th Dina Bélanger Catherine Labouré Mélanie Calvat Maximin Giraud Bernadette Soubirous Conchita de Armida Luisa Piccarreta Mary of the Divine Heart Thérèse of Lisieux Gemma Galgani 20th Padre Pio Therese Neumann Marthe Robin Alexandrina of Balazar Faustina Kowalska Sister Lúcia of Fátima Edgar Cayce Simone Weil Alfred Delp Thomas Merton Charles de Foucauld Edvige Carboni Elena Aiello Contemporary papal views Aspects of meditation ( Orationis Formas , 1989) Reflection on the New Age (2003) Literature and media Lingua ignota Ordo Virtutum Scivias Ascent of Mount Carmel Dark Night of the Soul Spiritual Canticle Way of Perfection Book of the First Monks The Interior Castle Abbey of the Holy Ghost A Dialogue of Comfort against Tribulation From Willow Creek to Sacred Heart The Glories of Mary The Imitation of Christ The Ladder of Divine Ascent Philokalia Revelations of Divine Love The Story of a Soul Theologia Germanica Devotio Moderna Fatima in Lucia's Own Words Calls from the Message of Fatima The Miracle of Our Lady of Fatima Sol de Fátima The Cloud of Unknowing On the Consolation of Philosophy The Mirror of Simple Souls Sister Catherine Treatise Tractatus de Purgatorio Sancti Patricii The Vision of Adamnán Divine Comedy Inferno Purgatorio Paradiso Fatima v t e Alfred Friedrich Delp SJ ( German: [ˈalfʁeːt ˈdɛlp] ⓘ ; 15 September 1907 – 2 February 1945) was a German Jesuit priest and philosopher of the German Resistance . A member of the inner Kreisau Circle resistance group, he is considered a significant figure in Catholic resistance to Nazism . Falsely implicated in the failed 1944 July Plot to overthrow Adolf Hitler , Delp was arrested and sentenced to death. He was executed in 1945.

Early life and education [ edit ] Alfred Delp was born in Mannheim , Grand Duchy of Baden , to a Catholic mother Maria, née Bernauer and a Protestant father Johann Adam Friedrich Delp. Although he was baptised as a Catholic, he attended a Protestant elementary school and was confirmed in the Lutheran church in 1921.  This was due to the influence of his paternal grandmother. Following a bitter argument with the Lutheran pastor, he requested and received the sacraments of First Communion and Confirmation in the Catholic Church. His Catholic pastor recognized the boy's intelligence and love for learning and arranged for him to study at the Goetheschule in Dieburg . Possibly because of the dual upbringing, he became later an ardent proponent of radically better relations between the Churches.

[ 1 ] Thereafter, Delp's youth was moulded mainly by the Bund Neudeutschland Catholic youth movement. Immediately after passing his Abitur – in which he was top of his class – he joined the Society of Jesus in 1926. Following philosophy studies at Pullach , he worked for 3 years as a prefect and sports teacher at Stella Matutina Kolleg in Feldkirch , Austria , where in 1933, he first experienced the Nazi regime, which forced an exodus of virtually all German students from Austria and thus the Stella Matutina [ 2 ] by means of a punitive 1000 Mark fine to be paid by anyone entering Austria. With his Director, Fr Otto Faller and Professor Alois Grimm , he was among the first to arrive in the Black Forest , where the Jesuits opened Kolleg St. Blasien for some 300 students forced out of Austria.

[ 3 ] After St. Blasien, he completed his theology studies in Valkenburg , The Netherlands (1934–1936), and in Frankfurt (1936–1937).

Ministry [ edit ] In 1935, Delp published his Tragic Existence , propagating a God-based humanism [ 4 ] and reviewing the existentialism of Martin Heidegger . In 1937, Delp was ordained a Catholic priest in Munich . Delp had wanted to study for a doctorate in philosophy at the University of Munich , but he was refused admission to the university for political reasons. From 1939 on, he worked on the editorial staff of the Jesuit journal Stimmen der Zeit ("Voices of the Times"), until the Nazis suppressed it in April 1941. He was then assigned as rector of St. Georg Church, part of Heilig-Blut Parish in the Munich neighbourhood Bogenhausen.

[ 5 ] He preached both at Heilig-Blut and St. Georg, and also secretly helped Jews who were escaping to Switzerland through the underground .

Resistance [ edit ] Outspoken opposition to the Nazis by individual Jesuits resulted in harsh response from government officials, including imprisonment of priests in concentration camps. The government takeover of church property, "Klostersturm", resulted in the loss of valuable properties such as that of Stimmen der Zeit , and limited the work of the Jesuits in Germany. The Jesuit provincial, Augustin Rösch , Delp's superior in Munich, became active in the underground resistance to Hitler.

Rösch introduced Delp to the Kreisau Circle . As of 1942, Delp met regularly with the clandestine group around Helmuth James Graf von Moltke to develop a model for a new social order after the Third Reich came to an end. Delp's role was to explain Catholic social teaching to the group, and to arrange contacts between Moltke and Catholic leaders, including Archbishop Konrad von Preysing of Berlin [ 6 ] and Bishop Johannes Dietz of Fulda.

[ 7 ] Arrest and trial [ edit ] After the 20 July plot to assassinate Hitler failed, a special Gestapo commission arrested and interrogated all known members of the Resistance. Delp was arrested in Munich on 28 July 1944 (eight days after Claus von Stauffenberg 's attempt on Hitler 's life), although he was not directly involved in the plot.

[ 8 ] He was transferred to Tegel Prison in Berlin. While in prison, he secretly began to say Mass and wrote letters, reflections on Advent, on Christmas, and other spiritual subjects, [ 9 ] which were smuggled out of the prison before his trial. On 8 December 1944, Delp had a visit from Franz von Tattenbach SJ, sent by Rösch to receive his final vows to the Jesuit Order. This was supposedly forbidden, but the attending policemen did not understand what was going on.

[ 10 ] Delp wrote on the same day, “It was too much, what a fulfillment, I prayed for it so much, I gave my life away. My chains are now without any meaning, because God found me worthy of the 'Vincula amoris' (chains of love)”.

[ 10 ] He was tried, together with Helmuth James Graf von Moltke , Franz Sperr, and Eugen Gerstenmaier , before the People's Court ( Volksgerichtshof ) on 9–11 January 1945, with Roland Freisler presiding. Delp, von Moltke, and Sperr were sentenced to death by hanging for high treason and treason .

[ 11 ] The court had dropped the charge against Delp of being aware of the 20 July plot, but his dedication to the Kreisau Circle, his work as a Jesuit priest, and his Christian-social worldview were enough to seal his fate.

[ 12 ] Execution [ edit ] While he was in prison, the Gestapo offered Delp his freedom in return for leaving the Jesuits, but he rejected it. Delp, like all prisoners connected with 20 July, was required to wear handcuffs day and night. Prisoners being taken to execution were handcuffed with their hands behind their backs.

[ 13 ] The sentence was carried out on 2 February 1945 at Plötzensee Prison in Berlin, , at the same time as Carl Friedrich Goerdeler and Johannes Popitz .

[ 14 ] . The next day, Roland Freisler was killed in an air-raid. A special order by Heinrich Himmler required that the remains of all prisoners executed in connection with 20 July Plot be cremated, and their ashes scattered over the sewage fields. Accordingly, the body of Alfred Delp was cremated and his ashes disposed of in an unknown location near Berlin.

[ 15 ] Posthumous honours [ edit ] In September 1949, the  superior Fr Otto Faller at Kolleg St. Blasien unveiled memorial plaques for Delp and Alois Grimm , both former educators and teachers slain by the Nazis. Thirty years later, Kolleg St. Blasien named its new theatre hall after Delp. The Alfred Delp Memorial Chapel in Lampertheim was consecrated on 2 February 1965, on the 20th anniversary of his death. Many schools in Germany are named after Alfred Delp, among them one in Bremerhaven . In Mannheim and in Göttingen , Catholic student residences are named for him. The guesthouse on the campus of Canisius College in Berlin also bears his name. In Dieburg , the uppermost level at the Gymnasium , the Alfred Delp School, the Catholic community centre, the Father Delp House, and a street are named after him. The Bundeswehr named its barracks in Donauwörth the Alfred-Delp-Kaserne . In 1955, the Wasserburgerstrasse, a street in Munich-Bogenhausen where Eva Braun resided beginning in 1935, has been renamed Delpstrasse.

Delp's name was included among the almost other 900 Catholics in a list of people having suffered a violent death for adherence to the Christian faith, published in 1999 as Zeugen für Christus. Das deutsche Martyrologium des 20. Jahrhunderts ( Witnesses for Christ. The German Martyrology of the 20th century ), prepared by Mgr Helmut Moll under the auspices of the German Bishops' Conference.

[ 16 ] Beatification process [ edit ] Delp's final parish in Munich sent documentation supporting the start of his official beatification process to the Archbishop of Berlin, Cardinal Georg Sterzinsky , in January 1990.

[ 17 ] Writings [ edit ] Delp's book In the Face of Death , published in 1956, gathered together  his meditations, notes, fragments of his diary and letters, written during his six months imprisonment, and has been compared to Dietrich Bonhoeffer 's Letters and Papers from Prison . It is the first part of a trilogy that includes Committed to the Earth and The Mighty God . The American edition of his Prison Meditations (1963) had an introduction by Thomas Merton , who considered him a mystic and among the most insightful writers of his time.

[ 18 ] The German edition of his Collected Works (1982–1988) was edited by Fr. Roman Bleistein SJ in five volumes.

Delp is best known for his writings that were smuggled out of prison. Because he was imprisoned during the Christmas season, many of these are on the theme of Advent and the coming of Jesus.

[ 19 ] In one of his last letters, Delp wrote, "...all of life is Advent".

[ 20 ] Many Christians continue to read and be inspired by Delp's life and witness.

[ 21 ] Quotes [ edit ] God does not need great pathos or great works. He needs greatness of hearts. He cannot calculate with zeroes [ 22 ] It is the time of sowing, not of harvesting. God is sowing; one day He will harvest again. I will try to do one thing. I will try to at least be a healthy and fruitful seed, falling into the soil. And into the Lord God's hand.

[ 23 ] Whoever does not have the courage to make history, becomes its poor object. Let's do it!

[ 24 ] Many of the things that are happening today would never have happened if we had been living in that longing, that disquiet of heart which comes when we are faced with God, and when we look clearly at things as they really are. If we had done this, God would have withheld his hand from many of the things that now shake and crush our lives. We would have come to terms with and judged the limits of our own competence.

[ 25 ] When we get out of here, we will show, that (ecumenicism) is more than personal friendship. We will continue to carry the historical burden of our separated churches, as baggage and inheritance. But never again shall it became shameful to Christ. Like you, I do not believe in the utopia of complete unity stews. But the one Christ is undivided, and when undivided love leads to Him, we will do better than our fighting predecessors and contemporaries.

[ 26 ] If there was a little more light and truth in the world through one human being, his life has had meaning.

In half an hour, I'll know more than you do.

[ 27 ] We need people who are moved by the horrific calamities and emerge from them with the knowledge that those who look to the Lord will be preserved by Him, even if they are hounded from the earth.

[ 25 ] Someday, others shall be able to live better and happier lives because we died.

[ 28 ] Works [ edit ] Tragische Existenz. Zur Philosophie Martin Heideggers , Herder, Freiburg im Breisgau, 1935.

Gesammelte Schriften (German edition of his Collected Writings , edited by Roman Bleistein SJ) in five volumes: Geistliche Schriften (1982) Philosophische Schriften (1983) Predigten und Ansprachen.

(1983) Aus dem Gefängnis.

(1984) Briefe – Texte – Rezensionen (1988) See also [ edit ] Jesuits and Nazi Germany Notes [ edit ] ^ Alfred Delp, Im Angesicht des Todes , Frankfurt, 1961, pp 138–139 ^ Josef Knünz SJ, 100 Jahre Stella Matutina 1856-1956 , J.N. Teutsch, Bregenz 1956; p.132 ^ Josef Knünz SJ, 100 Jahre Stella Matutina 1856-1956 , J.N. Teutsch, Bregenz 1956; p.134 ^ Alfred Delp, Tragische Existenz. Zur Philosophie Martin Heideggers (1935), in Stimmen der Zeit (1935) 37-147 and Sein als Existenz. Die Metaphysik von heute , in Stimmen der Zeit (1933) 557-590 ^ Karl H. Neufeld, Alfred Delp SJ , in Gestalten der Kirchengeschichte , Band 10,2, Stuttgart, 1993 ^ Gill, Anton (1994).

An Honourable Defeat . New York: Henry Holt. p.

164 .

ISBN 9780805035148 .

^ Opfermann, Bernhard (1987). "Johannes Dietz, Dr. phil. et theol., Bischof".

Das Bistum Fulda im Dritten Reich (in German). Fulda: Parzeller. pp.

43– 44.

^ See 20 July Plot , especially Note 4 ^ Alfred Delp, Im Angesicht des Todes , Frankfurt, 1961 ^ a b Alfred Delp, Kämpfer, Beter, Zeuge , Herder, Freiburg, 1962, p. 63 ^ Urteil des Volksgerichtshofs Berlin, 1.Senat vom 9.bis 11. Januar 1945 (1L439/44 - 1L397/44 - OJ 21/4 G Rs - OJ 38/44 gRs ^ Benedicta Maria Kempner, Priester vor Hitlers Tribunalen, Alfred Delp , Bertelsmann, 1996, p. 71 ^ Benedicta Maria Kempner, Priester vor Hitlers Tribunalen, Alfred Delp , Bertelsmann, 1996, p.72 ^ Delp, Alfred (29 October 2017).

Advent of the Heart: Seasonal Sermons and Writings - 1941-1944 .

Ignatius Press . p. 13.

ISBN 9781681490335 .

^ Alfred Delp, Kämpfer, Beter, Zeuge , Herder, Freiburg, 1962, p. 120 ^ " "All of life is advent": On the life and death of Alfred Delp, S.J." Ignatius Insight . 21 November 2009. Archived from the original on 2 December 2015 . Retrieved 10 January 2016 .

^ " "All of life is advent": On the life and death of Alfred Delp, S.J., Ignatius Insight, 21 November 2009" . Archived from the original on 2 December 2015 . Retrieved 10 January 2016 .

^ Batlogg, Andreas R. (21 January 2008).

"A Jesuit Martyr to the Nazis: Hitler wanted Alfred Delp forgotten, but his way of resistance still inspires" .

America . Retrieved 3 February 2020 .

^ "Alfred Delp" .

Plough . Retrieved 7 December 2017 .

^ " "All of life is Advent": On the life and death of Alfred Delp, S.J." www.ignatiusinsight.com . Ignatius Insight. 12 November 2009. Archived from the original on 10 July 2017 . Retrieved 7 December 2017 .

^ No. 49: Is Civilization a Mistake?

, retrieved 7 December 2017 ^ Alfred Delp SJ, Advent of the Heart , Ignatius Press, San Francisco,  2006, p.77 ^ Alfred Delp SJ, Advent of the Heart , Ignatius Press, San Francisco,  2006, page 19 ^ Alfred Delp SJ, The Prison Writings , Orbis 2004, p.xvi ^ a b "The Shaking Reality of Advent" .

Plough . Retrieved 7 December 2017 .

^ Letter to Eugen Gerstenmaier, in Kollegbrief St. Blasien , Sommer 1965, p. 7–8 ^ These were the last words of Alfred Delp. He whispered them jokingly, to the Prison Chaplain Rev. Peter Buchholz, who accompanied him to his execution. Alfred Delp SJ, The Prison Writings , Orbis 2004, p.xvii ^ Written after the death sentence was passed. Memorial plaque in Mannerheim Sources [ edit ] Sources in English [ edit ] Coady, Mary Frances, With Bound Hands: A Jesuit in Nazi Germany , Loyola Press, Chicago, 2003, ISBN 0-8294-1794-X .

Alfred Delp, Advent of the Heart: Seasonal Sermons and Prison Writings 1941-1944 , Ignatius Press, San Francisco, 2006, ISBN 1-58617-081-3 . Biographical information pp. 13–19 and pp. 173–189.

Anton Gill , An Honourable Defeat , Henry Holt, New York, 1994.

Kreuser Interview, personal memories of Father Delp as pastor in Munich Archived 13 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine Biography at GDW-Berlin, the center for remembrance of the German Resistance Delp honored by Raoul Wallenberg Foundation (regarding Alfred Delp's assistance to Jews) Sources in German [ edit ] Roman Bleistein, Alfred Delp, Geschichte eines Zeugen ( Alfred Delp, A Witness's Story ), Knecht Verlag, Frankfurt am Main 1989, ISBN 3-7820-0598-8 Günther Saltin, Durchkreutztes Leben , Schlüssler, Mannheim 2004 (2), ISBN 3-00-012687-2 Elke Endraß, Gemeinsam gegen Hitler. Pater Alfred Delp und Helmuth James Graf von Moltke , Kreuz Verlag, Stuttgart 2007, ISBN 978-3-7831-2881-9 Rita Haub/ Heinrich Schreiber, Alfred Delp, Held gegen Hitler ( Alfred Delp, Hero Against Hitler ), Echter Verlag, Würzburg 2005, ISBN 3-429-02665-2 Christian Feldmann, Alfred Delp. Leben gegen den Strom ( Alfred Delp, Life Against the Current ), Herder, Freiburg 2005, ISBN 3-451-28569-X Glaube als Widerstandskraft. Edith Stein, Alfred Delp, Dietrich Bonhoeffer ( Faith as Strength to Resist: Edith Stein, Alfred Delp, Dietrich Bonhoeffer ), 1987, ISBN 3-7820-0523-6 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Alfred Delp .

Alfred Delp Society Official Website (German) Archived 22 December 2015 at the Wayback Machine Translation of a Delp sermon about his ordination as priest Archived 13 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine Delp honored by Raoul Wallenberg Foundation (in English) Biography at GDW-Berlin, the center for remembrance of the German Resistance (in English) Alfred Delp SJ: a man transformed, Catholic Ireland Website Alfred Delp in the German National Library catalogue Biography at the German Historical Museum An Anglican meditation on Delp's Advent sermons from Anglicans Online (in English) Biography at Jesuiten-Online (in German) Article on the 60th anniversary of Alfred Delp's death, with a biography (in German) v t e Persecution of Christians Anti-Christian sentiment By incident Early Christianity New Testament Roman Empire Great Fire of Rome Persecution in Lyon Decian persecution Diocletianic Persecution Middle Ages Homs revolts (854–855) Massacre of the Latins Martyrs of Córdoba Bashmurian revolts Destruction of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre Kisrawan campaigns (1292–1305) Early modern French Revolution Revolt in the Vendée Martyrs of Japan Shimabara Rebellion Kakure Kirishitan Captivity of Mangalorean Catholics at Seringapatam Modern First Serbian Uprising Constantinople massacre of 1821 1843 and 1846 massacres in Hakkari 1850 Aleppo 1876 Bulgaria 1860 Lebanon conflict Tianjin Massacre Kucheng massacre Tự Đức's Catholic persecution Hamidian massacres Diyarbekir Candia massacre Boxer Rebellion Adana massacre Great Famine of Mount Lebanon Armenian genocide Assyrian genocide Greek genocide İzmit massacres Murder of the Romanov family Cristero War Shusha massacre Red Terror (Spain) Persecution of Jehovah's Witnesses in Nazi Germany Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia Bersiap Istanbul pogrom Turkish invasion of Cyprus Black Thursday East Timor genocide Chouf massacres Damour massacre Mountain War (Lebanon) Beer Hall Putsch Eastern Bloc Persecution of Christians in the post–Cold War era Sumgait pogrom 1990 Dushanbe riots Maluku sectarian conflict Nag Hammadi massacre Kosheh massacres Boko Haram insurgency Maspero demonstrations 1998 attacks on Christians in southeastern Gujarat 1998 attacks on Christians in Dangs district 1998 Ramgiri-Udaygiri violence 1999 Ranalai violence 2004 unrest in Kosovo 2007 Christmas violence in Kandhamal 2008 Kandhamal violence 2008 Kandhamal nun gang rape case 2008 attacks on Christians in southern Karnataka 2010 Baghdad church siege 2010 Manila hostage crisis 2016 Lahore bombing 2019 Sri Lanka Easter bombings 2021 anti-Christian violence in Karnataka Owo church attack 2023 Hamburg shooting Kasindi church bombing Attack on Saint Menas church Mar Elias Church attack By persecutor Early Christianity Agrippa I Roman Empire Nero Domitian Septimius Severus Maximinus Thrax Decius Valerian Late Antiquity Diocletian Maximian Galerius Shapur II Athanaric Middle Ages Al-Mutawakkil Al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah Hulagu Khan Timur Mehmed II Early modern Toyotomi Hideyoshi Tokugawa Ieyasu Kangxi Tipu Sultan Minh Mạng Tự Đức Queen Jeongsun Modern Ranavalona I Mwanga II of Buganda Plutarco Elías Calles Tomás Garrido Canabal Bai Chongxi Enver Hoxha Three Pashas Vladimir Lenin Joseph Stalin Plutarco Elías Calles Cristero War Adolf Hitler Mao Zedong Ante Pavelić Islamic State Nicolae Ceaușescu Pol Pot Suharto Saddam Hussein Daniel Ortega Mullah Omar Kim Il-sung Abubakar Shekau Xi Jinping Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi Kim Jong Un By country Afghanistan Algeria Azerbaijan Burma Cambodia China Egypt France German Empire Nazi Germany India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Laos Lebanon Madagascar Malaysia Mexico Nigeria North Korea Ottoman Empire Pakistan Palestine Saudi Arabia Somalia Soviet Union Spain Sudan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Yemen By persecuted group Anabaptists Catholics Eastern Orthodox Mormons Violence against Mormons Oriental Orthodox Armenians Copts Protestants Martyrs ( list ) Massacre of the Innocents Saint Stephen Carthusian Martyrs Chinese Martyrs Saint Martyrs of Jasenovac Drina Martyrs Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Korean Martyrs Martyrs of Japan Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War New Martyrs North American Martyrs Saints of the Cristero War Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs 233 Spanish Martyrs 498 Spanish Martyrs 522 Spanish Martyrs Martyrs of Turon Martyrs of Daimiel Eastern Catholics in the USSR 21 Martyrs of Libya Category Commons Portal v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Croatia Korea Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alfred_Delp&oldid=1305158834 " Categories : 1907 births 1945 deaths 20th-century German Jesuits 20th-century German male writers 20th-century German non-fiction writers 20th-century Roman Catholic martyrs Catholic philosophers Clergy from Mannheim Executed members of the 20 July plot German male non-fiction writers German religious writers German Roman Catholic writers Jesuit martyrs Members of the Kreisau Circle People executed by hanging at Plötzensee Prison People from Baden-Württemberg executed at Plötzensee Prison People from the Grand Duchy of Baden Roman Catholics in the German Resistance Roman Catholic priests executed by Nazi Germany Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2023 Articles with hCards Pages using Template:Post-nominals with customized linking Pages with German IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Webarchive template wayback links Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with German-language sources (de) This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 11:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Alfred Delp 21 languages Add topic

