Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Tectonics 2 See also 3 References Toggle References subsection 3.1 Sources Toggle the table of contents Woodlark plate 13 languages Azərbaycanca Español Euskara Français 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano Македонски 日本語 Polski Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Small tectonic plate located to the east of the island of New Guinea Woodlark plate Approximate surface projections of active tectonic plates. Key: Woodlark plate , Trobriand plate , Solomon Sea plate , Active trench subduction boundaries , Inactive trench subduction boundaries , current spreading boundary . The Australian plate to the southeast and the Pacific plate to the northwest are not shown, but their complex collision has created these microplates. Click and then mouse over shows feature names.

Type microplate Movement 1 northeast Speed 1 58 mm/year Features New Guinea , Pacific Ocean 1 Relative to the African plate New Britain Woodlark Island Solomon Islands Louisiade Archipelago Coral Sea Basin W. P.

Woodlark Basin Manus Basin Louisiade Plateau Ontong Java Plateau Britain New           Trench North Solomon Trough Woodlark Rise Papuan Plateau Trobriand Trough Pock- lington Trough Solomon Sea Pocklinton Rise Seafloor topographic map of area of Woodlark plate (W. P.) which is confined to the north of the Woodlark Basin 's mid oceanic ridge.

[ 1 ] The eastern part of the mid oceanic ridge boundary can be seen between the black label W.P, and the white label Woodlark Basin below it.

The Woodlark plate is a small almost triangular shaped tectonic plate located east of the island of New Guinea and situated mainly within the northern half of the Woodlark Basin . It is located in a very complex tectonic environment, that because of associated features, has been extensively studied since it was first proposed to exist. It is now known to be much smaller than originally proposed, mainly because of information from GPS stations on islands and sea floor studies that have fully defined its margins.

Tectonics [ edit ] Main article: Woodlark Basin Woodlark plate as based on 2003 modelling [ 2 ] -it is now modelled as much smaller and essentially confined to the northern section of the Woodlark Basin .

[ 1 ] The Woodlark plate was originally proposed to be somewhat larger than currently is believed to be the case.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] It is now suspected to have four active triple junctions, two of which are with the Australian plate to its south, based on areas of high seismic activity and other evidence.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] As originally modelled it extended to the west along the east coast of New Guinea and was subducting beneath the Caroline plate along its northern border. This is no longer accepted to be the case, so that either the Solomon Sea plate , [ 5 ] [ 6 ] or a further plate called the Trobriand plate must assume this role based on new information such as that from GPS groundstations.

[ 1 ] In this previous model, the Maoke plate had converged on its west, the Australian plate converges on the south, [ 2 ] and on the east there was an undefined compressive zone which might have been a transform fault that marked the boundary with the adjoining to the north Solomon Sea plate. When further oceanographic studies defined that there was a transform fault they also potentially enlarged the size of the Solomon Sea plate or created the need for a further current plate.

[ 7 ] It was also in this model contacting the South Bismarck plate to the northeast.

[ 2 ] Most of its originally assigned area and boundary activity are now assigned to a combination of the Australian plate and other microplates. It is possible that if a still active Trobriand microplate exists, because active subduction is still taking place at the Trobriand Trough, all the western activity that some have assigned to an enlarged Solomon Sea plate will become assigned to the Trobriand microplate. The Trobriand microplate must have existed historically.

[ 3 ] [ 1 ] These assignments are partially informed by GNS studies where the Woodlark Basin region had distinctly different movements from a "Trobriand Block" and multiple eastern New Guinea land "Blocks" so that it was possible to define up to 5 distinct crustal blocks with possible independent movement that others later interpreted as components of differing microplates.

[ 5 ] Subduction at the Trobriand Trough was originally assumed to be the case when the existence of the Woodlark plate was first modelled [ 2 ] but later went out of favour due to the relatively low seismic activity along some of the Trobriand Trough and measurement of movement across the trough.

[ 4 ] [ 8 ] Today because the Woodlark Basin has been well characterised by deep sea ocean basin standards it is understood to have a northern boundary where the Woodlark Rise is associated with the Nubara Transform Fault.

[ 9 ] This transform fault is definitely the boundary with the Solomon Sea plate, [ 10 ] and will also be the northern boundary with the Trobriand plate if this currently independently exists.

[ 10 ] The Woodlark plate's eastern side is being subducted northeast beneath the New Georgia Islands on the Solomon Sea/ Pacific plate but here the deformation front lacks a flexed outer rise and bathymetric trench, and is represented by the San Cristobal Trough extension to the north of the San Cristobal Trench.

[ 8 ] Where the Woodlark Basin is subducted northeast beneath the New Georgia Islands the relative light plate made of recent oceanic type basalt stays shallow and is presumably being melted on mantle contact and producing the many arc volcanoes of the western Solomon Islands.

[ 11 ] The southern boundary of the plate is defined by a mid oceanic ridge that is actively spreading tholeiitic basalt similar to mid-ocean ridge basalt (MORB) in a mostly north and south directions across its center in an east–west orientation with the Australian plate being to the south.

[ 12 ] The spreading centers are offset by transform faults, creating five segments, [ 6 ] which causes the spreading center to be uneven across the basin. There are two larger transform faults called respectively the Moresby transform in the middle of the basin and the Simbo transform at the far eastern end of the spreading center.

[ 6 ] The rate of spreading in the eastern section of the basin at 6.7 cm/year (2.6 in/year) is significantly higher than the rate of spreading of 3.8 cm/year (1.5 in/year) on the western side of the Woodlark Basin.

[ 6 ] As the eastern side of the basin has opened up much faster than the western side with the separation at the Moresby Transform Fault there is a shallower seafloor to the West, and an axial graben to the East, [ 6 ] that is about 500 m (1,600 ft) deeper than the western basin.

[ 13 ] The most recent major change in spreading direction of the Woodlark Basin spreading center and thus plate movement occurred about 450,000 years ago with a slowing in rate of divergence about 200,000 years ago.

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Woodlark Basin – Oceanic basin located to the east of the island of New Guinea References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Benyshek & Taylor 2021 , Section:2.1 Geologic Background, Figure 2 ^ a b c d e Bird, Peter (2003).

"An updated digital model of plate boundaries" .

Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems .

4 (3).

Bibcode : 2003GGG.....4.1027B .

doi : 10.1029/2001GC000252 .

^ a b c Benyshek & Taylor 2021 , Abstract,9 Conclusions ^ a b "USGS:Seismotectonics of the New Guinea Region and Vicinity:Historic Seismicity" . Retrieved 6 August 2023 .

^ a b Wallace et al. 2014 , Section:4 Interpretation of the GPS Results ^ a b c d e Boulart et al. 2022 , Fig. 1: Regional map of the Woodlark Basin, Section:Introduction ^ Benyshek & Taylor 2021 , Introduction, Figure 1.Geology and tectonics of the Papuan Peninsula-Woodlark Basin region ^ a b Benyshek & Taylor 2021 , 2.2 Gravity, Figure 3.Seismicity and focal mechanisms of the Papua New Guinea-Solomon Islands region ^ Benyshek & Taylor 2021 , 6.3.1.Case 1: Three-Plate Solution ^ a b Benyshek & Taylor 2021 , 6.3.1.Case 2: Four-Plate Solution, Figure 11 ^ Benyshek & Taylor 2021 , 2.3.Seismicity and Arc Volcanism ^ Boulart et al. 2022 , Section:Sulfide deposits and hydrothermal fluids ^ Benyshek & Taylor 2021 , 3.1.Woodlark Basin Spreading Center ^ Benyshek & Taylor 2021 , 8.Discussion Sources [ edit ] Benyshek, E. K.; Taylor, B. (2021).

"Tectonics of the Papua-Woodlark region" .

Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems .

22 (e2020GC009209).

doi : 10.1029/2020GC009209 .

Boulart, Cédric; Rouxel, Olivier; Scalabrin, Carla; Le Meur, Pierre; Pelleter, Ewan; Poitrimol, Camille; Thiébaut, Eric; Matabos, Marjolaine; Castel, Jade; Tran Lu Y, Adrien; Michel, Loic N.; Cathalot, Cécile; Chéron, Sandrine; Boissier, Audrey; Germain, Yoan; Guyader, Vivien; Arnaud-Haond, Sophie; Bonhomme, François; Broquet, Thomas; Cueff-Gauchard, Valérie; Le Layec, Victor; L’Haridon, Stéphane; Mary, Jean; Le Port, Anne-Sophie; Tasiemski, Aurélie; Kuama, Darren C.; Hourdez, Stéphane; Jollivet, Didier (2022).

"Active hydrothermal vents in the Woodlark Basin may act as dispersing centres for hydrothermal fauna" .

Communications Earth and Environment .

3 (64).

doi : 10.1038/s43247-022-00387-9 .

hdl : 20.500.12210/63872 .

Wallace, LM; Ellis, S; Little, T; Tregoning, P; Palmer, N; Rosa, R; Stanaway, R; Oa, J; Nidkombu, E; Kwazi, J (2014).

"Continental breakup and UHP rock exhumation in action: GPS results from the Woodlark Rift, Papua New Guinea" .

Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems .

15 (11): 4267– 90.

doi : 10.1002/2014GC005458 .

hdl : 1885/13228 .

v t e Tectonic plates Major plates African Antarctic Eurasian Indo-Australian Australian Indian North American Pacific South American Minor plates Amurian Arabian Burma Caribbean Caroline Cocos Indian Nazca New Hebrides Okhotsk Philippine Scotia Somali Sunda Yangtze Microplates Adriatic Aegean Sea Anatolian Balmoral Reef Banda Sea Bird's Head Capricorn Coiba Conway Reef Explorer Futuna Galápagos Gonâve Gorda Greenland Halmahera Iberian Iranian Juan de Fuca Juan Fernández Kerguelen Kermadec Lwandle Madagascar Malpelo Manus Maoke Mariana Molucca Sea Niuafo’ou North Andes North Bismarck North Galápagos Okinawa Panama Pelso Philippine Mobile Belt Rivera Rovuma Sangihe Seychelles Shetland Solomon Sea South Bismarck South Sandwich Timor Tisza Tonga Trobriand Victoria Woodlark Ancient plates Baltic Bellingshausen Charcot Cimmeria Farallon Insular Intermontane Izanagi Kula Lhasa Malvinas Moa Phoenix Kshiroda Oceanic ridges Aden Ridge Carlsberg Ridge Central Indian Ridge Chile Ridge Cocos Ridge East Pacific Rise Explorer Ridge Gakkel Ridge Galápagos Spreading Center Gorda Ridge Juan de Fuca Ridge Mid-Atlantic Ridge Knipovich Ridge Kolbeinsey Ridge Mohns Ridge Reykjanes Ridge Pacific–Antarctic Ridge South American–Antarctic Ridge Southeast Indian Ridge Southwest Indian Ridge Ancient oceanic ridges Aegir Ridge Alpha Ridge Antarctic–Phoenix Ridge Kula–Farallon Ridge Mid-Labrador Ridge Pacific–Farallon Ridge Pacific–Kula Ridge Geology portal List Category Commons v t e Tectonic plates of Southeast Asia – New Guinea ( Australian plate – Pacific plate convergence zone) Large Caroline plate Philippine Sea plate Sunda plate Small West Burma plate Philippines Philippine Mobile Belt Indonesia Banda Sea plate Bird's Head plate Halmahera plate Molucca Sea Collision Zone Molucca Sea plate Sangihe plate Timor plate New Guinea Maoke plate North Bismarck plate Manus plate Solomon Sea plate South Bismarck plate Trobriand plate Woodlark plate Faults Flores back-arc thrust fault Great Sumatran Fault Marikina Valley fault system New Britain subduction zone Palu-Koro Fault Philippine fault system Ramu-Markham Fault Sorong Fault Trenches and troughs Java Trench (Sunda) with Mentawai Trough Sunda Trough Timor Trough Philippines Cotabato Trench Manila Trench North Luzon Trough Negros Trench Palawan Trench Philippine Trench East Luzon Trench Sulu Trench Sulawesi and Moluccas Aru Trough Banda Trench Ceram Trough Salajar Trough Sangihe Trough Talaud Trough Ternate Trough Timor Aur Trough Tanimbar Trough New Guinea Ayu Trough Kilinailau Trench Manokwari Trough Lyra Trough Mussau Trough New Guinea Trench Pocklington Trough New Britain Trench (Bougainville) West Caroline Trough West Melanesian Trench Subsea plateaus and basins Arafura Basin Aru-Tanimbar Basin Bengkulu Basin Benham Plateau Bula Basin East Natuna Basin Geelvinck (Cendrawasih) Basin Manus Basin Minahasa Basin North Australian Basin North Biak Basin North Flores Basin Northern East Java Basin Northern Makassar Basin Ontong Java Plateau Sawu Basin Southern Makassar Basin Talaud Basin Weber Deep West Halmahera Basin West Natuna Basin Woodlark Basin Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Woodlark_plate&oldid=1256723842 " Categories : Tectonic plates Geology of the Pacific Ocean Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 11 November 2024, at 08:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Woodlark plate 13 languages Add topic

