Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Major branches Toggle Major branches subsection 1.1 Behavioral neuroscience 1.2 Computational modeling 1.3 Brain activity 2 Observations 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Systems neuroscience 10 languages العربية বাংলা Español Français 한국어 Italiano 日本語 Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Subdiscipline of neuroscience and systems biology This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( December 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Systems neuroscience is a subdiscipline of neuroscience and systems biology that studies the structure and function of various neural circuits and systems that make up the central nervous system of an organism.

[ 1 ] Systems neuroscience encompasses a number of areas of study concerned with how nerve cells behave when connected together to form neural pathways , neural circuits , and larger brain networks .  At this level of analysis, neuroscientists study how different neural circuits work together to analyze sensory information, form perceptions of the external world, form emotions, make decisions, and execute movements.

[ 2 ] Researchers in systems neuroscience are concerned with the relation between molecular and cellular approaches to understanding brain structure and function, as well as with the study of high-level mental functions such as language , memory , and self-awareness (which are the purview of behavioral and cognitive neuroscience). To deepen their understanding of these relations and understanding, systems neuroscientists typically employ techniques for understanding networks of neurons as they are seen to function, by way of electrophysiology using either single-unit recording or multi-electrode recording, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), and PET scans .

[ 1 ] The term is commonly used in an educational framework:  a common sequence of graduate school neuroscience courses consists of cellular/molecular neuroscience for the first semester, then systems neuroscience for the second semester.  It is also sometimes used to distinguish a subdivision within a neuroscience department in a university.

Major branches [ edit ] Systems neuroscience has three major branches in relation to measuring the brain: behavioral neuroscience, computational modeling, and brain activity. Through these three branches, it breaks down the core concepts of systems neuroscience and provides valuable information about how the functional systems of an organism interact independently and intertwined with one another.

Behavioral neuroscience [ edit ] Behavioral neuroscience in relation to systems neuroscience focuses on representational dissimilarity matrices (RDMs), which categorizes brain activity patterns and compares them across different conditions, such as the dissimilar level of brain activity observing an animal in comparison to an inanimate object. These models give a quantitative representation of behavior while providing comparable models of the patterns observed.

5 Correlations or anticorrelations between brain-activity patterns are used during experimental conditions to distinguish the processing of each brain region when stimuli is presented.

Computational modeling [ edit ] Computational models provide a base form of brain-activity level, which is typically represented by the firing of a single neuron. This is essential for understanding systems neuroscience as it shows the physical changes that occur during functional changes in an organism. While these models are important for understanding brain-activity, one-to-one correspondence of neuron firing has not been completely uncovered yet. Different measurements of the same activity lead to different patterns, when in theory, the patterns should be the same, or at least similar to one another. However, studies show fundamental differences when it comes to measuring the brain, and science strives to investigate this dissimilarity.

Brain activity [ edit ] Brain activity and brain imaging help scientists understand the differences between functional systems of an organism in combination with computational models and the understanding of behavioral neuroscience. The three major branches of systems neuroscience work together to provide the most accurate information about brain activity as neuroimaging allows in its current state. While there can always be improvements to brain-activity measurements, typical imaging studies through electrophysiology can already provide massive amounts of information about the systems of an organism and how they may work intertwined with one another. For example, using the core branches of systems neuroscience, scientists have been able to dissect a migraine’s attack on the nervous system by observing brain-activity dissimilarities and using computational modeling to compare the differences of a functioning brain and a brain affected by a migraine.

6 Observations [ edit ] Systems neuroscience is observed through electrophysiology , which focuses on the electrical activity of biological systems in an organism. Through electrophysiology studies, the activity levels of different systems in the body help explain abnormalities of systematic functioning, such as an abnormal heartbeat rhythm or a stroke. While the main focus of electrophysiology is the heart, it does provide informational scanning of brain activity in relation to other bodily functions, which can be useful for the connection of neurological activity between systems.

Although systems neuroscience is generally observed in relation to a human’s level of functioning, many studies have been conducted on drosophila , or the small fruit fly, as it is considered to be easier due to the simpler brain structure and more controllable genetic and environmental factors from an experimental standpoint. While there are strong dissimilarities between the functioning capabilities of a fruit fly in comparison to a human, these studies still provide valuable insight on how a human brain might work.

Neural circuits and neuron firing is more easily observable in fruit flies through functional brain imaging, as neuronal pathways are simplified and, therefore, are easier to follow. These pathways may be simple, but by understanding the basis of neuron firing, this can lead to important studies on a human’s neuronal pathway and eventually to a one-to-one neuron correspondence when a system is functioning.

7 See also [ edit ] Example systems Ascending reticular activating system Auditory system Gustatory system Motor system Olfactory system Reward system Sensory system Somatosensory system Visual system Related concepts Sensory neuroscience Neural oscillation Neural correlate Neural substrate Behavioral neuroscience Neuroimaging Electrophysiology References [ edit ] ^ a b Klaes, Christian (2018-01-01), Manahan-Vaughan, Denise (ed.), "Chapter 28 - Invasive Brain-Computer Interfaces and Neural Recordings From Humans" , Handbook of Behavioral Neuroscience , Handbook of  Neural Plasticity Techniques, vol. 28, Elsevier, pp.

527– 539 , retrieved 2024-09-26 ^ Rizzolatti, Giacomo; Fabbri‐Destro, Maddalena; Caruana, Fausto; Avanzini, Pietro (August 2018).

"System neuroscience: Past, present, and future" .

CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics .

24 (8): 685– 693.

doi : 10.1111/cns.12997 .

ISSN 1755-5930 .

PMC 6490004 .

PMID 29924477 .

3. Bear, M. F. et al. Eds. (1995).

Neuroscience: Exploring The Brain . Baltimore, Maryland, Williams and Wilkins.

ISBN 0-7817-3944-6 4. Hemmen J. L., Sejnowski T. J. (2006).

23 Problems in Systems Neuroscience .  Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-514822-3 5. Kriegeskorte, N., Mur, M., & Bandettini, P. (2008). Representational similarity analysis - connecting the branches of systems neuroscience.

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, 2 , 4–4. https://doi.org/10.3389/neuro.06.004.2008 6. Brennan, K. C., & Pietrobon, D. (2018). A Systems Neuroscience Approach to Migraine.

Neuron (Cambridge, Mass.) , 97 (5), 1004–1021. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2018.01.029 7. Kazama, H. (2015). Systems neuroscience in Drosophila : Conceptual and technical advantages.

Neuroscience, 296, 3–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.06.035 v t e Neuroscience Outline History Basic science Behavioral epigenetics Behavioral genetics Brain mapping Brain-reading Cellular neuroscience Computational neuroscience Connectomics Imaging genetics Integrative neuroscience Molecular neuroscience Neural decoding Neural engineering Neuroanatomy Neurobiology Neurochemistry Neuroendocrinology Neurogenetics Neuroinformatics Neurometrics Neuromorphology Neurophysics Neurophysiology Systems neuroscience Clinical neuroscience Behavioral neurology Clinical neurophysiology Epileptology Neurocardiology Neuroepidemiology Neurogastroenterology Neuroimmunology Neurointensive care Neurology Neuro-oncology Neuro-ophthalmology Neuropathology Neuropharmacology Neuroprosthetics Neuropsychiatry Neuroradiology Neurorehabilitation Neurosurgery Neurotology Neurovirology Nutritional neuroscience Psychiatry Cognitive neuroscience Affective neuroscience Behavioral neuroscience Chronobiology Molecular cellular cognition Motor control Neurolinguistics Neuropsychology Sensory neuroscience Social cognitive neuroscience Interdisciplinary fields Consumer neuroscience Cultural neuroscience Educational neuroscience Evolutionary neuroscience Global neurosurgery Neuroanthropology Neural engineering Neurobiotics Neurocinema Neurocriminology Neuroeconomics Neuroepistemology Neuroesthetics Neuroethics Neuroethology Neurohistory Neurolaw Neuromarketing Neuromorphic engineering Neuroscience of music Neurophenomenology Neurophilosophy Neuropolitics Neurorobotics Neurotheology Paleoneurobiology Social neuroscience Concepts Brain–computer interface Development of the nervous system Neural network (artificial) Neural network (biological) Detection theory Intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring Neurochip Neurodegenerative disease Neurodevelopmental disorder Neurodiversity Neurogenesis Neuroimaging Neuroimmune system Neuromanagement Neuromodulation Neuroplasticity Neurotechnology Neurotoxin Self-awareness Category Commons v t e Systems science System types Art Biological Complex Coupled human–environment Ecological Economic Information Multi-agent Nervous Recommender Social Concepts Doubling time Leverage points Limiting factor Negative feedback Positive feedback Theoretical fields Control theory Cybernetics Earth system science Living systems Sociotechnical system Systemics Urban metabolism World-systems theory Analysis Biology Dynamics Ecology Engineering Neuroscience Pharmacology Philosophy Psychology Theory ( Systems thinking ) Scientists Russell L. Ackoff Victor Aladjev William Ross Ashby Ruzena Bajcsy Béla H. Bánáthy Gregory Bateson Anthony Stafford Beer Richard E. Bellman Ludwig von Bertalanffy Margaret Boden Alexander Bogdanov Kenneth E. Boulding Murray Bowen Kathleen Carley Mary Cartwright C. West Churchman Manfred Clynes George Dantzig Edsger W. Dijkstra Fred Emery Heinz von Foerster Stephanie Forrest Jay Wright Forrester Barbara Grosz Charles A. S. Hall Mike Jackson Lydia Kavraki James J. Kay Faina M. Kirillova George Klir Allenna Leonard Edward Norton Lorenz Niklas Luhmann Humberto Maturana Margaret Mead Donella Meadows Mihajlo D. Mesarovic James Grier Miller Radhika Nagpal Howard T. Odum Talcott Parsons Ilya Prigogine Qian Xuesen Anatol Rapoport John Seddon Peter Senge Claude Shannon Katia Sycara Eric Trist Francisco Varela Manuela M. Veloso Kevin Warwick Norbert Wiener Jennifer Wilby Anthony Wilden Applications Systems theory in anthropology Systems theory in archaeology Systems theory in political science Organizations List Principia Cybernetica Category Portal Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Systems_neuroscience&oldid=1260428577 " Categories : Branches of neuroscience Systems biology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from December 2012 All articles lacking in-text citations This page was last edited on 30 November 2024, at 18:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Systems neuroscience 10 languages Add topic

