Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Collections curator 2 Exhibitions curator 3 Education and training 4 Biocuration 5 Community curation 6 Literary curation 7 Technology curators 8 Other definitions 9 See also 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Curator 39 languages Afrikaans العربية Български Bosanski Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gàidhlig 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Македонски Malti Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Português Русский Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Content specialist charged with managing an institution's collections Not to be confused with Curate .

Curator and exhibit designer dress a mannequin for an exhibit.

A curator (from Latin cura ' to take care ' ) [ 1 ] is a manager or overseer. When working with cultural organizations, a curator is typically a "collections curator" or an "exhibitions curator", and has multifaceted tasks dependent on the particular institution and its mission. The term "curator" may designate the head of any given division, not limited to museums . Curator roles include "community curators", "literary curators", " digital curators ", and " biocurators ".

Collections curator [ edit ] Emile Theodore (center), museum curator of the Palais des Beaux-Arts de Lille from 1912 to 1937, shown here during reconstruction of the gallery dedicated to Spanish and Italian paintings, c.

1920 .

A "collections curator", a "museum curator", or a "keeper" of a cultural heritage institution (e.g., gallery , museum , library , or archive ) is a content specialist charged with an institution's collections and involved with the interpretation of heritage material including historical artifacts. A collections curator's concern necessarily involves tangible objects of some sort—artwork, collectibles, historic items, or scientific collections.

In smaller organizations, a curator may have sole responsibility for acquisitions and even for collections care . A curator makes decisions regarding what objects to select, oversees their potential and documentation, conducts research based on the collection and its history, provides proper packaging of object for transportation, and shares  research with the public and community through exhibitions and publications. In very small, volunteer-based museums, such as those of local historical societies, a curator may be the only paid staff-member.

In larger institutions, the curator's primary function is that of a subject specialist, with the expectation that he or she will conduct original research on objects and guide the organization in its collecting. Such institutions can have multiple curators, each assigned to a specific collecting area (e.g., curator of ancient art, curator of prints and drawings, etc.) and often operating under the direction of a head curator. In such organizations, the physical care of the collection may be overseen by museum collections-managers or by museum conservators, with documentation and administrative matters (such as personnel, insurance, and loans) handled by a museum registrar.

In France, the term "collections curator" is translated as conservateur . There are two kinds of conservateurs : heritage curators ( conservateurs du patrimoine ) with five specialities (archeology, archives, museums, historical monuments, natural science museums), and librarian curators ( conservateurs des bibliothèques ). These curators are selected by competitive examination and attend the INP (Institut National du Patrimoine).

[ 2 ] [ better source needed ] The "conservateurs du patrimoine" are civil servants or work in the public service; the use of the title by private workers is not possible.

[ citation needed ] In the United Kingdom, the term "curator" also applies to government employees who monitor the quality of contract archaeological work under Planning Policy Guidance 16: Archaeology and Planning (PPG 16) and manage the cultural resource of a region. In a museum setting, a curator in the United Kingdom may also be called a "keeper".

Exhibitions curator [ edit ] An "exhibitions curator" is a person in charge of conceiving and organising exhibitions.

The title "curator" identifies someone who selects and often interprets works for an exhibit. In addition to selecting works, the curator is often responsible for writing labels, catalog essays, and other content supporting exhibitions. Such curators may be permanent staff members, "guest curators" from an affiliated organization or university, or "freelance curators" working on a consultancy basis.

In France, the term "exhibitions curator" is translated as commissaire d'exposition or curateur .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The late-20th century saw an explosion of artists organizing exhibitions. The artist-curator has a long tradition of influence, notably featuring Sir Joshua Reynolds (1723–1792), inaugural president of the Royal Academy of Arts , London, founded in 1768.

Education and training [ edit ] Curators hold a high academic degree in their subject, typically a Doctor of Philosophy or a master's degree in subjects such as history, art, history of art , archaeology , anthropology , or classics .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Curators are also expected to have contributed to their academic field, for example, by delivering public talks, publishing articles, or presenting at specialist academic conferences.

[ 5 ] It is important that curators have knowledge of the current collecting market for their area of expertise, and are aware of current ethical practices and laws that may impact their organisation's collecting.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] The increased complexity of many museums and cultural organisations has prompted the emergence of professional programs in fields such as public history, public humanities , museum studies , arts management , and curating/curatorial practice.

[ 10 ] Biocuration [ edit ] A biocurator is a professional scientist who curates, collects, annotates, and validates information that is disseminated by biological databases and model organism databases .

Community curation [ edit ] Education and outreach play an important role in some institutions. It has led to the emergence of titles such as "Curator of Education" and "Curator of Public Practice".

Community curation— also known as "co-curation",  "public curation" [ 11 ] or "inclusive curation" [ 12 ] —is a movement in museums, public humanities organizations, and within the biocuration field to involve community members in various curatorial processes, including exhibit development and programming.

Community members involved in community curation are likely not trained as museum professionals, but have vested interests in the outcomes of curatorial projects.

[ 13 ] Community curation is a response to the 19th century "information transmission" model of learning, in which museums are sources of expert knowledge and visitors are the recipients of that expertise.

[ 14 ] Community curation seeks not to abandon expertise, but to broaden definitions of expertise to "include broader domains of experience" that visitors bring to museums.

[ 15 ] Community curation practices are varied. Organizations have conducted community outreach at the beginning of exhibition projects, and convenes community advisory committees at various stages in the curatorial process.

[ 16 ] or have accepted exhibit proposals from community members and trained them in curatorial skills to co-create exhibits.

[ 17 ] Such efforts to allow communities to participate in curation can require "more not less expertise from museum staff".

[ 18 ] Literary curation [ edit ] The term "literary curator" has been used to describe persons who work in the field of poetry, such as former 92nd Street Y director Karl Kirchwey .

[ 19 ] Technology curators [ edit ] Technology curators are people who are able to disentangle the science and logic of a particular technology and apply it to real-world situations and society, whether it is for social change, commercial advantage, or other purposes. The first U.K.

Wired Conference had a test lab, where an independent curator selected technology that showcased radical technology advancements and their impact on society, such as the ability to design and "print" physical objects using 3D printers (such as a fully working violin) or the ability to model and represent accurate interactive medical and molecular models in stereoscopic 3D.

[ 20 ] As US museums have become increasingly more digitized, curators find themselves constructing narratives in both the material and digital worlds. Historian Elaine Gurian has called for museums in which "visitors could comfortably search for answers to their own questions regardless of the importance placed on such questions by others". This would change the role of curator from teacher to "facilitator and assistor".

[ 21 ] In this sense, the role of curator in the United States is precarious, as digital and interactive exhibits often allow members of the public to become their own curators, and to choose their own information. Citizens are then able to educate themselves on the specific subject they are interested in, rather than spending time listening to information they have no desire to learn.

Other definitions [ edit ] In Scotland, the term "curator" is also used to mean the guardian of a child, known as curator ad litem .

[ citation needed ] In Australia and New Zealand, the term also applies to a person who prepares a sports ground for use (especially a cricket ground ).

[ 22 ] This job is equivalent to that of groundsman in some other cricketing nations.

Obsolete terms referring to a female curator are "curatrix" [ 23 ] and "curatress".

[ 24 ] See also [ edit ] Curatorial platform References [ edit ] ^ Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Curator" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 7 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 636.

^ fr:Institut national du patrimoine (France) ^ Glicenstein, Jérôme (2015).

L'invention du curateur. Mutations dans l'art contemporain (in French). Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.

ISBN 978-2-13-065318-9 .

^ Lequeux, Emmanuelle (June 19, 2013).

"Curateur, le plus jeune métier du monde" .

Le Monde (in French) . Retrieved July 16, 2020 .

^ a b Carly Chynoweth, How do I become a museum curator?

[ dead link ] December 22, 2006, Times Online ^ Valarie Kinkade, Day in the life: curator.

Archived August 24, 2012, at the Wayback Machine American Alliance of Museums ^ Stephanie A. Harper, How to become a museum curator.

July 6, 2009, Edubook ^ A code of ethics for curators.

Archived May 17, 2017, at the Wayback Machine 2009, American Alliance of Museums Curators Committee ^ Combatting Illicit Trade: Due diligence guidelines for museums, libraries and archives on collecting and borrowing cultural material.

Archived September 27, 2010, at the Wayback Machine October 2005, Department for Culture, Media and Sport ^ Niru Ratnam, Hang it all.

March 9, 2003, The Observer ^ Morrissey, Kris; Satwicz, Tom (2011).

"Public Curation: From Trend to Research-Based Practice" in Bill Adair, Benjamin Filene, and Laura Koloski, eds., Letting Go? Sharing Historical Authority in a User-Generated World . Philadelphia: The Pew Center for Arts and Heritage. pp.

71– 72.

ISBN 978-0-9834803-0-3 .

^ French, Jade (2020).

Inclusive curating in contemporary art: a practical guide (New ed.). Leeds.

ISBN 978-1-64189-265-0 .

OCLC 1184460562 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ McLean, Kathleen (2011).

"Whose Questions, Whose Conversations?" in Bill Adair, Benjamin Filene, and Laura Koloski, eds., Letting Go? Sharing Historical Authority in a User-Generated World . Philadelphia: The Pew Center for Arts and Heritage. pp.

71– 72.

ISBN 978-0-9834803-0-3 .

^ McLean, Kathleen (2011).

"Whose Questions, Whose Conversations?" in Bill Adair, Benjamin Filene, and Laura Koloski, eds., Letting Go? Sharing Historical Authority in a User-Generated World . Philadelphia: The Pew Center for Arts and Heritage. p. 70.

ISBN 978-0-9834803-0-3 .

^ McLean, Kathleen (2011).

"Whose Questions, Whose Conversations?" in Bill Adair, Benjamin Filene, and Laura Koloski, eds., Letting Go? Sharing Historical Authority in a User-Generated World . Philadelphia: The Pew Center for Arts and Heritage. p. 71.

ISBN 978-0-9834803-0-3 .

^ Chinn, Cassie (June 22, 2012).

"Push Me, Pull You" .

Pew Center for Arts & Heritage .

^ Schwartz, Deborah (2011).

"Community as Curator: A Case Study at the Brooklyn Historical Society" in Bill Adair, Benjamin Filene, and Laura Koloski, eds., Letting Go? Sharing Historical Authority in a User-Generated World . Philadelphia: The Pew Center for Arts and Heritage. pp.

113– 114.

ISBN 978-0-9834803-0-3 .

^ Filene, Benjamin (2011).

"Listening Intently: Can StoryCorps Teach Museums How to Win the Hearts of New Audiences?" in Bill Adair, Benjamin Filene, and Laura Koloski, eds., Letting Go? Sharing Historical Authority in a User-Generated World . Philadelphia: The Pew Center for Arts and Heritage. p. 189.

ISBN 978-0-9834803-0-3 .

^ Alix Friedman (June 13, 2000).

"POETRY CENTER DIRECTOR KARL KIRCHWEY LEAVES 92nd STREET Y" . 92nd Street Y. Archived from the original on April 13, 2022 . Retrieved October 15, 2010 .

The 92nd Street Y announces the departure of Karl Kirchwey, longtime director of the 92nd Street Y Unterberg Poetry Center. Mr. Kirchwey will become Director of Creative Writing and Senior Lecturer in the Arts at Bryn Mawr College starting next fall. The Poetry Center is a program of the 92nd Street Y Tisch Center for the Arts, the Y's arts presenting division.

^ "Archived copy" . Archived from the original on January 14, 2012 . Retrieved May 30, 2012 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Clough, Wayne (2013).

Best of Both Worlds: Museums, Libraries and Achieves in the Digital Age (PDF) .

The Smithsonian Institution . p. 30.

^ "The Cordon – Cricket Blogs – ESPN Cricinfo" .

Cricinfo . Archived from the original on December 4, 2010.

^ https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/curatrix ]] ^ "Curatress" . September 21, 2020.

Further reading [ edit ] Burcaw, G. (1997) Introduction to Museum Work, 3rd edition. Lanham, MD: Altamira Press.

ISBN 978-0-7619-8926-4 Ferguson, B., Greenburg, R. and Nairne, S. (1996) Thinking About Exhibitions ISBN 0-415-11590-6 .

Glaser, J. and A. Zenetou. (1996) Museums: A Place to Work. Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-12724-0 Lord, G. and B. Lord. (1997) The Manual of Museum Management. Lanham, MD: Altamira Press.

ISBN 0-7591-0249-X Kuoni, Carin. (2001) Words of Wisdom: A Curator's Vade Mecum on Contemporary Art. New York: Independent Curators International (ICI) .

ISBN 0-916365-60-3 Marincola, P. (2002) Curating Now: Imaginative Practice/Public Responsibility ISBN 0-9708346-0-8 Obrist, H. (2008) A Brief History of Curating ISBN 3-905829-55-X .

Rugg, J. and Segdwick, M (2007) Issues in Curating. Intellect.

ISBN 978-1-84150-162-8 Richter, D. and Drabble, B (2007) Curating Critique. Revolver.

ISBN 978-3-86588-451-0 Sullivan, L. and Childs, S. (2003) Curating Archaeological Collections ISBN 0-7591-0024-1 .

Thea, C. (2009) On Curating: Interviews with Ten International Curators ISBN 1-935202-00-6 .

Graham, B. and Cook S. (2010) Rethinking Curating. Cambridge: MIT Press.

ISBN 0-262-01388-6 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Curators .

Look up curator in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

'Hang it all', article on contemporary curating and the rise of curating degrees , the Observer newspaper, Sunday March 9, 2003.

'Career Curating' article on curating contemporary design , the Guardian newspaper, Saturday July 14, 2001.

The Exhibitionists – geared towards children, an interactive guide to how an exhibition is put together.

v t e Visual arts and the art world Artwork Appropriation Collage Conceptual art Cultural artifact Drawing Fine art Fine-art photograph Found object Installation art Kinetic art Mixed media bricolage Mural fresco graffiti New media art history digital virtual Painting Performance art Plastic arts Portrait Printmaking Public art street art Sculpture carving relief statue tallest Site-specific art Social sculpture Soft sculpture Stained glass Artwork title Roles Artist Collector Conservator-restorer paintings frescos Critic Curator Dealer Model Patron Visual arts education Europe Places and events Art auction Art colony Art commune Art exhibition alternative exhibition space Art gallery Contemporary art gallery Art museum Single-artist museum Art school Europe Arts centre Arts festival Artist collective Artist cooperative Artist-in-residence program Artist-run initiative Artist-run space Biennale Commission Sculpture garden Sculpture trail Virtual museum History of art Timeline of art Art history (academic study) Art manifesto Art movements Criticism feminist History of painting outline Periods in Western art history Timeline of 20th century printmaking in America Related Art market The arts Catalogue raisonné Classificatory disputes Museum collection management deaccessioning Conservation-restoration paintings Cultural policy Depiction Destination painting Eclecticism in art Economics of art art finance art valuation Elements of art Forgery Index of painting-related articles Outline of the visual arts painting sculpture Provenance Sociology of art Style Unfinished work Lists Art magazines Art media Art techniques Art movements Art museums largest most visited sculpture parks single artist Art reference books Colossal sculptures in situ Contemporary artists Contemporary art galleries Modern artists National galleries Painters by name by nationality Photographers Sculptors female Stolen paintings Most expensive paintings , sculptures , works by living artists Painting portal Visual arts portal Arts portal v t e Cultural heritage and historic preservation Topics and issues Agents of deterioration Archival processing Archaeological science Archaeology Archive Bioarchaeology Book Calendar (archives) Conservation and restoration of cultural property Conservation and restoration of immovable cultural property Conservation and restoration of movable cultural property Conservation science (cultural property) Collecting Collection (museum) Collection catalog Collections maintenance Collections management Collections management system Cultural heritage Cultural heritage management Cultural property Cultural property documentation Cultural property exhibition Cultural property imaging Cultural property storage Cultural resource management Database preservation Deaccessioning Digital library Digital photograph restoration Digital preservation Disaster preparedness (cultural property) Film preservation Finding aid Fonds Found in collection Heritage asset Heritage science Historic site Inherent vice Intangible cultural heritage Integrated pest management (cultural property) Inventory (library and archive) Inventory (museums) Media preservation Midden Mold control and prevention (library and archive) Museum Optical media preservation Preservation (library and archive) Preservation metadata Preservation survey Provenance Repatriation Ruins Sustainable preservation Treasure Web archiving Roles and expertise Archivist Art dealer Art handler Auctioneer Collection manager Conservator-restorer Conservation scientist Conservation technician Curator Exhibition designer Mount maker Objects conservator Paintings conservator Photograph conservator Preservationist Registrar (cultural property) Textile conservator Methods and techniques Aging (artwork) Anastylosis Arrested decay Cradling (paintings) Cultural property radiography Detachment of wall paintings Desmet method Display case Digital repository audit method based on risk assessment Historic paint analysis Inpainting Kintsugi Leafcasting Lining of paintings Mass deacidification Overpainting Paleo-inspiration Paper splitting Reconstruction (architecture) Rissverklebung Textile stabilization Transfer of panel paintings UVC-based preservation VisualAudio Conservation and restoration of immovable cultural property by item type Archaeological sites Cultural venues Frescos Heritage railways Historic gardens Outdoor artworks Outdoor bronze objects Outdoor murals Conservation and restoration of movable cultural property by item type Aircraft Ancient Greek pottery Bone, horn, and antler objects Books, manuscripts, documents and ephemera Ceramic objects Clocks Copper-based objects Feathers Film Flags and banners Fur objects Glass objects Herbaria Human remains Illuminated manuscripts Insect specimens Iron and steel objects Ivory objects Judaica Lacquerware Leather objects Lighthouses Metals Musical instruments Neon objects New media art Paintings Painting frames Panel paintings Papyrus Parchment Performance art Photographs Photographic plates Plastic objects Rail vehicles Road vehicles Shipwreck artifacts Silver objects South Asian household shrines Stained glass Taxidermy Textiles Tibetan thangkas Time-based media art Totem poles Vinyl discs Woodblock prints Wooden artifacts Wooden furniture Intangible cultural heritage preservation Ancient music Applied folklore Dance notation Early music Endangered language Ethnochoreology Ethnomusicology Ethnopoetics Family folklore Folklore Folk art Folk dance Folk etymology Folk instrument Folk music Folk process Folk play Foodways Folklore studies Heritage language Heritage language learning Indigenous intellectual property Indigenous culture Indigenous language Language death Language preservation Language revitalization Living history Oral history preservation Preservation of meaning Prehistoric music Tradition preservation Traditional knowledge Traditional medicine Notable projects Conservation issues of Pompeii and Herculaneum Conservation-restoration of Ecce Homo by Elías García Martínez Conservation-restoration of The Gross Clinic by Thomas Eakins Conservation-restoration of Leonardo da Vinci's The Last Supper Pompeian frescoes Conservation-restoration of the Shroud of Turin Conservation-restoration of the Sistine Chapel frescoes Conservation-restoration of the Statue of Liberty Conservation-restoration of the H.L. Hunley Conservation response to flood of Arno, Florence Modern and Contemporary Art Research Initiative Preservation Metadata: Implementation Strategies World Heritage Site Authority control databases International FAST National Germany 2 United States France BnF data Czech Republic 2 Spain Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Curator&oldid=1305072238 " Categories : Curators Visual arts exhibitions Education and training occupations Museum occupations Visual arts occupations Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference CS1 French-language sources (fr) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2024 Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from December 2017 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from November 2017 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2014 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 22:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Curator 39 languages Add topic

