Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Black Hawk and the Black Hawk War 2 Controversy 3 Addressing the controversy 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Chicago Blackhawks name and logo controversy Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia US pro hockey team racism controversy Jonathan Toews during the 2008–09 season, wearing a Chicago Blackhawks jersey that features the team's logo of a Native American head Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e The Chicago Blackhawks name and logo controversy refers to the controversy surrounding the name and logo of the Chicago Blackhawks , a National Hockey League (NHL) ice hockey team based in Chicago, Illinois . Like other teams with tribal mascots, there are calls from Indigenous activists and organizations to change the Blackhawks' name and logo and eliminate tribal mascots and imagery throughout sports.

[ 1 ] In contrast to generic names used by other teams, says the Wirtz family owner, Blackhawk refers to a World War I-era U.S. Army division which was named for prominent Illinois-based Native American chief Black Hawk .

[ 2 ] The National Congress of American Indians , [ 3 ] the American Indian Center of Chicago, The Chi-Nations Youth Council, and over 1,500 Native organizations and advocates from over 150 federally recognized tribes across the country, including some members of the Sac and Fox Nation ,  support changing the team name and logo.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Some members of Black Hawk 's family have spoken out calling on the hockey team to change the team name and logo and cease from profiting off of Black Hawk’s name, image, and legacy.

[ 9 ] Since July 2020, headdresses have been banned from being worn at Blackhawk home games.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] The team has stated that they believe that both the name and logo symbolize the importance of Black Hawk's legacy.

[ 14 ] Chicago is home to the third largest Urban Indian population in the United States with 65,000 Native Americans in the Greater Chicagoland area with over 175 tribes represented.

[ 15 ] The team still maintains a collaborative partnership with Chief Black Hawk's Sac and Fox Nation tribe.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] History [ edit ] The National Hockey League (NHL)'s Chicago Blackhawks was named in honor of the U.S. 86th Infantry Division , which was nicknamed the "Blackhawk Division" after Black Hawk , a Native American chief who was based in present-day Illinois; the team's founder, Frederic McLaughlin , having served in that division.

[ 2 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] The first logo was drawn by Irene Castle , who was white, in 1926.

[ 20 ] Black Hawk was a leader of the Sauk who sided with the British in the War of 1812 and later attempted to regain tribal land in the Black Hawk War of 1832. Opponents of the logo say that adoption of his name for the 86th Infantry, the hockey team, and later for the Blackhawk helicopter are an example of designating certain Native Americans as "worthy adversaries." [ 21 ] [ 22 ] Black Hawk and the Black Hawk War [ edit ] Main articles: Black Hawk (Sauk leader) and Black Hawk War Ma-Ka-Tai-Me-She-Kia-Kiak or Black Hawk was born in Saukenuk (modern-day Rock Island, Illinois ).

[ 23 ] He was a Sac war leader. He fought with the British in the War of 1812 in hopes it would deter white settlement in his homelands.

[ 24 ] He rejected the Treaty of St. Louis of 1804 which took his homelands and called for removal west of the Mississippi River.

[ 25 ] In 1832, Black Hawk led an armed party of  Sacs, Meskwakis (Foxes) , Kickapoos , Ho-Chunk (Winnebagoes), and Potawatomis into his occupied homelands.

[ 26 ] This was in contrast with Sac Chief Keokuk who did not seek to confront the Americans.

[ 27 ] Black Hawk did not intend to start a war, but he was prepared to defend his homelands. His intention was to grow corn on his tribal homelands.

[ 28 ] Eventually, the Black Hawk War began, which was waged in modern-day Illinois and Wisconsin .

[ 29 ] During the war, his people faced starvation.

[ 26 ] The five month Black Hawk War culminated into what has been described as a massacre [ 30 ] and slaughter [ 31 ] at the Battle of Bad Axe in its fifth month. Despite Black Hawk waving a white flag on the first day of the battle, US troops slaughtered 23 Indigenous people.

[ 32 ] On the second day, US troops shot at Indigenous women, children, and men for eight hours [ 33 ] as they were crossing the river to escape as refugees into Iowa as well as fired on injured Indigenous people as they were drowning.

[ 26 ] Most of the 400 Indigenous people at the battle were killed. US troops scalped victims and tore skin off the backs of the dead.

[ 26 ] Jeffrey Ostler writes in the Journal of Genocide Research that "The slaughter at Bad Axe is clearly encompassed by Chalk and Jonassohn's definition of genocide as 'a form of one-sided mass killing in which a state or other authority intends to destroy a group'." [ 31 ] After the war, Black Hawk was taken prisoner of war under Lieutenant Jefferson Davis , who would later become President of the Confederate States of America .

[ 34 ] In his autobiography, Black Hawk described his imprisonment as torture.

[ 35 ] After the war, Andrew Jackson sent Black Hawk on a tour of eastern cities as a trophy of war [ 36 ] to show the strength of the United States.

[ 26 ] Black Hawk attracted large crowds and grew in fame. However, in Detroit, crowds hanged and burned an effigy of Black Hawk.

[ 34 ] Black Hawk spent the last years of his life in Iowa with his family with the Sacs, where he died.

[ 37 ] After his death, his grave was robbed and his head was severed. The rest of his remains were stolen later. One historical account says that his remains were stored at a museum which burned down and were destroyed.

[ 38 ] Controversy [ edit ] Main article: Native American mascot controversy Suzan Shown Harjo ( Cheyenne and Hodulgee Muscogee ), who was awarded the US Presidential Medal of Freedom for decades of American Indian advocacy, including leading a lawsuit against Washington’s football team [ 39 ] and restoring over 1 million acres of Indigenous land back , [ 40 ] and is President of the Morning Star Institute and former Executive Director of the National Congress of American Indians, [ 41 ] [ 42 ] says the Blackhawks have escaped the scrutiny given to other teams using Native imagery because hockey is not a cultural force on the level of football or baseball . American Indian organizations have called for an end to all Indian-related mascots and that she found the hockey team's name and Indian head symbol to be offensive. "It lacks dignity", she said. "There's dignity in a school being named after a person or a people. There's dignity in a health clinic or hospital. There's nothing dignified in something being so named (that is used for) recreation or entertainment or fun." The National Congress of American Indians also opposes the Blackhawks' logo, as it does all Native American mascots.

[ 43 ] In 2010, sports columnist Damien Cox called on the franchise to retire the "racially insensitive" logo, saying that: "Clearly, no right-thinking person would name a team after an aboriginal figure these days any more than they would use Muslims or Africans or Chinese or any ethnic group to depict a specific sporting notion." [ 44 ] In 2013, WTTW interviewed Chicagoan Anthony Roy, First Nation Ojibway Tribe , who has called for a new logo and mascot, who said "You can't ignore the history of the time and the ideas and the ideology people of color faced during the creation of mascots. There was forced assimilation and cultural destruction. When the [physical] genocide of the Nation was over, cultural genocide starts. So while children were taken from their families, Native children, ... this is alongside the history of sports and the births of sports leagues and many mascots. For instance the residential school my father attended that was around the time of the foundation of the Blackhawks." [ 45 ] In 2015, Mark Chipman , chairman of True North Sports & Entertainment , the owner of the NHL's Winnipeg Jets , decided to ban fake Native headdresses at games after meeting with First Nations leaders. The meeting took place in response to a complaint by a Jets fan after seeing a Blackhawks fan in a headdress.

[ 46 ] In 2020, Anthony Tamez-Pochel (Cree, Lakota, Black), co-president of the Chi-Nations Youth Council, wrote in Teen Vogue about being Black and Indigenous in a city with a race-based mascot. "Being Indigenous in a place like Chicago can be tough. The assault of racist mascots and attempts to erase Native culture are constant and daunting. There are many multiracial Natives like myself who don't look like a stereotype, and because of this, our Native identities are often questioned or dismissed entirely. This experience erases a whole part of us and mentally breaks us down. ... Living in Chicago, we are constantly bombarded with the Blackhawks logo, which represents the city's professional ice hockey team." [ 47 ] Black Hawk descendant April Holder contends the current Blackhawks logo is historically inaccurate, a “generic stereotype” and a “cartoon.” According to her family, “Black Hawk and His Son Whirling Thunder” (1833), by John Wesley Jarvis is the most accurate depiction of Black Hawk. Black Hawk is on the right next to his son.

[ 48 ] In 2024, in an interview with CBS, one of Black Hawk's lineal descendants, April Holder (Sauk and Fox, Wichita, Tonkawa), spoke out against the Chicago Blackhawks, calling on the team to stop use of its name and logo and to stop profiting off of her ancestor's identity and legacy. Holder said, "If someone were to come and take your name and use it for something and profit off of it, what is that called? It's called identity theft", she said. Referring to the logo, she said, "It's sickening, it's gross, it's grotesque, it's hurtful", she said. "[Black Hawk] was very eloquent, well spoken, and extremely intelligent ... he was just a man who wanted to do right by his people." Holder said that to her knowledge, the team has never asked her family for permission and if they had asked, her family would not give approval. "There are things that are not for sale. The dignity of my tribe, my people, and my ancestor's legacy are not for sale." Holder said his identity is "not for a team to use". "It belongs to our people. It belongs to my family. It belongs to that legacy of the people he fought for", she said. "Black Hawk did not make those sacrifices for some hockey team to exploit and profit off him. That was not what he created a legacy for. He created it so that future generations like my child and myself could exist." During the interview, Holder also referenced the Black Hawk War, saying, "(The United States) massacred our people there, they massacred women and children there ... It's not enough for us to experience genocide, basically. It's like, now we have to take even your names from you. We have to take the legacy of your people away from you." [ 49 ] Addressing the controversy [ edit ] The Blackhawks have worked with the American Indian Center (AIC) to help inform their community and fan base by sharing Native American culture and history. In 2013, Scott Sypolt, Executive Counsel for the American Indian Center weighed in on the logo and name controversy by stating, "There is a consensus among us that there's a huge distinction between a sports team called the Redskins depicting native people as red, screaming, ignorant savages and a group like the Blackhawks honoring Black Hawk, a true Illinois historical figure." [ 50 ] However, this stance is markedly different from the one previously taken by the American Indian Center, with the shift coming only in the past few years after other, more offensive mascots were successfully retired. In 2010, for instance, Joe Podlasek stated that, "The stance is very clear. We want the Chicago Blackhawks logo to change. For us, that's one of our grandfathers. Would you do that with your grandfather's picture? Take it and throw it on a rug? Walk on it and dance on it?" [ 51 ] John Blackhawk, Chairman of the Winnebago Tribe of Nebraska , has suggested that the change in position for the AIC may be connected to contributions the Blackhawks organization has recently begun making to the center: "We all do contributions, but we don't do it for the sake of wanting to be forgiven for something we've done that's offensive." [ 43 ] In 2019, the American Indian Center of Chicago ended all ties to the Chicago Blackhawks Foundation, stating they will no longer affiliate "with organizations that perpetuate stereotypes through the use of 'Indian' mascots." The AIC noted in its statement that they "previously held a relationship with the Chicago Blackhawks Foundation with the intention of educating the general public about American Indians and the use of logos and mascots. The AIC, along with members of the community have since decided to end this relationship" and stated that "going forward, AIC will have no professional ties with the Blackhawks, or any other organization that perpetuates harmful stereotypes." [ 52 ] [ 4 ] After the Washington Redskins announced that they would be changing their name in July 2020, the Blackhawks confirmed that they would continue to use their team name.

[ 53 ] However, the team did agree to ban Native American headdresses at home games held in the United Center in recognition of being sacred symbols.

[ 11 ] [ 10 ] [ 13 ] Before the ban was enacted, there had in fact been incidents where some Blackhawk fans wore headdresses.

[ 12 ] [ 54 ] [ 13 ] After the Cleveland Indians announced in December 2020 that the team would change their name after the 2021 season, new CEO Danny Wirtz reiterated that the Blackhawks would not change.

[ 55 ] The Chi-Nations Youth Council (CNYC), an Indigenous youth organization in Chicago, said in 2020, "The Chicago Blackhawks name and logo symbolizes a legacy of imperialism and genocide." "As statues of invaders, slave holders, and white supremacists fall across the nation so too should the images and language of the savage and dead 'Indians'." CNYC also noted "As social consciousness has grown over the past decades so has the Blackhawks performative gestures of buying their reprieve from those willing to sell out the health and humanity of our future generations." [ 56 ] Despite this opposition, as of 2022, the Blackhawks have stated their intent to keep the name and imagery, along with their belief that they "honor and celebrate legacy of Black Hawk" and that the name and logo "symbolizes this important and historic person." [ 14 ] Their website states that they are working on "educating our staff, fans and local community on the history of Black Hawk and original peoples of Illinois, as well as on Native American contributions to today's society." [ 14 ] The website also lists several Native American groups and individuals they donate money to, or hire to do artwork, and posts stories about various Native Americans who are considered members of the "Blackhawks community." [ 14 ] As of 2025, the team still maintains a partnership with Chief Black Hawk's Sac and Fox Nation tribe.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] The partnership involves collaboration on various issues, including land acknowledgement, grant programs, collaborative exhibits and installations, language preservation projects, game day materials, resources invested in identifying future opportunities and ways to ensure transparency between both parties.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] See also [ edit ] Washington Redskins name controversy Cleveland Indians name and logo controversy References [ edit ] ^ "Washington's NFL team drops 'Redskins' name after 87 years" . July 13, 2020.

^ a b "A brief history: Chicago Blackhawks" .

NHL.com/Blackhawks .

NHL Enterprises, LP . August 8, 2010 . Retrieved May 15, 2018 .

^ "NCAI Encouraged by Washington Commanders' Decision to Leave the Past Behind | NCAI" .

ncai.org . Retrieved July 12, 2024 .

^ a b "Statement on Blackhawks" .

American Indian Center Chicago . Archived from the original on October 4, 2020 . Retrieved August 8, 2020 .

^ "Statement on recent announcement to remove the Columbus statue" .

Twitter . Chi-Nations Youth Council. July 24, 2020 . Retrieved August 8, 2020 .

^ Michael Whitaker (July 3, 2020).

"The Athletic: Is it time for a logo change for the Chicago Blackhawks?" .

Detroit Sports Nation . Retrieved August 8, 2020 .

^ "Native Leaders and Investors Respond to Washington D.C. Football Team Name 'Review' " .

University of Colorado Boulder . First Peoples Worldwide. July 6, 2020 . Retrieved August 8, 2020 .

^ "Letter to Goodell" (PDF) .

University of Colorado Boulder . First Peoples Worldwide. July 6, 2020 . Retrieved August 8, 2020 .

^ Savini, Dave; Assad, Samah (June 10, 2024).

" "Do what's right": Black Hawk descendant demands Chicago Blackhawks change logo, name - CBS Chicago" .

www.cbsnews.com . Retrieved July 12, 2024 .

^ a b Kaplan, Emily (July 29, 2020).

"Chicago Blackhawks ban costume headdresses at United Center games, team events" . ESPN . Retrieved January 13, 2025 .

^ a b Thompson, Phil (July 29, 2020).

"Blackhawks ban fans from wearing Native American headdresses to their games" . Chicago Tribune . Retrieved January 13, 2025 .

^ a b Cain, Brandon (July 29, 2020).

"Blackhawks ban costume headdresses from team events, United Center" . Second City Hockey . Retrieved September 13, 2020 .

^ a b c "Blackhawks ban Native American headdresses at home games" .

Star Tribune . Associated Press. July 29, 2020.

[ permanent dead link ] ^ a b c d "Native American Initiatives" . Chicago Blackhawks . Retrieved September 27, 2022 .

^ " "We're Still Here": Chicago's Native American Community" .

WTTW Chicago . November 8, 2018 . Retrieved November 22, 2023 .

^ a b c "Chicago Blackhawks: Partnership Update" . Sac and Fox Nation . Retrieved January 13, 2025 .

^ a b c "Native American Initiative" . Chicago Blackhawks . Retrieved January 13, 2025 .

^ Ledra, Cristina; Pickens, Pat (November 22, 2016).

"NHL team nicknames explained" .

NHL.com . NHL Enterprises, LP . Retrieved May 15, 2018 .

^ Baffoe, Tim (June 17, 2013).

"Should The Blackhawks Ditch Their Indian Head Logo?" . CBS Chicago.

^ "Irene Castle and the Chicago Blackhawks" .

The Biggest Little Fashion City - Online exhibitions across Cornell University Library . May 25, 2018 . Retrieved November 22, 2023 .

^ Stephen E. Nash (February 2, 2016).

"Confessions of a Blackhawks Fan: Can an anthropologist who loves hockey embrace his team's race-based mascot?" . Sapiens . Retrieved September 6, 2017 .

^ Simon Waxman (June 26, 2014).

"The U.S. military's ongoing slur of Native Americans" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved September 6, 2017 .

^ "Black Hawk War begins" .

History . Retrieved November 22, 2023 .

^ "Black Hawk | Life & War" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . September 29, 2023 . Retrieved November 22, 2023 .

^ "Great Native American Chiefs | Ma-ka-tai-me-she-kia-kiak (aka Black Hawk)" .

Online Exhibits . University of Michigan Library . Retrieved November 22, 2023 .

^ a b c d e "The Black Hawk War Phases" .

Northern Illinois University Digital Library . Retrieved November 22, 2023 .

^ "Keokuk | Biography & Facts" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved November 22, 2023 .

^ "Black Hawk War" .

Oxford Reference . Retrieved November 22, 2023 .

^ "Black Hawk War – Native Resistance, US Invasion, Conflict" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved November 22, 2023 .

^ "Bad Axe, Battle of" . Wisconsin Historical Society. August 3, 2012 . Retrieved November 22, 2023 .

^ a b Ostler, Jeffrey (February 3, 2016).

" 'Just and lawful war' as genocidal war in the (United States) Northwest Ordinance and Northwest Territory, 1787–1832" (PDF) .

Journal of Genocide Research .

18 (1): 1– 20.

doi : 10.1080/14623528.2016.1120460 . Retrieved March 1, 2024 .

^ https://ss.sites.mtu.edu/mhugl/2015/10/11/battle-of-bad-axe-the-bad-axe-massacre/ [ bare URL ] ^ https://web.archive.org/web/20090815021319/http://lincoln.lib.niu.edu/blackhawk/page2c.html [ bare URL ] ^ a b "The Black Hawk War Phases" .

Northern Illinois University Digital Library .

^ Black Hawk.

Autobiography of Ma-ka-tai-me-she-kia-kiak, Or Black Hawk . Retrieved November 22, 2023 – via Project Gutenberg.

^ "Black Hawk Surrender Speech (1832)" .

Hanover History Department . Retrieved March 1, 2024 .

^ "Black Hawk | Life & War" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . February 16, 2024.

^ Duong, Ashley (September 20, 2019).

"Where are Blackhawk's bones? Historian disputes the final resting place of the Sauk chief" .

Southwest Iowa Union . Retrieved November 29, 2024 .

^ Milloy, Courtland (July 14, 2020).

"Suzan Harjo fought for decades to remove the Redskins name. She'll wait to celebrate" .

Washington Post . Retrieved March 1, 2024 .

^ "The Places That Inspired the Work of Poet and Activist Suzan Shown Harjo | National Trust for Historic Preservation" .

^ "President Obama Announces the Presidential Medal of Freedom Recipients" . November 10, 2014.

^ "NCAI Leadership | NCAI" .

^ a b Keilman, John (June 19, 2013).

"Protests rare over Blackhawks' name, logo: While critics say use of Indian mascots perpetuates outdated image, hockey club says it has mutually beneficial ties with local community" .

Chicago Tribune .

^ Cox, Damien (May 28, 2010).

"Cox: Offensive Blackhawks logo has got to go" .

Toronto Star . Retrieved March 3, 2013 .

^ "Native American Sports Mascots" .

WTTW .

^ Schilling, Vincent (November 11, 2015).

"Winnipeg Jets Ban Fake Native Headdresses" . Indian Country Today. Archived from the original on January 23, 2016 . Retrieved September 6, 2017 .

^ Tamez, Anthony Pochel (February 6, 2019).

"Safe Spaces Are Crucial for Native Youth" .

Teen Vogue . Archived from the original on March 1, 2020.

^ https://www.cbsnews.com/chicago/news/black-hawk-descendent-demands-chicago-blackhawks-change-logo-name/ [ bare URL ] ^ Savini, Dave; Assad, Samah (June 10, 2024).

" 'Do what's right': Black Hawk descendant demands Chicago Blackhawks change logo, name" .

CBS Chicago . Retrieved July 12, 2024 .

^ Neveau, James (October 18, 2013).

"Blackhawks Avoid Backlash -- For Now -- by Engaging Native American" .

NBC Chicago . Retrieved February 19, 2015 .

^ "Wearing Someone Else's Culture: More on the Chicago Blackhawks" . Indian Country Today. June 19, 2013. Archived from the original on September 30, 2015 . Retrieved September 6, 2017 .

^ "Statement: AIC ends ties with Chicago Blackhawks Foundation" .

American Indian Center of Chicago . July 8, 2019. Archived from the original on July 16, 2020 . Retrieved July 6, 2020 .

^ "Blackhawks on keeping nickname: Honors Native American leader" . ESPN. July 7, 2020.

^ Wheeler, Jordan (March 31, 2015).

"Chicago Blackhawks fan wearing headdress shocks hockey fans" . CBC News . Retrieved September 13, 2020 .

^ Phil Thompson (December 17, 2020).

"Chicago Blackhawks won't follow the Cleveland Indians' lead and change their nickname, new CEO Danny Wirtz says. A Native American representative responds: 'That Indian head has got to go.' " .

Chicago Tribune .

^ "Statement: Blackhawks' Name and Logo Symbolize a Legacy of Imperialism and Genocide" . October 14, 2020.

External links [ edit ] Phases of the Black Hawk War (Northern Illinois University Digital Library) Article from The Journal of Genocide Research about the Black Hawk War Jeffrey Ostler (2016) ‘Just and lawful war’ as genocidal war in the (United States) Northwest Ordinance and Northwest Territory, 1787–1832 , Journal of Genocide Research , 18:1, 1-20, DOI: 10.1080/14623528.2016.112046 v t e Chicago Blackhawks Founded in 1926 Based in Chicago, Illinois Franchise Team General managers Coaches Players Captains Draft picks Seasons Current season History Original Six Records Award winners Retired numbers Broadcasters Personnel Owner(s) Danny Wirtz General manager Kyle Davidson Head coach Jeff Blashill Team captain Nick Foligno Current roster Arenas Chicago Coliseum Chicago Stadium United Center Rivalries Detroit Red Wings St. Louis Blues Affiliates AHL Rockford IceHogs ECHL Indy Fuel Media TV Chicago Sports Network Radio WGN Radio Culture and lore Name and logo controversy Ashland Green/Pink Line station Curse of Muldoon Eddie Olczyk Gene Honda " Here Come the Hawks " Jim Cornelison The "Madhouse on Madison" Nancy Faust Pat Foley Sudden Death Wayne Messmer 86th Infantry Division The Dilemma 2010 sexual abuse scandal 17 seconds 2009 Winter Classic 2014 Stadium Series 2015 Winter Classic 2016 Stadium Series 2017 Winter Classic 2019 Winter Classic 2025 Winter Classic Category v t e Native American mascot controversy Professional sports teams Atlanta Braves Tomahawk chop and name controversy Chief Noc-A-Homa Chicago Blackhawks name and logo controversy Kansas City Chiefs name controversy Prior usage Washington Redskins Name controversy Name change advocates Trademark dispute Opinion polls Original Americans Foundation Chief Zee Washington Redhawks Other teams Cleveland Indians name and logo controversy Chief Wahoo Edmonton Eskimos Golden State Warriors College teams NCAA Native American mascot decision Chief Illiniwek Florida State Seminoles Osceola and Renegade Sammy Seminole Fighting Sioux name controversy San Diego State Aztec Warrior List of college teams Youth and school teams Sports teams named Redskins List of secondary school teams Change advocates Amanda Blackhorse Brett Chapman Gregg Deal Stephanie Fryberg Deb Haaland Suzan Shown Harjo Adrienne Keene Jacqueline Keeler Mary Kathryn Nagle Robert Roche Sundance Charlene Teters Philip Yenyo Related Contemporary Native American issues in the United States Cultural appropriation Indigenous intellectual property List of teams Native American mascot laws and regulations Pretendian Redface Redskin Stereotypes of Indigenous peoples of Canada and the United States Tomahawk chop v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chicago_Blackhawks_name_and_logo_controversy&oldid=1305997623 " Categories : Chicago Blackhawks National Hockey League team mascots Anti-Indigenous racism in Illinois Native American-related controversies Ice hockey controversies Black Hawk (Sauk leader) Native American mascots Mascots introduced in 1926 Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links All articles with bare URLs for citations Articles with bare URLs for citations from August 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from May 2025 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 09:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chicago Blackhawks name and logo controversy Add languages Add topic

