Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Types 3 Newton's law of cooling 4 Convective heat transfer 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Convection (heat transfer) 16 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia עברית Magyar မြန်မာဘာသာ Oromoo Português Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Heat transfer due to the movement of fluid This article is about the method of heat transfer. For fluid flow driven by heterogeneous fluid properties and body forces, see Convection .

Simulation of thermal convection in the Earth's mantle . Hot areas are shown in red, cold areas are shown in blue. A hot, less-dense material at the bottom moves upwards, and likewise, cold material from the top moves downwards.

Convection (or convective heat transfer ) is the transfer of heat from one place to another due to the movement of fluid. Although often discussed as a distinct method of heat transfer, convective heat transfer involves the combined processes of conduction (heat diffusion) and advection (heat transfer by bulk fluid flow ). Convection is usually the dominant form of heat transfer in liquids and gases .

Note that this definition of convection is only applicable in Heat transfer and thermodynamic contexts. It should not be confused with the dynamic fluid phenomenon of convection , which is typically referred to as Natural Convection in thermodynamic contexts in order to distinguish the two.

Overview [ edit ] Convection can be "forced" by movement of a fluid by means other than buoyancy forces (for example, a water pump in an automobile engine). Thermal expansion of fluids may also force convection. In other cases, natural buoyancy forces alone are entirely responsible for fluid motion when the fluid is heated, and this process is called "natural convection". An example is the draft in a chimney or around any fire. In natural convection, an increase in temperature produces a reduction in density, which in turn causes fluid motion due to pressures and forces when the fluids of different densities are affected by gravity (or any g-force ). For example, when water is heated on a stove , hot water from the bottom of the pan is displaced (or forced up) by the colder denser liquid, which falls. After heating has stopped, mixing and conduction from this natural convection eventually result in a nearly homogeneous density, and even temperature. Without the presence of gravity (or conditions that cause a g-force of any type), natural convection does not occur, and only forced-convection modes operate.

[ citation needed ] The convection heat transfer mode comprises two mechanisms. In addition to energy transfer due to specific molecular motion ( diffusion ), energy is transferred by bulk, or macroscopic , motion of the fluid. This motion is associated with the fact that, at any instant, large numbers of molecules are moving collectively or as aggregates. Such motion, in the presence of a temperature gradient, contributes to heat transfer. Because the molecules in aggregate retain their random motion, the total heat transfer is then due to the superposition of energy transport by random motion of the molecules and by the bulk motion of the fluid. It is customary to use the term convection when referring to this cumulative transport and the term advection when referring to the transport due to bulk fluid motion.

[ 1 ] Types [ edit ] This color schlieren image reveals thermal convection from a human hand (in silhouette form) to the surrounding still atmosphere.

Two types of convective heat transfer may be distinguished: Free or natural convection : when fluid motion is caused by buoyancy forces that result from the density variations due to variations of thermal ±temperature in the fluid.  In the absence of an internal source, when the fluid is in contact with a hot surface, its molecules separate and scatter, causing the fluid to be less dense. As a consequence, the fluid is displaced while the cooler fluid gets denser and the fluid sinks.  Thus, the hotter volume transfers heat towards the cooler volume of that fluid.

[ 2 ] Familiar examples are the upward flow of air due to a fire or hot object and the circulation of water in a pot that is heated from below.

Forced convection : when a fluid is forced to flow over the surface by an internal source such as fans, by stirring, and pumps, creating an artificially induced convection current.

[ 3 ] In many real-life applications (e.g. heat losses at solar central receivers or cooling of photovoltaic panels), natural and forced convection occur at the same time ( mixed convection ).

[ 4 ] Internal and external flow can also classify convection.  Internal flow occurs when a fluid is enclosed by a solid boundary such as when flowing through a pipe.  An external flow occurs when a fluid extends indefinitely without encountering a solid surface.  Both of these types of convection, either natural or forced, can be internal or external because they are independent of each other.

[ citation needed ] The bulk temperature , or the average fluid temperature, is a convenient reference point for evaluating properties related to convective heat transfer, particularly in applications related to flow in pipes and ducts.

Further classification can be made depending on the smoothness and undulations of the solid surfaces.  Not all surfaces are smooth, though a bulk of the available information deals with smooth surfaces. Wavy irregular surfaces are commonly encountered in heat transfer devices which include solar collectors, regenerative heat exchangers, and underground energy storage systems. They have a significant role to play in the heat transfer processes in these applications. Since they bring in an added complexity due to the undulations in the surfaces, they need to be tackled with mathematical finesse through elegant simplification techniques. Also, they do affect the flow and heat transfer characteristics, thereby behaving differently from straight smooth surfaces.

[ 5 ] For a visual experience of natural convection, a glass filled with hot water and some red food dye may be placed inside a fish tank with cold, clear water. The convection currents of the red liquid may be seen to rise and fall in different regions, then eventually settle, illustrating the process as heat gradients are dissipated.

Newton's law of cooling [ edit ] Main article: Newton's law of cooling Convection-cooling is sometimes loosely assumed to be described by Newton's law of cooling.

[ 6 ] Newton's law states that the rate of heat loss of a body is proportional to the difference in temperatures between the body and its surroundings while under the effects of a breeze . The constant of proportionality is the heat transfer coefficient .

[ 7 ] The law applies when the coefficient is independent, or relatively independent, of the temperature difference between object and environment.

In classical natural convective heat transfer, the heat transfer coefficient is dependent on the temperature. However, Newton's law does approximate reality when the temperature changes are relatively small, and for forced air and pumped liquid cooling, where the fluid velocity does not rise with increasing temperature difference.

Convective heat transfer [ edit ] The basic relationship for heat transfer by convection is: Q ˙ ˙ = h A ( T − − T f ) {\displaystyle {\dot {Q}}=hA(T-T_{f})} where Q ˙ ˙ {\displaystyle {\dot {Q}}} is the heat transferred per unit time, A is the area of the object, h is the heat transfer coefficient , T is the object's surface temperature, and T f is the fluid temperature.

[ 8 ] The convective heat transfer coefficient is dependent upon the physical properties of the fluid and the physical situation. Values of h have been measured and tabulated for commonly encountered fluids and flow situations.

See also [ edit ] Conjugate convective heat transfer Convection Forced convection Natural convection Mixed convection Heat transfer coefficient Heat transfer enhancement Heisler chart Thermal conductivity Convection–diffusion equation References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Heat transfer .

^ Incropera DeWitt VBergham Lavine 2007, Introduction to Heat Transfer , 5th ed., pg. 6 ISBN 978-0-471-45727-5 ^ http://biocab.org/Heat_Transfer.html Biology Cabinet organization, April 2006, "Heat Transfer", Accessed 20/04/09 ^ http://www.engineersedge.com/heat_transfer/convection.htm Engineers Edge, 2009, "Convection Heat Transfer", Accessed 20/04/09 ^ Garbrecht, Oliver (August 23, 2017).

"Large eddy simulation of three-dimensional mixed convection on a vertical plate" (PDF) .

RWTH Aachen University .

^ Aroon Shenoy, Mikhail Sheremet, Ioan Pop, 2016, Convective Flow and Heat Transfer from Wavy Surfaces: Viscous Fluids, Porous Media, and Nanofluids , CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, Florida ISBN 978-1-498-76090-4 ^ Based on a work by Newton published anonymously as "Scala graduum Caloris. Calorum Descriptiones & signa." in Philosophical Transactions , 1701, 824 –829;
ed. Joannes Nichols, Isaaci Newtoni Opera quae exstant omnia , vol. 4 (1782), 403 –407.

^ "Heat Transfer Mechanisms" .

Colorado State University . The College of Engineering at Colorado State University . Retrieved 14 September 2015 .

^ "Convective Heat Transfer Convection Equation and Calculator" .

Engineers Edge . Retrieved 14 September 2015 .

v t e Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning Fundamental concepts Air changes per hour (ACH) Bake-out Building envelope Convection Dilution Domestic energy consumption Enthalpy Fluid dynamics Gas compressor Heat pump and refrigeration cycle Heat transfer Humidity Infiltration Latent heat Noise control Outgassing Particulates Psychrometrics Sensible heat Stack effect Thermal comfort Thermal destratification Thermal mass Thermodynamics Vapour pressure of water Technology Absorption-compression heat pump Absorption refrigerator Air barrier Air conditioning Antifreeze Automobile air conditioning Autonomous building Building insulation materials Central heating Central solar heating Chilled beam Chilled water Constant air volume (CAV) Coolant Cross ventilation Dedicated outdoor air system (DOAS) Deep water source cooling Demand controlled ventilation (DCV) Displacement ventilation District cooling District heating Electric heating Energy recovery ventilation (ERV) Firestop Forced-air Forced-air gas Free cooling Heat recovery ventilation (HRV) Hybrid heat Hydronics Ice storage air conditioning Kitchen ventilation Mixed-mode ventilation Microgeneration Passive cooling Passive daytime radiative cooling Passive house Passive ventilation Radiant heating and cooling Radiant cooling Radiant heating Radon mitigation Refrigeration Renewable heat Room air distribution Solar air heat Solar combisystem Solar cooling Solar heating Thermal insulation Thermosiphon Underfloor air distribution Underfloor heating Vapor barrier Vapor-compression refrigeration (VCRS) Variable air volume (VAV) Variable refrigerant flow (VRF) Ventilation Water heat recycling Components Air conditioner inverter Air door Air filter Air handler Air ionizer Air-mixing plenum Air purifier Air source heat pump Attic fan Automatic balancing valve Back boiler Barrier pipe Blast damper Boiler Centrifugal fan Ceramic heater Chiller Condensate pump Condenser Condensing boiler Convection heater Compressor Cooling tower Damper Dehumidifier Duct Economizer Electrostatic precipitator Evaporative cooler Evaporator Exhaust hood Expansion tank Fan Fan coil unit Fan filter unit Fan heater Fire damper Fireplace Fireplace insert Freeze stat Flue Freon Fume hood Furnace Gas compressor Gas heater Gasoline heater Grease duct Grille Ground-coupled heat exchanger Ground source heat pump Heat exchanger Heat pipe Heat pump Heating film Heating system HEPA High efficiency glandless circulating pump High-pressure cut-off switch Humidifier Infrared heater Inverter compressor Kerosene heater Louver Mechanical room Oil heater Packaged terminal air conditioner Plenum space Pressurisation ductwork Process duct work Radiator Radiator reflector Recuperator Refrigerant Register Reversing valve Run-around coil Sail switch Scroll compressor Solar chimney Solar-assisted heat pump Space heater Smoke canopy Smoke damper Smoke exhaust ductwork Thermal expansion valve Thermal wheel Thermostatic radiator valve Trickle vent Trombe wall TurboSwing Turning vanes Ultra-low particulate air (ULPA) Whole-house fan Windcatcher Wood-burning stove Zone valve Measurement and control Air flow meter Aquastat BACnet Blower door Building automation Carbon dioxide sensor Clean air delivery rate (CADR) Control valve Gas detector Home energy monitor Humidistat HVAC control system Infrared thermometer Intelligent buildings LonWorks Minimum efficiency reporting value (MERV) Normal temperature and pressure (NTP) OpenTherm Programmable communicating thermostat Programmable thermostat Psychrometrics Room temperature Smart thermostat Standard temperature and pressure (STP) Thermographic camera Thermostat Thermostatic radiator valve Professions, trades, and services Architectural acoustics Architectural engineering Architectural technologist Building services engineering Building information modeling (BIM) Deep energy retrofit Duct cleaning Duct leakage testing Environmental engineering Hydronic balancing Kitchen exhaust cleaning Mechanical engineering Mechanical, electrical, and plumbing Mold growth, assessment, and remediation Refrigerant reclamation Testing, adjusting, balancing Industry organizations AHRI AMCA ASHRAE ASTM International BRE BSRIA CIBSE Institute of Refrigeration IIR LEED SMACNA UMC Health and safety Indoor air quality (IAQ) Passive smoking Sick building syndrome (SBS) Volatile organic compound (VOC) See also ASHRAE Handbook Building science Fireproofing Glossary of HVAC terms Warm Spaces World Refrigeration Day Template:Fire protection Template:Home automation Template:Solar energy NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐fbctf
Cached time: 20250817084659
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.311 seconds
Real time usage: 0.457 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1131/1000000
Revision size: 10047/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 42869/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2126/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 29300/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.184/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5653254/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  339.300      1 -total
 28.37%   96.272      1 Template:Reflist
 20.29%   68.829      1 Template:HVAC
 19.70%   66.851      1 Template:Navbox
 17.72%   60.131      1 Template:Short_description
 15.63%   53.048      1 Template:Commons_category
 15.17%   51.480      1 Template:Sister_project
 14.77%   50.117      1 Template:Side_box
 14.15%   47.997      2 Template:ISBN
 10.23%   34.716      2 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:9662955:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817084659 and revision id 1302289786. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Convection_(heat_transfer)&oldid=1302289786 " Categories : Thermodynamics Heat transfer Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2010 Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 24 July 2025, at 13:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Convection (heat transfer) 16 languages Add topic

