Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Codes 2 History 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents NFPA 704 41 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hazmat labeling system This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "NFPA 704" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) NFPA 704 safety square 4 4 4 W NFPA 704 safety squares on containers of ethyl alcohol and acetone .

" NFPA 704: Standard System for the Identification of the Hazards of Materials for Emergency Response " is a standard maintained by the U.S.

-based National Fire Protection Association . First "tentatively adopted as a guide" in 1960, [ 1 ] and revised several times since then, it defines the " Safety Square " or " Fire Diamond " which is used to quickly and easily identify the risks posed by hazardous materials. This helps determine what, if any, special equipment should be used, procedures followed, or precautions taken during the initial stages of an emergency response. It is an internationally accepted safety standard, and is crucial while transporting chemicals .

Codes [ edit ] Standard System for the Identification of the Hazards of Materials for Emergency Response The four divisions of the square are typically color-coded, with red on top indicating flammability , blue on the left indicating level of health hazard , yellow on the right for chemical reactivity , and white containing codes for special hazards not covered by the first three squares. Each of health, flammability and reactivity is rated on a scale from 0 (no reasonable hazard) to 4 (severe hazard). The latest version of NFPA 704 sections 5, 6, 7 and 8 for the specifications of each classification are listed below. The numeric values in the first column are designated in the standard by "Degree of Hazard" using Arabic numerals (0, 1, 2, 3, 4), not to be confused with other classification systems, such as that in the NFPA 30 Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code, where flammable and combustible liquid categories are designated by "Class", using Roman numerals (I, II, III).

[ 2 ] Flammability (red) 0 Materials that will not burn under typical fire conditions (e.g., carbon tetrachloride , silicon dioxide , perfluorohexane , water ), including intrinsically noncombustible materials such as concrete, stone, and sand.  Materials that will not burn in air unless exposed to a temperature of 820 °C (1,500 °F) for more than 5 minutes.

1 Materials that require considerable preheating, under all ambient temperature conditions, before ignition and combustion can occur (e.g., mineral oil , ammonia , ethylene glycol ). Includes some finely divided suspended solids that do not require heating before ignition can occur.

Flash point at or above 93.3 °C (200 °F).

2 Must be moderately heated or exposed to relatively high ambient temperature before ignition can occur (e.g., diesel fuel , paper , sulfur and multiple finely divided suspended solids that do not require heating before ignition can occur). Flash point between 37.8 and 93.3 °C (100 and 200 °F).

3 Materials (including finely divided suspended solids) that can be ignited under almost all ambient temperature conditions (e.g., acetone , ethanol ). Liquids having a flash point below 22.8 °C (73 °F) and having a boiling point at or above 37.8 °C (100 °F) or having a flash point between 22.8 and 37.8 °C (73 and 100 °F).

4 Will rapidly or completely vaporize at normal atmospheric pressure and temperature, or is readily dispersed in air and will burn readily (e.g., gasoline , acetylene , propane , hydrogen gas , diborane , tert-Butyllithium ). Includes pyrophoric substances. Flash point below room temperature at 22.8 °C (73 °F).

Health (blue) 0 Poses no health hazard, requires no precautions, and would offer no hazard beyond that of ordinary combustible materials (e.g., wood , sugar , salt , propylene glycol ) 1 Exposure would cause irritation with only minor residual injury (e.g., acetone , sodium bromate , potassium chloride ) 2 Intense or continued but not chronic exposure could cause temporary incapacitation or possible residual injury (e.g., diethyl ether , ammonium phosphate , carbon dioxide , chloroform , DEET , capsaicin ).

3 Short exposure could cause serious temporary or moderate residual injury (e.g., liquid hydrogen , sulfuric acid , calcium hypochlorite , carbon monoxide , hexafluorosilicic acid , zinc chloride , sodium hydroxide ) 4 Very short exposure could cause death or major residual injury (e.g.

aluminum phosphide , hydrogen cyanide , phosgene , diborane , methyl isocyanate , hydrofluoric acid , sarin , mustard gas , tert-Butyllithium ) Instability–reactivity (yellow) 0 Normally stable, even under fire exposure conditions, and is not reactive with water (e.g., helium , N 2 , carbon dioxide ) 1 Normally stable, but can become unstable at elevated temperatures and pressures (e.g., propene , ammonium acetate , carbonic acid ) 2 Undergoes violent chemical change at elevated temperatures and pressures, reacts violently with water, or may form explosive mixtures with water (e.g., white phosphorus , potassium , sodium ) 3 Capable of detonation or explosive decomposition but requires a strong initiating source, must be heated under confinement before initiation, reacts explosively with water, or will detonate if severely shocked (e.g., ammonium nitrate , caesium , hydrogen peroxide ) 4 Readily capable of detonation or explosive decomposition at normal temperatures and pressures (e.g., nitroglycerin , chlorine dioxide , nitrogen triiodide , manganese heptoxide , TNT , Picric acid , tert-Butyllithium ) Special notice (white) The white "special notice" area can contain several symbols. The following symbols are defined by the NFPA 704 standard.

OX Oxidizer , allows chemicals to burn without an air supply (e.g., potassium perchlorate , ammonium nitrate , hydrogen peroxide ).

W Reacts with water in an unusual or dangerous manner (e.g., caesium , sodium , diborane , sulfuric acid ).

SA Simple asphyxiant gas (specifically helium , nitrogen , neon , argon , krypton , and xenon ). The SA symbol shall also be used for liquified carbon dioxide vapor withdrawal systems and where large quantities of dry ice are used in confined areas.

[ 2 ] Non-standard symbols (white) These hazard codes are not part of the NFPA 704 standard, but are occasionally used in an unofficial manner. The use of non-standard codes may be permitted, required or disallowed by the authority having jurisdiction (e.g., fire department).

[ 3 ] — No special notice (the correct format is to leave the white square blank, but sometimes a dash is used) OXY Oxidizer , allows chemicals to burn without an air supply (the correct symbol is "OX") COR Corrosive ; strong acid or base (e.g., sulfuric acid , potassium hydroxide ) CORR ACID Acid ALK Alkaline BIO Biological hazard (e.g., flu virus , rabies virus ) POI Poisonous (e.g., strychnine , alpha-amanitin ) RA Radioactive (e.g., plutonium , cobalt-60 , carbon-14 ) RAD CRY Cryogenic (e.g., liquid nitrogen ) CRYO G OX Oxygen gas History [ edit ] NFPA 704 placard of hydrofluosilicic acid . Notably, it is using the nonstandard COR sign.

The development of NFPA 704 is credited to the Charlotte Fire Department after a fire at the Charlotte Chemical Company in 1959 led to severe injuries to many of the firefighters.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Upon arrival, the fire crew found a fire burning inside a vat that firefighters assumed to be burning kerosene. The crew tried to suppress the fire, which resulted in the vat exploding due to metallic sodium being stored in the kerosene. Thirteen firefighters were injured, several of whom had critical injuries while one lost both ears and most of his face from the incident.

At the time, such vats were not labelled with the materials they contained, so firefighters did not have the necessary information to recognize that hazardous materials were present, which required a specific response. In this case, sodium was able to react with water to release hydrogen gas and large amounts of heat, which has the potential to explode.

The Charlotte Fire Department developed training to respond to fires involving hazardous materials, ensured that protective clothing was available to those responding, and expanded the fire prevention inspection program. Fire Marshal J. F. Morris developed the diamond shaped placard as a marking system to indicate when a building contained hazardous materials, with their levels of flammability, reactivity and health effects.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] United States portal Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labeling of Chemicals GHS hazard pictograms Hazard symbol Hazchem Hazmat HMIS Color Bar References [ edit ] ^ Dornette, W. H. L.; Woodworth, Miles E. (1969).

"Proposed Amendments on Revisions to the Recommended System for the Identification of The Fire Hazards of Materials / NFPA No. 704M — 1969" (PDF) .

National Fire Protection Association . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-03-03 . Retrieved 2016-03-04 .

^ a b "NFPA 704: Standard System for the Identification of the Hazards of Materials for Emergency Response" . 2022.

^ "Decoding the City: The Fire Diamond" .

^ "Fact Friday 153 - Charlotte's Haz-Mat History" .

704 Shop . 22 June 2018 . Retrieved 2022-02-22 .

^ "July marks 62 years since Charlotte Fire invented Haz-Mat safety measure" .

Queen City News . 2021-06-28. Archived from the original on 2022-05-08 . Retrieved 2022-02-22 .

^ "History of the Charlotte Fire Department" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2023-04-07 . Retrieved 2022-02-22 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to NFPA 704 images .

NFPA 704 (2022) Free Access on NFPA.org ( registration required ) "Frequently Asked Questions on NFPA 704" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2017-07-16 . Retrieved 2016-03-04 .

"Pamphlet produced by the City of Milwaukee summarizing NFPA 704 code requirements" (PDF) .

City of Milwaukee .

"Hazard Communication" .

Occupational Safety and Health Administration .

"Safety in the Chemistry Laboratory: NFPA 704 Hazard Identification System" .

University of Oregon . Archived from the original on 2015-03-10.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=NFPA_704&oldid=1301262162 " Categories : NFPA Standards Safety codes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles using infobox templates with no data rows Commons category link from Wikidata Pages with login required references or sources This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 23:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents NFPA 704 41 languages Add topic

