Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Format 3 Seal 4 Content 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Papal bull 54 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaelg Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Македонски مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of decree by the Catholic pope For the horse, see Papal Bull (horse) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Papal bull" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Papal bull of Pope Urban VIII , 1637, sealed with a lead bulla The apostolic constitution Magni aestimamus issued as a papal bull by Pope Benedict XVI in 2011 which instituted the Military Ordinariate of Bosnia and Herzegovina A papal bull is a type of public decree, letters patent , or charter issued by the pope of the Catholic Church . It is named after the leaden seal ( bulla ) traditionally appended to authenticate it.

History [ edit ] Printed text of Pope Leo X 's Exsurge Domine , issued in June 1520. The Latin printed text reads: Bulla contra Errores Martini Lutheri et sequacium ( lit.

' Bull against the errors of Martin Luther and his followers ' ) Papal bulls have been in use at least since the 6th century, but the phrase was not used until around the end of the 13th century, and then only internally for unofficial administrative purposes. However, it had become official by the 15th century, when one of the offices of the Apostolic Chancery was named the "register of bulls" (" registrum bullarum ").

[ 1 ] By the accession of Pope Leo IX in 1048, a clear distinction developed between two classes of bulls of greater and less solemnity. The majority of the "great bulls" now in existence are in the nature of confirmations of property or charters of protection accorded to monasteries and religious institutions. In an era when there was much fabrication of such documents, those who procured bulls from Rome wished to ensure that the authenticity of their bull was above suspicion. A papal confirmation, under certain conditions, could be pleaded as itself constituting sufficient evidence of title in cases where the original deed had been lost or destroyed.

[ 1 ] Since the 12th century, papal bulls have carried a leaden seal with the heads of the apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul on one side and the pope's name on the other. Papal bulls were originally issued by the pope for many kinds of communication of a public nature, but by the 13th century, papal bulls were only used for the most formal or solemn of occasions.

[ 2 ] Papyrus seems to have been used almost uniformly as the material for these documents until the early years of the eleventh century, after which it was rapidly superseded by a rough kind of parchment .

[ 1 ] Modern scholars have retroactively used the word "bull" to describe any elaborate papal document issued in the form of a decree or privilege , solemn or simple, and to some less elaborate ones issued in the form of a letter. Popularly, the name is used for any papal document that contains a metal seal.

Today, the bull is the only written communication in which the pope will refer to himself as " Episcopus Servus Servorum Dei " ("Bishop, Servant of the Servants of God").

[ 3 ] While papal bulls always used to bear a metal seal, they now do so only on the most solemn occasions. A papal bull is today the most formal type of public decree or letters patent issued by the Vatican Chancery in the name of the pope.

Format [ edit ] A bull's format formerly began with one line in tall, elongated letters containing three elements: the pope's name, the papal title " Episcopus Servus Servorum Dei " ("Bishop, Servant of the Servants of God "), and its incipit , i.e., the first few Latin words from which the bull took its title for record-keeping purposes, but which might not be directly indicative of the bull's purpose.

The body of the text was often very simple in layout, and it had no specific conventions for its formatting. The closing section consisted of a short " datum " that mentioned the place of issuance, day of the month and year of the pope's pontificate on which issued, and signatures, near which was attached the seal.

For the most solemn bulls, the pope signed the document himself, in which case he used the formula " Ego N. Catholicae Ecclesiae Episcopus " ("I, N., Bishop of the Catholic Church"). Following the signature in this case would be an elaborate monogram , the signatures of any witnesses, and then the seal. In modern times, a member of the Roman Curia signs the document on behalf of the pope, usually the Cardinal Secretary of State , and thus the monogram is omitted.

Seal [ edit ] Lead bulla ( obverse and reverse ) of Gregory IX , pope 1227 to 1241 The most distinctive characteristic of a bull was the metal seal ( bulla ), which was usually made of lead , but on very solemn occasions was made of gold , as those on Byzantine imperial instruments often were (see Golden Bull ). On the obverse it depicted, originally somewhat crudely, the early Fathers of the Church of Rome , the apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul , identified by the letters S anctus PA ulus and S anctus PE trus (thus, SPA •SPE or SPASPE ). St. Paul, on the left, was shown with flowing hair and a long pointed beard composed of curved lines, while St. Peter, on the right, was shown with curly hair and a shorter beard made of dome-shaped globetti (beads in relief). Each head was surrounded by a circle of globetti , and the rim of the seal was surrounded by an additional ring of such beads, while the heads themselves were separated by a depiction of a cross.

[ 4 ] On the reverse was the name of the issuing pope in the nominative Latin form, with the letters "PP", for Pastor Pastorum ("Shepherd of Shepherds"). This disc was then attached to the document either by cords of hemp , in the case of letters of justice and executory letters, or by red and yellow silk , in the case of letters of grace, that was looped through slits in the vellum of the document. The term " bulla " derives from the Latin " bullire " ("to boil"), and alludes to the fact that, whether of wax, lead, or gold, the material making the seal had to be melted to soften it for impression.

In 1535, the Florentine engraver Benvenuto Cellini was paid 50 scudi to recreate the metal matrix which would be used to impress the lead bullae of Pope Paul III . Cellini retained definitive iconographic items like the faces of the two apostles, but he carved them with a much greater attention to detail and artistic sensibility than had previously been in evidence. On the reverse of the seal he added several fleurs-de-lis , a heraldic device of the Farnese family, from which Pope Paul III descended.

Since the late 18th century, the lead bulla has been replaced with a red ink stamp of Saints Peter and Paul with the reigning pope's name encircling the picture, though very formal letters, e.g. the bull of Pope John XXIII convoking the Second Vatican Council , still receive the leaden seal.

Original papal bulls exist in quantity only after the 11th century onward, when the transition from fragile papyrus to the more durable parchment was made. None survives in entirety from before 819. Some original lead bullae , however, still survive from as early as the 6th century.

From a series of woodcuts (1545) usually referred to as the Papstspotbilder or Papstspottbilder , [ 5 ] by Lucas Cranach , commissioned by Martin Luther .

[ 6 ] "Kissing the Pope's feet"; [ 7 ] German peasants respond to a papal bull of Pope Paul III . The caption reads: "Don't frighten us Pope, with your ban, and don't be such a furious man. Otherwise we shall turn around and show you our rears".

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Content [ edit ] Main article: List of papal bulls In terms of content, the bull is simply the format in which a decree of the pope appears. Any subject may be treated in a bull, and many were and are, including statutory decrees, episcopal appointments, dispensations , excommunications , apostolic constitutions , canonizations , and convocations .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] The bull was the exclusive letter format from the Vatican until the 14th century, when the papal brief appeared. The brief is the less formal form of papal communication and was authenticated with a wax impression, now a red ink impression, of the Ring of the Fisherman .

[ 1 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Abbreviator Bull of the Crusade Canonical coronation Edict Encyclical Fatwa Golden bull Heirloom Seal of the Realm Great Seal of the Realm Letters patent Papal brief Proclamation Rota (papal signature) Ukase Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Thurston, Herbert (1908). " Bulls and Briefs ". In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 3. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ "Papal bull" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . 10 January 2020 . Retrieved 7 July 2012 .

^ Mann, Stephanie A. (1 September 2016).

"What Is a Papal Bull?" .

Our Sunday Visitor . Archived from the original on 12 January 2020 . Retrieved 23 August 2017 .

^ Botsford, George Willis; Botsford, Jay Barrett (1922).

A Brief History of the World: With Especial Reference to Social and Economic Conditions . Macmillan. p. 293.

^ Oberman, Heiko Augustinus (1994).

The Impact of the Reformation: Essays . Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing.

ISBN 978-0802807328 – via Google Books.

^ Edwards, Mark U. Jr. (2004).

Luther's Last Battles: Politics And Polemics 1531–46 . Fortress Press. p. 4.

ISBN 978-0800637354 .

^ HIC OSCULA PEDIBUS PAPAE FIGUNTUR ^ "Nicht Bapst: nicht schreck uns mit deim ban, Und sey nicht so zorniger man. Wir thun sonst ein gegen wehre, Und zeigen dirs Bel vedere" ^ Jr, Mark U. Edwards (19 November 2004).

Luther's Last Battles: Politics and Polemics 1531-46 . Fortress Press.

ISBN 978-1-4514-1398-4 – via Google Books.

^ "Hear ye, one and all: The papal bull" . 30 June 2023.

^ "Papal Bulls" .

^ "Fisherman's ring | Papal Blessing, Devotional Jewelry & Prayer | Britannica" . 26 January 2024.

^ "Search results" .

References [ edit ] Chambers, Ephraim.

Cyclopaedia, or an Universal Dictionary of Arts and Sciences , 1728 "Papal bull" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 7 July 2012 .

Further reading [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Papal bulls .

Albert, C.S. " Bull ." Lutheran Cyclopedia.

New York: Scribner, 1899. p. 67 Papal Encyclicals Online List of Conciliar documents at the Theology Library Archived 30 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine Cherubini Laertius: Magnum Bullarium Romanum v t e Papacy Episcopate of the bishop of Rome Jurisdiction Holy See ( full communion ) Pope Leo XIV as bishop of the Diocese of Rome primacy history Vatican City ( index , outline ) Enclaved in Rome , Italy Lateran Treaty , 1929 along with extraterritorial properties of the Holy See Headquarters Vatican City : Apostolic Palace papal apartments Sistine Chapel Italy : Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran ( cathedra ) Major basilicas Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran St. Peter's Basilica Basilica of Saint Mary Major Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls Titles ( Papal names ) His Holiness Bishop of Rome Vicar of Jesus Christ Successor of the Prince of the Apostles Supreme Pontiff of the Universal Church Patriarch of the West Primate of Italy Archbishop and Metropolitan of the Roman Province Sovereign of the Vatican City State Servant of the servants of God Symbols Coats of arms Coat of arms of the Holy See Cross Keys of Heaven Regalia and insignia Rota Umbraculum Proclamations Infallibility Apostolic constitution Bull list Encyclical Apostolic exhortation Ecclesiastical letter Interdict Activities Arbitration deposition Blessing " pontifical " Urbi et Orbi Conclave list Coronation Consistory Diplomacy Inauguration Mass High Mass Travel Vestments Camauro Falda Fanon Ferula Flabellum Mantle Mitre Mozzetta Pallium Ring of the Fisherman Shoes slippers Subcinctorium Tiara list Zucchetto Transportation Popemobile Sedia gestatoria Shepherd One Household Camerlengo Commander of the Swiss Guard Chaplain Palatinus papal majordomo Gentlemen Preacher Prefect Prelate of Honour Prince assistant Theologian Staff College of Cardinals cardinals list Roman Curia Apostolic Camera commissions for Vatican City State councils congregations dicasteries Synods Cappella Giulia Sistine Chapel Choir Related Antipope Western Schism Canonised popes Fat pope, thin pope Gammarelli Legends Orders, decorations, and medals Papabile Papal nobility " Black " Pontifical academy Pontifical colleges in Rome Major Seminary Pontifical university in Rome Popes by country Sexually active popes St. Peter's Square Swiss Guard Vatican City portal Catholic Church portal Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐fh7j8
Cached time: 20250814214940
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.507 seconds
Real time usage: 0.641 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2247/1000000
Revision size: 13354/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 65616/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2386/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 59805/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.354/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16909235/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  545.605      1 -total
 26.22%  143.047      1 Template:Reflist
 14.91%   81.337      1 Template:Catholic
 14.90%   81.320      1 Template:Papacy
 13.68%   74.656      1 Template:Lang
 10.12%   55.214      1 Template:Commons_category
  9.82%   53.575      1 Template:Sister_project
  9.65%   52.662      1 Template:Short_description
  9.61%   52.408      1 Template:Side_box
  8.39%   45.794      1 Template:More_citations_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:210043:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814214940 and revision id 1303719021. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Papal_bull&oldid=1303719021 " Categories : Papal bulls Christian genres Seals (insignia) Hidden categories: Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2014 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Latin-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Use dmy dates from April 2017 This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 17:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Papal bull 54 languages Add topic

