Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Rain belt 2 Drought 3 Diseases 4 Research 5 References Toggle the table of contents Dry season 65 languages العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu Basa Bali বাংলা Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Dolnoserbski Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hornjoserbsce Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Ikinyarwanda Ikirundi Kiswahili ລາວ Lingála Magyar Македонски Malagasy Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Scots Setswana සිංහල Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 粵語 中文 Kumoring ꠍꠤꠟꠐꠤ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Yearly period of low rainfall, especially in the tropics For the Chadian film, see Dry Season (2006 film) . For the Czech drama film, see Dry Season (2024 film) .

Dry season in Laos . Long shadow of a dead tree with its branches on the dry fields of Don Det , a sunny day with blue sky and white clouds, late afternoon.

Part of a series on Weather Temperate and polar seasons Winter Spring Summer Autumn Tropical seasons Dry season Harmattan Wet season Storms Cloud Cumulonimbus cloud Arcus cloud Downburst Microburst Heat burst Derecho Lightning Volcanic lightning Thunderstorm Air-mass thunderstorm Thundersnow Dry thunderstorm Mesocyclone Supercell Tornado Anticyclonic tornado Landspout Waterspout Dust devil Fire whirl Anticyclone Cyclone Polar low Extratropical cyclone European windstorm Nor'easter Subtropical cyclone Tropical cyclone Atlantic hurricane Typhoon Storm surge Dust storm Simoom Haboob Monsoon Amihan Gale Sirocco Firestorm Winter storm Ice storm Blizzard Ground blizzard Snow squall Precipitation Drizzle Freezing Graupel Hail Megacryometeor Ice pellets Diamond dust Rain Freezing Cloudburst Snow Rain and snow mixed Snow grains Snow roller Slush Topics Air pollution Atmosphere Chemistry Convection Physics River Climate Cloud Physics Fog Mist Season Cold wave Heat wave Jet stream Meteorology Severe weather List Extreme Severe weather terminology Canada Japan United States Weather forecasting Weather modification Glossaries Meteorology Climate change Tornado terms Tropical cyclone terms Weather portal v t e The dry season is a yearly period of low rainfall, especially in the tropics . The weather in the tropics is dominated by the tropical rain belt , which moves from the northern to the southern tropics and back over the course of the year. The temperate counterpart to the tropical dry season is summer or winter .

Rain belt [ edit ] The tropical rain belt lies in the southern hemisphere roughly from November to March; during that time the northern tropics have a dry season with sparser precipitation , and days are typically sunny throughout. From May to September, the rain belt lies in the northern hemisphere, and the southern tropics have their dry season. Under the Köppen climate classification , for tropical climates , a dry season month is defined as a month when average precipitation is below 60 millimetres (2.4 in).

[ 1 ] The rain belt reaches roughly as far north as the Tropic of Cancer and as far south as the Tropic of Capricorn . Near these latitudes, there is one wet season and one dry season annually. At the equator there are two wet and two dry seasons, as the rain belt passes over twice a year, once moving north and once moving south. Between the tropics and the equator, locations may experience a short wet or a long wet season; and a short dry or a long dry season. Local geography may substantially modify these climate patterns, however they can.

Drought [ edit ] During the dry season, humidity is very low, causing some watering holes and rivers to dry up. This lack of water (and lack of food supply) may force many grazing animals to migrate to more fertile spots. Examples of such animals are: zebras , elephants , giraffes , hippos , rhinos , antelopes and wildebeest , wild water buffaloes , African buffaloes , gaur , tapirs , emus , ostriches , rheas , and kangaroos . Because of the lack of water in the plants, bushfires (wildfires) are common.

[ 2 ] Diseases [ edit ] Data shows that in Africa the start of the dry season coincides with a rise in the cases of measles —which researchers believe might be attributed to the higher concentration of people in the dry season, as agricultural operations are all but impossible without irrigation. During this time, some farmers move into cities, creating hubs of higher population density, and allowing the disease to spread more easily.

[ 3 ] Research [ edit ] New data shows that in the seasonal parts of the South American Amazon rainforest , foliage growth and coverage varies between the dry and wet seasons—with about 25% more leaves and faster growth in the dry season. Researchers believe that the Amazon itself has an effect in bringing [ clarification needed ] the onset of the wet season: by growing more foliage, it evaporates more water.

[ 4 ] However, this growth appears only in the undisturbed parts of the Amazon basin, where researchers believe roots can reach deeper and gather more rainwater.

[ 5 ] It has also been shown that ozone levels are much higher in the dry than in the wet season in the Amazon basin.

[ 6 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Updated world Köppen-Geiger climate classification map" (PDF) .

^ "Wet & Dry Seasons" . Archived from the original on 2012-03-20 . Retrieved 2008-04-21 .

^ "Dry Season Brings On Measles In Sub-Saharan Africa" . ScienceDaily. February 7, 2008.

^ "Amazon rainforest does have rainy and dry seasons" . mongabay.com. March 12, 2007. Archived from the original on June 4, 2008.

^ "Amazon rainforest greens up in the dry season" .

^ Kirchhoff, V. W. J. H.; Da Silva, I. M. O.; Browell, E. V. (1990).

"Ozone measurements in Amazonia: Dry season versus wet season" .

Journal of Geophysical Research .

95 (D10): 16913.

Bibcode : 1990JGR....9516913K .

doi : 10.1029/jd095id10p16913 . Archived from the original on 2011-06-06 . Retrieved 2008-04-21 .

v t e Seasons Temperate seasons Spring Summer Autumn Winter Weather portal Tropical seasons Wet season Dry season Specific Cyclone season Fog season Harmattan (West Africa) Monsoon season Mud / breakup / minoskamin bezdorizhzhia / rasputitsa Rainy season Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dry_season&oldid=1298449205 " Category : Seasons Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2015 This page was last edited on 2 July 2025, at 15:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dry season 65 languages Add topic

