Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 1974–1979: Early work and short films 2.2 1980–1987: Rise to prominence 2.3 1988–2002: Stardom and critical acclaim 2.4 2004–2016: Established director 2.5 2019–present 3 Artistry 4 Frequent collaborators 5 Personal life 6 Filmography Toggle Filmography subsection 6.1 Short film 6.2 Feature film 7 Awards and nominations 8 Notes 9 See also 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Pedro Almodóvar 80 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Davvisámegiella Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Kapampangan ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Piemontèis Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Scots Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska తెలుగు Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt Volapük Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Spanish filmmaker (born 1949) Pedro Almodóvar Almodóvar in 2024 Born Pedro Almodóvar Caballero ( 1949-09-25 ) 25 September 1949 (age 75) Calzada de Calatrava , Spain Occupations Film director screenwriter Years active 1974–present Partner Fernando Iglesias (2002–present) Relatives Agustín Almodóvar (brother) Awards Full list Signature Pedro Almodóvar Caballero [ a ] ( Spanish: [ˈpeðɾo almoˈðoβaɾ kaβaˈʎeɾo] ; born 25 September 1949) [ 1 ] is a Spanish film director, screenwriter and author. His films are distinguished by melodrama , irreverent humour, bold colour, glossy décor, quotations from popular culture, and complex narratives. Desire, LGBTQ issues, passion, family, motherhood, and identity are among Almodóvar's most frequently explored subjects. As one of the most internationally successful Spanish filmmakers, Almodóvar and his films have developed a cult following .

Almodóvar's career developed during La Movida Madrileña , a cultural renaissance that followed the end of Francoist Spain . His early films characterised the sense of sexual and political freedom of the period. In 1986, he established his own film production company, El Deseo , with his younger brother Agustín Almodóvar , who has been responsible for producing all of his films since Law of Desire (1987). His breakthrough film was Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown (1988), which was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film .

He achieved further success often collaborating with actors Antonio Banderas and Penélope Cruz . He directed Tie Me Up! Tie Me Down!

(1989), High Heels (1991), and Live Flesh (1997). Almodóvar's next two films, All About My Mother (1999) and Talk to Her (2002), earned him an Academy Award each for Best International Feature Film and Best Original Screenplay , respectively. His later films Volver (2006), Broken Embraces (2009), The Skin I Live In (2011), Julieta (2016), Pain and Glory (2019), and Parallel Mothers (2021) were also praised. He is also known for directing several short films including The Human Voice (2020) and Strange Way of Life (2023). He made his first English-language feature film with The Room Next Door (2024), which won the Golden Lion at the 81st Venice International Film Festival .

[ 2 ] Almodóvar has received numerous accolades , including an Academy Award , two Golden Globe Awards , two Emmy Awards , five BAFTA Awards , and five Goya Awards . He received the French Legion of Honour in 1997, the Gold Medal of Merit in the Fine Arts in 1999, the European Film Academy Achievement in World Cinema Award in 2013, [ 3 ] and the Golden Lion for Lifetime Achievement in 2019.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] He has also received honorary doctoral degrees from Harvard University , in 2009 [ 7 ] and from the University of Oxford in 2016.

[ 8 ] Early life [ edit ] Pedro Almodóvar Caballero was born on 25 September 1949 in Calzada de Calatrava , a small rural town of the Province of Ciudad Real in Spain.

[ 9 ] He has two older sisters, Antonia and María Jesús, [ 10 ] and one brother Agustín .

[ 11 ] His father, Antonio Almodóvar (d. 1980), [ 12 ] : 6 was a winemaker, [ 13 ] and his mother, Francisca Caballero (1916-1999), was a letter reader and transcriber for illiterate neighbours.

[ 14 ] When Almodóvar was eight years old, the family sent him to study at a religious boarding school in the city of Cáceres , Extremadura , in western Spain, [ 7 ] with the hope that he might someday become a priest. His family eventually joined him in Cáceres, where his father opened a gas station and his mother opened a bodega in which she sold her own wine.

[ 13 ] [ 15 ] Unlike Calzada, there was a cinema in Cáceres.

[ 16 ] "Cinema became my real education, much more than the one I received from the priest", he said later in an interview.

[ 17 ] Almodóvar was influenced by Luis Buñuel .

[ 18 ] Against his parents' wishes, Almodóvar moved to Madrid in 1967 to become a filmmaker. When the Spanish dictator, Francisco Franco , closed the National School of Cinema in Madrid, Almodóvar became self-taught.

[ 7 ] To support himself, Almodóvar had a number of jobs, including selling used items in the famous Madrid flea market El Rastro and as an administrative assistant with the Spanish phone company Telefónica , where he worked for 12 years.

[ 19 ] Career [ edit ] 1974–1979: Early work and short films [ edit ] In the early 1970s, Almodóvar became interested in experimental cinema and theatre. He collaborated with the vanguard theatrical group Los Goliardos, in which he played his first professional roles and met actress Carmen Maura .

[ 20 ] Madrid's flourishing alternative cultural scene became the perfect scenario for Almodóvar's social talents. He was a crucial figure in La Movida Madrileña (the Madrilenian Movement), a cultural renaissance that followed the death of Francisco Franco. Alongside Fabio McNamara, Almodóvar sang in a glam rock parody duo.

[ 21 ] Almodóvar also penned various articles for major newspapers and magazines, such as El País , Diario 16 and La Luna as well as contributing to comic strips, articles and stories in counterculture magazines, such as Star , El Víbora and Vibraciones .

[ 22 ] He published a novella, Fuego en las entrañas ( Fire in the Guts ) [ 23 ] and kept writing stories that were eventually published in a compilation volume entitled El sueño de la razón ( The Dream of Reason ).

[ 24 ] Almodóvar bought his first camera, a Super-8 , with his first paycheck from Telefónica when he was 22 years old, and began to make hand-held short films.

[ 25 ] Around 1974, he made his first short film, and by the end of the 1970s they were shown in Madrid 's night circuit and in Barcelona . These shorts had overtly sexual narratives and no soundtrack: Dos putas, o, Historia de amor que termina en boda ( Two Whores, or, A Love Story that Ends in Marriage ) in 1974; La caída de Sodoma ( The Fall of Sodom ) in 1975; Homenaje ( Homage ) in 1976; La estrella ( The Star ) in 1977; Sexo Va: Sexo viene ( Sex Comes and Goes ); and Complementos (Shorts) in 1978, his first film in 16mm .

[ 26 ] He remembers, "I showed them in bars, at parties... I could not add a soundtrack because it was very difficult. The magnetic strip was very poor, very thin. I remember that I became very famous in Madrid because, as the films had no sound, I took a cassette with music while I personally did the voices of all the characters, songs and dialogues".

[ 27 ] After four years of working with shorts in Super-8 format, Almodóvar made his first full-length film Folle, folle, fólleme, Tim ( Fuck Me, Fuck Me, Fuck Me, Tim ) in Super-8 in 1978, followed by his first 16 mm short Salomé .

[ 28 ] 1980–1987: Rise to prominence [ edit ] Pepi, Luci, Bom (1980) Almodóvar in 1988 Almodóvar made his first feature film Pepi, Luci, Bom (1980) with a very low budget of 400,000 pesetas , [ 29 ] shooting it in 16 mm and later blowing it up into 35 mm.

[ 30 ] The film was based on a comic strip titled General Erections that he had written and revolves around the unlikely friendship between Pepi (Carmen Maura), who wants revenge on a corrupt policeman who raped her, a masochistic housewife named Luci (Eva Siva), and Bom (Alaska), a lesbian punk rock singer. Inspired by La Movida Madrileña , Pepi, Luci, Bom expressed the sense of cultural and sexual freedom of the time with its many kitsch elements, campy style, outrageous humour and explicit sexuality (there is a golden shower scene in the middle of a knitting lesson).

The film was noted for its lack of polished filming technique, but Almodóvar looked back fondly on the film's flaws. "When a film has only one or two [defects], it is considered an imperfect film, while when there is a profusion of technical flaws, it is called style. That's what I said joking around when I was promoting the film, but I believe that that was closer to the truth".

[ 31 ] Pepi, Luci, Bom premiered at the 1980 San Sebastián International Film Festival [ 32 ] and despite negative reviews from conservative critics, the film amassed a cult following in Spain. It toured the independent circuits before spending three years on the late night showing of the Alphaville Theater in Madrid.

[ 33 ] The film's irreverence towards sexuality and social mores has prompted contemporary critics to compare it to the 1970s films of John Waters .

[ 34 ] Labyrinth of Passion (1982) His second feature Labyrinth of Passion (1982) focuses on nymphomaniac pop star, Sexila (Cecilia Roth), who falls in love with a gay middle-eastern prince, Riza Niro (Imanol Arias). Their unlikely destiny is to find one another, overcome their sexual preferences and live happily ever after on a tropical island. Framed in Madrid during La Movida Madrileña, between the dissolution of Franco's authoritarian regime and the onset of AIDS consciousness, Labyrinth of Passion caught the spirit of liberation in Madrid and it became a cult film.

[ 35 ] The film marked Almodóvar's first collaboration with cinematographer Ángel Luis Fernandez as well as the first of several collaborations with actor Antonio Banderas .

Labyrinth of Passion premiered at the 1982 San Sebastian Film Festival [ 36 ] and while the film received better reviews than its predecessor, Almodóvar later acknowledged: "I like the film even if it could have been better made. The main problem is that the story of the two leads is much less interesting than the stories of all the secondary characters. But precisely because there are so many secondary characters, there's a lot in the film I like".

[ 35 ] Almodóvar at the 2006 Toronto International Film Festival Dark Habits (1983) For his next film Dark Habits (1983), Almodóvar was approached by multi-millionaire Hervé Hachuel who wanted to start a production company to make films starring his girlfriend, Cristina Sánchez Pascual.

[ 37 ] Hachuel set up Tesuaro Production and asked Almodóvar to keep Pascual in mind. Almodóvar had already written the script for Dark Habits and was hesitant to cast Pascual in the leading role due to her limited acting experience. When she was cast, he felt it necessary to make changes to the script so his supporting cast were more prominent in the story.

The film heralded a change in tone to somber melodrama with comic elements. Pascual stars as Yolanda, a cabaret singer who seeks refuge in a convent of eccentric nuns, each of whom explores a different sin. This film has an almost all-female cast including Carmen Maura, Julieta Serrano , Marisa Paredes and Chus Lampreave , actresses who Almodóvar would cast again in later films. This is Almodóvar's first film in which he used popular music to express emotion: in a pivotal scene, the mother superior and her protégé sing along with Lucho Gatica 's bolero " Encadenados ".

Dark Habits premiered at the Venice Film Festival and was surrounded in controversy due its subject matter.

[ 38 ] Despite religious critics being offended by the film, it went on to become a modest critical and commercial success, cementing Almodóvar's reputation as the enfant terrible of the Spanish cinema .

What Have I Done to Deserve This?

(1984) Carmen Maura stars in What Have I Done to Deserve This?

, Almodóvar's fourth film, as Gloria, an unhappy housewife who lives with her ungrateful husband Antonio ( Ángel de Andrés López ), her mother in law ( Chus Lampreave ), and her two teenage sons.

Verónica Forqué appears as her prostitute neighbor and confidante.

Almodóvar has described his fourth film as a homage to Italian neorealism , although this tribute also involves jokes about paedophilia , prostitution, and a telekinetic child. The film, set in the tower blocks around Madrid in post-Franco Spain, depicts female frustration and family breakdown, echoing Jean-Luc Godard 's Two or Three Things I Know About Her and strong story plots from Roald Dahl 's Lamb to the Slaughter and Truman Capote 's A Day's Work , [ 39 ] but with Almodóvar's unique approach to film making.

Matador (1986) Almodóvar's growing success caught the attention of emerging Spanish film producer Andrés Vicente Gómez , who wanted to join forces to make his next film Matador (1986).

[ citation needed ] The film centres on the relationship between a former bullfighter and a murderous female lawyer, who both find sexual fulfillment through acts of murder.

Written together with Spanish novelist Jesús Ferrero , Matador drew away from the naturalism and humour of the director's previous work into a deeper and darker terrain.

[ citation needed ] Almodóvar cast several of his regulars actors in key roles: Antonio Banderas was hired for the role of Ángel, a bullfighting student who, after an attempted rape incident, falsely confesses to a series of murders that he did not commit; Julieta Serrano appears as Ángel's very religious mother; while Carmen Maura, Chus Lampreave, Verónica Forqué and Eusebio Poncela also appear in minor roles. Newcomers Nacho Martínez and Assumpta Serna , who would later work with Almodóvar again, had minor roles in the film.

Matador also marked the first time Almodóvar included a notable cinematic reference, using King Vidor 's 1946 Duel in the Sun in one scene.

The film premiered in 1986 and drew some controversy due to its subject matter. Almodóvar justified his use of violence, explaining: "The moral of all my films is to get to a stage of greater freedom." He went on to note: "I have my own morality. And so do my films. If you see Matador through the perspective of traditional morality, it's a dangerous film because it's just a celebration of killing.

Matador is like a legend. I don't try to be realistic; it's very abstract, so you don't feel identification with the things that are happening, but with the sensibility of this kind of romanticism." [ 40 ] The Law of Desire [ 41 ] (1987) Following the success of Matador , Almodóvar solidified his creative independence by starting his own production company, El Deseo , together with his brother Agustín Almodóvar in 1986. El Deseo's first major release was Law of Desire (1987), a film about the complicated love triangle between a gay filmmaker (Eusebio Poncela), his transsexual sister (Carmen Maura), and a repressed murderously obsessive stalker (Antonio Banderas).

Taking more risk from a visual standpoint, Almodóvar's growth as a filmmaker is clearly on display. In presenting the love triangle, Almodóvar drew away from most representations of homosexuals in films. The characters neither come out nor confront sexual guilt or homophobia; they are already liberated. The same can be said for the complex way he depicted transgender characters on screen. Almodóvar said about The Law of Desire : "It's the key film in my life and career. It deals with my vision of desire, something that's both very hard and very human. By this I mean the absolute necessity of being desired and the fact that in the interplay of desires it's rare that two desires meet and correspond." [ 42 ] The Law of Desire made its premiere at the Berlin International Film Festival in 1987, where it won the festival's first ever Teddy Award , which recognises achievement in LGBT cinema. The film was a hit in art-house theatres and received much praise from critics.

1988–2002: Stardom and critical acclaim [ edit ] Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown (1988) Almodóvar's first major critical and commercial success internationally came with the release of Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown (1988).The film debuted at the 45th Venice film festival . This feminist light comedy of rapid-fire dialogue and fast-paced action further established Almodóvar as a "women's director" in the same vein as George Cukor and Rainer Werner Fassbinder . Almodóvar has said that women make better characters: "women are more spectacular as dramatic subjects, they have a greater range of registers, etc." [ 43 ] Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown centres on Pepa (Carmen Maura), a woman who has been abruptly abandoned by her married boyfriend Iván ( Fernando Guillén ). Over two days, Pepa frantically tries to track him down. In the course, she discovers some of his secrets and realises her true feelings. Almodóvar included many of his usual actors, including Antonio Banderas, Chus Lampreave, Rossy de Palma , Kiti Mánver and Julieta Serrano as well as newcomer María Barranco .

[ citation needed ] The film was released in Spain in March 1988, and became a hit in the US, making more than $7 million when it was released later that same year, [ 44 ] bringing Almodóvar to the attention of American audiences.

Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown won five Goya Awards , Spain's top film honours, for Best Film , Best Original Screenplay , Best Editing (José Salcedo), Best Actress (Maura), and Best Supporting Actress (Barranco). The film won an award for best screenplay at the Venice film festival and two awards at the European Film Awards as well as being nominated for Best Foreign Language Film at the BAFTAs and Golden Globes . It also gave Almodóvar his first Academy Award nomination for Best Foreign Language Film .

[ 45 ] Tie Me Up! Tie Me Down!

(1990) Almodóvar's next film marked the end of the collaboration between him and Carmen Maura, and the beginning of a fruitful collaboration with Victoria Abril .

Tie Me Up! Tie Me Down!

(1990) tells the story about a recently released psychiatric patient, Ricky (Antonio Banderas), who kidnaps a porn star, Marina (Abril), in order to make her fall in love with him.

[ citation needed ] Rather than populate the film with many characters, as in his previous films, here the story focuses on the compelling relationship at its center: the actress and her kidnapper literally struggling for power and desperate for love. The film's title line Tie Me Up!

is unexpectedly uttered by the actress as a genuine request. She does not know if she will try to escape or not, and when she realizes she has feelings for her captor, she prefers not to be given a chance. In spite of some dark elements, Tie Me Up! Tie Me Down!

can be described as a romantic comedy, and the director's most clear love story, with a plot similar to William Wyler 's thriller The Collector .

[ citation needed ] Tie Me Up! Tie Me Down!

made its world premiere at the Berlin Film Festival to a polarized critical reaction. In the United States, the film received an X rating by the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA), and the stigma attached to the X rating marginalized the distribution of the film in the country.

Miramax , who distributed the film in the US, filed a lawsuit against the MPAA over the X rating, but lost in court. However, in September 1990, the MPAA replaced the X rating with the NC-17 rating. This was helpful to films of explicit nature, such as Tie Me Up! Tie Me Down!

, that were previously categorized with pornography because of the X rating.

[ 46 ] High Heels (1991) Almodóvar with Victoria Abril , star of High Heels , at the 1993 César Awards in Paris High Heels (1991) is built around the fractured relationship between a famous singer, Becky del Páramo (Marisa Paredes), and her news reporter daughter, Rebeca (Victoria Abril), as the pair get caught up in a murder mystery. Rebeca struggles with constantly being in her mother's shadow. The fact that Rebeca is married to Becky's former lover only adds to the tension between the two.

[ citation needed ] The film was partly inspired by old Hollywood mother-daughter melodramas like Stella Dallas , Mildred Pierce , Imitation of Life and particularly Autumn Sonata , which is quoted directly in the film. Production took place in 1990; Almodóvar enlisted Alfredo Mayo to shoot the film as Jose Luis Alcaine was unavailable.

[ citation needed ] Japanese composer Ryuichi Sakamoto created a score that infused popular songs and boleros .

High Heels also contains a prison yard dance sequence.

[ citation needed ] While High Heels was a box office success in Spain, the film received poor reviews from Spanish film critics due to its melodramatic approach and unsuspecting tonal shifts.

[ citation needed ] The film got a better critical reception in Italy and France and won France's César Award for Best Foreign Film . In the US, Miramax's lack of promotional effort was blamed for the film's underperformance in the country. It was however nominated for the Golden Globe for Best Foreign Language Film.

[ citation needed ] Kika (1993) His next film Kika (1993) centres on the good-hearted, but clueless, makeup artist named Kika (Verónica Forqué) who gets herself tangled in the lives of an American writer (Peter Coyote) and his stepson (Àlex Casanovas). A fashion conscious TV reporter (Victoria Abril), who is constantly in search of sensational stories, follows Kika's misadventures. Almodóvar used Kika as a critique of mass media , particularly its sensationalism .

[ citation needed ] The film is infamous for its rape scene that Almodóvar used for comic effect to set up a scathing commentary on the selfish and ruthless nature of media.

Kika made its premiere in 1993 and received very negative reviews from film critics worldwide; [ citation needed ] not just for its rape scene which was perceived as both misogynistic and exploitative, but also for its overall sloppiness. Almodóvar would later refer to the film as one of his weakest works.

[ citation needed ] The Flower of My Secret (1995) In The Flower of My Secret (1995), the story focuses on Leo Macías (Marisa Paredes), a successful romance writer who has to confront both a professional and personal crisis. Estranged from her husband, a military officer who has volunteered for an international peacekeeping role in Bosnia and Herzegovina to avoid her, Leo fights to hold on to a past that has already eluded her, not realising she has already set her future path by her own creativity and by supporting the creative efforts of others.

[ citation needed ] This was the first time that Almodóvar utilized composer Alberto Iglesias and cinematographer Affonso Beato , who became key figures in some future films.

The Flower of My Secret is the transitional film between his earlier and later style.

[ citation needed ] The film premiered in Spain in 1995 where, despite receiving 7 Goya Award nominations, was not initially well received by critics.

Live Flesh (1997) Live Flesh (1997) was the first film by Almodóvar that had an adapted screenplay. Based on Ruth Rendell 's novel Live Flesh , the film follows a man who is sent to prison after crippling a police officer and seeks redemption years later when he is released. Almodóvar decided to move the book's original setting of the UK to Spain, setting the action between 1970, when Franco declared a state of emergency , to 1996, when Spain had completely shaken off the restrictions of the Franco regime.

[ citation needed ] Live Flesh marked Almodóvar's first collaboration with Penélope Cruz , who plays the prostitute who gives birth to Victor. Additionally, Almodóvar cast Javier Bardem as the police officer David and Liberto Rabal as Víctor, the criminal seeking redemption. Italian actress Francesca Neri plays a former drug addict who sparks a complicated love triangle with David and Víctor.

Live Flesh premiered at the New York Film Festival in 1997. The film did modestly well at the international box office and also earned Almodóvar his second BAFTA nomination for Best Film Not in the English Language .

All About My Mother (1999) Almodóvar's next film, All About My Mother (1999), grew out of a brief scene in The Flower of My Secret . The premise revolves around a woman Manuela (Cecilia Roth), who loses her teenage son, Esteban (Eloy Azorín) in a tragic accident. Filled with grief, Manuela decides to track down Esteban's transgender mother, Lola (Toni Cantó), and notify her about the death of the son she never knew she had. Along the way Manuela encounters an old friend, Agrado (Antonia San Juan), and meets up with a pregnant nun, Rosa (Penélope Cruz).

The film revisited Almodóvar's familiar themes of the power of sisterhood and of family. Almodóvar shot parts of the film in Barcelona and used lush colors to emphasise the richness of the city. Dedicated to Bette Davis , Romy Schneider and Gena Rowlands , All About My Mother is steeped in theatricality, from its backstage setting to its plot, modeled on the works of Federico García Lorca and Tennessee Williams , to the characters' preoccupation with modes of performance. Almodóvar inserts a number of references to American cinema. One of the film's key scenes, where Manuela watches her son die, was inspired by John Cassavetes ' 1977 film Opening Night . The film's title is also a nod to All About Eve , which Manuela and her son are shown watching in the film. The comic relief of the film centers on Agrado, a pre-operative transgender woman. In one scene, she tells the story of her body and its relationship to plastic surgery and silicone , culminating with a statement of her own philosophy: "you get to be more authentic the more you become like what you have dreamed of yourself".

[ 47 ] All About My Mother opened at the 1999 Cannes Film Festival , where Almodóvar won both the Best Director and the Ecumenical Jury prizes.

[ 48 ] The film garnered a strong critical reception and grossed more than $67 million worldwide.

[ 49 ] All About My Mother has accordingly received more awards and honours than any other film in the Spanish motion picture industry, [ 50 ] including the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film, the Golden Globe in the same category, the BAFTA Awards for Best Direction and Best Film Not in the English Language as well as 6 Goyas in his native Spain.

[ 50 ] Talk to Her (2002) After the success of All About My Mother , Almodóvar took a break from filmmaking to focus on his production company El Deseo.

[ citation needed ] During this break, Almodóvar had an idea for Talk to Her (2002), a film about two men, played by Javier Cámara and Darío Grandinetti , who become friends while taking care of the comatose women they love, played by Leonor Watling and Rosario Flores . Combining elements of modern dance and silent filmmaking with a narrative that embraces coincidence and fate, [ citation needed ] in the film, Almodóvar plots the lives of his characters, thrown together by unimaginably bad luck, towards an unexpected conclusion.

Talk to Her was released in April 2002 in Spain, followed by its international premiere at the Telluride Film Festival in September of that year. It was hailed by critics and embraced by arthouse audiences, particularly in America.

[ 51 ] The unanimous praise for Talk to Her resulted in Almodóvar winning his first Academy Award, this time for Best Original Screenplay , as well as being nominated in the Best Director category.

[ 51 ] The film also won the César Award for Best Film from the European Union and both the BAFTA Award and Golden Globe Award for Best Foreign Language Film.

[ 51 ] Talk to Her made more than $51 million worldwide.

[ 52 ] Almodóvar (left) and Tim Burton (right) at the première of Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street in Madrid , in 2007 2004–2016: Established director [ edit ] Bad Education (2004) Two years later, Almodóvar followed with Bad Education (2004), tale of child sexual abuse and mixed identities, starring Gael García Bernal and Fele Martínez . In the drama film, two children, Ignácio and Enrique, discover love, cinema, and fear in a religious school at the start of the 1960s.

Bad Education has a complex structure that not only uses film within a film , but also stories that open up into other stories, real and imagined to narrate the same story: A tale of child molestation and its aftermath of faithlessness, creativity, despair, blackmail and murder.

Sexual abuse by Catholic priests , transsexuality , drug use , and a metafiction are also important themes and devices in the plot.

Almodóvar used elements of film noir , borrowing in particular from Double Indemnity .

[ citation needed ] The film's protagonist, Juan (Gael Garcia Bernal), was modeled largely on Patricia Highsmith 's most famous character, Tom Ripley , [ 53 ] as played by Alain Delon in René Clément 's Purple Noon . A criminal without scruples, but with an adorable face that betrays nothing of his true nature. Almodóvar explains : "He also represents a classic film noir character – the femme fatale. Which means that when other characters come into contact with him, he embodies fate, in the most tragic and noir sense of the word".

[ 54 ] Almodóvar claimed he worked on the film's screenplay for more than ten years before starting the film.

[ 55 ] Bad Education premiered in March 2004 in Spain before opening in the 57th Cannes Film Festival , the first Spanish film to do so, two months later.

[ 56 ] The film grossed more than $40 million worldwide, [ 57 ] despite its NC-17 rating in the US. It won the GLAAD Media Award for Outstanding Film – Limited Release and was nominated for the BAFTA Award for Best Film Not in the English Language; it also received 7 European Film Award nominations and 4 Goya nominations.

[ citation needed ] Volver (2006) Volver (2006), a mixture of comedy, family drama and ghost story, is set in part in La Mancha (the director's native region) and follows the story of three generations of women in the same family who survive wind, fire, and even death. The film is an ode to female resilience , where men are literally disposable.

Volver stars Penélope Cruz, Lola Dueñas , Blanca Portillo , Yohana Cobo and Chus Lampreave in addition to reunited the director with Carmen Maura, who had appeared in several of his early films.

The film was very personal to Almodóvar as he used elements of his own childhood to shape parts of the story.

[ original research?

] Many of the characters in the film were variations of people he knew from his small town.

[ citation needed ] Using a colorful backdrop, the film tackled many complex themes such as sexual abuse, grief, secrets and death. The storyline of Volver appears as both a novel and movie script in Almodóvar's earlier film The Flower of My Secret .

[ citation needed ] Many of Almodóvar's stylistic hallmarks are present: the stand-alone song (a rendition of the Argentinian tango song "Volver"), references to reality TV , and an homage to classic film (in this case Luchino Visconti 's Bellissima ).

[ citation needed ] Volver received a rapturous reception when it played at the 2006 Cannes Film Festival , where Almodóvar won the Best Screenplay prize while the entire female ensemble won the Best Actress prize. Penélope Cruz also received an Academy Award nomination for Best Actress , making her the first Spanish woman ever to be nominated in that category.

Volver went on to earn several critical accolades and earned more than £85 million internationally, becoming Almodóvar's highest-grossing film worldwide.

[ 58 ] Broken Embraces (2009) Almodóvar with Rossy de Palma (left) and Penélope Cruz at the premiere of Broken Embraces at the 2009 Cannes Film Festival Almodóvar's next film, Broken Embraces (2009) a romantic thriller which centres on a blind novelist, Harry Caine (Lluís Homar), who uses his works to recount both his former life as a filmmaker, and the tragedy that took his sight. A key figure in Caine's past is Lena (Penélope Cruz), an aspiring actress who gets embroiled in a love triangle with Caine and a paranoid millionaire, Ernesto ( José Luis Gómez ). The film has a complex structure, mixing past and present and film within a film. Almodóvar previously used this type of structure in Talk to Her and Bad Education .

Jose Luis Alcaine was unable to take part in the production, so Almodóvar hired Mexican cinematographer Rodrigo Prieto to shoot the film.

[ 59 ] Distinctive shading and shadows help to differentiate the various time periods within Broken Embraces , as Almodóvar's narrative jumps between the early 1990s and the late 2000s.

Broken Embraces was accepted into the main selection at the 2009 Cannes Film Festival in competition for the Palme d'Or , his third film to do so and fourth to screen at the festival.

[ 60 ] The film earned £30 million worldwide, [ 61 ] and received critical acclaim among critics with Roger Ebert giving the film his highest rating, 4 stars, writing, "Broken Embraces" is a voluptuary of a film, drunk on primary colors...using the devices of a Hitchcock to distract us with surfaces while the sinister uncoils beneath. As it ravished me, I longed for a freeze frame to allow me to savor a shot." [ 62 ] Despite the not receiving an Academy Award nomination, the film was nominated for both the British Academy Film Award and the Golden Globe Award for Best Foreign Language Film .

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] The Skin I Live In (2011) Loosely based on the French novel Tarantula by Thierry Jonquet, [ 65 ] The Skin I Live In (2011) is the director's first incursion into the psychological horror genre.

[ 66 ] Inspired to make his own horror film, The Skin I Live In revolves around a plastic surgeon, Robert (Antonio Banderas), who becomes obsessed with creating skin that can withstand burns. Haunted by past tragedies, Robert believes that the key to his research is the patient who he mysteriously keeps prisoner in his mansion.

[ 67 ] The film marked a long-awaited reunion between Almodóvar and Antonio Banderas, reunited after 21 years.

[ 68 ] Penélope Cruz was initially slated for the role of the captive patient Vera Cruz, but she was unable to take part as she was pregnant with her first child. As a result, Elena Anaya , who had appeared in Talk to Her , was cast.

[ 69 ] The Skin I Live In has many cinematic influences, most notably the French horror film Eyes Without a Face directed by Georges Franju , [ 66 ] but also refers to Alfred Hitchcock 's Vertigo , and the style of the films of David Cronenberg , Dario Argento , Mario Bava , Umberto Lenzi and Lucio Fulci while also paying tribute to the films of Fritz Lang and F. W. Murnau .

[ 66 ] After making its premiere at the 2011 Cannes Film Festival , the film grossed $30 million worldwide.

[ 70 ] The Skin I Live In received the BAFTA Award for Best Film Not in the English Language and a Golden Globe Award nomination in the same category.

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] I'm So Excited (2013) After a long period of dramatic and serious feature films, Almodóvar's next film was a comedy.

I'm So Excited (2013) is set almost entirely on an aircraft in flight, [ 73 ] whose first-class passengers, pilots, and trio of gay stewards all try to deal with the fact that landing gears are malfunctioning. During the ordeal, they talk about love, themselves, and a plethora of things while getting drunk on Valencia cocktails. With its English title taken from a song by the Pointer Sisters, Almodóvar openly embraced the campy humor that was prominent in his early works.

[ 74 ] The film's cast was a mixture of Almodóvar regulars such as Cecilia Roth, Javier Cámara, and Lola Dueñas, Blanca Suárez and Paz Vega as well as Antonio Banderas and Penélope Cruz who make cameo appearances in the film's opening scene. Shot on a soundstage, Almodóvar amplified the campy tone by incorporating a dance number and oddball characters like Dueñas' virginal psychic.

[ citation needed ] The film premiered in Spain in March 2013 and had its international release during the summer of that year. Despite mixed reviews from critics, the film did fairly well at the international box office.

[ 75 ] Julieta (2016) For his 20th feature film, [ 76 ] Almodóvar decided to return to drama and his "cinema of women".

[ 77 ] Julieta (2016) stars Emma Suárez and Adriana Ugarte , who play the older and younger versions of the film's titular character, [ 78 ] as well as regular Rossy de Palma , who has a supporting role in the film.

[ 79 ] This film was originally titled Silencio ( Silence ) but the director changed the name to prevent confusion with another recent release by that name .

[ 80 ] The film was released in April 2016 in Spain to positive reviews and received its international debut at the 2016 Cannes Film Festival . It was Almodóvar's fifth film to compete for the Palme d'Or . The film was also selected by the Spanish Academy as the entry for the Best Foreign Language Film at the 89th Academy Awards , [ 81 ] but it did not make the shortlist.

2019–present [ edit ] Pain and Glory (2019) Almodóvar with his brother Agustín, Nora Navas, Leonardo Sbaraglia, Penélope Cruz, and Antonio Banderas at the red carpet of the 34th Goya Awards in 2020 Almodóvar's next film— Pain and Glory ( Dolor y gloria )—was released in Spain on 22 March 2019 by Sony Pictures Releasing .

[ 82 ] It first was selected to compete for the Palme d'Or at the 2019 Cannes Film Festival .

[ 83 ] The film centers around an aging film director, played by Antonio Banderas who is suffering from chronic illness and writer's block as he reflects on his life in flashbacks to his childhood.

Penelope Cruz plays Jacinta, the mother of the aging film director, in the film's flashbacks. Almodóvar has described the film as semi-autobiographical.

[ 84 ] The film was nominated for the Academy Award for Best International Feature Film , though it ultimately lost to Bong Joon-ho 's Parasite .

Parallel Mothers (2021) In July 2020, Agustín Almodóvar announced that his brother had finished the script for his next full-length feature Parallel Mothers during the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown.

[ 85 ] Starring Penelope Cruz , the drama turns on two mothers who give birth the same day and follows their parallel lives over their first and second years raising their children. The film began shooting in February 2021 and opened the 78th Venice International Film Festival where Cruz won the Volpi Cup for Best Actress . The film has received near universal acclaim with David Rooney of The Hollywood Reporter writing, "It's a testament to the consummate gifts of one of the world's most treasured filmmakers — now entering the fifth decade of a career still going strong — that he can constantly delight your eye with no risk of losing your involvement in the emotional lives of characters he so clearly adores." [ 86 ] The film has been nominated for the Golden Globe Award and Independent Spirit Award for Best International Film.

The shoot delayed Almodóvar's previously announced feature-length adaptation of Lucia Berlin 's short story collection A Manual for Cleaning Women starring Cate Blanchett which had been set to be his first feature in English.

[ 85 ] During the COVID-19 pandemic Almodóvar directed the short film The Human Voice (2020) starring Tilda Swinton . The short, which was based on the Jean Cocteau play of the same name , premiered at the 77th Venice International Film Festival . He directed another short film Strange Way of Life (2023), a Western drama starring Ethan Hawke and Pedro Pascal . The film premiered at the 2023 Cannes Film Festival to positive reviews and was released in theatres by Sony Pictures Classics .

[ 87 ] The Last Dream (2024) In 2024, Almodóvar published his first collection of short stories.

[ 88 ] Described by Almodóvar as a "fragmentary autobiography", The Last Dream contains 12 stories that his assistant Lola García had archived – some of which are more than 50 years old and were written when Almodóvar was a teenager.

[ 89 ] [ 90 ] Almodóvar won the Golden Lion at the 81st Venice International Film Festival The Room Next Door (2024) Work on Almodóvar's film The Room Next Door began in March 2024.

[ 91 ] Featuring Tilda Swinton and Julianne Moore , it marked Almodóvar's feature length English-language debut. The film won the Golden Lion at the 2024 edition of the Venice Film Festival , becoming the first Spanish film to win the prize.

[ 92 ] Bitter Christmas Filming of Almodóvar's next film Bitter Christmas is expected to start on the Canary Islands in June 2025.

[ 93 ] A "tragic comedy about gender", it will explore the story of a woman who is left by her lover in Christmas time.

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] Artistry [ edit ] "Almodóvar has consolidated his own, very recognizable universe, forged by repeating themes and stylistic features", wrote Gerard A. Cassadó in Fotogramas , Spanish film magazine, in which the writer identified nine key features which recur in Almodóvar's films: homosexuality ; female heroines ; sacrilegious Catholicism ; lipsyncing ; familial cameos ; excessive kitsch and camp ; narrative interludes; and intertextuality .

[ 95 ] June Thomas from Slate magazine also recognised that illegal drug use , letter-writing, spying , stalking , prostitution , rape , incest , transsexuality , vomiting , movie-making, recent inmates , car accidents and women urinating on screen are frequent motifs recurring in his work.

[ 96 ] Almodóvar in 2008 Almodóvar has also been distinguished for his use of bold colours and inventive camera angles, as well as using "cinematic references, genre touchstones, and images that serve the same function as songs in a musical , to express what cannot be said".

[ 97 ] Elaborate décor and the relevance of fashion in his films are additionally important aspects informing the design of Almodóvar's mise-en-scène .

[ 98 ] Music is also a key feature; from pop songs to boleros to original compositions by Alberto Iglesias .

[ 99 ] While some criticise Almodóvar for obsessively returning to the same themes and stylistic features, others have applauded him for having "the creativity to remake them afresh every time he comes back to them".

[ 96 ] Internationally, Almodóvar has been hailed as an auteur by film critics, who have coined the term "Almodovariano" (which would translate as Almodovarian) to define his unique style.

[ 100 ] [ 101 ] Almodóvar has taken influences from various filmmakers, including figures in North American cinema, particularly old Hollywood directors George Cukor and Billy Wilder , [ 102 ] and the underground, transgressive cinema of John Waters and Andy Warhol .

[ 103 ] The influence of Douglas Sirk 's melodramas and the stylistic appropriations of Alfred Hitchcock are also present in his work.

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] He also takes inspiration from figures in the history of Spanish cinema , including directors Luis García Berlanga , Fernando Fernán Gómez , Edgar Neville as well as dramatists Miguel Mihura and Enrique Jardiel Poncela ; [ 105 ] [ 106 ] [ 107 ] many also hail Almodóvar as "the most celebrated Spanish filmmaker since Luis Buñuel ".

[ 99 ] [ 101 ] Other foreign influences include filmmakers Ingmar Bergman , Rainer Werner Fassbinder , Federico Fellini and Fritz Lang .

[ 108 ] References to film and allusions to theatre, literature, dance, painting, television and advertising "are central to the world that Almodóvar constructs on screen".

[ 109 ] Film critic José Arroyo noted that Almodóvar "borrows indiscriminately from film history".

[ 109 ] Almodóvar has acknowledged that "cinema is always present in my films [and that] certain films play an active part in my scripts. When I insert an extract from a film, it isn't a homage but outright theft. It's part of the story I'm telling, and becomes an active presence rather than a homage which is always something passive. I absorb the films I've seen into my own experience, which immediately becomes the experience of my characters".

[ 110 ] Almodóvar has alluded to the work of many different artists and genres in his work; sometimes works have been referenced diagetically or evoked through less direct methods.

[ 109 ] Almodóvar has additionally made self-references to films within his own oeuvre.

[ 111 ] Working with some of Spain's best-known actresses including Carmen Maura, Victoria Abril, Marisa Paredes and Penélope Cruz, Almodóvar has become famous for his female-centric films, his "sympathetic portrayals of women" [ 96 ] and his elevation of "the humdrum spaces of overworked women".

[ 112 ] He was heavily influenced by classic Hollywood films in which everything happens around a female main character, and aims to continue in that tradition.

[ 25 ] Almodóvar has frequently spoken about how he was surrounded by powerful women in his childhood: "Women were very happy, worked hard and always spoke. They handed me the first sensations and forged my character. The woman represented everything to me, the man was absent and represented authority. I never identified with the male figure: maternity inspires me more than paternity".

[ 113 ] Almodóvar in popular culture A critic from Popmatters notes that Almodóvar is interested in depicting women overcoming tragedies and adversities and the power of close female relationships.

[ 114 ] Ryan Vlastelica from AVClub wrote: "Many of his characters track a Byzantine plot to a cathartic reunion, a meeting where all can be understood, if not forgiven. They seek redemption".

[ 97 ] Almodóvar stated that he does not usually write roles for specific actors, but after casting a film, he custom-tailors the characters to suit the actors; [ 115 ] he believes his role as a director is a "mirror for the actors – a mirror that can't lie".

[ 115 ] Critics believe Almodóvar has redefined perceptions of Spanish cinema and Spain.

[ 116 ] Many typical images and symbols of Spain, such as bullfighting , gazpacho and flamenco , have been featured in his films; the majority of his films have also been shot in Madrid .

[ 117 ] Spanish people have been divided in their opinion of Almodóvar's work: while some believe that "Almodóvar has renegotiated what it means to be Spanish and reappropriated its ideals" in a post-Franco Spain, [ 111 ] others are concerned with how their essence might be dismissed as "another quirky image from a somewhat exotic and colorful culture" to a casual foreigner.

[ 100 ] Almodóvar has however acknowledged: "[M]y films are very Spanish, but on the other hand they are capriciously personal. You cannot measure Spain by my films".

[ 118 ] Almodóvar is generally better received by critics outside of Spain, particularly in France and the USA.

[ 100 ] Asked to explain the success of his films, Almodóvar says that they are very entertaining: "It's important not to forget that films are made to entertain. That's the key".

[ 25 ] He has also been noted for his tendency to shock audiences in his films by featuring outrageous situations or characters, which have served a political or commercial purpose to "tell viewers that if the people on the screen could endure these terrible travails and still communicate, so could they".

[ 96 ] Almodóvar believes all his films to be political, "even the most frivolous movie", but claimed that he had never attempted to pursue outright political causes or fight social injustice in his films; merely wanting to entertain and generate emotion.

[ 115 ] "I'm not a political director. As a filmmaker, my commitment was to want to create free people, completely autonomous from a moral point of view. They are free regardless of their social class or their profession", remarked Almodóvar.

[ 105 ] However, he admitted that in his earlier films, which were released just after Franco's death, he wanted to create a world on film in which Franco and his repression did not exist, [ 119 ] thereby "providing a voice for Spain's marginalized groups".

[ 97 ] Almodóvar has incorporated elements of underground and LGBT culture into mainstream forms with wide crossover appeal; [ 120 ] academics have recognised the director's significance in queer cinema.

[ 121 ] [ 122 ] Almodóvar dislikes being pigeonholed as a gay filmmaker, but Courtney Young from Pop Matters claimed that he has pushed boundaries by playing with the expectations of gender and sexuality, which places his work in the queer cinematic canon.

[ 123 ] Young also commented on Almodóvar's fluid idea of sexuality; within his films, LGBT characters do not need to come out as they are already sexually liberated, "enlivening the narrative with complex figures that move beyond trite depictions of the LGBTQI experience".

[ 123 ] She also wrote about the importance of the relationships between gay men and straight women in Almodóvar's films.

[ 123 ] In conclusion, Young stated, "Almodóvar is an auteur that designates the queer experience as he sees it the dignity, respect, attention, and recognition it so deserves".

[ 123 ] He served as the president of the jury for the 2017 Cannes Film Festival .

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] He was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 2001.

[ 1 ] Frequent collaborators [ edit ] Almodóvar with Penélope Cruz in 2017 Almodóvar often casts certain actors in many of his films. Actors who have performed in his films 3 or more times in either lead, supporting or cameo roles include Chus Lampreave (8), [ 126 ] Antonio Banderas (8), Rossy de Palma (8), Carmen Maura (7), Cecilia Roth (7), Penélope Cruz (7), Julieta Serrano (6), Kiti Manver (5), Fabio McNamara (5), Marisa Paredes (5), Eva Silva (5), Victoria Abril (4), Lola Dueñas (4), Lupe Barrado (4), Bibiana Fernández (Bibi Andersen) (4), Loles León (3) and Javier Cámara (3).

[ 127 ] Almodóvar is particularly noted for his work with Spanish actresses and they have become affectionately known as "Almodóvar girls" ( chicas Almodóvar ).

[ 128 ] After setting up El Deseo in 1986, Agustín Almodóvar , Pedro's brother, has produced all of his films since The Law of Desire (1986).

[ 129 ] Esther García has also been involved in the production of Almodóvar films since 1986.

[ 130 ] Both of them regularly appear in cameo roles in their films.

[ 130 ] [ 131 ] His mother, Francisca Caballero, made cameos in four films before she died.

Film editor José Salcedo was responsible for editing all of Almodóvar's films from 1980 until his death in 2017.

[ 132 ] Cinematographer José Luis Alcaine has collaborated on a total of six films with Almodóvar, particularly his most recent films. Their earliest collaboration was on Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown (1988), and their most recent on The Human Voice (2020).

[ 133 ] Angel Luis Fernández was responsible for cinematography in five of Almodóvar's earlier films in the 1980s, from Labyrinth of Passion (1982) until The Law of Desire (1987).

[ 134 ] In the 1990s, Almodóvar collaborated with Alfredo Mayo on two films and Affonso Beato on three films.

Composer Bernardo Bonezzi wrote the music for six of his earlier films from Labyrinth of Passion (1982) until Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown (1988).

[ 135 ] His musical style is intertextually imbued with the compositional language of various classical and film composers such as Erik Satie , Igor Stravinsky , Bernard Hermann and Nino Rota .

[ 136 ] Since The Flower of My Secret (1995), Alberto Iglesias has composed the music for all of Almodóvar's films.

[ 137 ] Art design on Almodóvar's films has invariably been the responsibility of Antxón Gomez in recent years, [ 138 ] though other collaborators include Román Arango, Javier Fernández and Pin Morales. Almodóvar's frequent collaborators for costume design include José María de Cossío, Sonia Grande and Paco Delgado. Almodóvar has also worked with designers Jean Paul Gaultier and Gianni Versace on a few films.

Work Actor 1980 1982 1983 1984 1986 1987 1988 1990 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2002 2004 2006 2009 2011 2013 2016 2019 2021 2024 Pepi, Luci, Bom Labyrinth of Passion Dark Habits What Have I Done to Deserve This?

Matador Law of Desire Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown Tie Me Up! Tie Me Down!

High Heels Kika The Flower of My Secret Live Flesh All About My Mother Talk to Her Bad Education Volver Broken Embraces The Skin I Live In I'm So Excited!

Julieta Pain and Glory Parallel Mothers The Room Next Door Victoria Abril Elena Anaya Raúl Arévalo Antonio Banderas Lupe Barrado Javier Cámara Penélope Cruz Lola Dueñas Bibiana Fernández Verónica Forqué Chus Lampreave Loles León Fabio McNamara Kiti Manver Carmen Maura Rossy de Palma Marisa Paredes Eusebio Poncela Cecilia Roth Assumpta Serna Julieta Serrano Eva Siva Paz Vega Personal life [ edit ] Almodóvar is openly gay.

[ 139 ] He describes himself as having been actively bisexual until the age of 34.

[ 140 ] He has been with his partner, actor and photographer, Fernando Iglesias, since 2002, and often casts him in small roles in his films.

[ 141 ] The pair live in separate dwellings in neighbouring districts of Madrid; Almodóvar in Argüelles and Iglesias in Malasaña .

[ 142 ] Almodóvar used to live on Calle de O'Donnell on the eastern side of the city but moved to his €3 million apartment on Paseo del Pintor Rosales in the west in 2007.

[ 143 ] In 2009, Almodóvar signed a petition in support of film director Roman Polanski , calling for his release after Polanski was arrested in Switzerland in relation to his 1977 charge for drugging and raping a 13-year-old girl.

[ 144 ] Almodóvar endorsed Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton in the run-up for the 2016 U.S. presidential election.

[ 145 ] In 2025, Almodóvar signed a letter criticising the film industry's "passivity" before the ongoing Gaza genocide .

[ 146 ] In the 2025 documentary miniseries Pedro x Javis , Almodóvar cited Kika and I'm So Excited!

as his least favourite pictures of his own filmography, while considering All About My Mother , Talk to Her , and Bad Education to be his most accomplished works.

[ 147 ] Panama Papers scandal In April 2016, a week before his film Julieta was to be released in Spain, Pedro and Agustín Almodóvar were listed in the leak of the Panama Papers from the database of the offshore law firm Mossack Fonseca ; their names showed up on the incorporation documents of a company based in the British Virgin Islands between 1991 and 1994.

[ 148 ] As a result, Pedro cancelled scheduled press, interviews and photocalls he had made for the release of Julieta in Spain.

[ 149 ] Agustín released a statement in which he declared himself fully responsible, saying that he has always taken charge of financial matters while Pedro has been dedicated to the creative side and hoping that this would not tarnish his brother's reputation.

[ 150 ] He also stressed that the brothers have always abided by Spanish tax laws. "On the legal front there are no worries", he explained. "It's a reputation problem which I'm responsible for. I'm really sorry that Pedro has had to suffer the consequences. I have taken full responsibility for what has happened, not because I'm his brother or business partner, but because the responsibility is all mine. I hope that time will put things in its place. We are not under any tax inspection".

[ 151 ] The week after the release of Julieta , Pedro gave an interview in which he stated that he knew nothing about the shares as financial matters were handled by his brother, Agustín. However, he emphasised that his ignorance was not an excuse and took full responsibility.

[ 152 ] Agustín later admitted that he believed Julieta ' s box office earnings in Spain suffered as a result, [ 151 ] as the film reportedly had the worst opening of an Almodóvar film at the Spanish box office in 20 years.

[ 153 ] Filmography [ edit ] Short film [ edit ] Year Title Director Writer Notes 1974 Film político Yes Yes Dos putas, o historia de amor que termina en boda Yes Yes 1975 La caída de Sódoma Yes Yes Homenaje Yes Yes El sueño, o la estrella Yes Yes Blancor Yes Yes 1976 Sea caritativo Yes Yes Muerte en la carretera Yes Yes 1977 Sexo va, sexo viene Yes Yes 1978 Salomé Yes Yes 1985 Tráiler para amantes de lo prohibido!

Yes Yes TV short 1996 Pastas Ardilla Yes Yes TV advert 2009 La concejala antropófaga Yes Yes Credited as "Mateo Blanco" (director) and as "Harry 'Huracán' Caine" (writer) 2020 The Human Voice Yes Yes 2023 Strange Way of Life Yes Yes Feature film [ edit ] Year English title Director Writer Producer Original title 1980 Pepi, Luci, Bom and Other Girls on the Heap Yes Yes No Pepi, Luci, Bom y otras chicas del montón 1982 Labyrinth of Passion Yes Yes Yes Laberinto de pasiones 1983 Dark Habits Yes Yes No Entre tinieblas 1984 What Have I Done to Deserve This?

Yes Yes No ¿Qué he hecho yo para merecer esto?

1986 Matador Yes Yes No Matador 1987 Law of Desire Yes Yes No La ley del deseo 1988 Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown Yes Yes Yes Mujeres al borde de un ataque de nervios 1989 Tie Me Up! Tie Me Down!

Yes Yes No ¡Átame!

1991 High Heels Yes Yes No Tacones lejanos 1993 Kika Yes Yes No Kika 1995 The Flower of My Secret Yes Yes No La flor de mi secreto 1997 Live Flesh Yes Yes No Carne trémula 1999 All About My Mother Yes Yes No Todo sobre mi madre 2002 Talk to Her Yes Yes No Hable con ella 2004 Bad Education Yes Yes Yes La mala educación 2006 Volver Yes Yes No Volver 2009 Broken Embraces Yes Yes No Los abrazos rotos 2011 The Skin I Live In Yes Yes No La piel que habito 2013 I'm So Excited!

Yes Yes No Los amantes pasajeros 2016 Julieta Yes Yes No Julieta 2019 Pain and Glory Yes Yes No Dolor y gloria 2021 Parallel Mothers Yes Yes No Madres paralelas 2024 The Room Next Door Yes Yes No La habitación de al lado 2026 Bitter Christmas Yes — — Amarga Navidad Awards and nominations [ edit ] Main article: List of awards and nominations received by Pedro Almodóvar Year Title Academy Awards BAFTA Awards Golden Globe Awards Goya Awards Nominations Wins Nominations Wins Nominations Wins Nominations Wins 1986 Matador 1 1988 Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown 1 1 1 16 5 1991 High Heels 1 5 1997 Live Flesh 1 3 1 1999 All About My Mother 1 1 3 2 1 1 14 7 2002 Talk to Her 2 1 2 2 1 7 1 2004 Bad Education 1 4 2006 Volver 1 2 2 14 5 2009 Broken Embraces 1 1 5 1 2011 The Skin I Live In 1 1 1 16 4 2013 I'm So Excited!

1 2016 Julieta 1 7 1 2019 Pain and Glory 2 1 2 16 7 2021 Parallel Mothers 2 1 2 8 2024 The Room Next Door 1 10 3 Total 9 2 14 5 13 1 137 35 Notes [ edit ] ^ In this Spanish name , the first or paternal surname is Almodóvar and the second or maternal family name is Caballero .

See also [ edit ] List of Spanish Academy Award winners and nominees List of LGBTQ Academy Award winners and nominees References [ edit ] ^ a b "Book of Members, 1780–2010: Chapter A" (PDF) . American Academy of Arts and Sciences . Retrieved 15 April 2011 .

^ Dalton, Ben.

"Pedro Almodóvar's 'The Room Next Door' wins Golden Lion at Venice Film Festival" .

Screen . Retrieved 7 September 2024 .

^ "Winners 2013" .

European Film Awards . European Film Academy . Retrieved 9 December 2013 .

^ "Biennale Cinema 2019 | Pedro Almodóvar, Golden Lion for Lifetime Achievement" .

La Biennale di Venezia . 14 June 2019 . Retrieved 8 December 2022 .

^ Vivarelli, Nick (14 June 2019).

"Pedro Almodovar to Receive Lifetime Achievement Award at Venice Film Festival" .

Variety . Retrieved 8 December 2022 .

^ Wiseman, Andreas (14 June 2019).

"Pedro Almodóvar To Receive Venice Film Festival Golden Lion For Lifetime Achievement" .

Deadline . Retrieved 8 December 2022 .

^ a b c Ireland, Corydon; Alvin Powell; Colleen Walsh (4 June 2009).

"Ten honorary degrees awarded at Commencement" .

The Harvard Gazette . Retrieved 8 June 2025 .

^ Martínez, Luis (29 March 2016).

"Pedro Almodóvar, doctor honoris causa por Oxford | Cultura | EL MUNDO" .

Elmundo.es . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ "Pedro Almodóvar Biography" . Biography.com. Archived from the original on 28 January 2019 . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ Romo, José Luis (8 April 2016).

"Agustín Almodóvar, 'Todo sobre mi hermano' | loc | EL MUNDO" .

Elmundo.es . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ Ramaswamy, Chitra (28 April 2013).

"Pedro Almodóvar on his new film 'I'm so Excited!' " . Scotsman.com . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ Levy, Emanuel (2015). "Pedro Almodóvar".

Gay Directors, Gay Films?: Pedro Almodóvar, Terence Davies, Todd Haynes, Gus Van Sant, John Waters . Columbia University Press. pp.

1– 117.

doi : 10.7312/levy15276-002 .

ISBN 978-0-231-15277-8 . Retrieved 26 May 2025 .

^ a b Hirschberg, Lynn (5 September 2004).

"The Redeemer : Pedro Almodovar : Cannes: The Slow Drive to Triumph" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ Tremlett, Giles (27 April 2013).

"Pedro Almodóvar: 'It's my gayest film ever' | Film" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ D'Lugo, Pedro Almodóvar , p. 13.

^ Allison, A Spanish Labyrinth , p. 7.

^ D'Lugo, Pedro Almodóvar , p. 14.

^ "Almodóvar rescatará tres filmes en súper 8 anteriores a su primera película" . Elmundo.es. 18 October 2006 . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ "Pedro Almodóvar interview for The Skin I Live In" .

The Telegraph . 13 August 2011 . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ Dickson, Andrew (10 December 2014).

"Women on the verge of song and dance: Almodóvar's world is pure theatre | Stage" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ "Almodóvar no da crédito: Su principal compañero de la 'Movida' se ha convertido en "portavoz delirante de Gallardón" : Periódico digital progresista" . Archived from the original on 29 December 2014 . Retrieved 29 December 2014 .

^ "Pedro Almodóvar, el genio del cine español" . Elmundo.es . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ "The Call of the Wild How Did Pedro Almodovar Go From Phone-company Worker To Spain's Hottest Director?" . Articles.philly.com. Archived from the original on 29 December 2014 . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ "Almodóvar celebrates 61 years with "I'm So Excited" (Video)" (in Spanish). Laopinion.com. Archived from the original on 3 January 2015 . Retrieved 3 January 2015 .

^ a b c Ratner-Arias, Sigal (19 November 2009), Director Pedro Almodovar is haunted by one taboo [ dead link ] ^ Edwards, Almodóvar: Labyrinth of Passion , p. 12.

^ Almodóvar Secreto: Cobos and Marias, pp. 76–78.

^ Allison, A Spanish Labyrinth , p. 9.

^ Abraham, Raphael (2 January 2015).

"Tea with the FT: Pedro Almodóvar" . FT.com.

Archived from the original on 11 December 2022 . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ "Pepi, Luci, Bom – Film Calendar" .

The Austin Chronicle . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ D'Lugo, Pedro Almodóvar , p. 19.

^ Stone, Judy (23 October 1988).

"FILM – Carmen Maura – Good Times for a 'Bad Woman' " .

The New York Times . SPAIN . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ D'Lugo, Pedro Almodóvar , p. 26.

^ "Early Almodóvar – Harvard Film Archive" .

Hcl.harvard.edu . Archived from the original on 6 May 2016 . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ a b Strauss, Almodóvar on Almodóvar , p. 28.

^ Chartrand, Dorothy (3 November 2011).

"Antonio Banderas takes a leap of faith in The Skin I Live In | Georgia Straight Vancouver's News & Entertainment Weekly" .

Straight.com . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ Parkinson, David (29 May 2013).

"Dark Habits – A Sister Act of Sacrilegious Salvation" .

Moviemail.com . Archived from the original on 13 May 2016 . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ Almodóvar, Pedro (7 August 1996).

"Vuelve 'Entre tinieblas' | Edición impresa | EL PAÍS" .

El País . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ "Ted Anton on Truman Capote's "A Day's Work" " .

Assay: A Journal of Nonfiction Studies . 27 April 2015 . Retrieved 19 December 2017 .

^ D'Lugo, Pedro Almodóvar , p. 96.

^ Arroyo, Jose (31 July 2002).

"Pedro Almodovar" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 8 January 2025 .

^ Strauss, Almodóvar on Almodóvar , p. 15.

^ Almodóvar Secreto: Cobos and Marias, p. 100.

^ "Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown (1988)" . Box Office Mojo. 11 November 1988 . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ "The 61st Academy Awards (1989) Nominees and Winners" .

oscars.org . Archived from the original on 6 July 2011 . Retrieved 20 August 2015 .

^ Fox, David J. (27 September 1990).

"X Film Rating Dropped and Replaced by NC-17 : Movies: Designation would bar children under 17. Move expected to clear the way for strong adult themes. – latimes" . Articles.latimes.com . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ Pedro Almodóvar, All About my Mother .

^ "Festival de Cannes: All About My Mother" .

festival-cannes.com . Archived from the original on 22 August 2011 . Retrieved 8 October 2009 .

^ "All About My Mother (1999)" . Box Office Mojo. 28 August 2002 . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ a b D'Lugo, Pedro Almodóvar , p. 105.

^ a b c Lyttelton, Oliver (14 October 2011).

"The Films of Pedro Almodóvar: A Retrospective" .

IndieWire . Archived from the original on 8 January 2012 . Retrieved 20 November 2012 .

^ "Talk to Her (2002)" . Box Office Mojo . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ D'Lugo, Pedro Almodóvar , p. 117.

^ Strauss, Almodóvar on Almodóvar , p. 212.

^ De La Fuente, Anna Marie (4 November 2004).

"Almodovar puts 'Education' to use" .

Variety .

Archived from the original on 5 January 2013 . Retrieved 20 June 2009 .

^ "Festival de Cannes: Bad Education" .

festival-cannes.com . Archived from the original on 10 October 2012 . Retrieved 5 December 2009 .

^ "Bad Education (2004)" . Box Office Mojo. 25 April 2005 . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ "Volver (2006)" . Box Office Mojo . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ "Review: Broken Embraces" .

Film Comment . Retrieved 22 November 2020 .

^ "Festival de Cannes: Broken Embraces" .

festival-cannes.com . Archived from the original on 4 July 2009 . Retrieved 9 May 2009 .

^ "Broken Embraces (2009)" . Box Office Mojo. 27 May 2010 . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ "Broken Embraces movie review" .

rogerebert.com . Retrieved 22 November 2020 .

^ "Bafta Film Awards: 2010 winners" .

BBC News . 21 February 2010 . Retrieved 22 November 2020 .

^ "Golden Globes nominations: the 2010 list in full" .

The Guardian . 15 December 2009 . Retrieved 22 November 2020 .

^ "Mygale (Tarantula) (The Skin I Live In) – Thierry Jonquet" . Complete-review.com . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ a b c Almodóvar, Some Notes About The Skin I Live In , pp. 94–95.

^ "Review: The Skin I Live In" .

Film Comment . Retrieved 22 November 2020 .

^ Barton, Steve (5 May 2010).

"Antonio Banderas To Carve Up The Skin I Live In" . Dreadcentral.com . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ "Pedro Almodóvar Finally Unites Penélope Cruz and Antonio Banderas" .

W Magazine . 31 January 2019 . Retrieved 22 November 2020 .

^ "The Skin I Live In (2011)" . Box Office Mojo. 29 March 2012 . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ "Almodóvar hoping for fifth Bafta with "The Skin I Live In" " .

thinkSpain . Archived from the original on 30 November 2020 . Retrieved 22 November 2020 .

^ "The Skin I Live In" .

Goldenglobes.com . Retrieved 22 November 2020 .

^ Sarda, Juan. (14 February 2012) Almodovar laughs with The Brief Lovers | News | Screen . Screendaily.com. Retrieved 22 May 2014.

^ "Out of Frame: I'm So Excited" .

dcist .

Archived from the original on 21 September 2020 . Retrieved 22 November 2020 .

^ "I'm So Excited (2013)" . Box Office Mojo. 7 November 2013 . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ "Pedro Almodovar Announces New Cast for Film 'Silencio' : Entertainment" . Latinpost.com. 29 March 2015 . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ Raphael Abraham (2 January 2015).

"Tea with the FT: Pedro Almodóvar" . FT.com . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ " 'Silencio': Pedro Almodóvar is filming | In English | EL PAÍS" . Elpais.com. 27 March 2015 . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ "Rossy de Palma: "A Almodóvar nunca le he pedido nada" | Vanity Fair" . Revistavanityfair.es. 16 January 2015. Archived from the original on 24 January 2015 . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ Schonfeld, Zach (23 December 2016).

"Review: 'Julieta' is Pedro Almodovar's Best Film in Years" .

Newsweek .

^ Belinchón, Gregorio (7 September 2016).

" 'Julieta' representará a España en los Oscar" .

El País . Retrieved 20 September 2016 .

^ Marie De La Fuente, Anna (13 December 2018).

"Sony Pictures to Release Pedro Almodovar's 'Pain & Glory' (EXCLUSIVE)" .

Variety . Retrieved 13 December 2018 .

^ "Cannes festival 2019: full list of films" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 18 April 2019 .

^ "Director Pedro Almodóvar on semi-autobiographical film 'Pain and Glory – and refusing to work in Hollywood" .

Channel 4 . 23 August 2019 . Retrieved 18 November 2020 .

^ a b Hopewell, John (30 June 2020).

"Pedro Almodovar, Penelope Cruz Look to Team Up on Motherhood-Themed 'Madres Paralelas' " .

Variety . Retrieved 9 July 2020 .

^ "Penélope Cruz in Pedro Almodóvar's 'Parallel Mothers' ('Madres Paralelas'): Film Review - Venice 2021" .

The Hollywood Reporter . September 2021 . Retrieved 8 January 2022 .

^ "Pedro Almodóvar's 'Strange Way of Life' Sets October Theatrical Debut from Sony Classics" .

IndieWire . 3 August 2023 . Retrieved 9 September 2023 .

^ "Pedro Almodóvar has a book out this fall, a 'fragmentary autobiography' called 'The Last Dream' " .

AP News . 29 January 2024 . Retrieved 22 April 2024 .

^ Kultur, S. W. R. (28 March 2024).

"Pedro Almodóvar – Der letzte Traum. Zwölf Erzählungen" .

swr.online (in German) . Retrieved 22 April 2024 .

^ Jones, Sam (7 September 2024).

"Pedro Almodóvar: 'Life needs fiction to make it bearable' " .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 10 September 2024 .

^ Ruimy, Jordan (22 January 2024).

"Julianne Moore Cast in Pedro Almodovar's 'The Room Next Door' " .

World of Reel . Retrieved 24 January 2024 .

^ "Pedro Almodóvar's 'The Room Next Door' wins Golden Lion at Venice Film Festival" .

^ a b "Pedro Almódovar: desvelamos los primeros nombres (y más datos) de la nueva película que va a empezar a rodar" .

hola.com (in Spanish). 7 May 2025 . Retrieved 25 May 2025 .

^ " 'The Room Next Door': How Pedro Almodóvar Wrangled Formal Spanish Into His First English-Language Feature" .

Indiewire . 3 October 2024 . Retrieved 25 May 2025 .

^ "Los 9 temas más reconocibles del cine de Almodóvar - Cinefilia - Fotogramas" . Archived from the original on 25 April 2016 . Retrieved 24 April 2016 .

^ a b c d Thomas, June (13 October 2011).

"Pedro Almodovar's filmography: What I learned from watching all his films" .

Slate.com . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ a b c Vlastelica, Ryan (11 January 2016).

"A beginner's guide to the twisty melodrama of Pedro Almodóvar · Primer" .

Avclub.com . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ Limnander, Armand (30 April 2009).

"ABCD" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ a b [1] [ dead link ] ^ a b c "Lost in Translation" . PopMatters . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ a b "All About Almodóvar" .

Dga.org . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ "Almodovar Looks To Films of Wilder For Motivation" .

Articles.chicagotribune.com . 2 March 1989 . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ "Pedro Almodóvar : 'Mis influencias han sido Andy Warhol y Lola Flores' " .

Elcultural.com . 13 November 2008 . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ Robey, Tim; David Gritten (15 February 2003).

"Love in a time of intolerance" .

The Telegraph . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ a b c "ALMODOVAR : SA GRANDE CONFESSION | Le meilleur magazine de cinéma du monde" .

Sofilm.fr . 9 May 2016 . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ "Pedro Almodóvar • Great Director profile • Senses of Cinema" .

Sensesofcinema.com . 4 October 2002 . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ Hopewell, John (15 October 2014).

"Pedro Almodóvar Talks About Spanish Cinema He Loves" . Variety . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ "Viva Pedro: The Almodóvar Interview" . PopMatters . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ a b c "Referencing & Recycling" . PopMatters. 16 November 2009 . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ Almodóvar on Almódovar: Strauss, p. 45.

^ a b "Pedro Almodovar's Renegotiation of the Spanish Identity" . Movies in 203. 11 January 2011 . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ Crooke, Daniel (15 May 2017).

"Pedro Party: What Have I Done To Deserve This? & Volver" .

filmexpereince.net . Retrieved 15 May 2017 .

^ "Almodóvar: puedo sobrevivir sin Palma de Oro pero no sin cine | La Nación" .

Lanacion.com.py . 7 May 2016 . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ "Woman or Object: Selected Female Roles in the Films of Pedro Almodóvar" . PopMatters. 17 November 2009 . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ a b c "Pedro Almodovar Discusses Career Influences, Women's Natural Acting Skills" . Hollywood Reporter. 18 November 2012 . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ Film: Bergan, p. 252.

^ Lanyado, Benji.

"All about Madrid | Travel" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ Almodovar, Pedro (Spring 1994).

"Interview with Ela Troyano" .

BOMB Magazine . Archived from the original on 25 May 2012 . Retrieved 4 May 2012 .

^ Nelson, Jim; Ruven Afandor (29 May 2013).

"The GQ+A: Pedro Almodovar" . GQ . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ "Almodóvar y el sexo" .

Elmundo.es . 22 December 2006 . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ "Pedro Almodóvar: queer pioneer – Parade@Portsmouth" .

Eprints.port.ac.uk . Archived from the original on 1 July 2016 . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ Miller, Ben (5 August 2015).

"Lambda Literary" . Lambda Literary . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ a b c d Bad Education (17 November 2009).

"Pedro Almodóvar's Quintessentially Pansexual Oeuvre" . PopMatters . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ "Pedro Almodóvar President of the Jury of the 70th Festival de Cannes" .

Cannes . Archived from the original on 2 February 2017 . Retrieved 31 January 2017 .

^ "Pedro Almodóvar, Leone d'oro a Venezia: "Sarà la mia mascotte insieme ai gatti" " .

La Repubblica . 14 June 2019 . Retrieved 14 June 2019 .

^ Thomas, June (4 April 2016).

"Almodovar muse Chus Lampreave is dead at 85" .

Slate.com . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ "Heroines of Cinema: Almodóvar's Seven Favorite Actresses" . Indiewire. 14 November 2013 . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ Lindo, Elvira (31 October 2015).

"Ser chica Almodóvar | Estilo | EL PAÍS" .

El País . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ Ramón, Esteban (19 December 2013).

"Agustín Almodóvar: "Hemos perdido el derecho moral sobre nuestras películas" " .

RTVE.es . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ a b "Esther García (El Deseo): "Almodóvar convierte en una obra cinematográfica lo que quiere con total libertad" " .

Europapress.es (in Spanish). 20 November 2015 . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ Abraham, Raphael (2 January 2015).

"Tea with the FT: Pedro Almodóvar" .

Financial Times . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ "Actualidad en el cine español" . Archived from the original on 26 April 2016 . Retrieved 19 April 2016 .

^ "Jose Luis Alcaine to get Golden Camera 300 at 2013 Manaki Brothers" .

Moviescopemag.com . Archived from the original on 26 April 2016 . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ "Ángel Luis Fernández, un iluminador emblemático" .

Academiadecine.com . Archived from the original on 26 April 2016 . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ RTVE.es (30 August 2012).

"Fallece el músico de la movida Bernardo Bonezzi" .

RTVE.es . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ Buljančević, Rastko. (2022). Significantes intertextuales en la banda sonora de Bernardo Bonezzi: paradigma del cine de Pedro Almodóvar.

Cuadernos de Investigación Musical , (15, extraordinario), pp. 221-239, https://doi.org/10.18239/invesmusic.2022.15.18 ^ Coady, Alan (11 November 2014).

"Scoring for Spain: the film music of Alberto Iglesias | by Bachtrack for classical music, opera, ballet and dance event reviews" .

Bachtrack.com . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ "En venta el baúl de los tesoros de Almodóvar | Cultura" .

Elmundo.es . 15 December 2010 . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ "Pedro Almodóvar" . Oneequalworld.com. 10 June 2013 . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ "The Evolution of Pedro Almodóvar" .

The New Yorker . 28 November 2016 . Retrieved 30 September 2021 .

^ "El novio de Pedro Almodóvar, Fernando Iglesias, sale del anonimato en el cine" .

Lavozlibre.com . Archived from the original on 6 May 2016 . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ "Almodóvar y su novio reviven la llama del amor con Caetano Veloso | loc | EL MUNDO" .

Elmundo.es . 23 July 2015 . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ "Almodóvar compra casa en Pintor Rosales. Noticias de Noticias" .

Vanitatis.elconfidencial.com . 21 June 2007 . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ Shoard, Catherine; agencies (29 September 2009).

"Release Polanski, demands petition by film industry luminaries" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 8 January 2018 . Retrieved 29 August 2021 .

^ Winfrey, G.

Indiewire 4 November 2016.

^ "Mark Ruffalo, Guy Pearce, Melissa Barrera and Ralph Fiennes Among 350+ Figures to Sign Letter About Killing of Palestinian Protagonist of Cannes-Bound Doc: 'We Are Ashamed' of Industry 'Passivity' (EXCLUSIVE)" .

Variety . 12 May 2025 . Retrieved 14 May 2025 .

^ Martínez, Luis (18 June 2025).

"Cuando Carmen Machi se cagó, las dos peores películas de Almodóvar según Almodóvar, la pasión del director manchego por Onlyfans... y otros asuntos del montón" .

El Mundo (in Spanish) . Retrieved 19 July 2025 .

^ "Tax havens: Pedro Almodóvar breaks silence over Panama Papers | In English | EL PAÍS" .

Elpais.com . 15 April 2016 . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ Pamela Rolfe (4/5/2016), "Pedro Almodovar Cancels Press for New Film After Panama Papers Mention" , The Hollywood Reporter . Retrieved 5 April 2016.

^ "Agustín Almodóvar Takes The Fall For Filmmaker Brother Pedro in Panama Papers Company | The Spain Report" .

Thespainreport.com . 4 April 2016. Archived from the original on 16 April 2016 . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ a b Cabeza, Elisabet (21 April 2016).

"Agustín Almodóvar interview: producer talks Panama Papers, 'Julieta' box office | News | Screen" .

Screendaily.com . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ "Pedro Almodóvar sobre los papeles de Panamá: "Soy absolutamente responsable" " .

Lavanguardia.com . 14 April 2016 . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ " 'Julieta', el peor estreno en la taquilla de Pedro Almodóvar en 20 años | Cultura" .

Elmundo.es . 11 April 2016 . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

Further reading [ edit ] Acevedo-Munoz, Ernesto R. (24 February 2007).

Pedro Almodovar . British Film Institute.

ISBN 978-1-84457-149-9 .

Allinson, Mark (18 August 2001).

A Spanish Labyrinth: Films of Pedro Almodóvar, The . I.B.Tauris.

ISBN 978-1-86064-507-5 .

Almodóvar, Pedro (2011).

The Pedro Almodóvar Archives .

Taschen Benedikt Verlag Gmbh.

ISBN 978-3-8365-0283-2 .

Bergan, Ronald.

Film , D.K Publishing, 2006, ISBN 0-7566-2203-4 Gutierrz-Albilla, Julian Daniel.

Aesthetics, Ethics and Trauma in the Cinema of Pedro Almodovar . Edinburgh University Press, 2017, ISBN 978-1-4744-3167-5 Cobos, Juan and Marias Miguel.

Almodóvar Secreto , Nickel Odeon, 1995 D'Lugo, Marvin (2006).

Waves of Opposition . University of Illinois Press.

ISBN 978-0-252-07361-8 .

Edwards, Gwyne.

Almodóvar: labyrinths of Passion . London: Peter Owen. 2001, ISBN 0-7206-1121-0 Elgrably, Jordan.

Anti-Macho Man: Spanish Iconoclast Pedro Almodóvar . Los Angeles: Los Angeles Times 1992 Levy, Emanuel.

Gay Directors/Gay Films?: Almodovar, Terence Davies, Todd Haynes, Gus Van Sant, John Waters . New York: Columbia University Press, hardcover 2015; paperback 2016.

Shulman, Liliana.

Los films de Almodóvar: Un entramado de evocaciones, autobiografía y emociones . Buenos Aires: Editorial Biblos. 2020, ISBN 9876918117 , ISBN 9789876918114 .

Smith, Paul Julian (2000).

Desire Unlimited: The Cinema of Pedro Almodóvar . Verso.

ISBN 978-1-85984-778-7 .

Strauss, Frederick.

Almodóvar on Almodóvar , Faber and Faber, 2006, ISBN 0-571-23192-6 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pedro Almodóvar .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Pedro Almodóvar .

Pedro Almodóvar at IMDb Almodóvar Bibliography (via UC Berkeley) v t e Films directed by Pedro Almodóvar Awards and nominations Pepi, Luci, Bom and Other Girls on the Heap (1980) Labyrinth of Passion (1982) Dark Habits (1983) What Have I Done to Deserve This?

(1984) Matador (1986) Law of Desire (1987) Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown (1988) Tie Me Up! Tie Me Down!

(1990) High Heels (1991) Kika (1993) The Flower of My Secret (1995) Live Flesh (1997) All About My Mother (1999) Talk to Her (2002) Bad Education (2004) Volver (2006) Broken Embraces (2009) The Skin I Live In (2011) I'm So Excited!

(2013) Julieta (2016) Pain and Glory (2019) The Human Voice (2020) Parallel Mothers (2021) Strange Way of Life (2023) The Room Next Door (2024) Bitter Christmas (2026) Awards for Pedro Almodóvar v t e Academy Award for Best International Feature Film 1947–1955 (Honorary) 1947: Shoeshine – Vittorio De Sica 1948: Monsieur Vincent – Maurice Cloche 1949: Bicycle Thieves – Vittorio De Sica 1950: The Walls of Malapaga – René Clément 1951: Rashomon – Akira Kurosawa 1952: Forbidden Games – René Clément 1953: No Award 1954: Gate of Hell – Teinosuke Kinugasa 1955: Samurai, The Legend of Musashi – Hiroshi Inagaki 1956–1975 1956: La Strada – Federico Fellini 1957: Nights of Cabiria – Federico Fellini 1958: My Uncle – Jacques Tati 1959: Black Orpheus – Marcel Camus 1960: The Virgin Spring – Ingmar Bergman 1961: Through a Glass Darkly – Ingmar Bergman 1962: Sundays and Cybèle – Serge Bourguignon 1963: 8½ – Federico Fellini 1964: Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow – Vittorio De Sica 1965: The Shop on Main Street – Ján Kadár & Elmar Klos 1966: A Man and a Woman – Claude Lelouch 1967: Closely Watched Trains – Jiří Menzel 1968: War and Peace – Sergei Bondarchuk 1969: Z – Costa-Gavras 1970: Investigation of a Citizen Above Suspicion – Elio Petri 1971: The Garden of the Finzi-Continis – Vittorio De Sica 1972: The Discreet Charm of the Bourgeoisie – Luis Buñuel 1973: Day for Night – François Truffaut 1974: Amarcord – Federico Fellini 1975: Dersu Uzala – Akira Kurosawa 1976–present 1976: Black and White in Color – Jean-Jacques Annaud 1977: Madame Rosa – Moshé Mizrahi 1978: Get Out Your Handkerchiefs – Bertrand Blier 1979: The Tin Drum – Volker Schlöndorff 1980: Moscow Does Not Believe in Tears – Vladimir Menshov 1981: Mephisto – István Szabó 1982: Volver a Empezar ('To Begin Again') – José Luis Garci 1983: Fanny and Alexander – Ingmar Bergman 1984: Dangerous Moves – Richard Dembo 1985: The Official Story – Luis Puenzo 1986: The Assault – Fons Rademakers 1987: Babette's Feast – Gabriel Axel 1988: Pelle the Conqueror – Bille August 1989: Cinema Paradiso – Giuseppe Tornatore 1990: Journey of Hope – Xavier Koller 1991: Mediterraneo – Gabriele Salvatores 1992: Indochine – Régis Wargnier 1993: Belle Époque – Fernando Trueba 1994: Burnt by the Sun – Nikita Mikhalkov 1995: Antonia's Line – Marleen Gorris 1996: Kolya – Jan Svěrák 1997: Character – Mike van Diem 1998: Life Is Beautiful – Roberto Benigni 1999: All About My Mother – Pedro Almodóvar 2000: Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon – Ang Lee 2001: No Man's Land – Danis Tanović 2002: Nowhere in Africa – Caroline Link 2003: The Barbarian Invasions – Denys Arcand 2004: The Sea Inside – Alejandro Amenábar 2005: Tsotsi – Gavin Hood 2006: The Lives of Others – Florian Henckel von Donnersmarck 2007: The Counterfeiters – Stefan Ruzowitzky 2008: Departures – Yōjirō Takita 2009: The Secret in Their Eyes – Juan José Campanella 2010: In a Better World – Susanne Bier 2011: A Separation – Asghar Farhadi 2012: Amour – Michael Haneke 2013: The Great Beauty – Paolo Sorrentino 2014: Ida – Paweł Pawlikowski 2015: Son of Saul – László Nemes 2016: The Salesman – Asghar Farhadi 2017: A Fantastic Woman – Sebastián Lelio 2018: Roma – Alfonso Cuarón 2019: Parasite – Bong Joon-ho 2020: Another Round – Thomas Vinterberg 2021: Drive My Car – Ryusuke Hamaguchi 2022: All Quiet on the Western Front – Edward Berger 2023: The Zone of Interest – Jonathan Glazer 2024: I'm Still Here – Walter Salles v t e Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay 1940–1975 Preston Sturges (1940) Herman J. Mankiewicz and Orson Welles (1941) Michael Kanin and Ring Lardner Jr.

(1942) Norman Krasna (1943) Lamar Trotti (1944) Richard Schweizer (1945) Muriel Box and Sydney Box (1946) Sidney Sheldon (1947) No award (1948) Robert Pirosh (1949) Charles Brackett , D. M. Marshman Jr.

, and Billy Wilder (1950) Alan Jay Lerner (1951) T. E. B. Clarke (1952) Charles Brackett , Richard L. Breen , and Walter Reisch (1953) Budd Schulberg (1954) Sonya Levien and William Ludwig (1955) Albert Lamorisse (1956) George Wells (1957) Nathan E. Douglas and Harold Jacob Smith (1958) Clarence Greene , Maurice Richlin , Russell Rouse , and Stanley Shapiro (1959) I. A. L. Diamond and Billy Wilder (1960) William Inge (1961) Ennio De Concini , Pietro Germi , and Alfredo Giannetti (1962) James Webb (1963) S. H. Barnett , Peter Stone and Frank Tarloff (1964) Frederic Raphael (1965) Claude Lelouch and Pierre Uytterhoeven (1966) William Rose (1967) Mel Brooks (1968) William Goldman (1969) Francis Ford Coppola and Edmund H. North (1970) Paddy Chayefsky (1971) Jeremy Larner (1972) David S. Ward (1973) Robert Towne (1974) Frank Pierson (1975) 1976–2000 Paddy Chayefsky (1976) Woody Allen and Marshall Brickman (1977) Robert C. Jones , Waldo Salt , and Nancy Dowd (1978) Steve Tesich (1979) Bo Goldman (1980) Colin Welland (1981) John Briley (1982) Horton Foote (1983) Robert Benton (1984) William Kelley , Pamela Wallace , and Earl W. Wallace (1985) Woody Allen (1986) John Patrick Shanley (1987) Ronald Bass and Barry Morrow (1988) Tom Schulman (1989) Bruce Joel Rubin (1990) Callie Khouri (1991) Neil Jordan (1992) Jane Campion (1993) Quentin Tarantino and Roger Avary (1994) Christopher McQuarrie (1995) Joel Coen and Ethan Coen (1996) Ben Affleck and Matt Damon (1997) Marc Norman and Tom Stoppard (1998) Alan Ball (1999) Cameron Crowe (2000) 2001–present Julian Fellowes (2001) Pedro Almodóvar (2002) Sofia Coppola (2003) Pierre Bismuth , Michel Gondry and Charlie Kaufman (2004) Paul Haggis and Bobby Moresco (2005) Michael Arndt (2006) Diablo Cody (2007) Dustin Lance Black (2008) Mark Boal (2009) David Seidler (2010) Woody Allen (2011) Quentin Tarantino (2012) Spike Jonze (2013) Alejandro G. Iñárritu , Nicolás Giacobone , Alexander Dinelaris Jr.

, and Armando Bo (2014) Tom McCarthy and Josh Singer (2015) Kenneth Lonergan (2016) Jordan Peele (2017) Nick Vallelonga , Brian Currie and Peter Farrelly (2018) Bong Joon-ho and Han Jin-won (2019) Emerald Fennell (2020) Kenneth Branagh (2021) Daniel Kwan and Daniel Scheinert (2022) Justine Triet and Arthur Harari (2023) Sean Baker (2024) v t e BAFTA Award for Best Direction 1968–2000 Mike Nichols (1968) John Schlesinger (1969) George Roy Hill (1970) John Schlesinger (1971) Bob Fosse (1972) François Truffaut (1973) Roman Polanski (1974) Stanley Kubrick (1975) Miloš Forman (1976) Woody Allen (1977) Alan Parker (1978) Francis Ford Coppola (1979) Akira Kurosawa (1980) Louis Malle (1981) Richard Attenborough (1982) Bill Forsyth (1983) Wim Wenders (1984) No Award (1985) Woody Allen (1986) Oliver Stone (1987) Louis Malle (1988) Kenneth Branagh (1989) Martin Scorsese (1990) Alan Parker (1991) Robert Altman (1992) Steven Spielberg (1993) Mike Newell (1994) Michael Radford (1995) Joel Coen (1996) Baz Luhrmann (1997) Peter Weir (1998) Pedro Almodóvar (1999) Ang Lee (2000) 2001–present Peter Jackson (2001) Roman Polanski (2002) Peter Weir (2003) Mike Leigh (2004) Ang Lee (2005) Paul Greengrass (2006) Joel Coen and Ethan Coen (2007) Danny Boyle (2008) Kathryn Bigelow (2009) David Fincher (2010) Michel Hazanavicius (2011) Ben Affleck (2012) Alfonso Cuarón (2013) Richard Linklater (2014) Alejandro G. Iñárritu (2015) Damien Chazelle (2016) Guillermo del Toro (2017) Alfonso Cuarón (2018) Sam Mendes (2019) Chloé Zhao (2020) Jane Campion (2021) Edward Berger (2022) Christopher Nolan (2023) Brady Corbet (2024) v t e BAFTA Award for Best Original Screenplay 1983–2000 Paul D. Zimmerman (1983) Woody Allen (1984) Woody Allen (1985) Woody Allen (1986) David Leland (1987) Shawn Slovo (1988) Nora Ephron (1989) Giuseppe Tornatore (1990) Anthony Minghella (1991) Woody Allen (1992) Harold Ramis and Danny Rubin (1993) Quentin Tarantino and Roger Avary (1994) Christopher McQuarrie (1995) Mike Leigh (1996) Gary Oldman (1997) Andrew Niccol (1998) Charlie Kaufman (1999) Cameron Crowe (2000) 2001–present Jean-Pierre Jeunet and Guillaume Laurant (2001) Pedro Almodóvar (2002) Tom McCarthy (2003) Charlie Kaufman (2004) Paul Haggis and Bobby Moresco (2005) Michael Arndt (2006) Diablo Cody (2007) Martin McDonagh (2008) Mark Boal (2009) David Seidler (2010) Michel Hazanavicius (2011) Quentin Tarantino (2012) Eric Warren Singer and David O. Russell (2013) Wes Anderson and Hugo Guinness (2014) Tom McCarthy and Josh Singer (2015) Kenneth Lonergan (2016) Martin McDonagh (2017) Deborah Davis and Tony McNamara (2018) Bong Joon-ho and Han Jin-won (2019) Emerald Fennell (2020) Paul Thomas Anderson (2021) Martin McDonagh (2022) Justine Triet and Arthur Harari (2023) Jesse Eisenberg (2024) v t e Cannes Film Festival Award for Best Director 1946–1975 René Clément (1946) René Clément (1949) Luis Buñuel (1951) Christian-Jaque (1952) Jules Dassin / Sergei Vasilyev (1955) Sergei Yutkevich (1956) Robert Bresson (1957) Ingmar Bergman (1958) François Truffaut (1959) Yuliya Solntseva (1961) Liviu Ciulei (1965) Sergei Yutkevich (1966) Ferenc Kósa (1967) Vojtěch Jasný / Glauber Rocha (1969) John Boorman (1970) Miklós Jancsó (1972) Michel Brault / Costa-Gavras (1975) 1976–2000 Ettore Scola (1976) Nagisa Ōshima (1978) Terrence Malick (1979) Werner Herzog (1982) Robert Bresson / Andrei Tarkovsky (1983) Bertrand Tavernier (1984) André Téchiné (1985) Martin Scorsese (1986) Wim Wenders (1987) Fernando Solanas (1988) Emir Kusturica (1989) Pavel Lungin (1990) Joel Coen (1991) Robert Altman (1992) Mike Leigh (1993) Nanni Moretti (1994) Mathieu Kassovitz (1995) Joel Coen (1996) Wong Kar-wai (1997) John Boorman (1998) Pedro Almodóvar (1999) Edward Yang (2000) 2001–present Joel Coen / David Lynch (2001) Paul Thomas Anderson / Im Kwon-taek (2002) Gus Van Sant (2003) Tony Gatlif (2004) Michael Haneke (2005) Alejandro González Iñárritu (2006) Julian Schnabel (2007) Nuri Bilge Ceylan (2008) Brillante Mendoza (2009) Mathieu Amalric (2010) Nicolas Winding Refn (2011) Carlos Reygadas (2012) Amat Escalante (2013) Bennett Miller (2014) Hou Hsiao-hsien (2015) Olivier Assayas / Cristian Mungiu (2016) Sofia Coppola (2017) Paweł Pawlikowski (2018) Dardenne brothers (2019) Leos Carax (2021) Park Chan-wook (2022) Tran Anh Hung (2023) Miguel Gomes (2024) Kleber Mendonça Filho (2025) v t e Cannes Film Festival Award for Best Screenplay 1949–2000 Alfred L. Werker , Eugene Ling & Virginia Shaler (1949) Terence Rattigan (1951) Piero Tellini (1952) Pier Paolo Pasolini , Massimo Franciosa & Pasquale Festa Campanile (1958) Dumitru Carabat, Henri Colpi & Yves Jamiaque (1963) Ray Rigby / Pierre Schoendoerffer (1965) Alain Jessua / Elio Petri (1967) Steven Spielberg , Hal Barwood & Matthew Robbins (1974) Furio Scarpelli , Agenore Incrocci & Ettore Scola (1980) István Szabó (1981) Jerzy Skolimowski (1982) Thanassis Valtinos, Theo Angelopoulos & Tonino Guerra (1984) Michel Blanc (1994) Jacques Audiard & France Alain Le Henry (1996) James Schamus (1997) Hal Hartley (1998) Yuri Arabov (1999) James Flamberg & John C. Richards (2000) 2001–present Danis Tanović (2001) Paul Laverty (2002) Denys Arcand (2003) Agnès Jaoui & Jean-Pierre Bacri (2004) Guillermo Arriaga (2005) Pedro Almodóvar (2006) Fatih Akin (2007) Jean-Pierre & Luc Dardenne (2008) Mei Feng (2009) Lee Chang-dong (2010) Joseph Cedar (2011) Cristian Mungiu & Tatiana Niculescu Bran (2012) Jia Zhangke (2013) Andrey Zvyagintsev & Oleg Negin (2014) Michel Franco (2015) Asghar Farhadi (2016) Yorgos Lanthimos & Efthymis Filippou / Lynne Ramsay (2017) Jafar Panahi & Nader Saeivar / Alice Rohrwacher (2018) Céline Sciamma (2019) Ryusuke Hamaguchi & Takamasa Oe (2021) Tarik Saleh (2022) Yuji Sakamoto (2023) Coralie Fargeat (2024) Jean-Pierre & Luc Dardenne (2025) v t e Donostia Award Lifetime Achievement Award at the San Sebastián International Film Festival 1986: Gregory Peck / Gene Tierney 1987: Glenn Ford 1988: Vittorio Gassman 1989: Bette Davis 1990: Claudette Colbert 1991: Anthony Perkins 1992: Lauren Bacall 1993: Robert Mitchum 1994: Lana Turner 1995: Susan Sarandon / Catherine Deneuve 1996: Al Pacino 1997: Michael Douglas / Jeremy Irons 1998: Jeanne Moreau / Anthony Hopkins / John Malkovich 1999: Anjelica Huston / Fernando Fernán Gómez / Vanessa Redgrave 2000: Michael Caine / Robert De Niro 2001: Julie Andrews / Warren Beatty / Francisco Rabal 2002: Jessica Lange / Bob Hoskins / Dennis Hopper / Francis Ford Coppola 2003: Robert Duvall / Sean Penn / Isabelle Huppert 2004: Annette Bening / Jeff Bridges / Woody Allen 2005: Willem Dafoe / Ben Gazzara 2006: Max von Sydow / Matt Dillon 2007: Liv Ullmann / Richard Gere 2008: Meryl Streep / Antonio Banderas 2009: Ian McKellen 2010: Julia Roberts 2011: Glenn Close 2012: Oliver Stone / Ewan McGregor / Tommy Lee Jones / John Travolta / Dustin Hoffman 2013: Carmen Maura / Hugh Jackman 2014: Denzel Washington / Benicio del Toro 2015: Emily Watson 2016: Sigourney Weaver / Ethan Hawke 2017: Ricardo Darín / Monica Bellucci / Agnès Varda 2018: Hirokazu Kore-eda / Danny DeVito / Judi Dench 2019: Penélope Cruz / Costa-Gavras / Donald Sutherland 2020: Viggo Mortensen 2021: Johnny Depp / Marion Cotillard 2022: Juliette Binoche / David Cronenberg 2023: Javier Bardem / Víctor Erice / Hayao Miyazaki 2024: Pedro Almodóvar / Cate Blanchett v t e European Film Award for Best Director Wim Wenders (1988) Géza Bereményi (1989) Jean-Pierre Jeunet (2001) Pedro Almodóvar (2002) Lars von Trier (2003) Alejandro Amenábar (2004) Michael Haneke (2005) Pedro Almodóvar (2006) Cristian Mungiu (2007) Matteo Garrone (2008) Michael Haneke (2009) Roman Polanski (2010) Susanne Bier (2011) Michael Haneke (2012) Paolo Sorrentino (2013) Paweł Pawlikowski (2014) Paolo Sorrentino (2015) Maren Ade (2016) Ruben Östlund (2017) Paweł Pawlikowski (2018) Yorgos Lanthimos (2019) Thomas Vinterberg (2020) Jasmila Žbanić (2021) Ruben Östlund (2022) Justine Triet (2023) Jacques Audiard (2024) v t e European Film Award for Best Screenwriter Louis Malle (1988) Maria Khmelik (1989) Vitali Kanevsky (1990) Jaco Van Dormael (1991) István Szabó (1992) Arif Aliev, Sergei Bodrov , and Boris Giller (1996) Chris Vander Stappen and Alain Berliner (1997) Peter Howitt (1998) István Szabó and Israel Horovitz (1999) Agnès Jaoui and Jean-Pierre Bacri (2000) Danis Tanović (2001) Pedro Almodóvar (2002) Bernd Lichtenberg (2003) Agnès Jaoui and Jean-Pierre Bacri (2004) Hany Abu-Assad and Bero Beyer (2005) Florian Henckel von Donnersmarck (2006) Fatih Akin (2007) Matteo Garrone , Roberto Saviano , Maurizio Braucci, Ugo Chiti, Gianni Di Gregorio , and Massimo Gaudioso (2008) Michael Haneke (2009) Robert Harris and Roman Polanski (2010) Jean-Pierre Dardenne and Luc Dardenne (2011) Tobias Lindholm and Thomas Vinterberg (2012) François Ozon (2013) Paweł Pawlikowski and Rebecca Lenkiewicz (2014) Yorgos Lanthimos and Efthimis Filippou (2015) Maren Ade (2016) Ruben Östlund (2017) Paweł Pawlikowski (2018) Céline Sciamma (2019) Tobias Lindholm and Thomas Vinterberg (2020) Christopher Hampton and Florian Zeller (2021) Ruben Östlund (2022) Justine Triet and Arthur Harari (2023) Jacques Audiard (2024) v t e European Film Academy Achievement in World Cinema Award Miloš Forman (1997) Stellan Skarsgård (1998) Antonio Banderas (1999) Roman Polanski (1999) Jean Reno (2000) Roberto Benigni (2000) Ewan McGregor (2001) Victoria Abril (2002) Carlo Di Palma (2003) Liv Ullmann (2004) Maurice Jarre (2005) Jeremy Thomas (2006) Michael Ballhaus (2007) Søren Kragh-Jacobsen (2008) Kristian Levring (2008) Lars von Trier (2008) Thomas Vinterberg (2008) Isabelle Huppert (2009) Gabriel Yared (2010) Mads Mikkelsen (2011) Helen Mirren (2012) Pedro Almodóvar (2013) Steve McQueen (2014) Christoph Waltz (2015) Pierce Brosnan (2016) Julie Delpy (2017) Ralph Fiennes (2018) Juliette Binoche (2019) Susanne Bier (2021) Elia Suleiman (2022) Isabel Coixet (2023) Isabella Rossellini (2024) v t e Feroz of Honor Lifetime Achievement Award at Feroz Awards 2014: José Sacristán 2015: Carlos Saura 2016: Rosa Maria Sardà 2017: Narciso Ibáñez Serrador 2018: Verónica Forqué 2019: José Luis Cuerda 2020: Julia Gutiérrez Caba / Emilio Gutiérrez Caba 2021: Victoria Abril 2022: Cecilia Bartolomé 2023: Pedro Almodóvar 2024: Mónica Randall 2025: Jaime Chávarri v t e Festival de Gramado Best Director Award 1973-1979 Luis Sérgio Person (1973) Denoy de Oliveira (1974) Walter Hugo Khouri (1975) Eduardo Escorel (1976) Bruno Barreto (1977) João Batista de Andrade (1978) Jorge Bodansky and Wolf Gauer (1979) 1980-1989 Carlos Hugo Christensen (1980) Carlos Alberto Prates Correia (1981) Djalma Limongi Batista (1982) Ana Carolina (1983) Denoy de Oliveira (1984) André Klotzel (1985) Carlos Reichenbach (1986) Wilson Barros (1987) Guilherme de Almeida Prado (1988) Murilo Salles (1989) 1990-1999 Miguel Faria Jr.

(1990) Neville D'Almeida (1991) Pedro Almodóvar (1992) Eliseo Subiela (1993) Mario Brenta (1994) Jorge Fons (1995) Murilo Salles (1996) Beto Brant (1997) Bruno Stagnaro / Israel Caetano (1998) Julio Medem (1999) 2000-2009 Francisco José Lombardi (2000) André Klotzel (2001) Anna Muylaert (2002) Ricardo Elias (2003) Joel Zito Araújo (2004) Tizuka Yamasaki (2005) Andrea Tonacci (2006) Paulo Caldas (2007) Domingos de Oliveira (2008) Vincent Carelli / Paulo Nascimento (2009) 2010-2019 Jeferson De (2010) Gustavo Pizzi (2011) Kleber Mendonça Filho (2012) Andradina Azevedo / Dida Andrade (2013) Marcelo Galvão (2014) Chico Teixeira (2015) Domingos de Oliveira (2016) Laís Bodanzky (2017) André Ristum (2018) Allan Deberton (2019) 2020-2029 Ruy Guerra (2020) Aly Muritiba (2021) Cristiano Burlan (2022) Petrus Cariry (2023) Eliane Caffé (2024) v t e Film Society of Lincoln Center Gala Tribute Honorees Charlie Chaplin (1972) Fred Astaire (1973) Alfred Hitchcock (1974) Joanne Woodward and Paul Newman (1975) George Cukor (1978) Bob Hope (1979) John Huston (1980) Barbara Stanwyck (1981) Billy Wilder (1982) Laurence Olivier (1983) Claudette Colbert (1984) Federico Fellini (1985) Elizabeth Taylor (1986) Alec Guinness (1987) Yves Montand (1988) Bette Davis (1989) James Stewart (1990) Audrey Hepburn (1991) Gregory Peck (1992) Jack Lemmon (1993) Robert Altman (1994) Shirley MacLaine (1995) Clint Eastwood (1996) Sean Connery (1997) Martin Scorsese (1998) Mike Nichols (1999) Al Pacino (2000) Jane Fonda (2001) Francis Ford Coppola (2002) Susan Sarandon (2003) Michael Caine (2004) Dustin Hoffman (2005) Jessica Lange (2006) Diane Keaton (2007) Meryl Streep (2008) Tom Hanks (2009) Michael Douglas (2010) Sidney Poitier (2011) Catherine Deneuve (2012) Barbra Streisand (2013) Rob Reiner (2014) Robert Redford (2015) Morgan Freeman (2016) Robert De Niro (2017) Helen Mirren (2018) Spike Lee (2020) Cate Blanchett (2022) Viola Davis (2023) Jeff Bridges (2024) Pedro Almodóvar (2025) v t e Golden Lion for Lifetime Achievement Luis Buñuel (1969) Orson Welles (1970) John Ford / Marcel Carné / Ingmar Bergman (1971) Charlie Chaplin / Anatoli Golovnya / Billy Wilder (1972) Alessandro Blasetti / Luis Buñuel / Frank Capra / George Cukor / Jean-Luc Godard / Alexander Kluge / Akira Kurosawa / Michael Powell / Satyajit Ray / King Vidor / Sergei Yutkevich / Cesare Zavattini (1982) Michelangelo Antonioni (1983) Federico Fellini (1985) Paolo and Vittorio Taviani (1986) Luigi Comencini / Joseph L. Mankiewicz (1987) Joris Ivens (1988) Robert Bresson (1989) Miklós Jancsó / Marcello Mastroianni (1990) Mario Monicelli / Gian Maria Volonté (1991) Francis Ford Coppola / Jeanne Moreau / Paolo Villaggio (1992) Claudia Cardinale / Robert De Niro / Roman Polanski / Steven Spielberg (1993) Suso Cecchi d'Amico / Ken Loach / Al Pacino (1994) Woody Allen / Giuseppe De Santis / Goffredo Lombardo / Ennio Morricone / Alain Resnais / Martin Scorsese / Alberto Sordi / Monica Vitti (1995) Robert Altman / Vittorio Gassman / Dustin Hoffman / Michèle Morgan (1996) Gérard Depardieu / Stanley Kubrick / Alida Valli (1997) Warren Beatty / Sophia Loren / Andrzej Wajda (1998) Jerry Lewis (1999) Clint Eastwood (2000) Éric Rohmer (2001) Dino Risi (2002) Dino De Laurentiis / Omar Sharif (2003) Manoel de Oliveira / Stanley Donen (2004) Hayao Miyazaki / Stefania Sandrelli (2005) David Lynch (2006) Tim Burton (2007) Ermanno Olmi (2008) John Lasseter (2009) John Woo (2010) Marco Bellocchio (2011) Francesco Rosi (2012) William Friedkin (2013) Thelma Schoonmaker / Frederick Wiseman (2014) Bertrand Tavernier (2015) Jean-Paul Belmondo / Jerzy Skolimowski (2016) Jane Fonda / Robert Redford (2017) David Cronenberg / Vanessa Redgrave (2018) Pedro Almodóvar / Julie Andrews (2019) Ann Hui / Tilda Swinton (2020) Roberto Benigni / Jamie Lee Curtis (2021) Catherine Deneuve / Paul Schrader (2022) Liliana Cavani / Tony Leung Chiu-wai (2023) Sigourney Weaver / Peter Weir (2024) Kim Novak / Werner Herzog (2025) v t e Goya Award for Best Director Fernando Fernán Gómez (1986) José Luis Garci (1987) Gonzalo Suárez (1988) Fernando Trueba (1989) Carlos Saura (1990) Vicente Aranda (1991) Fernando Trueba (1992) Luis García Berlanga (1993) Imanol Uribe (1994) Álex de la Iglesia (1995) Pilar Miró (1996) Ricardo Franco (1997) Fernando León de Aranoa (1998) Pedro Almodóvar (1999) José Luis Borau (2000) Alejandro Amenábar (2001) Fernando León de Aranoa (2002) Icíar Bollaín (2003) Alejandro Amenábar (2004) Isabel Coixet (2005) Pedro Almodóvar (2006) Jaime Rosales (2007) Javier Fesser (2008) Daniel Monzón (2009) Agustí Villaronga (2010) Enrique Urbizu (2011) J. A. Bayona (2012) David Trueba (2013) Alberto Rodríguez (2014) Cesc Gay (2015) J. A. Bayona (2016) Isabel Coixet (2017) Rodrigo Sorogoyen (2018) Pedro Almodóvar (2019) Salvador Calvo (2020) Fernando León de Aranoa (2021) Rodrigo Sorogoyen (2022) J. A. Bayona (2023) Isaki Lacuesta and Pol Rodríguez (2024) v t e Goya Award for Best Adapted Screenplay 1980s 1986: Fernando Fernán Gómez [1] 1987: Rafael Azcona [1] 1988: Manuel Gutiérrez Aragón and Antonio Giménez-Rico 1989: Fernando Trueba , Manuel Matji, and Menno Meyjes 1990s 1990: Carlos Saura and Rafael Azcona 1991: Juan Potau and Gonzalo Torrente Malvido 1992: Francisco Prada, Antonio Larreta , Pedro Olea , and Arturo Pérez-Reverte 1993: José Luis García Sánchez and Rafael Azcona 1994: Imanol Uribe 1995: Montxo Armendáriz and José Ángel Mañas 1996: Pilar Miró and Rafael Pérez Sierra 1997: Bigas Luna and Cuca Canals 1998: Luis Marías 1999: Rafael Azcona , Manuel Rivas , and José Luis Cuerda 2000s 2000: Fernando Fernán Gómez 2001: Jorge Juan Martínez, Juan Carlos Molinero, Clara Pérez Escrivá, and Lola Salvador Maldonado 2002: Adolfo Aristarain and Kathy Saavedra 2003: Isabel Coixet 2004: José Rivera 2005: Marcelo Piñeyro and Mateo Gil 2006: Lluís Arcarazo 2007: Félix Viscarret 2008: Rafael Azcona and José Luis Cuerda 2009: Jorge Guerricaechevarría and Daniel Monzón 2010s 2010: Agustí Villaronga 2011: Ángel de la Cruz, Ignacio Ferreras, Paco Roca , and Rosanna Cecchini 2012: Javier Barreira, Gorka Magallón, Ignacio del Moral, Jordi Gasull, and Neil Landau 2013: Alejandro Hernández and Mariano Barroso 2014: Javier Fesser , Claro García, and Cristóbal Ruiz 2015: Fernando León de Aranoa 2016: Alberto Rodríguez and Rafael Cobos 2017: Isabel Coixet 2018: Álvaro Brechner 2019: Benito Zambrano , Daniel Remón, and Pablo Remón 2020s 2020: David Pérez Sañudo and Marina Parés Pulido 2021: Daniel Monzón and Jorge Guerricaechevarría 2022: Fran Araújo, Isa Campo , and Isaki Lacuesta 2023: Pablo Berger 2024: Pedro Almodóvar [1] Awarded as Best Screenplay (including both original and adapted) v t e Goya Award for Best Original Screenplay 1980s Pedro Almodóvar (1988) Agustí Villaronga (1989) 1990s Montxo Armendáriz (1990) Juanma Bajo Ulloa and Eduardo Bajo Ulloa (1991) Rafael Azcona , José Luis García Sánchez and Fernando Trueba (1992) Mario Camus (1993) Joaquín Oristrell , Yolanda García Serrano, Juan Luis Iborra and Manuel Gómez Pereira (1994) Agustín Díaz Yanes (1995) Alejandro Amenábar (1996) Ricardo Franco and Ángeles González-Sinde (1997) Fernando León de Aranoa (1998) Benito Zambrano (1999) 2000s Achero Mañas and Verónica Fernández (2000) Alejandro Amenábar (2001) Enrique Brasó and Antonio Hernández (2002) Icíar Bollaín and Alicia Luna (2003) Alejandro Amenábar and Mateo Gil (2004) Isabel Coixet (2005) Guillermo del Toro (2006) Sergio G. Sánchez (2007) Javier Fesser (2008) Alejandro Amenábar and Mateo Gil (2009) Chris Sparling (2010) 2010s Enrique Urbizu and Michel Gaztambide (2011) Pablo Berger (2012) David Trueba (2013) Alberto Rodríguez and Rafael Cobos (2014) Cesc Gay and Tomas Aragay (2015) Raúl Arévalo and David Pulido (2016) Aitor Arregi , Andoni de Carlos, Jon Garaño and Jose Mari Goenaga (2017) Isabel Peña and Rodrigo Sorogoyen (2018) Pedro Almodóvar (2019) 2020s Pilar Palomero (2020) Fernando León de Aranoa (2021) Isabel Peña and Rodrigo Sorogoyen (2022) Estibaliz Urresola Solaguren (2023) Eduard Sola (2024) v t e Honorary César 1976–2000 Ingrid Bergman (1976) Diana Ross (1976) Henri Langlois (1977) Jacques Tati (1977) Robert Dorfmann (1978) René Goscinny (1978) Marcel Carné (1979) Charles Vanel (1979) Walt Disney (1979) Pierre Braunberger (1980) Louis de Funès (1980) Kirk Douglas (1980) Marcel Pagnol (1981) Alain Resnais (1981) Georges Dancigers (1982) Alexandre Mnouchkine (1982) Jean Nény (1982) Andrzej Wajda (1982) Raimu (1983) René Clément (1984) Georges de Beauregard (1984) Edwige Feuillère (1984) Christian-Jaque (1985) Danielle Darrieux (1985) Christine Gouze-Rénal (1985) Alain Poiré (1985) Maurice Jarre (1986) Bette Davis (1986) Jean Delannoy (1986) René Ferracci (1986) Claude Lanzmann (1986) Jean-Luc Godard (1987) Serge Silberman (1988) Bernard Blier (1989) Paul Grimault (1989) Gérard Philipe (1990) Jean-Pierre Aumont (1991) Sophia Loren (1991) Michèle Morgan (1992) Sylvester Stallone (1992) Jean Marais (1993) Marcello Mastroianni (1993) Gérard Oury (1993) Jean Carmet (1994) Jeanne Moreau (1995) Gregory Peck (1995) Steven Spielberg (1995) Lauren Bacall (1996) Henri Verneuil (1996) Charles Aznavour (1997) Andie MacDowell (1997) Michael Douglas (1998) Clint Eastwood (1998) Jean-Luc Godard (1998) Pedro Almodóvar (1999) Johnny Depp (1999) Jean Rochefort (1999) Josiane Balasko (2000) Georges Cravenne (2000) Jean-Pierre Léaud (2000) Martin Scorsese (2000) 2001–present Darry Cowl (2001) Charlotte Rampling (2001) Agnès Varda (2001) Anouk Aimée (2002) Jeremy Irons (2002) Claude Rich (2002) Bernadette Lafont (2003) Spike Lee (2003) Meryl Streep (2003) Micheline Presle (2004) Jacques Dutronc (2005) Will Smith (2005) Hugh Grant (2006) Pierre Richard (2006) Marlène Jobert (2007) Jude Law (2007) Jeanne Moreau (2008) Roberto Benigni (2008) Romy Schneider (2008) Dustin Hoffman (2009) Harrison Ford (2010) Quentin Tarantino (2011) Kate Winslet (2012) Kevin Costner (2013) Scarlett Johansson (2014) Sean Penn (2015) Michael Douglas (2016) George Clooney (2017) Penélope Cruz (2018) Robert Redford (2019) Cate Blanchett (2022) David Fincher (2023) Agnès Jaoui (2024) Christopher Nolan (2024) Julia Roberts (2025) Costa-Gavras (2025) v t e Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Director 1975–2000 Sidney Lumet (1975) Sidney Lumet (1976) Herbert Ross (1977) Michael Cimino (1978) Robert Benton (1979) Roman Polanski (1980) Warren Beatty (1981) Steven Spielberg (1982) James L. Brooks (1983) Miloš Forman (1984) Terry Gilliam (1985) David Lynch (1986) John Boorman (1987) David Cronenberg (1988) Spike Lee (1989) Martin Scorsese (1990) Barry Levinson (1991) Clint Eastwood (1992) Jane Campion (1993) Quentin Tarantino (1994) Mike Figgis (1995) Mike Leigh (1996) Curtis Hanson (1997) Steven Spielberg (1998) Sam Mendes (1999) Steven Soderbergh (2000) 2001–present David Lynch (2001) Pedro Almodóvar (2002) Peter Jackson (2003) Alexander Payne (2004) Ang Lee (2005) Paul Greengrass (2006) Paul Thomas Anderson (2007) Danny Boyle (2008) Kathryn Bigelow (2009) Olivier Assayas / David Fincher (2010) Terrence Malick (2011) Paul Thomas Anderson (2012) Alfonso Cuarón (2013) Richard Linklater (2014) George Miller (2015) Barry Jenkins (2016) Guillermo del Toro / Luca Guadagnino (2017) Debra Granik (2018) Bong Joon-ho (2019) Chloé Zhao (2020) Jane Campion (2021) Todd Field (2022) Jonathan Glazer (2023) Mohammad Rasoulof (2024) v t e Platino Award for Best Director Amat Escalante (2014) Damián Szifron (2015) Ciro Guerra (2016) Pedro Almodóvar (2017) Sebastián Lelio (2018) Alfonso Cuarón (2019) Pedro Almodóvar (2020) Fernando Trueba (2021) Fernando León de Aranoa (2022) Rodrigo Sorogoyen (2023) v t e Platino Award for Best Screenplay Sebastián Lelio and Gonzalo Maza (2014) Damián Szifron (2015) Pablo Trapero (2016) Andrés Duprat (2017) Sebastián Lelio and Gonzalo Maza (2018) Alfonso Cuarón (2019) Pedro Almodóvar (2020) David Trueba (2021) Fernando León de Aranoa (2022) v t e Satellite Award for Best Original Screenplay John Sayles / Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski (1996) Matt Damon and Ben Affleck (1997) Gary Ross (1998) M. Night Shyamalan (1999) Kenneth Lonergan (2000) Milo Addica and Will Rokos (2001) Pedro Almodóvar (2002) Sofia Coppola (2003) James L. White (2004) George Clooney and Grant Heslov (2005) Peter Morgan (2006) Diablo Cody (2007) Tom Mccarthy (2008) Scott Neustadter and Michael H. Weber (2009) David Seidler (2010) Terrence Malick (2011) Mark Boal (2012) Eric Warren Singer and David O. Russell (2013) Dan Gilroy (2014) Tom McCarthy and Josh Singer (2015) Barry Jenkins (2016) Martin McDonagh (2017) Alfonso Cuarón (2018) Noah Baumbach (2019) Emerald Fennell (2020) Kenneth Branagh (2021) Martin McDonagh (2022) Bradley Cooper and Josh Singer (2023) Jesse Eisenberg (2024) v t e Laureates of the Prince or Princess of Asturias Award for the Arts Prince of Asturias Award for the Arts 1981: Jesús López Cobos 1982: Pablo Serrano 1983: Eusebio Sempere 1984: Orfeón Donostiarra 1985: Antonio López García 1986: Luis García Berlanga 1987: Eduardo Chillida 1988: Jorge Oteiza 1989: Oscar Niemeyer 1990: Antoni Tàpies 1991: Victoria de los Ángeles , Teresa Berganza , Montserrat Caballé , José Carreras , Pilar Lorengar , Alfredo Kraus and Plácido Domingo 1992: Roberto Matta 1993: Francisco Javier Sáenz de Oiza 1994: Alicia de Larrocha 1995: Fernando Fernán Gómez 1996: Joaquín Rodrigo 1997: Vittorio Gassman 1998: Sebastião Salgado 1999: Santiago Calatrava 2000: Barbara Hendricks 2001: Krzysztof Penderecki 2002: Woody Allen 2003: Miquel Barceló 2004: Paco de Lucía 2005: Maya Plisetskaya and Tamara Rojo 2006: Pedro Almodóvar 2007: Bob Dylan 2008: Sistema de Orquesta Juvenil e Infantil de Venezuela 2009: Norman Foster 2010: Richard Serra 2011: Riccardo Muti 2012: Rafael Moneo 2013: Michael Haneke 2014: Frank Gehry Princess of Asturias Award for the Arts 2015: Francis Ford Coppola 2016: Núria Espert 2017: William Kentridge 2018: Martin Scorsese 2019: Peter Brook 2020: Ennio Morricone and John Williams 2021: Marina Abramović 2022: Carmen Linares and María Pagés 2023: Meryl Streep 2024: Joan Manuel Serrat 2025: Graciela Iturbide v t e Cannes Film Festival jury presidents 1946–1975 Georges Huisman (1946) Georges Huisman (1947) Georges Huisman (1949) André Maurois (1951) Maurice Genevoix (1952) Jean Cocteau (1953) Jean Cocteau (1954) Marcel Pagnol (1955) Maurice Lehmann (1956) André Maurois (1957) Marcel Achard (1958) Marcel Achard (1959) Georges Simenon (1960) Jean Giono (1961) Tetsurō Furukaki (1962) Armand Salacrou (1963) Fritz Lang (1964) Olivia de Havilland (1965) Sophia Loren (1966) Alessandro Blasetti (1967) André Chamson (1968) Luchino Visconti (1969) Miguel Ángel Asturias (1970) Michèle Morgan (1971) Joseph Losey (1972) Ingrid Bergman (1973) René Clair (1974) Jeanne Moreau (1975) 1976–2000 Tennessee Williams (1976) Roberto Rossellini (1977) Alan J. Pakula (1978) Françoise Sagan (1979) Kirk Douglas (1980) Jacques Deray (1981) Giorgio Strehler (1982) William Styron (1983) Dirk Bogarde (1984) Miloš Forman (1985) Sydney Pollack (1986) Yves Montand (1987) Ettore Scola (1988) Wim Wenders (1989) Bernardo Bertolucci (1990) Roman Polanski (1991) Gérard Depardieu (1992) Louis Malle (1993) Clint Eastwood (1994) Jeanne Moreau (1995) Francis Ford Coppola (1996) Isabelle Adjani (1997) Martin Scorsese (1998) David Cronenberg (1999) Luc Besson (2000) 2001–present Liv Ullmann (2001) David Lynch (2002) Patrice Chéreau (2003) Quentin Tarantino (2004) Emir Kusturica (2005) Wong Kar-wai (2006) Stephen Frears (2007) Sean Penn (2008) Isabelle Huppert (2009) Tim Burton (2010) Robert De Niro (2011) Nanni Moretti (2012) Steven Spielberg (2013) Jane Campion (2014) Joel and Ethan Coen (2015) George Miller (2016) Pedro Almodóvar (2017) Cate Blanchett (2018) Alejandro González Iñárritu (2019) Spike Lee (2021) Vincent Lindon (2022) Ruben Östlund (2023) Greta Gerwig (2024) Juliette Binoche (2025) Portals : Film LGBTQ Spain Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Spain 2 Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Korea 2 Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Artists ULAN MusicBrainz Museum of Modern Art Photographers' Identities FID People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pedro_Almodóvar&oldid=1304989570 " Categories : 1949 births Living people 20th-century Spanish male writers 20th-century Spanish screenwriters 21st-century Spanish male writers 21st-century Spanish screenwriters Best Director BAFTA Award winners Best Director Goya Award winners Best Original Screenplay Academy Award winners Best Original Screenplay BAFTA Award winners Cannes Film Festival Award for Best Director winners Cannes Film Festival Award for Best Screenplay winners César Award winners César Honorary Award recipients Directors of Best Foreign Language Film Academy Award winners European Film Award for Best Director winners European Film Award for Best Screenwriter winners Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Film directors from Castilla–La Mancha Filmmakers who won the Best Foreign Language Film BAFTA Award Gay screenwriters Golden Lion for Lifetime Achievement recipients Goya Award winners Knights of the Legion of Honour News & Documentary Emmy Award winners People from the Province of Ciudad Real People named in the Panama Papers Postmodernist filmmakers Spanish film directors Spanish film producers Spanish gay writers Spanish LGBTQ film directors Spanish LGBTQ screenwriters Spanish male screenwriters David di Donatello winners Hidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2024 CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with dead external links from May 2016 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2021 Biography with signature Articles with hCards Pages with Spanish IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2016 All articles that may contain original research Articles that may contain original research from May 2016 Articles containing Spanish-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 11:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pedro Almodóvar 80 languages Add topic

