Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Positions Toggle Positions subsection 2.1 Status quo change 2.2 Concept of ideology 2.3 Difference from extremism 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Radical politics 6 languages العربية Azərbaycanca فارسی Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Intent to transform or replace the fundamental principles of society Not to be confused with Extremism .

For historical political use of the term "radical", see Radicalism (historical) . For other uses, see Radical (disambiguation) .

Part of the Politics Series Party politics Political spectrum Left-wing Far-left Centre-left Centre Centre-left Radical centre Centre-right Right-wing Centre-right Far-right Syncretism Major ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Christian democracy Communism Conservatism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Green politics Hindutva Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Monarchism Nationalism Populism Progressivism Classical radicalism Republicanism Social democracy Socialism Syncretism Third Way Types Bloc party Elite party Cartel party Competitive Catch-all party Entrepreneurial party Ethnic party Fraternal party Major party / Minor party Mass party Ruling party / Opposition party Rump party Parliamentary opposition Party of power Official party status Single-issue party Transnational / International Leaders and organization Backbencher Caucus Caucus chair Frontbencher Lead candidate Leader of the Opposition Majority leader Minority leader Political faction Parliamentary leader Party chair Party leader Party spokesperson Party secretary Shadow cabinet Whip Internal elections Primary election Leadership election Open list Party convention/conference Leadership convention Party discipline Conscience vote Crossing the floor Party discipline Party line Party-line vote Party switching Whip Party systems One-party Dominant-party Two-party Multi-party Non-partisan Coalitions between parties Parliamentary group Divided government Coalition government Confidence and supply Consensus government Cordon sanitaire Grand coalition Hung parliament Majority government Minority government National unity government Rotation government Tech-Trad Alliance Lists of political parties Ruling parties by country Political parties by region Banned political parties Politics portal v t e Radical politics denotes the intent to transform or replace the fundamental principles of a society or political system , often through social change , structural change , revolution or radical reform .

[ 1 ] The process of adopting radical views is termed radicalisation .

The word radical derives from the Latin radix ("root") and Late Latin radicalis ("of or pertaining to the root, radical"). Historically, political use of the term referred exclusively to a form of progressive electoral reformism , known as Radicalism , that had developed in Europe during the 18th and 19th centuries. However, the denotation has changed since its 18th century coinage to comprehend the entire political spectrum , though retaining the connotation of "change at the root".

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] The Oxford English Dictionary traces usage of 'radical' in a political context to 1783.

[ 2 ] The Encyclopædia Britannica records the first political usage of 'radical' as ascribed to Charles James Fox , a British Whig Party parliamentarian who in 1797 proposed a 'radical reform' of the electoral system to provide universal manhood suffrage , thereby idiomatically establishing the term ' Radicals ' as a label denoting supporters of the reformation of British Parliament.

[ 3 ] Throughout the 19th century, the concept of radical politics broadened into a variety of political notions and doctrines.

Party politics in England began to favour moderate positions, marginalising other movements into more politically aggressive factions.

[ citation needed ] As open advocacy of republicanism was illegal in France following the Napoleonic Wars , Radicals emerged under similar reformist ideals as their British counterparts, though they later branched out to form the Radical-Socialist movement with a focus on proletarian solidarity.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] With the rise of Marxism , the notion of radical politics shifted away from reformism and became more associated with revolutionary politics.

[ 3 ] In United States politics , the term is used pejoratively among conservatives and moderates to denote political extremism , [ 3 ] [ 5 ] with the 19th-century Cyclopaedia of Political Science describing it as "characterized less by its principles than by the manner of their application".

[ 6 ] During the 20th century, radical politicians took power in many countries across the world. Such radical leaders included Vladimir Lenin and Joseph Stalin in Russia, Mao Zedong in China, Ruhollah Khomeini in Iran, Adolf Hitler in Germany, as well as more mainstream radicals such as Ronald Reagan in the United States and Margaret Thatcher in the United Kingdom.

[ 1 ] [ 7 ] Positions [ edit ] Status quo change [ edit ] The common feature to all radical political forms is a view that some fundamental change is required of the status quo . For an array of anti-capitalist forms, this manifests in anti-establishment reactions to modern neoliberal regimes.

[ 1 ] Concept of ideology [ edit ] The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy describes the radical concept of ideology to be that: While social conditions exist "that are vulnerable to criticism and protest; ideology exists to protect these social conditions from attack by those who are disadvantaged by them." [ 8 ] "Ideology conserves by camouflaging flawed social conditions, giving an illusory account of their rationale or function, in order to legitimate and win acceptance of them." [ 8 ] This view reflects "a consensus among radicals of all stripes on the role of law as a dissembling force to safeguard the unjust relations of the status quo." [ 8 ] This radical critique of ideology is especially prominent within post-leftism .

[ 9 ] In addressing specific issues, some radical politics may completely forgo any overarching ideological plan.

[ 1 ] Difference from extremism [ edit ] Astrid Bötticher identifies several differences between radicalism and extremism , among them in goals (idealistic vs.

restorative , emancipatory vs. anti-democratic), morals (particular vs. universal), approach towards diversity (acceptance vs. disdain), and use of violence (pragmatic and selective vs. legitimate and acceptable).

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Anarchism Communism Populism Radical centrism Radical feminism Radical left (disambiguation) Radical right (disambiguation) Reactionary Revolutionary Rules for Radicals References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Pugh, Jonathan, ed. (2009).

What is Radical Politics Today?

. Palgrave Macmillan UK.

ISBN 9780230236257 .

^ "radical" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) "That the omnipotence of the state is not lodged, by the constitution, with the people, but with the whole legislative body in parliament assembled, was a radical doctrine of this obnoxious ministry." ^ a b c d "Radical (ideologist)" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved January 10, 2020 .

^ Hayward, J. E. S. "The Official Philosophy of the French Third Republic: Leon Bourgeois and Solidarism".

International Review of Social History .

^ Sanders, Mike, ed. (2001).

"General Introduction" .

Women and Radicalism in the Nineteenth Century . p. xix.

ISBN 0-415-20526-3 . Retrieved 18 September 2020 .

Conservatives frequently deployed 'radical' as a blanket term of abuse ^ Block, Maurice (1893).

"Radicalism" .

Cyclopaedia of Political Science, Political Economy, and of the Political History of the United States . p. 492.

^ Short, Clare (2009). "The Forces Shaping Radical Politics Today". In Pugh, Jonathan (ed.).

What is Radical Politics Today?

. Palgrave Macmillan UK. p. 59.

ISBN 9780230236257 .

For example, Mrs Thatcher was radical, the British National Party is radical and Hitler was radical.

^ a b c Sypnowich, Christine (2001-10-22).

"Law and Ideology" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2019 ed.).

^ McQuinn, Jason (2004).

"Post-Left Anarchy: Leaving the Left Behind" .

^ Bötticher, Astrid (2017).

"Towards Academic Consensus Definitions of Radicalism and Extremism" .

Perspectives on Terrorism .

11 (4): 73– 77.

ISSN 2334-3745 .

JSTOR 26297896 .

Abcarian, Gilbert (1971).

American Political Radicalism: Contemporary Issues and Orientations .

Walter, Edward (1992).

The Rise and Fall of Leftist Radicalism in America . Bloomsbury Academic.

ISBN 0-275-94276-7 .

March, Luke (2012).

Radical Left Parties in Europe . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-136-57897-7 .

External links [ edit ] The M and S Collection at the Library of Congress contains materials on radical movements.

v t e Political spectrum Far-left Left Centre-left Centre Centre-right Right Far-right Political positions Post-leftism Ultra-leftism Anti-Stalinist left New Left Centrist Marxism Third Way Radical centrism New Right Political ideologies Anarchism Marxism Communism Socialism Social democracy Liberalism Christian democracy Conservatism Nationalism Fascism Nazism Religious politics Buddhist socialism Christian left Jewish left Islamic socialism Christian right Hindutva Islamism Religious Zionism Political pejoratives Baizuo Champagne socialist Hard left Liberal elite Limousine liberal Loony left Moonbat Red fascist Regressive left Social fascism Social imperialism Social justice warrior Soft left Wingnut Models Horseshoe theory Left–right political spectrum Nolan Chart Overton window Open–closed political spectrum Pournelle chart Right-wing authoritarianism See also Anti-authoritarianism Democratic transition Libertarianism Syndicalism Progressivism Green politics Identity politics Corporatism Authoritarianism Totalitarianism Revolutionary Reactionary Anti-establishment Collectivism Communitarianism The Establishment Individualism Hardline Populism Radical politics Triangulation Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Radical_politics&oldid=1291574227 " Categories : Political spectrum Political terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from January 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2022 This page was last edited on 22 May 2025, at 02:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Radical politics 6 languages Add topic

