Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Ṣūrat al-’Arḍ 3 Editions 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Ibn Hawqal 30 languages العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Kurdî Кыргызча 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Русский Sicilianu سنڌي ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 10th century Arab writer and geographer This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Ibn Hawqal" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Ibn Hawqal Born Nisibis , Abbasid Caliphate (modern-day Nusaybin , Mardin , Turkey ) Died after 978 Academic background Influences Al-Balkhi Academic work Era Islamic Golden Age School or tradition Balkhi school Main interests Islamic geography Notable works Ṣūrat al-’Arḍ 10th century map of the World by Ibn Hawqal. For an English version, see here .

10th century map of the Caspian sea by Ibn Hawqal 10th century map of the Caspian sea by Ibn Hawqal Muḥammad Abū’l-Qāsim Ibn Ḥawqal ( محمد أبو القاسم بن حوقل ), also known as Abū al-Qāsim b. ʻAlī Ibn Ḥawqal al-Naṣībī ,  born in Nisibis , Upper Mesopotamia ; [ 1 ] was a 10th-century Arab [ 2 ] Muslim writer, geographer, and chronicler who travelled from AD 943 to 969.

[ 3 ] His famous work, written in 977, is called Surat Al-Ard ( صورة الارض ; "The face of the Earth"). The date of his death, known from his writings, was after AH 368/ AD 978.

Biography [ edit ] Details known of Ibn Hawqal's life are extrapolated from his book. He spent the last 30 years of his life traveling to remote parts of Asia and Africa , and writing about different things he saw during his journey. One journey brought him 20° south of the equator along the East African coast where he discovered large populations in regions the ancient Greek writers had deemed uninhabitable.

[ citation needed ] Ṣūrat al-’Arḍ [ edit ] Ibn Hawqal based his great work of geography on a revision and augmentation of the text called Masālik ul-Mamālik by Istakhri (AD 951), which itself was a revised edition of the Ṣuwar al-aqālīm by Ahmed ibn Sahl al-Balkhi , (ca. AD 921).

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] However Ibn Hawqal was more than an editor, he was a travel writer writing in the style followed later by Abu Ubaydallah al-Bakri in his Kitab al-Masālik wa-al-Mamālik , a literary genre which uses reports of merchants and travellers. Ibn Hawqal introduces 10th century humour into his account of Sicily during the Kalbid-Fatimid dynasty. As a primary source his medieval geography tends to exaggeration, depicting the "barbaric and uncivilised" Christians of Palermo , reflecting the prevailing politics and attitudes of his time. Yet his geographic accounts of his personal travels were relied upon, and found useful, by medieval Arab travellers.

The chapters on al-Andalus , Sicily, and the richly cultivated area of Fraxinet ( La Garde-Freinet ) describes in detail a number of regional innovations practiced by Muslim farmers and fishermen.

The chapter on the Byzantine Empire —known in the Muslim world as, and called by the Byzantines themselves, the "Lands of the Romans"—gives his first-hand observation of the 360 languages spoken in the Caucasus , with the Lingua Franca being Arabic and Persian across the region. With the description of Kiev , he may have mentioned the route of the Volga Bulgars and the Khazars , which was perhaps taken from Sviatoslav I of Kiev .

[ 6 ] He also published a cartographic map of Sindh together with accounts of the geography and culture of Sindh and the Indus River .

Editions [ edit ] An anonymous epitome of the book was written in AD 1233.

[ 4 ] In the 1870s, the famous Dutch orientalist Michael Jan de Goeje edited a selection of manuscript texts by Arab geographers, which was published by Brill , Leiden in the eight-volume series Bibliotheca geographorum Arabicorum . Ibn Haukal's text was the second volume published in 1873 under the Latin title Viae et Regna, descriptio ditionis Moslemicae auctore Abu'l-Kásim Ibn Haukal - "Routes and Realms, a description of Muslim territories by the author Abu'l-Kásim Ibn Haukal".

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Al-Maqdisi Ibn al-Faqih Qudama ibn Ja'far Ibn Khordadbeh Ibn Rustah Al-Ya'qubi Al-Masudi Muslim scholars References [ edit ] ^ Soucek, Svat , A History of Inner Asia ( Cambridge University Press :2000), p.73.

^ Jean-Charles, Ducène (January 2017).

"Ibn Ḥawqal" .

Encyclopaedia of Islam, Three .

^ Ludwig W. Adamec (2009), Historical Dictionary of Islam , p.137. Scarecrow Press.

ISBN 0810861615 .

^ a b Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Ibn Hauḳal" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 14 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 221.

^ Şeşen 1999 , p. 35.

^ Encyclopedia of Ukraine Further reading [ edit ] James, Preston Everett.

All Possible Worlds: A History of Geography . New York: Wiley, 1981.

Uylenbroek, P. J. (1822).

Specimen geographico-historicum exhibens dissertationem de Ibn Haukalo geographo, nec non descriptionem Iracae Persicae cum ex eo scriptore tum ex aliis mss. arabicis bibl. L.B. petitam . Lugduni Batavorum (Leiden): Luchtmans, S. et J.

OCLC 905422872 .

Ibn Haukal (1873).

"Viae et regna, descriptio ditionis moslemicae auctore Abu'l-Kasim Ibn Haukal" . In de Goeje , M. J. (ed.).

Bibliotheca geographorum Arabicorum (in Arabic and Latin). Vol. 2. Lugdunum Batavorum (Leiden): Brill .

Al-Istakhri, Abu Ishaq Ibrahim ibn Muhammad (1927), Goeje , M. J. de (ed.), "Viae Regnorum descriptio ditionis Moslemicae auctore Abū Ishāk al-Fārisi al-Istakhri" , Bibliotheca Geographorum Arabicorum (in Arabic and Latin), 1 , Lugdunum Batavorum (Leiden): Brill Goeje , M. J. de, ed. (1870), "Indices, glossarium et addenda et emendanda ad Part I-III" , Bibliotheca Geographorum Arabicorum (in Arabic and Latin), 4 , Lugdunum Batavorum (Leiden): Brill Gabrieli, Francesco (1961). "Ibn Ḥawqal e gli Arabi di Sicilia".

Rivista degli studi orientali .

36 : 245– 253.

JSTOR 41879386 .

Şeşen, Ramzan (1999).

IBN HAVKAL (in Turkish). Vol. 20 (Ibn Haldun - Ibnu'l Cezeri).

TDV Encyclopedia of Islam . pp.

34– 35.

ISBN 9789753894470 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ibn Hawqal .

Vernet, J. (2008) [1970-80].

"Ibn Ḥawqal Abū'l-Qāsim Muḥammad" .

Complete Dictionary of Scientific Biography . Encyclopedia.com.

Calvo, Emilia (1997).

"Ibn Hawqal" . In Selin, Helaine (ed.).

Encyclopaedia of the history of science, technology, and medicine in non-western cultures . Kluer Academic Publishing.

ISBN 0-7923-4066-3 .

v t e Geography and cartography in the medieval Islamic world Geographers 9th century Al-Khwarizmi Abu Hanifa Dinawari Ya'qubi Sulaiman al-Tajir 10th century Ibn Khordadbeh Ahmad ibn Rustah Ahmad ibn Fadlan Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Hamdani Al-Masudi Istakhri Khashkhash Ibn Saeed Ibn Aswad Ibn Hawqal Ibn al-Faqih Al-Muqaddasi Buzurg ibn Shahriyar Qudama ibn Ja'far 11th century Al-Biruni Abu Saʿīd Gardēzī Al-Bakri Mahmud al-Kashgari Domiyat 12th century al-Zuhri Muhammad al-Idrisi Abu'l Abbas al-Hijazi 13th century Ibn Jubayr Saadi Shirazi Yaqut al-Hamawi Ibn Said al-Maghribi Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Mujawir 14th century Al-Dimashqi Abu'l-Fida Ibn al-Wardi Hamdallah Mustawfi Ibn Battuta Lin Nu 15th century Abd-al-Razzāq Samarqandī Ghiyāth al-dīn Naqqāsh Ahmad ibn Mājid Zheng He Ma Huan Fei Xin 16th century Sulaiman Al Mahri Piri Reis Mir Ahmed Nasrallah Thattvi Amīn Rāzī 17th century Evliya Çelebi Works Book of Roads and Kingdoms (al-Bakrī) Book of Roads and Kingdoms (ibn Khordadbeh) Tabula Rogeriana Kitab al-Rawd al-Mitar Mu'jam Al-Buldan Rihla The Meadows of Gold Piri Reis map Kitab al-Kharaj Influences Geography (Ptolemy) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Sweden Vatican Israel Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ibn_Hawqal&oldid=1249814503 " Categories : 10th-century geographers 10th-century people from the Abbasid Caliphate 10th-century writers 10th-century Arab people Balkhi school Travel writers of the medieval Islamic world Writers from Baghdad 10th-century travelers 10th-century cartographers Medieval travel writers Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2015 All articles needing additional references Articles with hCards Articles containing Arabic-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 CS1 Arabic-language sources (ar) CS1 Latin-language sources (la) CS1: long volume value CS1 Turkish-language sources (tr) Commons category link is on Wikidata Year of birth unknown Year of death unknown This page was last edited on 6 October 2024, at 23:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ibn Hawqal 30 languages Add topic

