Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types of fires and extinguishers Toggle Types of fires and extinguishers subsection 1.1 Flammable solids: Class A (US/EU/AU) 1.2 Flammable liquids: Class B (US/EU/AU), and flammable gases: Class B (US) / Class C (EU/AU) 1.3 Combustible metals: Class D (US/EU/AU) 1.4 Electrical fires: Class C (US) / Class E (AU) / Unclassified (EU) 1.5 Grease fires (cooking): Class F (EU/AU) / Class K (US) 2 Ventilation 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Fire control 1 language বাংলা Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Practice of reducing the heat output of a fire For the UK emergency control centres, see FiReControl . For components that assist the firing of weapons, see Fire-control system . For the aspect of human sociocultural evolution, see Control of fire by early humans .

Fire control is the practice of reducing the heat output of a fire , reducing the area over which the fire exists, or suppressing or extinguishing the fire by depriving it of fuel , oxygen , or heat (see fire triangle ).

Fire prevention and control is the prevention, detection, and extinguishment of fires, including such secondary activities as research into the causes of fire, education of the public about fire hazards, and the maintenance and improvement of fire-fighting equipment.

[ 1 ] Types of fires and extinguishers [ edit ] Main articles: Fire class and Fire extinguisher In some territories, such as the United States , Europe and Australia , fire types are categorised with letter codes. Each class is a specific type of fire that requires a specific control method based on its cause. Understanding the cause is essential so that the correct fire extinguisher is used; if the wrong extinguisher is used, it can either make the fire worse or fail to control it.

Flammable solids: Class A (US/EU/AU) [ edit ] See also: Fire retardant and Wildfire This fire extinguisher is rated for Classes A, B, and C A fire that is fuelled by ordinary combustible solids, like paper, wood, or plastics is one of the most common and simplest types to extinguish with a fire extinguisher .

[ 2 ] The most common method to control them is to remove heat by spraying the burning solid fuels with water . Another control method for most class types of fires would be to reduce the oxygen content in the immediate vicinity of the fire (i.e., "smother" the fire), by, simply, covering it with the natural ground soil or mud . A fire blanket consists of a sheet of a fire retardant material that is placed over most class types of fires in order to smother them.

Sodium bicarbonate dry powder is another commonly sourceable method to smother most class types of fires in effective fire control.  Another method to smother the fire is the introduction of an inert gas such as carbon dioxide . Another common type of extinguisher uses the chemical monoammonium phosphate .

In a wildfire , fire control includes various wildland fire suppression techniques such as defensible space , widening the fuel ladder , and removing fuel in the fire's path with firebreaks and backfires to minimize the brush fire reaching new combustible fuel and spreading further.

Flammable liquids: Class B (US/EU/AU), and flammable gases: Class B (US) / Class C (EU/AU) [ edit ] Many flammable liquid and gas based fires (hydrocarbons, petroleum , and similar fuels) cannot be efficiently controlled with water because fuels with a density less than water (such as gasoline or oil ) float on top, resulting in the fire continuing to burn. In addition, the heat of an intense fire may cause water to flash into steam in an explosion which can spread the flaming fuel more widely.

The configuration of some fuels, such as coal and baled waste paper, may result in a deep-seated and burrowing fire, resulting in less effective fire control by the application of water on the outer surfaces of the fuel.

[ 3 ] Class B fires should be extinguished with foam, powder, or carbon dioxide extinguishers. Some Class-B fires can be controlled with the application of chemical fire suppressants. Applying a combination of fire suppressant foam mixed with water is a common and effective method of forming a blanket on top of the liquid fuel, which eliminates the oxygen needed for combustion.

[ 3 ] Combustible metals: Class D (US/EU/AU) [ edit ] Fires based on combustible or pyrophoric metals can include those involving potassium, uranium, sodium, lithium, calcium, and plutonium. The most common are those fuelled by magnesium and titanium. The recommended method to extinguish them is to use a dry powder fire extinguisher, which smothers the fire while absorbing heat.

[ 4 ] Electrical fires: Class C (US) / Class E (AU) / Unclassified (EU) [ edit ] Fires involving electricity as a continuous power source for the ignition of the fuels associated with electrical equipment, such as plastic cable jackets. The application of water does not always result in effective fire control, and there is a general concern regarding conductivity and personnel safety, possibly resulting in electrical shock . They can be effectively controlled by removing the oxygen with a dry powder (typically monoammonium phosphate and sodium bicarbonate ) or carbon dioxide, dry chemical ABC extinguisher.

[ 3 ] The source of electricity also needs to be removed to eliminate re-ignition. Once the electricity is removed, the remaining fire can be dealt with as one of the other classes.

[ 3 ] Grease fires (cooking): Class F (EU/AU) / Class K (US) [ edit ] Fires involving cooking fats and oils (grease fires) are a distinct cagetory, set apart from other flammable solids and liduids. Water should not be used on such a fire, as it will disperse the material and cause the fire to grow rapidly. The correct type of fire extinguisher is usually a wet chemical fire extinguisher.

[ 5 ] Ventilation [ edit ] Fires can spread through the interior of a structure as the hot gases spread due to the expansion of the gases as a result of the combustion. Some fires can be partially controlled by venting these gases to the outside through manufactured heat vents in the structure's roof, or by the fire department cutting holes in the roof. Ventilation is important when it comes to the fire service, since it is "the systematic removal or heat, smoke and fire gases from a structure". The main purpose for ventilating a fire is to decrease the likelihood of a flashover from occurring.

[ 6 ] The best time to ventilate is before sending anyone into a structure so that the path the fire will take is through the roof and not through the front door when firefighters open it, allowing more oxygen to feed the fire.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Fire blanket Fire bucket Fire classes Fire extinguisher Firefighting foam References [ edit ] ^ "Fire prevention and control" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2020-10-08 .

^ Recharging fire extinguishers (manufactured to BS 5423 'Specification for portable fire extinguishers') , BSI British Standards, doi : 10.3403/00139500u , retrieved 2020-10-08 ^ a b c d Mitrokostas, Sophia.

"The 5 types of fires and how experts say you should put them out" .

Insider . Retrieved 2020-10-08 .

^ "How to Detect and Extinguish a Class D Fire (Combustible Metals)" .

Scutum South East . 2013-08-16 . Retrieved 2020-11-16 .

^ Security, Koorsen Fire &.

"What is a Class K Fire Extinguisher Used For?" .

blog.koorsen.com . Retrieved 2020-11-16 .

^ a b "The Why & When of Ventilation" .

Fire Rescue Magazine . 2012-05-01. Archived from the original on 2020-10-01 . Retrieved 2020-10-08 .

v t e Firefighting General By place Antarctica Belgium Finland France Germany Japan South Korea United Kingdom United States History Personnel and organization Battalion chief Chief fire officer Fire captain Fire chief Station officer Retained firefighter Fire marshal Fire police Firefighter assist and search team Handcrew Special operations firefighter Volunteer fire department Women in firefighting Fire department ranks by country Facilities Drill tower Fire department list Fire lookout tower Fire station Hose tower Apparatus Airport crash tender Fire command vehicle Fire engine Fire motorcycle Fireboat Firefighting apparatus Hazardous materials apparatus Light and air unit Quint Rescue vehicle Water tender Equipment Bunker gear Escape chair Fire blanket Fire brigade keys Fire bucket Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire proximity suit Fire retardant Fire shelter Fireman's pole Fireman's switch Flame retardant Fog nozzle Halligan bar Hard suction hose Hazmat suit Heat detector Hose bridge Hydraulic rescue tool ("Jaws of life") Kelly tool Nomex New York roof hook PASS device The pig Portable water tank Rotary saw Secure information box Self-contained breathing apparatus Siren Smoke detector Thermal imaging camera Terminology Backdraft Barn fire Chimney fire Dead man zone Deluge gun Door breaching Draft False alarm Fire classification Fire control Fire safety Fire triangle Fireman's carry Firewall Flash fire Flashover Gaseous fire suppression Multiple-alarm fire Rollover Stop, drop and roll Structure fire Two-in, two-out Ventilation Miscellaneous Candidate Physical Ability Test Fire camp Fire engine red Fire photography Fire protection engineering International Firefighters' Day International organizations International Fire Marshals Association International Association of Fire Chiefs International Association of Fire Fighters List of films Muster Saint Florian World Firefighters Games World Police and Fire Games Wildfires General Wildfire emergency management Wildfire suppression Equipment and tactics Aerial firefighting Controlled burn Driptorch Fire flapper Fire hose Fire lookout tower Fire rake Fire retardant Fire retardant gel Fire trail Firebreak Firefighting apparatus Firefighting foam Helicopter bucket Hose pack McLeod Modular Airborne FireFighting System Pulaski Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel Wildland fire engine Wildland water tender Personnel Fire lookout Handcrew Helitack Hotshot crew Smokejumper Wildland fire module By location Ancient Rome Australia United States History California Washington Lists Glossary of wildfire terms List of wildfires See also Fire Fire protection Category Commons Glossary Index Outline v t e Fire protection Fundamental concepts Backdraft Boiling liquid expanding vapor explosion (BLEVE) Boilover Combustibility and flammability Conflagration Dangerous goods (HAZMAT) Deflagration Detonation Dust explosion Enthalpy of vaporization Explosive Fire classification Fire control Fire loading Fire point Fire triangle Flammability diagram Flammability limit Flammable liquid Flashover Flash point Friction loss Gas leak Heat transfer Jet fire K-factor (fire protection) Pool fire Pyrolysis Spontaneous combustion Structure fire Thermal radiation Water pressure Technology Active fire protection Automatic fire suppression Condensed aerosol fire suppression Detonation flame arrester External water spray system Fire bucket Fire prevention Fire protection Fire retardant Fire-retardant fabric Fire retardant gel Fire-safe polymers Fire safety Fire sprinkler system Fire suppression system Firefighting foam Flame arrester Flame retardant Flashback arrestor Fusible link Gaseous fire suppression Hypoxic air technology for fire prevention Inerting system Intumescent Passive fire protection Personal protective equipment (PPE) Relief valve Spark arrestor Tank blanketing Vehicle fire suppression system Building design Annulus (firestop) Area of refuge Booster pump Compartmentation Crash bar Electromagnetic door holder Electromagnetic lock Emergency exit Emergency light Exit sign Fire curtain Fire cut Fire damper Fire door Fire escape Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire pump Fire sprinkler Firestop Firestop pillow Firewall (construction) Grease duct Heat and smoke vent Packing (firestopping) Penetrant (mechanical, electrical, or structural) Penetration (firestop) Pressurisation ductwork Safety glass Smoke control Smoke damper Smoke exhaust ductwork Smokeproof enclosure Standpipe (firefighting) Fire alarm systems Aspirating smoke detector Carbon monoxide detector Circuit integrity Explosive gas leak detector Fire alarm call box Fire alarm control panel Fire alarm notification appliance Fire drill Flame detector Heat detector Manual fire alarm activation Smoke detector Professions, trades, and services Duct cleaning Fire insurance Fire protection engineering Fireproofing Fire-resistance rating Fire Safety Evaluation System (FSES) Fire test Kitchen exhaust cleaning Listing and approval use and compliance Sprinkler fitting Industry organizations Institution of Fire Engineers (IFE) National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying (NCEES) National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Society of Fire Protection Engineers (SFPE) Underwriters Laboratories (UL) Standards CE marking EN 3 EN 54 EN 16034 Flame spread GHS hazard statements GHS precautionary statements Life Safety Code (NFPA 101) List of R-phrases List of S-phrases Safety data sheet UL 94 Awards Arthur B. Guise Medal Harry C. Bigglestone Award See also Template:Fire Template:Firefighting Template:HVAC Category Commons Authority control databases NARA NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐z6lxp
Cached time: 20250812001512
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.323 seconds
Real time usage: 0.398 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 910/1000000
Revision size: 8303/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 61035/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 588/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 8/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 44610/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.200/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4908033/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  313.012      1 -total
 37.01%  115.856      1 Template:Reflist
 30.90%   96.727      5 Template:Cite_web
 25.41%   79.546      1 Template:Fire_fighting
 25.01%   78.292      2 Template:Navbox
 17.50%   54.779      1 Template:Short_description
  9.14%   28.603      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.82%   21.342      1 Template:About
  5.84%   18.287      1 Template:Authority_control
  5.84%   18.275      3 Template:Main_other Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1493346:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812001512 and revision id 1293456198. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fire_control&oldid=1293456198 " Categories : Firefighting Wildfire suppression Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 June 2025, at 20:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fire control 1 language Add topic

