Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography and ecology 2 History 3 Research and commerce 4 Recreation 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Taumoana (Five Finger Peninsula) Marine Reserve Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 45°41′53″S 166°32′24″E ﻿ / ﻿ 45.698°S 166.54°E ﻿ / -45.698; 166.54 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Marine reserve in Fiordland on New Zealand's South Island Taumoana (Five Finger Peninsula) Marine Reserve Entrance to Tamatea / Dusky Sound Location Fiordland , New Zealand Coordinates 45°41′53″S 166°32′24″E ﻿ / ﻿ 45.698°S 166.54°E ﻿ / -45.698; 166.54 Area 464 hectares (1,150 acres) Established 2005 Governing body Department of Conservation Taumoana (Five Finger Peninsula) Marine Reserve is a marine reserve covering an area of 464 hectares (1,150 acres) in Fiordland on New Zealand's South Island . It was established in 2005 and is administered by the Department of Conservation . It is located next to the Five Fingers Peninsula, at the entrance to Tamatea / Dusky Sound .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Geography and ecology [ edit ] The reserve is one of the only protected wave-exposed rocky reef habitats in Fiordland, and is more representative of the outer fiords and coastline than Fiordland's other marine reserves. It may contain significant populations of pāua .

[ 1 ] The surrounding hillsides create a layer of freshwater above the seawater.

[ 3 ] Ocean swells come into the inlet from the southwest to Parrot and Pigeon Islands and the eastern side of the Five Eyes Peninsula. There are shallow and estuary habitats around the peninsula, Cormorant Cove and Facile Harbour. The marine reserve has lots of direct sunlight due to low-lying hillsides.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] The Māori name Hāwea is after the ancient iwi of Kāti Hāwea.

[ 4 ] Early New Zealand conversationist Richard Henry recognised the number of flightless native birds was decreasing after the introduction of predators. In the late 19th century he spent ten years based alone on Pigeon Island, within the current reserve, transporting kākāpō and kiwi to pest-free areas around Fiordland.

[ 1 ] [ 5 ] His home is protected as a site of national significance.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] The reserve was part of a conservation strategy the Fiordland Marine Guardians launched in 2002 and presented to the Ministry for the Environment Marian Hobbs and Minister of Fisheries Pete Hodgson in 2003.

[ 8 ] It was officially established on 21 April 2005.

[ 9 ] [ 2 ] The Ministry of Primary Industries , Fiordland Marine Guardians and other agencies are involved in protecting the marine reserve and stopping the spread of invasive seaweed.

[ 3 ] The New Zealand Air Force conducted aerial surveillance patrols for illegal commercial fishing in 2021.

[ 10 ] Research and commerce [ edit ] Richard Henry's research findings during his time on Pigeon Island have been widely published.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Ongoing educational and scientific activities are encouraged, but must not disturb or endanger plants, animals or natural features. Scientific research requires a permit from the Department of Conservation.

[ 3 ] An area within the marine reserve is designated for commercial rock lobster fishers to store holding pots, including pots to sore live lobsters caught outside the reserve. No other commercial or non-commercial fishing or aquaculture is allowed.

[ 3 ] Recreation [ edit ] The reserve is accessible from Te Anau via the Milford Road. Anchoring boats is banned in many areas to protect the particularly fragile species that can be damaged by anchors or swinging chains. Taking off and landing aircraft is permitted.

[ 3 ] Pigeon Island and the home of conversationist Richard Henry are accessible via private or tourist boat.

[ 6 ] The protected marine life can be viewed by diving or snorkelling, either independently or with a tourism or charter boat service. To protect the fragile environments, divers must follow the safety and care codes.

[ 3 ] There is a ban on fishing, and taking, killing or moving marine life and materials. However, members of Ngāi Tahu may remove pounamu provided they have the right authorisation, only collect by hand, keep disturbance to the site to a minimum, and only carry as much as they can in one trip. They may also collect deceased marine mammals and collect teeth and bones.

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Marine reserves of New Zealand References [ edit ] ^ a b c d "Taumoana (Five Finger Peninsula) Marine Reserve" .

doc.govt.nz .

Department of Conservation .

^ a b Hutching, Gerard.

"Marine protected areas" .

Te Ara - the Encyclopedia of New Zealand .

Ministry for Culture and Heritage .

^ a b c d e f g "Fiordland marine reserves" .

doc.govt.nz .

Department of Conservation .

^ "NZGB notices – October 2019" . Land Information New Zealand. 17 October 2019 . Retrieved 15 December 2019 .

^ Hill, S (1987).

Richard Henry of Resolution Island . Dunedin: John McIndoe Press.

^ a b "History of Richard Henry's house site" .

doc.govt.nz .

Department of Conservation .

^ Peat, N (2007).

New Zealand’s Fiord Heritage: A Guide to the Historic Sites of Coastal Fiordland .

Department of Conservation .

^ "History" .

fmg.org.nz . Fiordland Marine Guardians.

^ "Fiordland (Te Moana o Atawhenua) Marine Management Act 2005" .

legislation.govt.nz .

New Zealand Government .

^ Baker, Che (7 December 2021).

"Illegal fishing targeted in Southland surveillance operation" .

stuff.co.nz .

^ Henry, R (1903).

The habits of the flightless birds of New Zealand with notes on other New Zealand birds . Wellington: John Mackay.

^ Begg, A C (1966).

Dusky Bay . Whitcombe & Tombs).

v t e Protected areas of New Zealand Conservation parks Ahuriri Aorangi Aotea Catlins Coromandel Craigieburn Eyre Mountains/Taka Ra Haka Hakatere Hāwea Hanmer Kaimai Mamaku Kaimanawa Kaweka Ka Whata Tu O Rakihouia Korowai / Torlesse Tussocklands Lake Sumner Mavora Lakes Mount Richmond Northland North-west Nelson Oteake Pirongia Pureora Remutaka Ruahine Raukumara Ruataniwha Tararua Te Kahui Kaupeka Te Papanui Victoria Whakarewarewa Whirinaki Te Pua-a-Tāne Ecological islands Brook Waimārama Sanctuary Bushy Park Sanctuary Mountain Maungatautari Orokonui Ecosanctuary Tawharanui Open Sanctuary Zealandia Government purpose reserves Pāuatahanui Wildlife Reserve Pukaha / Mount Bruce National Wildlife Centre Historic reserves Hāpūpū / J M Barker Maungauika / North Head Puhi Kai Iti / Cook Landing Site Stony Batter Te Kuri a Paoa/Young Nick's Head Marine reserves Akaroa Auckland Islands Cape Rodney-Okakari Point Hautai Hawea (Clio Rocks) Hikurangi Horoirangi Kahukura (Gold Arm) Kahurangi Kapiti Kermadec Islands Kutu Parera (Gaer Arm) Long Bay-Okura Long Island-Kokomohua Moana Uta (Wet Jacket Arm) Motu Manawa-Pollen Island Moutere Hauriri / Bounty Islands Moutere Ihupuku / Campbell Island Moutere Mahue / Antipodes Island Parininihi Piopiotahi (Milford Sound) Pohatu / Flea Bay Poor Knights Islands Punakaiki Taipari Roa (Elizabeth Island) Tapuae Taputeranga Taumoana (Five Finger Peninsula) Tauparikākā Tāwharanui Te Angiangi Te Awaatu Channel (The Gut) Te Hapua (Sutherland Sound) Te Matuku Te Paepae o Aotea (Volkner Rocks) Te Tapuwae o Hua (Long Sound) Te Tapuwae o Rongokako Tonga Island Tuhua (Mayor Island) Ulva Island-Te Wharawhara Waiau Glacier Coast Westhaven (Te Tai Tapu) Whanganui-A-Hei (Cathedral Cove) Whangarei Harbour National parks Current Abel Tasman Aoraki / Mount Cook Arthur's Pass Egmont Fiordland Kahurangi Mount Aspiring Nelson Lakes Paparoa Rakiura Tongariro Westland Tai Poutini Whanganui Former Te Urewera National reserves Hāpūpū / J M Barker Lewis Pass Puhi Kai Iti / Cook Landing Site Subantarctic Islands Te Kuri a Paoa/Young Nick's Head Recreation reserves Bastion Point Otago Central Rail Trail Truby King Recreation Reserve Regional parks Akatarawa Ambury Ashley Rakahuri Ātiu Creek Auckland Botanic Gardens Āwhitu Battle Hill Farm Belmont Duder East Harbour Ferrymead Glenfern Sanctuary Hunua Ranges Kaitoke Lake Tekapo Long Bay Mahurangi Motukorea Browns Island Muriwai Mutukaroa / Hamlins Hill Ōmana Onekawa Te Mawhai Orere Point Pākiri Pakuratahi Papamoa Hills Queen Elizabeth Scandrett Shakespear Tāpapakanga Tāwharanui Tawhitokino Te Ārai Te Muri Te Rau Pūriri Waharau Waimakariri River Wainuiomata Regional Park Waitākere Ranges Waitawa Wenderholm Whakanewha Whakatīwai Scenic reserves Alice Eaves Reserve Bruce Park Goldie Bush Peel Forest Park Waro Limestone Wetlands Awarua Wetland Farewell Spit Firth of Thames Kopuatai Peat Dome Manawatū Estuary Pāuatahanui Wildlife Reserve Wairarapa Moana Whangamarino Other areas Fensham Reserve Hutt Water Collection Area Northern Pegasus Bay Wainuiomata Water Collection Area Whitireia Other Amenity area Ecological area Sanctuary area Wilderness area Wildlife management area v t e Southland District , New Zealand Seat : Invercargill City Populated places Mararoa Waimea Ward Five Rivers Area Athol Eyre Creek Garston Lowther Lumsden Mossburn Parawa Te Anau Area Manapouri Mararoa Milford Sound Te Anau Waikaia Area Balfour Riversdale Waikaia Waiau Aparima Ward Riverton Area Colac Bay / Ōraka Gummies Bush Orepuki Pahia Riverton / Aparima Thornbury Waipango Tuatapere Area Blackmount Clifden Te Waewae Tuatapere Wallace Area Drummond Fairfax Heddon Bush Isla Bank Nightcaps Ohai Otautau Wairio Wreys Bush Waihopai Toetoes Ward Toetoes Area Curio Bay Fortification Fortrose Glenham Pine Bush Pukewao Slope Point Titiroa Te Peka Tokanui Waipapa Point Waikawa Waimahaka Wyndham Waihopai Area Ashers Dacre Gorge Road Grove Bush Kapuka Kapuka South Longbush Mabel Bush Makarewa Mokotua Oteramika Rakahouka Roslyn Bush Timpanys Woodlands Oreti Ward Te Tipua Area Edendale Glencoe Mataura Island Menzies Ferry Seaward Downs Te Tipua Tuturau Waitane Wallacetown Area Lochiel Waianiwa Wallacetown Waimatuku Winton Area Browns Dipton Hedgehope Limehills Springhills Winton Stewart Island / Rakiura Oban Port Pegasus Geographic features Mavora Lakes Mokoreta River Mount Richardson Niagara Falls Porpoise Bay Waipapa Point Facilities and attractions Eyre Mountains / Taka Ra Haka Conservation Park Hawea (Clio Rocks) Marine Reserve Kahukura (Gold Arm) Marine Reserve Kutu Parera (Gaer Arm) Marine Reserve Lake2Lake Trail Mavora Lakes Conservation Park Moana Uta (Wet Jacket Arm) Marine Reserve Piopiotahi (Milford Sound) Marine Reserve SS Tararua Taipari Roa (Elizabeth Island) Marine Reserve Taumoana (Five Fingers Peninsula) Marine Reserve Te Awaatu Channel (The Gut) Marine Reserve Te Hapua (Sutherland Sound) Marine Reserve Te Tapuwae o Hua (Long Sound) Marine Reserve Ulva Island-Te Wharawhara Marine Reserve Waipapa Point Lighthouse Government District Council Mayor Regional Council Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Taumoana_(Five_Finger_Peninsula)_Marine_Reserve&oldid=1236096268 " Categories : Marine reserves of New Zealand Protected areas of the Southland Region Southland District 2005 establishments in New Zealand Protected areas established in 2005 Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use New Zealand English from April 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in New Zealand English Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 July 2024, at 21:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Taumoana (Five Finger Peninsula) Marine Reserve Add languages Add topic

