Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Social discrimination Toggle Social discrimination subsection 1.1 Bathroom access 1.2 Brazil 1.3 United States 2 Workplace discrimination Toggle Workplace discrimination subsection 2.1 United States 3 Military discrimination Toggle Military discrimination subsection 3.1 United States 4 Health discrimination Toggle Health discrimination subsection 4.1 New Zealand 4.2 United Kingdom 4.3 United States 4.4 Russia 5 Legal discrimination Toggle Legal discrimination subsection 5.1 Australia 5.2 Canada 5.3 Italy 5.4 United Kingdom 5.5 United States 5.5.1 Identity documents 5.6 Switzerland 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Discrimination against non-binary people 9 languages العربية Español Français Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Simple English Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Prejudicial treatment of people who do not identify as male or female Not to be confused with Discrimination against intersex people .

The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the English-speaking world and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( September 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Part of a series on Transgender topics Outline History Timeline Gender identities Androgyne Bissu, Calabai, Calalai Burrnesha Cisgender Gender bender Hijra Non-binary or genderqueer Gender fluidity Kathoey Koekchuch Third gender Bakla Faʻafafine Femminiello Khanith Māhū Mudoko dako Mukhannath Muxe Travesti Two-spirit Winkte X-gender Trans man Trans woman Fakaleitī Mak nyah Rae-rae Transgender Youth Akava'ine Trans* Transsexual Health care practices Gender clinic Gender dysphoria in children causes Sex assignment Hormone therapy feminizing masculinizing DIY Puberty-suppressing hormone therapy Gender-affirming surgery masculinizing feminizing Facial feminization surgery Facial masculinization surgery Hair removal Pregnancy Assisted reproductive technology Voice therapy WPATH Standards of Care Transgender health care misinformation Rights and legal status Gender self-identification Legal gender Non-binary gender Personal identity Rights movement Organizations Political office-holders United States Asylum Healthcare Military service South Korea United States Prisons Toilets Bathroom bills Unisex Anti-gender movement Anti-transgender movement in the United Kingdom Discrimination Non-binary Parental rights movement Transgender men Transmisogyny Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary radical feminism Genocide Inequality Violence Murders Trans panic defense Yogyakarta Principles Society and culture Events and awareness Awareness Week Beauty pageants Day of Remembrance Day of Visibility Flag March more Culture Anatomical terminology Fictional characters Film Literature Transgender culture of New York City Media portrayals People non-binary Publications Religion Sports Television Theory and concepts Androphilia and gynephilia Blanchard's typology Childhood gender nonconformity Cisgender / cissexual Cisnormativity Cross-dressing Deadnaming Gender binary Gender detransitioning Gender expression Gender transitioning Gender identity Gender modality Gender nonconformity Gender-sexuality questioning Postgenderism Rapid-onset dysphoria Studies Transfeminism views Transmedicalism Transmisogyny By country Rights Argentina 2012 law 2021 law Australia Austria Brazil Canada 2016 bill China Finland France [ fr ] Germany 1980 law 2018 law 2024 law India 2014 bill 2019 act Tamil Nadu Iran Ireland Pakistan 2017 bill 2018 act New Zealand Norway 2016 act Singapore South Africa 2003 act South Korea Spain 2022 law United Kingdom Anti-trans movement 2004 act 2022 bill United States Disenfranchisement Title IX Transphobia History Argentina [ es ] Australia Re Kevin Brazil China Finland Nazi Germany Singapore United Kingdom United States Legality elected officials Cafeteria riot Stonewall See also 2020s anti-LGBTQ movement in the United States Androgyny Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric Gender Gender diversity Gender studies Healthcare and the LGBTQ community Intersex Legal recognition of intersex people Queer heterosexuality LGBTQ Mental health of LGBTQ people Sex Sex–gender distinction Sexual orientation Social construction of gender Suicide among LGBTQ people LGBTQ portal Category v t e Discrimination against non-binary people , called enbyphobia [ 1 ] or exorsexism , [ 2 ] people who do not identify exclusively or at all as male or female, may occur in social, professional, medical or legal contexts.

Social discrimination [ edit ] Non-binary people may be considered confusing, wrong, evil or nonexistent to people who subscribe to the binary theory of gender .

[ 3 ] According to a 2016 study from The Journal of Sex Research , one of the most common themes of discrimination for genderqueer people is the incorrect use of gender pronouns. The study labeled this as 'nonaffirmation', and it occurs when others do not affirm one's sense of gender identity. The negative effects of misgendering are well-documented. A 2018 study published in the American Psychological Association found a positive association between misgendering and anxiety, depression, and stress.

[ 4 ] Repeated misgendering by strangers, also known as chronic misgendering, can amplify these stressors to the point where trans individuals do not want to leave their homes.

[ 5 ] Participants within the 2016 study also reported experiencing gender policing .

[ 6 ] Gender policing is especially common in K-12 schools on a systematic level. One way in which systematic gender policing manifests in schools is through sex-segregated bathrooms. A study published in the Journal of Gay & Lesbian Services found that 23.9% of trans students surveyed, or 439 students out of 1836, were denied access to gender-appropriate bathrooms or housing at school due to being transgender or gender non-conforming.

[ 7 ] An article from the book Violence and Gender , states that this experienced violence and discrimination leads to high levels of stress. This article stated that non-binary participants are less likely to experience hate speech (24.4% vs. 50%) compared to trans men and equally as likely (24.4% vs. 24.4%) as trans women, yet genderqueer/nonbinary participants, along with trans women, are more likely than trans men individuals to be concerned about the safety of themselves and others.

[ 8 ] Bathroom access [ edit ] Non-binary individuals, when interviewed, found binary spaces such as bathrooms to be difficult to navigate, reporting visual inspections, questioning, and harassment when entering such spaces. In a 2019 paper by Douglas Schrock, interviewees reported being addressed with fear, being pressured to apologize for their appearance or androgyny, verbal confrontations, and in an extreme case, a stranger attempting to break into a stall due to suspicion.

[ 9 ] A quantitative study found that bathroom discrimination significantly increased the odds of considering or attempting suicide, with 60% of surveyed youths who were denied access to gender-appropriate bathrooms considering suicide.

[ 10 ] Brazil [ edit ] A study by the State University of São Paulo (Unesp) found that 2% of the Brazilian population identifies as transgender, while approximately 1.19% identifies as non-binary, which equates to approximately three million people.

[ 11 ] Despite this, the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE) did not include specific questions about non-binary identity in its census.

[ 12 ] United States [ edit ] Of the approximately 6,450 transgender and gender-nonconforming respondents to the National Transgender Discrimination Survey (NTDS), conducted by the National Center for Transgender Equality and National Gay and Lesbian Task Force in 2008–2009, [ 13 ] : 12–15, 50 864 (13%) chose the write-in option for gender identity, "A gender not listed here (please specify)".

[ 13 ] : 16 (The other options were "Male/man", "Female/women", and "Part time as one gender, part time as another".) [ 13 ] : 16 Responses from these participants were analysed in the 2011 journal article "A Gender Not Listed Here: Genderqueers, Gender Rebels, and Otherwise in the National Transgender Discrimination Survey".

[ 14 ] Individuals reporting "a gender not listed here" experienced higher rates of physical (32% vs. 25%) and sexual (15% vs 9%) assault due to bias than other NTDS respondents.

[ 14 ] : 23 Workplace discrimination [ edit ] The examples and perspective in this section deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this section , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new section, as appropriate.

( October 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) United States [ edit ] According to the NTDS, almost all non-binary people had experienced discrimination in the workplace. Their findings show that being out as a non-binary person negatively affects that person's employment outcomes. Though non-binary people have higher unemployment rates than those who identify with a specified gender, masculine non-binary people who still appear male, or are not "passing as female" generally have a harder time in the work environment.

[ 15 ] 19% of respondents to the NTDS identifying themselves as "a gender not listed here" reported job loss due to anti-transgender bias, a smaller proportion than for other respondents (27%).

[ 16 ] : 8 Not only does discrimination against transgender and non-binary people in the workplace affect transgender and non-binary employees, but it also affects the entire workplace team, distracting the victim and the perpetrator from the job itself.

[ 17 ] Transgender and non-binary individuals in the U.S. often face workplace discrimination like conflicts related to their bathroom usage, backlash over transitioning genders and being misgendered by coworkers. The Center of American Progress in 2012 also found that there is also a substantial amount of public ignorance towards transgender and non-binary communities, in comparison to LGB community peers. Because of that, negative psychological consequences occur as a result like mental health disparities , higher rates in attempted suicide, and anxiety in public spaces.

[ 18 ] Military discrimination [ edit ] United States [ edit ] In the United States military, physical fitness tests such as the United States Army Physical Fitness Test only have male or female standards with gender norming . The National Center for Transgender Equality has called on the US Department of Defense to "adopt policies to permit transgender service members with a non-binary gender identity to serve in a manner consistent with their gender identity." [ 19 ] On February 26, 2025, the Department of Defense (DoD) released a policy memorandum titled "Additional Guidance on Prioritizing Military Excellence", expressing that service members suffering from gender dysphoria do not adhere to the strict standards of serving in the military and will therefore be dismissed. These standards include identifying with biological sex and pronouns with that identity.

[ 20 ] The document outlines that the DoD only acknowledges two sexes: male and female. A policy statement in the memorandum describes that a person's sex is fixed and does not change over time, and it mandates that all service members must serve based on their biological sex. Furthermore, the DoD will deny funds to service members who want to pursue sex reassignment surgical procedures or cross-sex hormone therapy. Any unscheduled, scheduled, or planned surgical procedures will be cancelled. The living conditions within military spaces will also change to reflect the department's view of sex. Intimate spaces will be marked for either male, female, or family use in line with military guidelines for sex.

[ 21 ] For military veterans who are transgender, non-binary, or intersex, the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) has announced the discontinuation of providing healthcare such as hormone therapy or mental health services. The conclusion of the Veterans Health Administration's (VHA) 2018 Directive 1341, a policy that expanded healthcare access to these populations.

[ 22 ] Lindsay Church, Executive Director of Minority Veterans of America, stresses that the decision for the department to rescind Directive 1341 is a "direct attack on the dignity and well-being of transgender, non-binary, and intersex veterans —one that will have deadly outcomes".

[ 22 ] Health discrimination [ edit ] New Zealand [ edit ] A 2019 study by the Professional Association for Transgender Health Aotearoa led by Jaimie Veale of the University of Waikato showed that "One in five participants avoided seeing a doctor in the last 12 months because they were worried about disrespect or mistreatment as a trans or non-binary person".

[ 23 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] A 2015 survey conducted by the Scottish Trans Alliance examined experiences of medical services among 224 non-binary individuals who had attended a gender identity clinic (GIC) in the preceding two years. When asked if they had experienced "problems getting the assistance they needed" because of their non-binary identity, 28% chose "yes", 28% "maybe", and 44% "no". Denial of treatment was reported by 13 respondents (6%), delay of treatment by 12 (5%), and lack of knowledge or understanding about their identities by 10 (5%). When asked if they had been pressured by the GIC, 43% chose "yes", 12% "unsure", and 46% "no". Respondents reported having been pressured to appear more binary (36 individuals, 17%), to change their names (19, 9%), to socially transition to fulfil the real-life experience requirement (13, 6%), or to pursue medical transition (13, 6%).

[ 24 ] Under the law of the United Kingdom, individuals are considered by the state to be either female or male, the sex that is stated on their birth certificate. This means that non-binary gender is not recognized in UK law.

United States [ edit ] A survey conducted among rural U.S. LGBT populations suggested that transgender and non-binary patients were three times more likely to find health care providers that have other LGBT patients. They were also three times more likely to drive over an hour out of the way to visit their health care provider due "to the fact that in the last year, one in ten had visited an LGBT-specific health care clinic, which are often located in urban areas." [ 25 ] A 2015 study found that 20.4% of transgender and gender-nonconforming respondents to the NTDS reported having experienced discrimination when trying to access doctors and hospitals, 11.9% when attempting to access emergency rooms, and 4.6% when attempting to access the service of an ambulance.

[ 26 ] Russia [ edit ] In contemporary Russian psychiatry and psychology, as a rule, a binary approach to gender identity is used. V. D. Mendelevich, a psychiatrist, testifies that non-binary people are faced with demands to "determine" their gender identity in the binary paradigm. Refusal to do so is perceived as psychopathological. According to Mendelevich, the use of this approach does not correspond to modern scientific ideas about norm and pathology.

[ 27 ] Legal discrimination [ edit ] See also: Legal recognition of non-binary gender Australia [ edit ] The Sex Discrimination Act of 1984 did not explicitly protect non-binary people from discrimination until the Sex Discrimination Amendment (Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity and Intersex Status) Act of 2013, which prohibited any discrimination on the grounds of "gender identity" and "intersex status". This amendment also removed the use of "other" and "opposite sex" in exchange for broader terms like "different sex".

[ 28 ] In 2014, the Australian High Court legally recognized non-binary as a category for people to identify with on legal documents. After Norrie May-Welby made a request for a third gender identity on legal documents and was eventually denied, Norrie chose to take the matter up with Australia's Human Rights Commission and their Court of Appeal . After a four-year-long legal battle beginning in 2010, Norrie finally won the case. From this and the legalizing of the matter in New South Wales , the Australian Capital Territory decided to pass a law that recognized non-binary identities. Several other states and territories followed suit afterward.

Canada [ edit ] In 2002, the Northwest Territories was the first of Canada 's provinces to explicitly include gender identity as a protected group from discrimination under the law, followed by Manitoba in 2012.

[ 29 ] By 2015, every Canadian province and territory had included similar changes to their discrimination laws.

In 2017, Canada passed Bill C-16 which formally recognized non-binary gender people and granted them protection under the law towards discrimination on the grounds of "gender identity" and "gender expression." [ 30 ] Italy [ edit ] In 2024, the Italian Constitutional Court , with judgment no. 143 of July 23, explicitly recognized for the first time the existence of non-binary individuals, affirming that they too are entitled to the protection of fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution—such as the right to personal identity, health, and equal social dignity (Articles 2, 3, and 32). However, the Court declared inadmissible the request to introduce a “non-binary” gender marker in the civil registry, stating that such a profound change to Italy’s legal and administrative system—still firmly rooted in a male/female binary—requires legislative action and cannot be enacted through judicial interpretation alone. At the same time, the Court ruled unconstitutional the legal requirement for judicial authorization to access gender-affirming surgery after legal gender rectification, considering it an unjustified obstacle to individual self-determination. In summary, the decision marks an important step toward the recognition of non-conforming gender identities, but it leaves unresolved the full legal recognition of non-binary gender, which remains in the hands of Parliament. Non-binary individuals are now recognized as subjects of rights. It is no longer mandatory to obtain a judge’s authorization to undergo gender-affirming surgery after the legal change of gender. For the first time, the Court explicitly acknowledges that there are individuals who do not identify as male or female, and affirms that their right to identity is constitutionally protected (Articles 2, 3, and 32). The obligation to obtain judicial authorization for surgery after legal gender rectification was declared unconstitutional, as it is no longer justified.

[ 31 ] In 2025, the Italian Ministry of Education mandated that schools in the country ban the use of gender-neutral language , such as asterisks and schwa [ 32 ] [ 33 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] Non-binary is not legally recognized as a gender identity in the United Kingdom. The Gender Recognition Act 2004 allowed people to apply to the Gender Recognition Panel for a change of gender after living as the gender they wished to show on all their legal documents and being given a diagnosis of gender dysphoria by at least two health professionals. However, this only allowed for a legal change of gender from male to female or vice versa. There is no non-binary specific legal clinical pathway available for medical assistance, and non-binary people will receive a new NHS number denoting the sex opposite to the one they were assigned at birth.

United States [ edit ] Despite being more likely to achieve higher levels of education when compared to the general public, [ 16 ] : 11 90% of non-binary individuals face discrimination, often in the form of harassment in the workplace. 19% percent of self-identifying non-binary individuals reported job loss as a result of their identities.

[ 16 ] Anti-discrimination laws that prohibit discrimination specifically against non-binary individuals do not exist.

[ citation needed ] However, the current proposed version of the federal Employment Non-Discrimination Act use such terms as "gender identity" and "gender expression", categories under which non-binary individuals fall due to the fact that their gender expression cannot be defined as male or female.

[ 16 ] Non-binary individuals are subject to higher rates of physical and sexual assault and police harassment than those who identify as men or women, likely due to their gender expression or presentation.

[ 14 ] [ 34 ] Identity documents [ edit ] In 2016, the U.S. State Department was sued for denying a passport to Dana Zzyym , who is a veteran, an intersex person and then also identified as a non-binary person. Zzyym wrote "intersex" on their passport form instead of male or female, which were the only two available gender fields on the form. Zzyym was denied the passport, which led to LGBTQ advocacy organizations filing a lawsuit against the U.S. State Department on Zzyym's behalf. The advocacy group Lambda Legal argued for gender-neutral terms and a third option on U.S. passports, arguing that the existing passport fields violated the Due Process Clause and Equal Protection Clause of the U.S. Constitution. The State Department argued that adding additional gender fields to the passport form would prevent the agency's efforts to combat identity theft and passport fraud. The Tenth Circuit Court ruled in favor of Zzyym, the first time in U.S. history that the federal government recognized non-binary people.

[ 35 ] In California, the Gender Recognition Act of 2017 was introduced in the State Senate in Sacramento in January 2017 and signed into law by governor Jerry Brown on October 19.  The law recognizes a third gender option known as "non-binary" which may be used on state-issued documents such as driver's licenses to more accurately reflect a person's gender. Senate bill SB179 was originally drafted by State Senators Toni Atkins and Scott Wiener .  The law also makes it easier for existing documents to be changed, by removing requirements for sworn statements by physicians and replacing it with a sworn attestation by the person seeking to make the change to their documents.  The Executive Director of Equality California commented, "It is up to an individual—not a judge or even a doctor—to define a person's gender identity." [ 36 ] [ 37 ] The first two U.S. citizens to receive a court decreed non-binary gender were in Oregon and California. In Oregon , Elisa Rae Shupe was able to obtain a non-binary designation in June 2016 after a brief legal battle.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] Following in Shupe's footsteps, California resident Sarah Kelly Keenan was also able to legally change her gender marker to non-binary in September 2016.

[ 40 ] After both Shupe and Keenan had success with their cases, more people have been inspired to take on the legal battle of changing their gender to a non-binary marker. With the help of organizations such as the Nonbinary & Intersex Recognition Project dozens of these petitions have been granted and additional states have changed regulations to provide a third gender option on state ID, birth certificates, and/or court orders.

[ 41 ] Switzerland [ edit ] From 1 January 2022, it is possible to change your name and legal gender on documents in Switzerland without the need for a medical report or judicial authorization.

[ 42 ] Despite this, there is no legal recognition of non-binary gender in the country and the Swiss government has decided that it is not mandatory to recognize documents with neutral gender markers issued abroad, although it has expressed concern about the situation.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] A Tamedia survey found that 62% of Swiss are against the introduction of a gender-neutral marker in official documents, while around 35-40% are in favour of the change.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] See also [ edit ] Anti-gender movement Cosmetics policy Gender-based dress codes Gender polarization Transphobia References [ edit ] ^ Márquez, Andrés N. (November 12, 2021).

"Enebefobia: el odio y rechazo hacia las personas no binarias" .

El Closet LGBT (in Spanish) . Retrieved July 27, 2025 .

^ Pereira, Rodolfo Viana, ed. (May 26, 2022).

Direitos Políticos, Liberdade de Expressão e Discurso de Ódio – Volume V (in Brazilian Portuguese). Brasília, DF: Abradep.

ISBN 978-85-93139-09-3 .

^ Hale, J.C. (1998) "...[O]ur embodiments and our subjectivities are abjected from social ontology: we cannot fit ourselves into extant categories without denying, eliding, erasing, or otherwise abjecting personally significant aspects of ourselves ... When we choose to live with and in our dislocatedness, fractured from social ontology, we choose to forgo intelligibility: lost in language and in social life, we become virtually unintelligible, even to ourselves..." from Consuming the Living, Dis(Re)Membering the Dead in the Butch/FtM Borderlands in the Gay and Lesbian Quarterly 4:311, 336 (1998). Retrieved on April 7, 2007.

^ McLemore, Kevin A. (February 2018).

"A minority stress perspective on transgender individuals' experiences with misgendering" .

Stigma and Health .

3 (1): 53– 64.

doi : 10.1037/sah0000070 .

ISSN 2376-6964 .

S2CID 152228766 .

^ Kolysh, Simone (2021).

Everyday Violence: The Public Harassment of Women and LGBTQ People . New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.

ISBN 9781978823990 .

^ Nadal, Kevin L.; Whitman, Chassitty N.; Davis, Lindsey S.; Erazo, Tanya; Davidoff, Kristin C. (March 11, 2016). "Microaggressions Toward Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer, and Genderqueer People: A Review of the Literature".

The Journal of Sex Research .

53 ( 4– 5): 488– 508.

doi : 10.1080/00224499.2016.1142495 .

ISSN 0022-4499 .

PMID 26966779 .

S2CID 23205208 .

^ Seelman, Kristie L. (April 3, 2014).

"Transgender Individuals' Access to College Housing and Bathrooms: Findings from the National Transgender Discrimination Survey" .

Journal of Gay & Lesbian Social Services .

26 (2): 186– 206.

doi : 10.1080/10538720.2014.891091 .

ISSN 1053-8720 .

S2CID 16766073 .

^ Veldhuis, Cindy B.; Drabble, Laurie; Riggle, Ellen D.B.; Wootton, Angie R.; Hughes, Tonda L. (March 2018).

" "I Fear for My Safety, but Want to Show Bravery for Others": Violence and Discrimination Concerns Among Transgender and Gender-Nonconforming Individuals After the 2016 Presidential Election" .

Violence and Gender .

5 (1): 26– 36.

doi : 10.1089/vio.2017.0032 .

ISSN 2326-7836 .

^ Barbee, Harry; Schrock, Douglas (September 2019).

"Un/gendering Social Selves: How Nonbinary People Navigate and Experience a Binarily Gendered World" .

Sociological Forum .

34 (3): 572– 593.

doi : 10.1111/socf.12517 .

ISSN 0884-8971 .

S2CID 200037223 .

^ Price-Feeney, Myeshia; Green, Amy E.; Dorison, Samuel H. (June 1, 2021).

"Impact of Bathroom Discrimination on Mental Health Among Transgender and Nonbinary Youth" .

Journal of Adolescent Health .

68 (6): 1142– 1147.

doi : 10.1016/j.jadohealth.2020.11.001 .

ISSN 1054-139X .

PMID 33288457 .

S2CID 227950339 .

^ "Transgêneros e não binários são 2% dos brasileiros, revela estudo" .

Agência Brasil (in Brazilian Portuguese). November 22, 2021 . Retrieved August 3, 2025 .

^ "Preconceito afeta produção de dados sobre LGBTI+" .

Agência Brasil (in Brazilian Portuguese). June 28, 2022 . Retrieved August 3, 2025 .

^ a b c "National Transgender Discrimination Survey" (PDF) .

National Center for Transgender Equality . Retrieved April 26, 2017 .

^ a b c Jack Harrison; Jaime Grant; Jody L. Herman (2011–2012).

"A Gender Not Listed Here: Genderqueers, Gender Rebels, and Otherwise in the National Transgender Discrimination Survey" (PDF) .

LGBTQ Policy Journal .

2 . Archived from the original (PDF) on July 25, 2012 . Retrieved March 4, 2017 .

^ Davidson, Skylar (April 26, 2017).

"Gender Inequality: Nonbinary Transgender People in the Workplace" .

umass.edu .

^ a b c d "Non-Binary Identities & the Law" .

transgenderlawcenter.org . April 16, 2014. Archived from the original on September 28, 2015 . Retrieved October 21, 2015 .

^ Barclay, J.M.; Scott, L.J. (July 2006). "Transsexuals and workplace diversity".

Personnel Review .

35 (4): 487– 502.

doi : 10.1108/00483480610670625 .

^ Haas, Ann P.; Eliason, Mickey; Mays, Vickie M.; Mathy, Robin M.; Cochran, Susan D.; D'Augelli, Anthony R.; Silverman, Morton M.; Fisher, Prudence W.; Hughes, Tonda; Rosario, Margaret; Russell, Stephen T.; Malley, Effie; Reed, Jerry; Litts, David A.; Haller, Ellen; Sell, Randall L.; Remafedi, Gary; Bradford, Judith; Beautrais, Annette L.; Brown, Gregory K.; Diamond, Gary M.; Friedman, Mark S.; Garofalo, Robert; Turner, Mason S.; Hollibaugh, Amber; Clayton, Paula J.

(December 30, 2010).

"Suicide and Suicide Risk in Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Populations: Review and Recommendations" .

Journal of Homosexuality .

58 (1): 10– 51.

doi : 10.1080/00918369.2011.534038 .

PMC 3662085 .

PMID 21213174 .

^ "Chapter 14 - Military Service".

A BLUEPRINT FOR EQUALITY: FEDERAL AGENDA FOR TRANSGENDER PEOPLE (PDF) . National Center for Transgender Equality. October 2016. pp.

54– 56 . Retrieved December 22, 2022 .

^ "DOD: Gender Dysphoria Incompatible With Military, Service Members Must Serve in Accordance" .

U.S. Department of Defense . Archived from the original on May 5, 2025 . Retrieved May 7, 2025 .

^ "Wayback Machine" (PDF) .

www.defense.gov . Archived from the original (PDF) on April 29, 2025 . Retrieved May 1, 2025 .

^ a b Gerson, Emily Starbuck (March 14, 2025).

"Press Release: Military and Veteran Groups Denounce VA Rollback of Transgender, Nonbinary, and Intersex Protections for Veterans" .

Modern Military Association of America . Retrieved May 1, 2025 .

^ communications@waikato.ac.nz (September 24, 2019).

"Ground-breaking New Zealand report on trans and non-binary people's health released" .

www.waikato.ac.nz . Retrieved July 26, 2023 .

^ "Non-binary people's experiences of using UK gender identity clinics" (PDF) .

^ Whitehead, J.; Shaver, John; Stephenson, Rob (January 5, 2016).

"Outness, Stigma, and Primary Health Care Utilization among Rural LGBT Populations" .

PLOS ONE .

11 (1): e0146139.

Bibcode : 2016PLoSO..1146139W .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0146139 .

ISSN 1932-6203 .

PMC 4701471 .

PMID 26731405 .

^ Kattari, Shanna K.; Walls, N. Eugene; Whitfield, Darren L.; Langenderfer-Magruder, Lisa (April 3, 2015). "Racial and Ethnic Differences in Experiences of Discrimination in Accessing Health Services Among Transgender People in the United States".

International Journal of Transgenderism .

16 (2): 68– 79.

doi : 10.1080/15532739.2015.1064336 .

ISSN 1553-2739 .

S2CID 5500532 .

^ Менделевич, В. Д. (2020).

"Небинарная гендерная идентичность и трансгендерность вне психиатрического дискурса" .

Неврологический вестник (in Russian).

LII (2): 5– 11.

doi : 10.17816/nb26268 .

ISSN 1027-4898 .

^ Bennett, Theodore (2014).

" 'No man's land': Non-binary sex identification in Australian law and policy" (PDF) .

University of New South Wales Law Journal .

37 : 847– 873.

^ Cossman, Brenda (January 2018). "Gender identity, gender pronouns, and freedom of expression: Bill C-16 and the traction of specious legal claims".

University of Toronto Law Journal .

68 (1): 37– 79.

doi : 10.3138/utlj.2017-0073 .

ISSN 0042-0220 .

S2CID 148916100 .

^ "Canada: Senate Passes Landmark Transgender Rights Bill" .

Library of Congress .

^ Quari, Serenella (September 19, 2024).

"Pronti ma non del tutto. La Corte Costituzionale di fronte al superamento del binarismo di genere" .

Diritti Comparati (in Italian) . Retrieved May 22, 2025 .

^ "Italy bans gender-neutral symbols in schools in latest culture clash" .

Reuters . March 21, 2025 . Retrieved July 26, 2025 .

^ Caldero, Rocco (March 25, 2025).

"Italy Reclaims Tradition with Ban on Gender-Neutral Symbols" .

The Rio Times . Retrieved July 26, 2025 .

^ "10 Myths About Non-Binary People It's Time to Unlearn" .

Everyday Feminism . December 6, 2014 . Retrieved October 21, 2015 .

^ "Judge rules in favor of intersex veteran who was denied passport" .

PBS NewsHour . November 23, 2016.

^ Gutierrez, Melody (January 26, 2017).

"Bill seeks 3rd gender option on licenses, birth certificates" .

SFGate .

Hearst . Retrieved October 26, 2017 .

^ Bowerman, Mary (January 26, 2017).

"Female, male or non-binary: California legally recognizes a third gender on identification documents" .

USA Today .

Gannett . Retrieved October 26, 2017 .

^ Holmes Hehn, Amy (June 10, 2016).

"Case No.: 16CV13991: In The Matter Of The Sex Change Of Jamie Shupe, Petitioner" (PDF) .

Portland Mercury . Archived from the original (PDF) on June 26, 2016 . Retrieved November 30, 2018 .

^ Dake, Lauren (June 16, 2016).

"Jamie Shupe becomes first legally non-binary person in the US" .

The Guardian .

^ "Californian becomes second US citizen granted 'non-binary' gender status" .

NBC News . September 26, 2016.

^ "Resources" .

www.intersexrecognition.org . Archived from the original on March 17, 2023 . Retrieved July 31, 2018 .

^ "Switzerland: Transgender Persons May Change Gender Marker and First Name Starting January 1, 2022" .

Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. 20540 USA . Retrieved July 26, 2025 .

^ "Annual Review 2024 of the Human Rights Situation of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex People in Europe and Central Asia" (PDF) .

www.ilga-europe.org . Retrieved July 22, 2025 .

^ "Switzerland rejects idea of a third-gender option in official records" .

euronews . December 21, 2022 . Retrieved July 26, 2025 .

^ Times, The Swiss (May 30, 2023).

"Swiss are not interested in a 'third gender' " .

The Swiss Times . Retrieved July 26, 2025 .

^ Times, The Swiss (May 22, 2023).

"Swiss say they are not interested in 'woke' language" .

The Swiss Times . Retrieved July 26, 2025 .

External links [ edit ] Nonbinary & Intersex Recognition Project v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons v t e LGBTQ people ( topic outline ) Academic fields Discourse LGBTQ topics in education Gender studies Lesbian feminism Linguistics Literature Gay Lesbian Transgender Psychology Queer studies Queer theory Transfeminism Community Culture Anthems Awards Literary Bars Gay Lesbian Bisexual community Businesses Coming out Community centers Cross-dressing Drag king Drag queen Events Awareness periods Film festivals Gay village Gay-friendly Icons Literature Music Media Bury your gays Films New queer cinema Periodicals Portrayal Organizations People Pets Pride Pride Month Pride parade Queerplatonic relationships Religious groups Rodeos Same-sex relationships Slang Slogans Sports Pride Nights Takatāpui Theatre Companies Tourism Symbols Black triangle Gaysper Labrys Lambda Pink triangle Rainbow plaque Pride flags Aromantic Asexual Bear Bisexual Gay flag of South Africa Gay men Intersex Leather Lesbian Non-binary Pansexual Rainbow Rainbow crossing Transgender Gender identities Sexual identities Sexual diversities Gender identity Androgyny Boi Cisgender Gender bender Gender nonconformity Khanith Man Non-binary / genderqueer Queer heterosexuality Theyby Transgender Akava'ine Trans man Transsexual Trans woman Mak nyah Woman Womxn Womyn Xenogender Third sex / Third gender Bakla Balkan sworn virgins Bissu Faʻafafine Fakaleitī Femminiello Hijra Kathoey Köçek Māhū Mukhannath Muxe Travesti Two-spirit Winkte Sexual identities Sexual orientations Asexual Bisexual Homosexual Aromanticism Asexuality Gray asexuality Demisexuality Aegosexuality Attraction to transgender people Banjee Bi-curious Fictosexuality Gay Gay men Heteroflexible Lesbian Monosexual Non-heterosexual Pansexual Queer Questioning Romantic orientation Same gender loving Sexual minority Tom / Dee Related Acronyms LGBTQ Detransition Effeminacy Erotic target location error Ex-gay Ex-ex-gay Female Gender and sexual diversity Gender assignment Gender binary Gender essentialism Gender expression Gender modality Gender neutrality Gender roles Gender transition Health Organizations Hermaphrodite Human female sexuality Human male sexuality Intersex Androgynos Tumtum Legal status of transgender people Male Men who have sex with men / Sexual practices between men Sex–gender distinction Sexuality and gender identity-based cultures Social construction of gender Straight ally Tomboy Transgender health care Misinformation Women who have sex with women / Sexual practices between women History LGBTQ history History of homosexuality History of gay men in the United States History of lesbianism Transgender history Timeline of transgender history Timeline of asexual history LGBTQ history timeline Migration Social movements Students History of Christianity and homosexuality History of same-sex unions Pederasty Category:LGBTQ history Pre-modern era Adelphopoiesis Ancient Egypt Ancient Greece pre-Columbian Peru Ancient Rome Medieval Europe 16th to 19th century Molly house Section 377 First homosexual movement 20th century Dance of the Forty-One Institut für Sexualwissenschaft Persecution of homosexuals in Nazi Germany Cadet scandal Florida Legislative Investigation Committee Sea queens Compton's Cafeteria riot Stonewall riots Gay Liberation Front Handkerchief code Festival of Light action White Night riots Front homosexuel d'action révolutionnaire Florida orange juice boycott Operation Soap Epidemiology of HIV/AIDS ACT UP Section 28 Tasty nightclub raid Bar Abanicos police raid 21st century Timeline of same-sex marriage Lawrence v. Texas Russian anti-LGBTQ law Anti-Homosexuality Act, 2014 Rainbow wave Rainbow Night 2020s anti-LGBTQ movement in the United States Rights and legal issues LGBTQ rights by country or territory Africa Americas Asia Europe Oceania List of LGBTQ rights articles by region LGBTQ rights topics Capital punishment for homosexuality Censorship of LGBTQ issues Civil unions and partnerships Criminalization of homosexuality decriminalization Hate crime laws Intersex human rights Military service Same-sex parenting Adoption Assisted reproduction Same-sex marriage Timeline Socialism Legal status of transgender people Transgender rights movement United Nations / Yogyakarta Principles La Francophonie Commonwealth of Nations LGBTQ rights movements Homophile Gay liberation LGBTQ rights groups LGBTQ rights activists Rainbow capitalism Separatism Gay Lesbian Sexual orientation — Medicine, science and sexology Autism and LGBTQ identities Biology Birth order Demographics Disability and LGBTQ identities Environment Homosexuality and psychology Homosexuality in the DSM Kinsey scale Klein Grid Life expectancy Neuroscience Prenatal hormones Sexual inversion Conversion therapy Split attraction model Sexual orientation identity Timeline of sexual orientation and medicine Societal attitudes Prejudice Violence Societal attitudes Amatonormativity Heteronormativity Heteropatriarchy Homonationalism Pinkwashing Gay panic defense Opposition to LGBTQ rights Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric LGBTQ stereotypes Suicide among LGBTQ people list Monuments and memorials Queerbaiting Homosexuality and religion Transgender people and religion Prejudice and discrimination Arophobia Acephobia Anti-gender movement AIDS stigma Biphobia Gayphobia Grooming conspiracy theory Heterosexism Homophobia Liberal homophobia Discrimination against lesbians Discrimination against non-binary people Racism Riddle scale SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Transmisogyny Transphobia Violence against LGBTQ people Corrective rape Capital punishment for homosexuality Gay bashing Violence against LGBTQ people History in the UK in the US Transgender people Unlawful killings Persecution of homosexuals in Nazi Germany Stop Murder Music LGBTQ portal Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Discrimination_against_non-binary_people&oldid=1304056160 " Categories : Discrimination against LGBTQ people Non-binary gender Transphobia Discrimination against transgender people Hidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 Brazilian Portuguese-language sources (pt-br) CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from September 2021 Anglophone-centric Use mdy dates from June 2019 Articles with excerpts Articles containing Neapolitan-language text Articles with limited geographic scope from October 2018 United States-centric All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2017 This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 18:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Discrimination against non-binary people 9 languages Add topic

