Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Family 3 See also 4 References 5 Works 6 Secondary sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Carsun Chang 10 languages Català Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia 日本語 Svenska 文言 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chinese politician and philosopher (1887–1969) In this Chinese name , the family name is Chang .

Carsun Chang 張嘉森 Carsun Chang as pictured in The Most Recent Biographies of Chinese Dignitaries Born ( 1887-01-18 ) 18 January 1887 Jiading , Jiangsu , Qing dynasty Died 23 February 1969 (1969-02-23) (aged 82) San Francisco , California , U.S.

Alma mater Waseda University Political party China Democratic League China Democratic Socialist Party Relatives Chang Kia-ngau (brother) Zhang Youyi (sister) Xu Zhimo (brother-in-law) Part of a series on Social democracy History Age of Enlightenment Frankfurt Declaration French Revolution Godesberg Program Humanism Internationalist–defencist schism Keynesianism Labor movement Marxism Orthodox Revisionist Nordic model Reformist–revolutionary dispute Socialism Revolutions of 1848 Utopian socialism Welfare capitalism Concepts Civil liberties Critical theory Democracy Economic Industrial Representative Dirigisme Environmentalism Environmental protection Fair trade Gradualism Institutional abuse Internationalism Labor rights Land reform Left-wing nationalism Mixed economy Nationalization Negative and positive rights Progressivism Reformism Left Socialism Revolutionary socialism Secularism Social corporatism Social justice Social market economy Socialist state Capitalism Socialism Structural abuse Structural violence Trade union Tripartism Welfare Welfare state Variants Democratic socialism Ethical socialism Evolutionary socialism Liberal socialism Socialism of the 21st century Third Way People Allende Ardern Attlee Awolowo Batlle y Ordóñez Bebel Ben-Gurion Berger Bernstein Betancourt Bhutto Blanc Bonnell Brandt Branting Brown Bruenig Callaghan Cárdenas Clark Craxi Crosland Corbyn Curtin Daszyński Debs Douglas Drees Ebert Ecevit Engels Erlander Fraser Gaitskell Gandhi Gerhardsen González Goulart Hardie Hilferding Hook Ingerman İnönü Jaurès Jenkins Jumblatt Junmai Katayama Kautsky Kerensky Kéthly Kirk Kulinski Lagos Lassalle Layton Lenin Lévesque Liebknecht (Wilhelm) Liebknecht (Karl) Luxemburg MacDonald Mandela Marx Myrdal (Alva) Myrdal (Gunnar) Nehru Pakman Palme Plekhanov Prodi Russell Radbruch Reich Rustin Sánchez Sanders Savage Scholz Stauning Thomas Den Uyl Vail Webb Whitlam Wilson Wynn Zhordania Organizations International Trade Union Confederation International Union of Socialist Youth Progressive Alliance Socialist International Young European Socialists Network of Social Democracy in Asia Parties CPDS ESDP MLSTP–PSD MSZDP MSZP PES PS Andorra France PSD PSDE PSDSH PSSh S Denmark Latvia SAP SD SDE SDF SDK SDLP SDP Croatia Finland Japan Montenegro SDPI SDSM Smer SOCDEM SocDems SPD SDP BiH SPDS SP SPÖ Related Bevanism Figuerism Kirchnerism Lulism " The Internationale " Economics portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e This article is part of a series on Liberalism in China Ideologies Classical Individualism Liberal socialism Social democracy Libertarianism Anarchism Progressivism Social Taoism Laozi philosophy Principles Civil and political rights Due process Economic freedom Environmentalism Equality before the law Freedom of the press Freedom of religion Freedom of speech Popular sovereignty Rule of law Social justice History Democracy movements 1970s Hong Kong student protests 1989 Tiananmen Square protests 2011 Chinese pro-democracy protests 2014 Hong Kong protests 2019–2020 Hong Kong protests 2022 COVID-19 protests in China Beijing Spring Democracy Wall Hong Kong 1 July marches 1911 Revolution Hundred Flowers Campaign New Enlightenment May Fourth Movement New Culture Movement Weiquan movement Lawyers People Ai Bao Bo Chang (Carsun) Chang (P. C.) Cheung Chi Chiang Chou Chow Chu (Anping) Chu (Eddie) Fan Fang Fei Gu (Su) Gu (Zhun) He Ho (Albert) Ho (Cyd) Ho (Kai) Ku (Meng-yu) Hsu Hu (Shih) Hu (Yaobang) Jiang Lai Lei Laozi Lau (Emily) Lau (Siu-lai) Law Lee Li (Ao) Li (Rui) Li (Shenzhi) Li (Yinhe) Liang (early) Liu (Junning) Liu (Xiaobo) Luo Luo Longji Mao Mo Mok Qin Sun (Yat-sen) Sun (Fo) Tao To Wong Wang (Ruoshui) Wang (Yang) Wen Wu (Chi-wai) Wu (Jinglian) Wu (K. C.) Xiang Xu (Jilin) Xu (Youyu) Xu (Zhangrun) Yang Yeung James Yen Zhang (Dongsun) Zhang (Qianfan) Zhang (Weiying) Zhu Zimmerman Extant parties China Democratic League (early) Hong Kong ADPL April Fifth Action Civic Act-up Community Alliance Democratic Party Hong Kong and Kowloon Trades Union Council Labour Party League of Social Democrats Neighbourhood and Worker's Service Centre People Power Professional Commons Socialist Action Macau New Democratic Macau Association New Hope New Macau Association Republic of China (Taiwan) (groups of pro-Chinese identity) Chinese People's Party Non-Partisan Solidarity Union People First Party Historical parties Democratic Party (1912) Labor Party of the Republic of China [ zh ] Hong Kong 123 Democratic Alliance Citizens Party Civic Party Democratic Alliance Democratic Self-Government Party The Frontier (1996) The Frontier (2010) Hong Kong Affairs Society Hong Kong Chinese Reform Association (early) Hong Kong Confederation of Trade Unions Hong Kong Socialist Democratic Party Meeting Point Power for Democracy Revolutionary Communist Party of China Revolutionary Marxist League United Democrats Republic of China (Taiwan) (groups of pro-Chinese identity) China Democracy Party Republican Party Banned parties Democracy Party of China New Democracy Party of China Union of Chinese Nationalists Alliances Pro-democracy camp Hong Kong Macau Organisations Alliance for True Democracy Civil Human Rights Front Group of 190 HKASPDMC Hong Kong Democratic Foundation Next Digital Reform Club of Hong Kong Tiananmen Mothers Media Current China Times (early) Hong Kong Free Press Yanhuang Chunqiu Former Apple Daily Endeavor Weekly Free China Journal Next Magazine Sharp Daily By region Hong Kong Localism Related ideologies Anti-authoritarianism Federalism Feminism Progressivism Confucianism Three Principles of the People Related topics Anti-communism Anti-PRC Conservatism in China (opposing) Critics of Confucianism Democracy in China Hong Kong Hong Kong nationalism Human rights in China LGBTQ Pro-ROC sentiment Republican Fever Progressivism in Taiwan Taiwanese nationalism ROC independence One China, Many Paths Liberalism portal China portal Hong Kong portal Taiwan portal v t e Carsun Chang ( Chinese : 張嘉森 ; pinyin : Zhāng Jiāsēn ; 1887–1969), also known as Chang Chun-mai ( Chinese : 張君勱 ; pinyin : Zhang Junmai ) or Carson Chang , was a prominent Chinese philosopher, public intellectual and a social democratic politician. He was recognized as "Father of Constitution in Republic of China ".

[ 1 ] He played an important role in the drafting of the Constitution of the Republic of China in 1946.

[ 2 ] Chang was influenced by ideas related to Jeffersonian democracy .

[ 2 ] Biography [ edit ] A pioneering theorist of human rights in the Chinese context, Chang established his own small "Third Force" democratic party during the Nationalist era.

Chang supported German-style social democracy while opposing capitalism , communism , and guild socialism .

[ 3 ] He supported socialization of major industries such as railroads and mines to be run by a combination of government officials, technicians, and consumers., [ 4 ] and the development of a mixed economy in China, like that advocated by the Social Democratic Party of Germany under Philipp Scheidemann .

[ 4 ] Equipped with the traditional Confucian degree of xiucai or "accomplished scholar", Chang went on to study at Waseda University in Japan where he came under the influence of Liang Qichao 's theory of constitutional monarchy.  In 1918 he accompanied Liang's tour of post-war Europe, later going to Germany to study philosophy for a short time at Berlin University .  While in Germany he came under the influence of the teachings of Rudolf Eucken (1846–1926) and Henri Bergson (1859–1941).   With Hans Driesch , who was formerly Eucken's student, Chang travelled throughout China in the early 1920s, serving as Driesch's Chinese translator as he lectured on Eucken's philosophical vision. In 1922, Chang led a committee which drafted an outline for a constitution with a federal system of government.

[ 5 ] In 1923 Chang gave a lecture at Tsinghua University , the title was "outlook on life (人生觀)". Soon after, his speech was published on Tsinghua weekly (淸華週刊), this led to polemics over science and metaphysics (also known as the "worldview controversy"). He wrote extensively on what now forms part of modern neo-Confucianism.

With Zhang Dongsun , he organized a National Socialist Party (no connection with the Nazis in Germany). In 1933 he and Huang Yanpei organized the China Democratic League , a Third Force party with strong commitments to liberal doctrines of separation of powers , freedom of expression and human rights . Chang joined the pacifist Low-Key Club during the early Second Sino-Japanese War , which consisted of Nanjing Nationalist elites and emphasized China's inability to counter Japan's military power, while advocating for Sino-Japanese peace and a ceasefire. The political scientist Qian Duansheng criticized Chang as "neither an organizer himself nor a man able to pick capable men to organize for him." John F. Melby , an American diplomat who knew Chang during the war, felt that Chang was as "unrealistic" as his brother, Chang Kia-ngau , was hard headed. As a scholar, Melby conceded, Chang was "highly intelligent and well educated," but as a politician he was "utopian" and "ineffectual." After the war against Japan, Chang became the chairman of the China Democratic Socialist Party .

[ 6 ] Opposed to the Chinese communists, but also dissatisfied with Chiang Kai-shek 's noncompliance with the constitution, Carsun Chang went to the United States after 1949.  The Democratic Socialist Party moved to Taiwan afterwards and continued resisting the implementation of a one-party dictatorship and oppression by the Kuomintang though its very survival in Taiwan was due to its tacit cooperation with the Kuomintang.  Carsun Chang reappeared in 1962 calling for the unity of the party, but returned to the United States before his death in 1969.

Family [ edit ] Carsun Chang was the older brother of the prominent banker and politician Chang Kia-ngau (Zhang Jia'ao). His sister, Zhang Youyi , was an educator, banker, and the first wife of poet Xu Zhimo .

See also [ edit ] Chinese philosophy References [ edit ] ^ Jeans Jr. (1997) , p. 41.

^ a b Kroncke, Jedidiah Joseph; Li, Haimo (2025).

"Carsun Chang's Jefferson: A Lost Era of Transnational Sino-American Constitutional Imagination" .

Law and History Review : 1– 29.

doi : 10.1017/S0738248024000397 .

ISSN 0738-2480 .

^ Jeans Jr. (1997) , pp. 41, 47.

^ a b Jeans Jr. (1997) , p. 44.

^ Chen (1999).

Chen Jiongming and the federalist movement : regional leadership and nation building in early Republican China . pp.

179– 180.

ISBN 0-89264-135-5 .

^ Fung (2000) , p.

148 .

Works [ edit ] Chang, Carsun.

The Third Force in China.

New York: Bookman Associates, 1952.

Chang, Carsun.

The Development of Neo-Confucian Thought.

2 vols. New York: Bookman Associates, 1957-1962. ( Vol. 2 ) Chang, Carsun.

Wang Yang-ming: Idealist philosopher of sixteenth-century China . Jamaica, NY: St.  John's University Press, 1962.

Chang, Carsun, and Rudolf Eucken.

Das Lebensproblem in China und in Europa.

Leipzig: Quelle & Meyer, 1922.

Chang, Carsun, and Kalidas Nag.

China and Gandhian India.

Calcutta: The Book Company, 1956.

Chang, Carsun et al. (1958).

A Manifesto on the Reappraisal of Chinese Culture; Our Joint Understanding of the Sinological Study Relating to World Cultural Outlook.

Chang, Carsun.

Guoxian yi (1921). In Xian Zheng zhi dao (Beijing: Qinghua daxue chubanshe, 2006a).

Chang, Carsun.

Minzu fuxing de xueshu jichu (1935). Beijing: Zhongguo renmin daxue chubanshe, 2006b.

Chang, Carsun.

Mingri zhi Zhongguo wenhua (1936). Beijing: Zhongguo renmin daxue chubanshe, 2006c.

Chang, Carsun.

Li guo zhi dao (1938). In Xian Zheng zhi dao (Beijing: Qinghua daxue chubanshe, 2006d).

Chang, Carsun.

Yili xue shi jiang gangyao (1955). Beijing: Zhongguo renmin daxue chubanshe, 2006.

Chang, Carsun.

Bijiao Zhong Ri Yangming xue.

Taipei: Taiwan shangwu yinshu guan, 1955.

Chang, Carsun.

Bianzheng weiwu zhuyi bolun.

Hong Kong: Youlian chubanshe, 1958.

Chang, Carsun.

Zhongguo zhuanzhi junzhu zhengzhi pingyi.

Taipei: Hongwen guan chubanshe, 1986.

Chang, Carsun.

Rujia zhexue zhi fuxing.

Beijing: Zhongguo renmin daxue chubanshe, 2006.

Chang, Carsun, and Wenxi Cheng.

Zhong Xi Yin zhexue wenji.

2 vols. Taipei: Taiwan xuesheng shuju, 1970.

Chang, Carsun, and Huayuan Xue.

Yijiusijiu nian yihou Zhang Junmai yanlun ji.

Taipei : Daoxiang chubanshe, 1989.

Secondary sources [ edit ] Jeans Jr., Roger B. (1997).

Democracy and Socialism in Republican China: The Politics of Zhang Junmai (Carsun Chang), 1906–1941 . Lanham (Maryland) and Oxford (UK): Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 9780847687077 .

Fung, Edmund S. K. (2000).

In Search of Chinese Democracy: Civil Opposition in Nationalist China, 1929-1949 . Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0521771242 .

Nelson, Eric S. (2017).

Chinese and Buddhist Philosophy in Early Twentieth-Century German Thought . London: Bloomsbury, pp. 43-76.

ISBN 9781350002555 .

Nelson, Eric S. (2020).

"Zhang Junmai's Early Political Philosophy and the Paradoxes of Chinese Modernity" .

Asian Studies .

8 : 183– 208.

doi : 10.4312/as.2020.8.1.183-208 .

S2CID 214271980 .

Xinzhong Yao, ed. (2003).

RoutledgeCurzon Encyclopedia of Confucianism . London and New York: RoutledgeCurzon, Vol. 2, pp. 799–800.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Zhang Junmai .

"Zhang Junmai (Carsun Chang, 1877-1969)" , Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Greece Korea Israel Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Carsun_Chang&oldid=1296515719 " Categories : 1887 births 1969 deaths China Democratic Socialist Party politicians Chinese social democrats Academic staff of Yenching University Academic staff of Tsinghua University New Confucian philosophers Republic of China politicians from Shanghai 20th-century Chinese philosophers Philosophers from Shanghai Chinese emigrants to the United States Waseda University alumni Humboldt University of Berlin alumni Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 20 June 2025, at 12:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Carsun Chang 10 languages Add topic

