Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History 3 Syncretism 4 Names and epithets 5 In ancient literature 6 Temple 7 Worship 8 In popular culture 9 Gallery 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Mercury (mythology) 83 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Azərbaycanca Basa Bali বাংলা Беларуская Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Kernowek Kiswahili Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy Malti मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt West-Vlams Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Roman god of trade, merchants and travel "Alipes" and "Mercurius" redirect here. For other uses, see Alipes (horse) , Alipes (centipede) , Mercury (disambiguation) , and Mercurius (disambiguation) .

Mercury God of financial gain, commerce, eloquence, messages, communication, travelers, boundaries, luck, trickery, merchants, thieves Member of the Dii Consentes Mercurius by Artus Quellinus the Elder Planet Mercury Symbol Caduceus , winged sandals, winged hat, tortoise, ram and rooster Day Wednesday ( dies Mercurii ) Genealogy Parents Jupiter and Maia or Caelus and Dies ( Cicero and Hyginus ) [ 1 ] Consort Larunda Children Lares Equivalents Etruscan Turms Greek Hermes Egyptian Thoth or Anubis Celtic Lugus Fresco of Mercury-Hermes in Pompeii , 1st century Religion in ancient Rome Marcus Aurelius ( head covered ) sacrificing at the Temple of Jupiter Practices and beliefs libation votum temples festivals ludi funerary practices cult ( imperial ) mystery religions Priesthoods Pontifices Augures Vestales Flamines Fetiales Epulones Fratres Arvales Deities Dii Consentes Capitoline Triad Aventine Triad Indigitamenta underworld gods agricultural gods childhood gods divine emperors Related topics Glossary of ancient Roman religion Roman mythology Ancient Greek religion Etruscan religion Gallo-Roman religion Interpretatio Graeca Decline v t e Mercury ( / ˈ m ɜːr k j ʊr i / ; Latin : Mercurius [mɛrˈkʊrijʊs] ⓘ ) is a major god in Roman religion and mythology , being one of the 12 Dii Consentes within the ancient Roman pantheon . He is the god of boundaries, commerce, communication (including divination ), eloquence, financial gain, languages, luck, thieves, travelers, and trickery; he is also the guide of souls to the underworld.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] In Roman mythology, he was the son of Maia , one of the seven daughters of the Titan Atlas , and Jupiter .

[ 1 ] In his earliest forms, he appears to have been related to the Etruscan deity Turms ; both gods share characteristics with the Greek god Hermes . He is often depicted holding the caduceus in his left hand. Similar to his Greek equivalent Hermes, he was awarded a magic wand by Apollo , which later turned into the caduceus , the staff with intertwined snakes.

Seated Hermes , excavated at the Villa of the Papyri .

Etymology [ edit ] The name "Mercury" is possibly related to the Latin words merx ("merchandise"; cf.

merchant , commerce , etc.), mercari ( to trade ), and merces ( wages ); another possible connection is the Proto-Indo-European root merĝ- for "boundary, border" (cf.

Old English " mearc ", Old Norse " mark " and Latin " margō ") and Greek οὖρος (by analogy of Arctūrus / Ἀρκτοῦρος ), as the "keeper of boundaries," referring to his role as bridge between the upper and lower worlds.

[ original research?

] Also to note, per Matasović the terms merx and margō are cognate via PIE [ 4 ] , cf. typologically Mongolian зах "border, boundary, edge; market, bazaar".

History [ edit ] Mercury did not appear among the numinous di indigetes of early Roman religion . Rather, he subsumed the earlier Dei Lucrii as Roman religion was syncretized with Greek religion during the time of the Roman Republic , starting around the 4th century BC.

[ citation needed ] His cult was introduced also by influence of Etruscan religion in which Turms had similar characteristics.

[ 5 ] From the beginning, Mercury had essentially the same aspects as Hermes , wearing winged shoes ( talaria ) and a winged hat ( petasos ), and carrying the caduceus , a herald's staff with two entwined snakes that was Apollo 's gift to Hermes. He was often accompanied by a rooster , herald of the new day, [ 6 ] a ram or goat, symbolizing fertility , and a tortoise, referring to Mercury's legendary invention of the lyre from a tortoise shell.

Like Hermes, he was also a god of messages, eloquence and of trade, particularly of the grain trade . He was the patron of travelers and the god of thievery as well. Mercury was also considered a god of abundance and commercial success, particularly in Gaul , where he was said to have been particularly revered.

[ 7 ] He was also, like Hermes, the Romans' psychopomp , leading newly deceased souls to the afterlife. Additionally, Ovid wrote that Mercury carried Morpheus 's dreams from the valley of Somnus to sleeping humans.

[ 8 ] Archeological evidence from Pompeii suggests that Mercury was among the most popular of Roman gods.

[ 9 ] The god of commerce was depicted on two early bronze coins of the Roman Republic, the sextans and the semuncia .

[ 10 ] Syncretism [ edit ] When they described the gods of Celtic and Germanic tribes, rather than considering them separate deities, the Romans interpreted them as local manifestations or aspects of their own gods, a cultural trait called the interpretatio romana . Mercury, in particular, was reported as becoming extremely popular among the nations the Roman Empire conquered; Julius Caesar wrote of Mercury being the most popular god in Britain and Gaul, regarded as the inventor of all the arts.

[ 11 ] This is probably because, in the Roman syncretism , Mercury was equated with the Celtic god Lugus , and in this aspect was commonly accompanied by the Celtic goddess Rosmerta . Although Lugus may originally have been a deity of light or the sun (though this is disputed), similar to the Roman Apollo, his importance as a god of trade made him more comparable to Mercury, and Apollo was instead equated with the Celtic deity Belenus .

[ 8 ] Romans associated Mercury with the Germanic god Wotan , by interpretatio romana ; 1st-century Roman writer Tacitus identifies him as the chief god of the Germanic peoples.

[ 12 ] This association of Mercury and Wotan is seen in the English language day-name Wednesday and the French Mercredi.

Names and epithets [ edit ] Mercury is known to the Romans as Mercurius and occasionally in earlier writings as Merqurius, Mirqurios or Mircurios , had a number of epithets representing different aspects or roles, or representing syncretisms with non-Roman deities. The most common and significant of these epithets included the following: Mercurius Artaios , a syncretism of Mercury with the Celtic god Artaios , a deity of bears and hunting who was worshipped at Beaucroissant, France .

[ 13 ] Mercurius Arvernus , a syncretism of the Celtic Arvernus with Mercury. Arvernus was worshipped in the Rhineland , possibly as a particular deity of the Arverni tribe , though no dedications to Mercurius Arvernus occur in their territory in the Auvergne region of central France.

[ 13 ] Mercurius Cimbrianus , a syncretism of Mercury with a god of the Cimbri sometimes thought to represent Odin.

Mercurius Cissonius , a combination of Mercury with the Celtic god Cissonius , who is written of in the area spanning from Cologne, Germany to Saintes, France .

[ 13 ] Mercurius Esibraeus , a syncretism of the Iberian deity Esibraeus with the Roman deity Mercury. Esibraeus is mentioned only in an inscription found at Medelim , Portugal, and is possibly the same deity as Banda Isibraiegus, who is invoked in an inscription from the nearby village of Bemposta .

[ 14 ] Mercurius Gebrinius , a syncretism of Mercury with the Celtic or Germanic Gebrinius , known from an inscription on an altar in Bonn, Germany .

[ 13 ] Mercurius Moccus , from a Celtic god, Moccus , who was equated with Mercury, known from evidence at Langres, France . The name Moccus ("pig") implies that this deity was connected to boar-hunting.

[ 13 ] Mercurius Sobrius ("Mercury the Teetotaler"), a syncretism of Mercury with a Carthaginian god of commerce.

[ 15 ] Mercurius Visucius , a syncretism of the Celtic god Visucius with the Roman god Mercury, attested in an inscription from Stuttgart, Germany . Visucius was worshipped primarily in the frontier area of the empire in Gaul and Germany. Although he was primarily associated with Mercury, Visucius was also sometimes linked to the Roman god Mars , as a dedicatory inscription to "Mars Visucius" and Visucia, Visicius' female counterpart, was found in Gaul.

[ 13 ] [ 16 ] In ancient literature [ edit ] In Virgil 's Aeneid , Mercury reminds Aeneas of his mission to found the city of Rome. In Ovid's Fasti , Mercury is assigned to escort the nymph Larunda to the underworld. Mercury, however, falls in love with Larunda and makes love to her on the way. Larunda thereby becomes mother to two children, referred to as the Lares , invisible household gods .

Temple [ edit ] Mercury's temple in Rome was situated in the Circus Maximus , between the Aventine and Palatine Hills, and was built in 495 BC.

[ 17 ] That year saw disturbances at Rome between the patrician senators and the plebeians , which led to a secession of the plebs in the following year. At the completion of its construction, a dispute emerged between the consuls Appius Claudius Sabinus Regillensis and Publius Servilius Priscus Structus as to which of them should have the honour of dedicating the temple.

The Roman Senate referred the decision to the popular assembly, and also decreed that whichever was chosen should also exercise additional duties, including presiding over the markets, establish a merchants' guild, and exercising the functions of the pontifex maximus . The people, because of the ongoing public discord, and in order to spite the senate and the consuls , instead awarded the honour of dedicating the temple to Marcus Laetorius, the senior military officer of one of the legions. The senate and the consuls, in particular the conservative Appius, were outraged at this decision, and it inflamed the ongoing situation.

[ 18 ] The dedication occurred on 15 May, 495 BC.

[ 19 ] The temple was regarded as a fitting place to worship a swift god of trade and travel, since it was a major center of commerce as well as a racetrack. Since it stood between the plebeian stronghold on the Aventine and the patrician center on the Palatine, it also emphasized the role of Mercury as a mediator .

[ citation needed ] Worship [ edit ] Because Mercury was not one of the early deities surviving from the Roman Kingdom , he was not assigned a flamen (priest), but he did have his own major festival, on 15 May, the Mercuralia . During the Mercuralia, merchants sprinkled water from his sacred well near the Porta Capena on their heads [ citation needed ] .

In popular culture [ edit ] See also: Planets in astrology § Mercury Mercury features in the first published comic book story of Jack Kirby , Mercury in the 20th Century , published in Red Raven Comics 1, 1940.

[ 20 ] The United States' so-called Mercury dime , issued from 1916 to 1945, actually features a Winged Liberty and not the god Mercury, but despite wearing a Phrygian cap instead of a winged helm, the coin bears his name due to resemblance.

[ 21 ] The United States E-6B aircraft flown by the United States Navy is a communications platform named after the god.

Gallery [ edit ] Mercury portrait on a bronze semuncia (215–211 BC) Mercury-Hermes, antique fresco from Pompeii Bronze figurine of Mercury with three phalluses, with rooster in the left hand and money bag in the right hand, 100 to 250 A.D., found in Tongeren , ca 8.8 cm Gallo-Roman Museum (Tongeren) Đorđe Jovanović : A statue of Mercury on top of the Central credits bureau building in Novi Sad , Serbia , 1896 Hendrik Goltzius : Mercury , with his symbols Jan Gerritsz van Bronckhorst : Jupiter Gives Orders to Mercury to Kill Argus A statue of the Greek god Hermes at Hart House , Toronto A statue of Mercury on the island of Källskär in Kökar , Åland Mercury as the winged messenger on a 1949 Saint Lucia stamp issued in connection with the Universal Postal Union Alfred Salmon after François Boucher , "Venus Entering Her Bath-Cupid's Lesson," 19th century, engraving References [ edit ] ^ a b Cicero , De natura Deorum 3.56; also Arnobius , Adversus Nationes 4.14.

^ Glossary to Ovid's Fasti, Penguin edition, by Boyle and Woodard at 343 ^ Rupke, The Religion of the Romans, at 4 ^ Matasović, Ranko (30 June 2022).

"Four Latin Etymologies: volgus, laedo, paedor, merx" .

Latina et Graeca . pp.

7– 16.

ISSN 0350-414X . Retrieved 18 September 2022 .

^ Parise, N.F.

"TURMS in "Enciclopedia dell'Arte Antica" " .

^ Exploratorium: Beeldje van Mercurius ^ Caesar, Gallic War, at 55 ^ a b Littleton, C. Scott (Ed.) (2002).

Mythology: The Illustrated Anthology of World Myth and Storytelling (pp. 195, 251, 253, 258, 292). London: Duncan Baird Publishers.

ISBN 1-904292-01-1 .

^ Beard, Pompeii: The Life of a Roman Town at 295–298 ^ Sear, David R. (2000).

Roman Coins and Their Values – The Millennium Edition . Volume I: The Republic and The Twelve Caesars, 280BC-AD96 (pp. 187–189). London: Spink.

ISBN 1-902040-35-X ^ De Bello Gallico 6.17 ^ Germania 9 ^ a b c d e f Green, Miranda J. (1992).

Dictionary of Celtic Myth and Legend (pp. 148–149). London: Thames and Hudson .

ISBN 0-500-01516-3 .

^ Alarcão, Jorge de (1988).

Roman Portugal . Volume I: Introduction (p. 93). Warminster: Aris and Phillips.

^ Potter, David.

"Review of "Rome and Carthage at Peace" by R.E.A.Palmer" .

Bryn Mawr Classical Review . Retrieved 9 February 2019 .

^ Espérandieu, E. (1931).

Recueil Général des Bas-relief, Statues et Bustes de la Germanie Romaine . Paris and Brussels.

^ Livy , Ab urbe condita , 2:21 ^ Livy .

Ab urbe condita .

2.27 .

^ Livy .

Ab urbe condita .

2.21 .

^ Marvel Visionaries, Jack Kirby, Marvel Comics, 2004 ^ "1916-1945 Mercury silver dime value" .

Coinflation .

External links [ edit ] The Warburg Institute Iconographic Database (images of Mercury) Media related to Mercurius (deus) at Wikimedia Commons v t e Ancient Roman religion and mythology Deities ( Dii Consentes ) Agenoria Angerona Anna Perenna Apollo Aurora Bellona Bona Dea Carmenta Castor and Pollux Ceres Cloacina Cupid Dea Dia Diana Dies Dīs Pater Egeria Fauna Faunus Flora Genius Hercules Janus Juno Jupiter Lares Lares Familiares Liber Libertas Luna Mars Mercury Minerva Neptune Nox Ops Orcus Penates Pluto Pomona Priapus Proserpina Quirinus Salacia Saturn Silvanus Sol Summanus Venus Veritas Vesta Vertumnus Vulcan Abstract deities Abundantia Aequitas Aeternitas Africa Annona Averruncus Bonus Eventus Caelus Concordia Feronia Fides Fortuna Fontus Laverna Pax Pietas Roma Salus Securitas Spes Tranquillitas Terra Victoria Legendary figures Aeneas Rhea Silvia Romulus and Remus Numa Pompilius Tullus Hostilius Servius Tullius Ancus Marcius Lucius Tarquinius Priscus Lucius Tarquinius Superbus Kings of Alba Longa Hersilia Legendary beings She-wolf Barnacle goose Texts Virgil Aeneid Ovid Fasti Metamorphoses Propertius Varro Res divinae Sibylline Books Apuleius The Golden Ass Concepts and practices Festivals Interpretatio graeca Imperial cult Charity Palladium Theology of victory Pomerium Temples Capitolium Cella Celtic Philosophy Cynicism Epicureanism Neoplatonism Peripateticism Pythagoreanism Stoicism Events Golden Bough Founding of Rome Natale di Roma Rape of the Sabine Women Battle of Lacus Curtius Objects Gubernaculum Parabiago Plate Pignora imperii Variations Gallo-Roman Mysteries Cybele Isis Mithraism See also Classical mythology Decline Persecution Etruscan religion Glossary Greek mythology Myth and ritual Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Czech Republic Poland Israel People DDB Other IdRef Te Papa (New Zealand) Yale LUX Portals : Mythology Ancient Rome Mercury (mythology) at Wikipedia's sister projects : Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐52kcv
Cached time: 20250817043623
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.788 seconds
Real time usage: 1.047 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3697/1000000
Revision size: 18411/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 85678/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5394/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 16/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 77652/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.498/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18136189/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  896.405      1 -total
 23.76%  212.953      1 Template:Ancient_Roman_religion
 23.40%  209.738      1 Template:Sidebar
 16.96%  152.012     21 Template:Lang
 14.65%  131.285      1 Template:Reflist
 10.69%   95.869      1 Template:Subject_bar
 10.67%   95.656      1 Template:Infobox_deity
  9.85%   88.304      3 Template:Cite_web
  8.16%   73.110      1 Template:Short_description
  6.12%   54.886      1 Template:Infobox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:37417:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043623 and revision id 1304148929. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mercury_(mythology)&oldid=1304148929 " Categories : Mercury (mythology) Commerce gods Deities in the Aeneid Messenger gods Roman gods Trickster gods Hermes Abundance gods Mercurian deities Planetary gods Fortune gods Psychopomps Metamorphoses characters Dii Consentes Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2015 Articles having different image on Wikidata and Wikipedia Pages with Latin IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Articles containing Old English (ca. 450-1100)-language text Articles containing Old Norse-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles that may contain original research Articles that may contain original research from February 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2024 Articles containing German-language text Articles with unsourced statements from October 2013 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2023 Commons category link is on Wikidata Pages using Sister project links with wikidata namespace mismatch This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 07:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mercury (mythology) 83 languages Add topic

