Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Vernacular region 2 Research Toggle Research subsection 2.1 Public participation tool 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Vernacular geography 3 languages العربية Igbo Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Common linguistic sense of place Part of a series on Geography Portal Outline History of geography Graeco-Roman Chinese Islamic Age of Discovery History of cartography Historical geography Environmental determinism Regional geography Quantitative revolution Critical geography Human geography Fields Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Physical geography Fields Biogeography Ecology Phytogeography Zoogeography Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Earth science Geology Geomorphology Glaciology Hydrology / Hydrography Landscape ecology Limnology Pedology Quaternary science Technical geography Fields Geodesign Geodesy Geoinformatics Geographic information science Geomatics Statistical geography Spatial analysis Integrated geography Fields Environmental social science Environmental studies Landscape architecture Landscape ecology Methods Quantitative Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Geochronology Geographic information system Distributed GIS Internet GIS Web GIS Geologic modelling Geomathematics Geostatistics Geovisualization Global Positioning System Hydrography Map algebra Participant observation Photogrammetry Remote Sensing Statistical survey Surveying Land change modeling Qualitative Ethnography Geopoetics Interview (research) Survey (human research) Philosophy of geography Behavioral Critical Feminist Marxist Non-representational theory Modernism Structuralism Semiotics Postmodernism Post-structuralism Deconstruction Societies Index Geographers v t e Vernacular geography is the sense of place that is revealed in ordinary people's language.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Current research by the Ordnance Survey is attempting to understand the landmarks, streets, open spaces, water bodies, landforms, fields, woods, and many other topological features. These commonly used descriptive terms do not necessarily use the official or current names for features; and often these concepts of places don't have clear, rigid boundaries. For example, sometimes the same name may refer to more than one feature, and sometimes people in a locality use more than one name for the same feature. When people refer to geographical regions in a vernacular form they are commonly referred to as imprecise regions. Regions can include large areas of a country such as the American Midwest, the British Midlands, the Swiss Alps, the south east of England and southern California; or smaller areas such as Silicon Valley in northern California. Commonly used descriptions of areas of cities such as a city's downtown district, New York's Upper East Side, London's square mile or the Latin Quarter of Paris can also be viewed as imprecise regions.

Vernacular region [ edit ] Beyond "vernacular geography," a "vernacular region" is a distinctive area where the inhabitants collectively consider themselves interconnected by a shared history, mutual interests, and a common identity. Such regions are "intellectual inventions" and a form of shorthand to identify things, people, and places. Vernacular regions reflect a "sense of place," but rarely coincide with established jurisdictional borders.

[ 3 ] Examples of vernacular regions in the United States include Tidewater, also known as Hampton Roads , Siouxland , and the Tri-City area of Batavia, Geneva, and St. Charles, Illinois. Another can be the American South, since it can be non-officially considered as the Confederate States of the U.S. Civil War, where the climate is warm and has limited snow, or by being below a certain latitude. Other vernacular regions include the DFW Metroplex , Southern California , the Tri-Cities of Tennessee, the Piedmont Triad , Metrolina and the Research Triangle of North Carolina, the High Desert and Inland Empire in California, the Emerald Coast and the Gold Coast of Florida, and the Twin Cities .

Research [ edit ] The World Wide Web is a major source of geographical information submitted by non-specialists. The British Ordnance Survey is sponsoring research at the Universities of Cardiff and Sheffield, [ 4 ] [ 5 ] the aim of which is to study the use of vernacular geography, and to investigate how information mined from the Web can be used to generate an approximate spatial boundary for an imprecise region.

[ 6 ] The existing technology for accessing geographical data is not well adapted to the unstructured, largely text-based resources of the Web. Spatial information on the Web can be categorized geographically according to the textual content, but a major problem for GIS developers wanting to use this resource is the vague and imprecise nature of place names that are commonly employed within web documents.

In pursuit of delineating vernacular regions, trigger phrases are used by the researchers to capture regular linguistic patterns, which identify relationships between geographic locations. For example, the trigger phrase “X is located in Y” can be "Birmingham is located in *" or "* is located in Birmingham" . The completed trigger phrase is then submitted to a search engine. For each search, up to 100 results are retrieved. Duplicate results are then removed based on the URL, and snippet text and the search result is used to find candidate region members.

From these results, geo-references are extracted and assigned spatial coordinates. A bounding box is then applied and the bounding box is used to find coordinates of other regions and points, apparently lying outside the candidate region. Thus it is possible to compute a boundary for the imprecise region using the points inside and outside.

Public participation tool [ edit ] Cardiff University launched a web questionnaire [ 7 ] together with mapping tools to capture people's perception of Vernacular Geography in Great Britain.

References [ edit ] ^ "Research: Vernacular Geography jay" . www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk. Archived from the original on 2010-04-02 . Retrieved 2009-10-10 .

^ "Tools for the web-based GIS mapping of 'fuzzy' vernacular geography" . GISRUK 2003, City University, London, 9–11 April 2003 . Retrieved 2009-12-01 .

^ [Scheetz, George H.] "Whence Siouxland?" Book Remarks [Sioux City Public Library], May 1991.

^ "Vernacular Geography – GIS @ Cardiff University" . gis.cs.cardiff.ac.uk. Archived from the original on 2012-02-27 . Retrieved 2009-10-10 .

^ "Geo-tagging for imprecise regions of different sizes - White Rose Research Online" . eprints.whiterose.ac.uk . Retrieved 2009-10-20 .

^ Pasley, R.C., Clough, P. and Sanderson, M. (2007).

"Geo-tagging for imprecise regions of different sizes" (PDF) .

Proceedings of the 4th ACM Workshop on Geographical Information Retrieval. Workshop On Geographic Information Retrieval, November 09, 2007, Lisbon, Portugal . Retrieved 2009-10-10 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "People's Place Names – People's Place Names" . Cardiff University, School of Computer Science and Informatics . Retrieved 2010-07-26 .

External links [ edit ] HTML version of MS PowerPoint presentation explaining vernacular geography [ dead link ] DEAD LINK 22/07/2021 Links to related articles v t e Sub-fields of and approaches to human geography Sub-fields Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Approaches Critical Culture theory Feminist Marxist Modernism Structuralism Semiotics Non-representational theory Postmodernism Post-structuralism Deconstruction Scientific method Time Universalism Category v t e Geography topics Glossary History Philosophy Geographers Index Outline Branches Human Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Physical Biogeography Ecology Phytogeography Zoogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Earth science Atmospheric science / Meteorology Environmental science Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Geobiology Geophysics / Geodesy Earth system science Geomorphology / Geology Glaciology Hydrology / Limnology Soil science ( Pedology / Edaphology ) Quaternary science Technical Geodesign Geodesy Geoinformatics Geographic information science Geomatics Statistical geography Spatial analysis Integrated Environmental social science Environmental studies Landscape architecture Landscape ecology Time geography Techniques and tools Quantitative Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Geochronology Geographic information system Distributed GIS Internet GIS Web GIS Geologic modelling Geomathematics Geostatistics Geovisualization Global Positioning System Hydrography Map algebra Participant observation Photogrammetry Remote sensing Statistical survey Surveying Land change modeling Qualitative Ethnography Geopoetics Interview (research) Survey (human research) Institutions, organizations, and societies Geography organizations Geographic data and information organizations Geographical societies Geoscience societies Education Geo-literacy Geographers on Film International Geography Olympiad National Council for Geographic Education Spatial citizenship Publication Geography books Geography journals Geographic magazines Category Portal Commons WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vernacular_geography&oldid=1303566126 " Categories : Vernacular geography Geographic position Human geography Folklore Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2024 This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 19:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vernacular geography 3 languages Add topic

