Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 History 3 References 4 See also Toggle the table of contents Liberalism in Norway Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Liberalism in Norway" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is part of a series on Liberalism in Norway Ideologies Classical Economic Laissez-faire Haugeanism Liberal conservatism National Neo Radical Reformism Right-libertarianism Social Principles Capitalism Constitutionalism Free market Supply-side economics Liberal democracy Private property Intellectuals Trygve J. B. Hoff Oskar Jæger Anton Martin Schweigaard Politicians Anders Lange Carl I. Hagen Søren Jaabæk Ole Gabriel Ueland Tor Mikkel Wara Pål Atle Skjervengen Fridtjof Frank Gundersen Siv Jensen Emil Stang Christian Schweigaard Abraham Berge Guri Melby Christian Michelsen Wollert Konow (SB) Francis Hagerup Anton Martin Schweigaard Pierre Poumeau Flor Isaach Isaachsen Arnoldus von Westen Sylow Koren Ludvig Mariboe Jacob Hoel Parties Active Høyre Liberal Party Liberalistene Progress Party Defunct Coalition Party Free-minded Liberal Party Liberal People's Party New People's Party Radical People's Party Organisations Active Free Democrats Defunct De tretti tyranner (Norge) [ no ] Reformforeningen [ nn ] Bondevennene [ nn ] Media Farmand Morgenbladet Folketidende Det norske Nationalblad Statsborgeren Patrouillen Related topics Night-watchman state Politics of Norway Conservatism in Norway Liberalism portal Libertarianism portal Norway portal v t e This article gives an overview of liberalism in Norway .  It is limited to liberal parties with substantial support, mainly proved by having been represented in the Norwegian Parliament, Stortinget .

Background [ edit ] The Liberal Party ( Venstre , literally "Left") was the first organized political force in Norway , and was for long times the dominant political party (from the 1880s to the 1920s).  Since the Second World War , it has been one of the minor parties, but still represented in parliament. Today, Venstre is a centrist liberal party.  Venstre is also one of the founding members of the Liberal International .  Venstre calls itself 'the only liberal party in Norway', [ 1 ] though this is disputed by other parties who also refer to themselves as liberal.

The Conservative Party ( Høyre , literally "Right",) was the second organized political party in Norway. After the Second World War, it has at points been the second largest party in elections. In its policies, Høyre supports moderate free market liberalism, while being moderately conservative in social issues. There are, however, more liberally oriented factions within the party.

The Progress Party (Norwegian: Fremskrittspartiet ) formed in 1973. Over the years, the party has supported a variety of liberal positions, especially in regards to a market economy, but also on some social issues. During the 1980s, the party was influenced by libertarianism, but this influence has decreased from the early 1990s and onwards. Since 2006, the party has become more socially conservative in orientation. This might have changed again to a certain degree recently however, as the party chose to vote in favor of same-sex marriage in the 2013 national convention, [ 2 ] as well as party leader Siv Jensen's focus on liberalism in recent news articles.

[ 3 ] The Progress Party is also skeptical of non-Western immigration, which could be seen as conflicting with traditional liberal values. The party has in several elections been the second largest party in Norway, but had never participated in government until the election of 2013, when they formed a coalition government with the Conservative Party.

[ 4 ] The Capitalist Party (Norwegian: Liberalistene ) is a newer party grounded in classical liberalism and Laissez-faire capitalism. It advocates personal freedom and autonomy. This party has not yet been represented in parliament.

The Liberal People's Party (Norwegian: Det Liberale Folkepartiet ) is a minor, classical liberal party, with a focus on Objectivism . It has never been represented in parliament.

History [ edit ] The following are events of Norway's liberalism, beginning with the 19th century.

1800s: The Haugean movement was a Christian and classical liberal movement that advocated for religious freedom and economic liberalism.

[ 5 ] 1814: Norway got one of the most democratic and liberal constitutions in Europe.

1842: The Conventicle Act was repealed.

1852: The Jewish Clause of the Norwegian Constitution of 1814 was repealed, allowing Jews to live in Norway.

1865: Bondevennene [ no ] , founded by Søren Jaabæk , was a classical liberal organization that advocated for republicanism and greater economic liberalism.

1869: Reformforeningen [ no ] was founded in parlament.

1884: The liberal and radical groups in Stortinget (up until that time collectively referred to as "venstre", without capitalisation) organised a political party, Venstre . Venstre deposes the incumbent conservative government in an impeachment trial in the same year, and the leader of Venstre, Johan Sverdrup , becomes the first Prime Minister of Norway taken from the ranks of Stortinget.

1888: A group of Christian conservatives leaves Venstre to form Moderate Venstre ( The Moderate Left ).  The party is later reunited with Venstre, but the present-day Christian People's Party also claims Moderate Venstre as its forerunner.

1891: The Austrian Farmand magazin was founded.

1909: The right wing of Venstre leaves the party and forms Frisinnede Venstre ( Free-minded Liberal Party ).

1911: A radical faction leaves Venstre to form Arbeiderdemokraterne (Labour Democrats).  This party is later renamed Radikale Folkeparti ( Radical People's Party ).

1936: Radikale Folkeparti is reabsorbed into Venstre.  Frisinnede Venstre is merged with the main conservative party, Høyre (literally Right ) 1972: Venstre is split over the issue of Norway's accession to the European Economic Community .  The Pro-EEC faction forms Nye Venstre (New Left), later renamed Det Liberale Folkeparti ( Liberal People's Party ).

1988: Venstre and Det Liberale Folkeparti are reunited.

1992: Former members of the Det Liberale Folkeparti founded the a new Liberal People's Party .

1994: A libertarian wing of the populist Progress Party , counting among them four members of Stortinget, forms its own party, Fridemokratene (Free Democrats) or joined the Det Liberale Folkepartiet.  The party is reduced to insignificance after the general elections of 1997.

2003: The Civita first libreal and conservative think tank is founded.

2005: Venstre gains ten seats in Parliament at the general elections, forming the largest socialLiberal group in Stortinget since 1972.

2014: Liberalistene ( Classical Liberals ) was founded.

2017: Det Liberale Folkeparti merged with Liberalistene.

References [ edit ] ^ http://www.nrk.no/ytring/venstre-er-eneste-liberale-parti-1.11162732 (Norwegian) ^ "FRP snur i homo-spørsmål" . 16 October 2012.

^ "En kamp om verdier" . March 2013.

^ "Erna Solberg's Government" . 21 October 2013.

^ Minde, Kjell Bjørn (2021-06-10).

"A contribution to Norway's political geography: The Haugean parliamentarians in the Storting (Norwegian parliament) in the 19th century" .

Problems and Perspectives in Management .

19 (2): 251– 263.

doi : 10.21511/ppm.19(2).2021.21 .

ISSN 1810-5467 .

See also [ edit ] History of Norway Politics of Norway List of political parties in Norway v t e Liberalism in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liberalism_in_Norway&oldid=1301355373 " Categories : Liberalism in Norway Liberalism by country Politics of Norway Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Articles needing additional references from September 2013 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 10:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Liberalism in Norway Add languages Add topic

