Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Taxonomy Toggle Taxonomy subsection 2.1 Classification 2.2 Phylogeny 3 Evolution of microphylls 4 Gallery 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Lycophyte 51 languages አማርኛ العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Davvisámegiella Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska עברית ქართული Latviešu Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oromoo Polski Português Runa Simi Русский Simple English Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Broadly circumscribed group of spore bearing plants This article is about a broadly defined group of plants that includes the extinct zosterophylls. For the group excluding the zosterophylls, see Lycopodiopsida .

Lycophyte Temporal range: 428–0 Ma PreꞒ Ꞓ O S D C P T J K Pg N Silurian [ 1 ] to recent Collage of modern lycophytes. Upper left: Lycopodium clavatum ( Lycopodiales , Lycopodioideae ) Lower left: Huperzia serrata ( Lycopodiales , Huperzioideae ) Top right: Isoetes japonica ( Isoetales ) Right centre: Selaginella tamariscina Lower right: Selaginella remotifolia Selaginellales Scientific classification Kingdom: Plantae Clade : Tracheophytes Clade : Lycophytes Classes † Zosterophyllopsida - zosterophylls † Nothia Lycopsids † Drepanophycales Lycopodiopsida - clubmosses, spikemosses, quillworts, scale trees The lycophytes , when broadly circumscribed , are a group of vascular plants that include the clubmosses . They are sometimes placed in a division Lycopodiophyta or Lycophyta or in a subdivision Lycopodiophytina . They are one of the oldest lineages of extant (living) vascular plants; the group contains extinct plants that have been dated from the Silurian (ca. 425 million years ago).

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Lycophytes were some of the dominating plant species of the Carboniferous period, and included the tree-like Lepidodendrales , some of which grew over 40 metres (130 ft) in height, although extant lycophytes are relatively small plants.

[ 4 ] The scientific names and the informal English names used for this group of plants are ambiguous. For example, "Lycopodiophyta" and the shorter "Lycophyta" as well as the informal "lycophyte" may be used to include the extinct zosterophylls or to exclude them.

Description [ edit ] Lycophytes reproduce by spores and have alternation of generations in which (like other vascular plants) the sporophyte generation is dominant. Some lycophytes are homosporous while others are heterosporous .

[ 5 ] When broadly circumscribed , the lycophytes represent a line of evolution distinct from that leading to all other vascular plants , the euphyllophytes , such as ferns , gymnosperms and flowering plants . They are defined by two synapomorphies : lateral rather than terminal sporangia (often kidney-shaped or reniform), and exarch protosteles , in which the protoxylem is outside the metaxylem rather than vice versa. The extinct zosterophylls have at most only flap-like extensions of the stem ("enations") rather than leaves, whereas extant lycophyte species have microphylls , leaves that have only a single vascular trace (vein), rather than the much more complex megaphylls of other vascular plants. The extinct genus Asteroxylon represents a transition between these two groups: it has a vascular trace leaving the central protostele, but this extends only to the base of the enation.

[ 6 ] See § Evolution of microphylls .

Zosterophylls and extant lycophytes are all relatively small plants, but some extinct species, such as the Lepidodendrales , were tree-like, and formed extensive forests that dominated the landscape and contributed to the formation of coal .

[ 6 ] Taxonomy [ edit ] Classification [ edit ] In the broadest circumscription of the lycophytes, the group includes the extinct zosterophylls as well as the extant (living) lycophytes and their closest extinct relatives. The names and ranks used for this group vary considerably. Some sources use the names "Lycopodiophyta" or the shorter "Lycophyta" to include zosterophylls as well as extant lycophytes and their closest extinct relatives, [ 7 ] while others use these names to exclude zosterophylls.

[ 8 ] [ 6 ] The name "Lycopodiophytina" has also been used in the inclusive sense.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] English names, such as "lycophyte", "lycopodiophyte" or "lycopod", are similarly ambiguous, and may refer to the broadly defined group or only to the extant lycophytes and their closest extinct relatives.

The consensus classification produced by the Pteridophyte Phylogeny Group classification in 2016 (PPG I) places all extant (living) lycophytes in the class Lycopodiopsida .

[ 11 ] There are around 1,290 to 1,340 such species.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 11 ] For more information on the classification of extant lycophytes, see Lycopodiopsida § Classification .

Phylogeny [ edit ] A major cladistic study of land plants was published in 1997 by Kenrick and Crane.

[ 1 ] In 2004, Crane et al. published some simplified cladograms , based on a number of figures in Kenrick and Crane (1997). Their cladogram for the lycophytes is reproduced below (with some branches collapsed into 'basal groups' to reduce the size of the diagram).

[ 14 ] panlycophyte † basal groups Cooksonia cambrensis, Renalia , Sartilmania , Uskiella , Yunia lycophytes † Hicklingia †basal groups Adoketophyton , Discalis , Distichophytum (= Rebuchia ), Gumuia , Huia , Zosterophyllum myretonianum , Z. llanoveranum, Z. fertile †'core' zosterophylls Zosterophyllum divaricatum , Tarella , Oricilla , Gosslingia , Hsua , Thrinkophyton , Protobarinophyton , Barinophyton obscurum , B. citrulliforme , Sawdonia , Deheubarthia , Konioria , Anisophyton , Serrulacaulis , Crenaticaulis †basal groups Nothia , Zosterophyllum deciduum lycopsids extant and extinct members In this view, the "zosterophylls" comprise a paraphyletic group, ranging from forms like Hicklingia , which had bare stems, [ 15 ] to forms like Sawdonia and Nothia , whose stems are covered with unvascularized spines or enations.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] The genus Renalia illustrates the problems in classifying early land plants. It has characteristics both of the non-lycophyte rhyniophytes – terminal rather than lateral sporangia – and of the zosterophylls – kidney-shaped sporangia opening along the distal margin.

[ 18 ] A rather different view is presented in a 2013 analysis by Hao and Xue. Their preferred cladogram shows the zosterophylls and associated genera basal to both the lycopodiopsids and the euphyllophytes, so that there is no clade corresponding to the broadly defined group of lycophytes used by other authors.

[ 19 ] tracheophytes basal groups Adoketophyton Zosterophyllopsida Lycopsida basal groups Yunia , Dibracophyton euphyllophytes "lycophytes" of other authors Some extinct orders of lycophytes fall into the same group as the extant orders. Different sources use varying numbers and names of the extinct orders. The following phylogram shows a likely relationship between some of the proposed Lycopodiopsida orders.

[ citation needed ] Lycopodiopsida Lycopodiales † Drepanophycales Selaginellales † Lepidodendrales † Pleuromeiales Isoetales Evolution of microphylls [ edit ] Suggested evolution of microphylls: (1) Sawdonia (2) Asteroxylon (3) Leclercqia Within the broadly defined lycophyte group, species placed in the class Lycopodiopsida are distinguished from species placed in the Zosterophyllopsida by the possession of microphylls . Some zosterophylls, such as the Devonian Zosterophyllum myretonianum , had smooth stems (axes). Others, such as Sawdonia ornata , had flap-like extensions on the stems ("enations"), but without any vascular tissue.

Asteroxylon , identified as an early lycopodiopsid, had vascular traces that extended to the base of the enations. Species in the genus Leclercqia had fully vascularized microphylls. These are considered to be stages in the evolution of microphylls.

[ 20 ] Gallery [ edit ] Lycopodites , an early lycopod-like fossil External mold of Lepidodendron from the Upper Carboniferous of Ohio .

Lycopod bark showing leaf scars, from the Middle Devonian of Wisconsin.

Fossil in situ lycopsid , probably Sigillaria , with attached stigmarian roots .

Base of a fossil lycopsid showing connection with stigmarian roots .

Reconstruction of a Silurian Zosterophyllum Reconstruction of Nothia aphylla Reconstruction of Lepidodendron Lycopod axis (branch) from the Middle Devonian of Wisconsin.

Lycopodium dendroideum , a modern member of the Lycopodiales Isoetes melanospora , a modern member of the Isoetales Restoration of Pleuromeia , an extinct Isoetales genus from the Early Triassic References [ edit ] ^ a b Kenrick, Paul; Crane, Peter R. (1997).

The Origin and Early Diversification of Land Plants: A Cladistic Study . Washington, D. C.: Smithsonian Institution Press. pp.

339– 340.

ISBN 978-1-56098-730-7 .

^ Rickards, R.B. (2000). "The age of the earliest club mosses: the Silurian Baragwanathia flora in Victoria, Australia".

Geological Magazine .

137 (2): 207– 209.

Bibcode : 2000GeoM..137..207R .

doi : 10.1017/s0016756800003800 .

S2CID 131287538 .

^ McElwain, Jenny C.; Willis, K. G.; Willis, Kathy; McElwain, J. C. (2002).

The evolution of plants . Oxford [Oxfordshire]: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-850065-0 .

^ Ranker, T. A.; Hauler, C. H. (2008).

Biology and evolution of ferns and lycophytes . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

^ Eichhorn, Evert, and Raven (2005).

Biology of Plants , Seventh Edition. 381-388.

^ a b c Mauseth, James D. (2014).

Botany : An introduction to Plant Biology (5th ed.). Burlington, MA: Jones & Bartlett Learning.

ISBN 978-1-4496-6580-7 .

^ Doweld, Alexander B. (2017). "(2499) Proposal to conserve the name Zosterophyllaceae against Sciadophytaceae (Fossil Lycopodiophyta: Zosterophyllopsida)".

Taxon .

66 (1): 207– 208.

Bibcode : 2017Taxon..66..207D .

doi : 10.12705/661.27 .

^ Taylor, T.N.; Taylor, E.L. & Krings, M. (2009).

Paleobotany : The Biology and Evolution of Fossil Plants (2nd ed.). Amsterdam; Boston: Academic Press.

ISBN 978-0-12-373972-8 .

^ Kenrick, Paul & Crane, Peter R. (1997a).

The Origin and Early Diversification of Land Plants: A Cladistic Study . Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press.

ISBN 978-1-56098-730-7 .

^ Kenrick, Paul & Crane, Peter R. (1997b).

"The origin and early evolution of plants on land" .

Nature .

389 (6646): 33– 39.

Bibcode : 1997Natur.389...33K .

doi : 10.1038/37918 .

S2CID 3866183 .

^ a b PPG I (2016). "A community-derived classification for extant lycophytes and ferns".

Journal of Systematics and Evolution .

54 (6): 563– 603.

Bibcode : 2016JSyEv..54..563.

.

doi : 10.1111/jse.12229 .

S2CID 39980610 .

^ Callow, R.S. & Cook, Laurence Martin (1999).

Genetic and evolutionary diversity: the sport of nature . Cheltenham: S. Thornes. p. 8.

ISBN 978-0-7487-4336-0 .

^ Christenhusz, M. J. M., M.J.M. & Byng, J.W. (2016). "The number of known plants species in the world and its annual increase".

Phytotaxa .

261 (3): 201– 217.

Bibcode : 2016Phytx.261..201C .

doi : 10.11646/phytotaxa.261.3.1 .

^ Crane, P.R.; Herendeen, P. & Friis, E.M. (2004). "Fossils and plant phylogeny".

American Journal of Botany .

91 (10): 1683– 1699.

Bibcode : 2004AmJB...91.1683C .

doi : 10.3732/ajb.91.10.1683 .

PMID 21652317 .

S2CID 8493380 .

^ Edwards, D. (1976). "The systematic position of Hicklingia edwardii Kidston and Lang".

New Phytologist .

76 (1): 173– 181.

Bibcode : 1976NewPh..76..173E .

doi : 10.1111/j.1469-8137.1976.tb01449.x .

^ Taylor, Taylor & Krings (2009) , p. 253.

^ Kerp, H.; Hass, M.H. & Mosbrugger, V. (2001). "New Data on Nothia aphylla Lyon 1964 ex El-Saadawy et Lacey 1979, a Poorly Known Plant from the Lower Devonian Rhynie Chert". In Gensel, P.G. & Edwards, D. (eds.).

Plants invade the Land : Evolutionary & Environmental Perspectives . New York: Columbia University Press. pp.

52– 82.

ISBN 978-0-231-11161-4 .

^ Taylor, Taylor & Krings (2009) , p. 250.

^ Hao, Shougang & Xue, Jinzhuang (2013).

The early Devonian Posongchong flora of Yunnan: a contribution to an understanding of the evolution and early diversification of vascular plants . Beijing: Science Press. Fig. 6.8, p. 246.

ISBN 978-7-03-036616-0 .

^ Taylor, Taylor & Krings (2009) , p. 267ff.

External links [ edit ] Wikispecies has information related to Lycopodiophyta .

The Wikibook Dichotomous Key has a page on the topic of: Lycopodiophyta Lycophytes Fossil Groves Archived 2009-03-12 at the Wayback Machine Paleo Plants (archived 15 January 2005) v t e Classification of Archaeplastida or Plantae s.l.

Domain Archaea Bacteria Eukaryota (major groups Metamonada Discoba Diaphoretickes Hacrobia Cryptista Rhizaria Alveolata Stramenopiles Plants Amorphea Amoebozoa Opisthokonta Animals Fungi Mesomycetozoea ) incertae sedis † Algospongia Glaucoplantae Glaucophyta Glaucocystophyceae Rhodoplantae Picozoa Picomonadea Rhodelphidia Rhodelphea Rhodophyta (red algae) Cyanidiophytina Cyanidiophyceae Proteorhodophytina Porphyridiophyceae Stylonematophyceae Compsopogonophyceae Rhodellophyceae Eurhodophytina Bangiophyceae Florideophyceae Viridiplantae or Plantae s.s.

( green algae & land plants) Prasinodermophyta Prasinodermophyceae Palmophyllophyceae Chlorophyta Prasinophytina Mamiellophyceae Pyramimonadophyceae Chlorophytina Nephroselmidophyceae Picocystophyceae Chloropicophyceae Pedinophyceae Chlorodendrophyceae UTC clade Ulvophyceae Trebouxiophyceae Chlorophyceae Streptophyta Chlorokybophytina Mesostigmatophyceae Chlorokybophyceae Spirotaeniaceae Klebsormidiophytina Klebsormidiophyceae Phragmoplastophyta Charophytina Charophyceae Coleochaetophytina Coleochaetophyceae Anydrophyta Zygnematophytina Zygnematophyceae Embryophyta (land plants) Bryophytes Marchantiophyta (liverworts) Haplomitriopsida Marchantiopsida Jungermanniopsida Anthocerotophyta (hornworts) Leiosporocerotopsida Anthocerotopsida Bryophyta (mosses) Takakiopsida Sphagnopsida Andreaeobryopsida Andreaeopsida Oedipodiopsida Tetraphidopsida Polytrichopsida Bryopsida Polysporangiophytes † Protracheophytes* † Aglaophyton †Eophytidae † Horneophytopsida Tracheophytes (vascular plants) † Paratracheophytes* † Cooksoniopsida † Renaliales † Rhyniopsida Eutracheophytes Lycophytes † Barinophytopsida † Zosterophyllopsida Lycopodiopsida ( clubmosses , spikemosses & quillworts ) Euphyllophytes † Eophyllophytopsida † Trimerophytopsida Moniliformopses † Ibykales † Cladoxylopsida Polypodiopsida (ferns and horsetails ) Lignophytes † Progymnosperms * † Aneurophytopsida † Archaeopteridopsida † Noeggerathiopsida † Protopityales Spermatophytes (seed plants) † Pteridosperms * (seed ferns) and other extinct seed plant groups † Bennettitales † Calamopityales † Callistophytales † Caytoniales † Cordaitales † Corystospermales † Czekanowskiales † Gigantopteridales † Glossopteridales † Lyginopteridopsida † Medullosales † Peltaspermopsida † Pentoxylopsida † Petriellales Acrogymnospermae (living gymnosperms) Cycadopsida (cycads) Ginkgoales ( Ginkgo ) Pinopsida (conifers) Gnetopsida Angiospermae (flowering plants) Basal angiosperms Core angiosperms Magnoliids Monocots Eudicots * paraphyletic groups † = extinct List of plant orders Current definitions of Plantae v t e Extant life phyla/divisions by domain Bacteria Abditibacteriota Acidobacteriota Actinomycetota Aquificota Armatimonadota Atribacterota Bacillota Bacteroidota Balneolota Caldisericota Calditrichota Chlamydiota Chlorobiota Chloroflexota Chrysiogenota Coprothermobacterota Cyanobacteriota Deferribacterota Deinococcota Dictyoglomerota Elusimicrobiota Fibrobacterota Fidelibacterota Fusobacteriota Gemmatimonadota Kiritimatiellota Lentisphaerota Minisyncoccota Mycoplasmatota Nitrospinota Nitrospirota Planctomycetota Pseudomonadota Rhodothermota Spirochaetota Synergistota Thermodesulfobacteriota Thermomicrobiota Thermotogota Verrucomicrobiota Vulcanimicrobiota " Ca.

Acetithermota " " Ca.

Aerophobota " " Ca.

Auribacterota " " Ca.

Babelota " " Ca.

Binatota " " Ca.

Bipolaricaulota " " Ca.

Caldipriscota " " Ca.

Calescibacteriota " " Ca.

Canglongiota " " Ca.

Cloacimonadota " " Ca.

Cosmopoliota " " Ca.

Cryosericota " " Ca.

Deferrimicrobiota " " Ca.

Dormiibacterota " " Ca.

Effluvivivacota " " Ca.

Electryoneota " " Ca.

Elulimicrobiota " " Ca.

Fermentibacterota " " Ca.

Fervidibacterota " " Ca.

Goldiibacteriota " " Ca.

Heilongiota " " Ca.

Hinthialibacterota " " Ca.

Hydrogenedentota " " Ca.

Hydrothermota " " Ca.

Kapaibacteriota " " Ca.

Krumholzibacteriota " " Ca.

Kryptoniota " " Ca.

Latescibacterota " " Ca.

Lernaellota " " Ca.

Lithacetigenota " " Ca.

Macinerneyibacteriota " " Ca.

Margulisiibacteriota " " Ca.

Methylomirabilota " " Ca.

Moduliflexota " " Ca.

Muiribacteriota " " Ca.

Nitrosediminicolota " " Ca.

Omnitrophota " " Ca.

Parcunitrobacterota " " Ca.

Peregrinibacteriota " " Ca.

Qinglongiota " " Ca.

Rifleibacteriota " " Ca.

Ryujiniota " " Ca.

Spongiamicota " " Ca.

Sumerlaeota " " Ca.

Sysuimicrobiota " " Ca.

Tangaroaeota " " Ca.

Tectimicrobiota " " Ca.

Tianyaibacteriota " " Ca.

Wirthibacterota " " Ca.

Zhuqueibacterota " " Ca.

Zhurongbacterota " Archaea Methanobacteriota Microcaldota Nanobdellota Promethearchaeota Thermoproteota " Ca.

Aenigmatarchaeota " " Ca.

Altarchaeota " " Ca.

Augarchaeota " " Ca.

Geoarchaeota " " Ca.

Hadarchaeota " " Ca.

Hadesarchaeota " " Ca.

Huberarchaeota " " Ca.

Hydrothermarchaeota " " Ca.

Iainarchaeota " " Ca.

Micrarchaeota " " Ca.

Nanohalarchaeota " " Ca.

Nezhaarchaeota " " Ca.

Parvarchaeota " " Ca.

Poseidoniota " " Ca.

Undinarchaeota " Eukaryote Protist Amoebozoa Ancyromonadida Apicomplexa Apusomonadida Aquavolonida Bigyra Breviatea Cercozoa Charophyta Chlorophyta Choanoflagellata Chromerida Ciliophora Collodictyonidea Colponemida Cryptista Developea Dinoflagellata Endomyxa Euglenozoa Filasterea Glaucophyta Glissandrida Gymnosphaerida Haptista Hemimastigophora Ichthyosporea Jakobea Malawimonada Mantamonadea Metamonada Nebulidia Nibbleridia Nucleariidae Ochrophyta Heterolobosea Perkinsozoa Picozoa Pirsonea Pluriformea Pseudofungi Retaria Rhodophyta Rigifilidea Telonemia Fungi Chytridiomycota Blastocladiomycota Neocallimastigomycota Glomeromycota Zygomycota Ascomycota Basidiomycota Land plant Angiospermae Bryophyta Marchantiophyta Anthocerotophyta Lycopodiophyta Pteridophyta Cycadophyta Ginkgophyta Pinophyta Gnetophyta Animal Porifera Ctenophora Placozoa Cnidaria Xenacoelomorpha Chordata Hemichordata Echinodermata Chaetognatha Kinorhyncha Loricifera Priapulida Nematoda Nematomorpha Onychophora Tardigrada Arthropoda Platyhelminthes Gastrotricha Orthonectida Dicyemida Rotifera Acanthocephala Gnathostomulida Micrognathozoa Cycliophora Nemertea Phoronida Bryozoa Entoprocta Brachiopoda Mollusca Annelida Incertae sedis Parakaryon Relate: Extraterrestrial life Taxon identifiers Lycopodiophyta Wikidata : Q215370 Wikispecies : Lycopodiophyta EPPO : 1LYCP GBIF : 12 iNaturalist : 323947 ITIS : 500002 NBN : NHMSYS0001747258 NCBI : 3242 Paleobiology Database : 249949 Tropicos : 43000004 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lycophyte&oldid=1299399197 " Categories : Lycophytes Cryptogams Plant divisions Wenlock first appearances Extant Silurian first appearances Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with 'species' microformats All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2019 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 8 July 2025, at 05:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lycophyte 51 languages Add topic

