Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Career 3 Speeches 4 Health 5 Family 6 Legacy 7 Works 8 Further reading 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Rufus Choate 8 languages العربية تۆرکجه Deutsch فارسی 한국어 Magyar مصرى Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American politician (1799–1859) "Senator Choate" redirects here. For the Vermont State Senate member, see Matthew Choate .

Rufus Choate Choate c.

1853 United States Senator from Massachusetts In office February 23, 1841 – March 3, 1845 Preceded by Daniel Webster Succeeded by Daniel Webster Member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Massachusetts's 2nd district In office March 4, 1831 – June 30, 1834 Preceded by Benjamin W. Crowninshield Succeeded by Stephen C. Phillips 10th Massachusetts Attorney General In office 1853–1854 Governor John H. Clifford Preceded by John H. Clifford Succeeded by John H. Clifford Member of the Massachusetts Senate In office 1827 Member of the Massachusetts House of Representatives In office 1825–1826 Personal details Born ( 1799-10-01 ) October 1, 1799 Ipswich, Massachusetts , U.S.

Died July 13, 1859 (1859-07-13) (aged 59) Halifax , British Canada Resting place Mount Auburn Cemetery Boston, Massachusetts , U.S.

Political party Whig Alma mater Dartmouth College Harvard University Profession Law Rufus Choate ( / tʃ oʊ t / ) (October 1, 1799 – July 13, 1859) was an American lawyer , orator , and Senator who represented Massachusetts as a member of the Whig Party . He is regarded as one of the greatest American lawyers of the 19th century, arguing over a thousand cases in a lifetime practice extending to virtually every branch of the law then recognized. Notably, he was one of the pioneers of the legal technique of arousing jury sympathy in tort cases. In one instance, he successfully won a record judgement of $22,500 for a badly injured widow, the most ever awarded to a plaintiff at the time.

[ 1 ] Along with his colleague and close associate Daniel Webster , he is also regarded as one of the greatest orators of his age. Among his most famous orations are his Address on The Colonial Age of New England delivered at the centennial celebration of the settlement of Ipswich, Massachusetts in 1831 and his Address on The Age of the Pilgrims as the Heroic Period of Our History before the New England Society of New York in 1843. Through these addresses, Choate became one of the most prominent advocates of promoting the Puritan settlers as the first founders of the American republic.

A staunch nationalist and unionist, Choate was among several former Whigs to oppose the Republican Party over concerns that it was a "sectional party" whose platform threatened to separate the Union. In turn, he publicly voiced his support for Democratic candidate James Buchanan over Republican John C. Frémont in the 1856 presidential election .

Early life [ edit ] Rufus Choate was born in Ipswich, Massachusetts , the son of Miriam (Foster) and David Choate, a teacher and Revolutionary War veteran.

[ 2 ] He was a descendant of an English family which settled in Massachusetts in 1643.

[ 3 ] His first cousin, physician George Choate, was the father of George C. S. Choate and Joseph Hodges Choate . Rufus Choate's birthplace, Choate House , remains virtually unchanged to this day.

A precocious child, at six he is said to have been able to repeat large parts of the Bible and of Pilgrim's Progress from memory. He was elected to Phi Beta Kappa [ 4 ] and graduated as valedictorian of his class at Dartmouth College in 1819, was a tutor there in 1819–1820.

In the fall of 1820 he was entered at the Dane Law School in Cambridge, under the instruction of Chief Justice Parker and Professor Asahel Stearns . In the following year Choate studied in Washington, D.C.

in the office of William Wirt , then Attorney General of the United States .

[ 5 ] Career [ edit ] Statue of Rufus Choate by noted American sculptor Daniel Chester French at the John Adams Courthouse in Boston, Massachusetts He was admitted to the Massachusetts bar in 1823 and practiced at what was later South Danvers (now Peabody) for five years, during which time he served in the Massachusetts House of Representatives (1825–1826) and in the Massachusetts Senate (1827).

In 1828, he moved to Salem , where his successful conduct of several important lawsuits brought him prominently into public notice. In 1830 he was elected to Congress as a Whig from Salem, defeating the Jacksonian candidate for re-election, Benjamin Crowninshield , a former United States Secretary of the Navy , and in 1832 he was re-elected. His career in Congress was marked by a speech in defence of a protective tariff .

Choate lived on Winthrop Place, Boston, 1851-1859 [ 6 ] In 1834, before the completion of his second term, he resigned and established himself in the practice of law in Boston . Already his reputation as a speaker had spread beyond New England , and he was much sought after as an orator for public occasions. His skill was so great that when he argued cases at the Norfolk County Courthouse , students from the nearby Dedham High School would be dismissed to listen to his orations.

[ 7 ] For several years, he devoted himself unremittingly to his profession but, in 1841, succeeded fellow Dartmouth graduate Daniel Webster in the United States Senate . Shortly afterwards he delivered an address at the memorial services for President William Henry Harrison at Faneuil Hall .

In the Senate, he spoke on the tariff, the Oregon boundary, in favor of the Fiscal Bank Act , and in opposition to the annexation of Texas . On Webster's re-election to the Senate in 1845, Choate resumed his law practice. He later served a short term as attorney-general of Massachusetts in 1853–1854. In 1846, Choate convinced a jury that the accused, Albert Tirrell , did not cut the throat of his lover, or, if he did so, he did it while sleepwalking , under the 'insanity of sleep'.

[ 8 ] His successful use of sleepwalking as a defense against murder charges was the first time in American legal history this defense was successful in a murder prosecution.

[ 9 ] He was a faithful supporter of Webster's policy as declared in the latter's Seventh of March Speech of 1850 and labored to secure for him the presidential nomination at the Whig National Convention in 1852. In 1853, he was a member of the state constitutional convention.

In 1856, he refused to follow most of his former Whig associates into the Republican Party and gave his support to Democrat James Buchanan , whom he considered the representative of a national instead of a sectional party.

Speeches [ edit ] The Colonial Age of New England , 1831.

The Importance of Illustrating New-England History by a Series of Romances like the Waverly Novels , 1833.

The Age of the Pilgrims as the Heroic Period of Our History, 1843.

The Positions and Functions of the American Bar, as an Element of Conservatism in the State , 1845.

American Nationality , 1856, The Eloquence of Revolutionary Periods , 1857.

Health [ edit ] In 1850 Choate traveled Europe for three months to improve his health. He was accompanied by his old friend and well-known lawyer, the Hon.

Joseph M. Bell , who married Choate's sister, and later his daughter Helen.

[ 5 ] : 427, 429, 434 In 1859, failing health led him to seek rest yet again in Europe. In June 1859, he sailed from Boston to England, became worse and left the ship at Halifax, Nova Scotia , where he died on July 13.

[ 5 ] He was buried at Mount Auburn Cemetery in Boston.

[ 10 ] Family [ edit ] With his wife Helen Olcott, whom he married on March 29, 1825, Choate had seven children: Catherine Bell (1826–1830), an infant child (1828–1828), Helen Olcott Bell (1830–1918), Sarah (1831–1875), Rufus (1834–1866), Miriam Foster (1835–??), and Caroline (1837–1840).

[ 5 ] Legacy [ edit ] Choate's private library contained seven thousand books with three thousand volumes in his law library.

[ 5 ] His childhood home is preserved by the Trustees of Reservations on the Crane Wildlife Refuge .

[ 11 ] A statue of him stands in the Suffolk County Courthouse in Boston.

Works [ edit ] Works — edited, with a memoir, by S. G. Brown , and published in two volumes at Boston in 1862 Memoir — published in 1870 EG Parker 's Reminiscences of Rufus Choate (New York, 1860) EP Whipple 's Some Recollections of Rufus Choate (New York, 1879) Albany Law Review of 1877–1878 Claude Fuess ' Rufus Choate, The Wizard of the Law (1928) The Political Writings of Rufus Choate (2003) Further reading [ edit ] Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Choate, Rufus" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

Attribution This article incorporates public domain material from the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress References [ edit ] ^ Howe, Daniel Walker (1979).

The Political Culture of the American Whigs . The University of Chicago Press. p. 225.

^ "Rufus Choate | Encyclopedia.com" .

^ Jameson, Ephraim Orcutt . The Choates in America. 1643–1896. John Choate and His Descendants.

Chebacco, Ipswich, Mass. Boston: A. Mudge & Son, printers, 1896.

^ Dartmouth to honor two valedictorians , Dartmouth Press Release, June 2009. Retrieved 2009-10-09.

^ a b c d e Cogswell, J. B. D. (John Bear Doane), 1829-1889 (1884).

Memoir of Rufus Choate . The Library of Congress: Cambridge : J. Wilson.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ State Street Trust Company. Forty of Boston's historic houses. 1912.

^ Clarke, Wm. Horatio (1903).

Mid-Century Memories of Dedham .

Dedham Historical Society . p. 14.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ "Maria Bickford" . Brown University Law Library. Archived from the original on November 21, 2007 . Retrieved November 22, 2007 .

^ Kappman, Edward W., ed. (1994).

Great American Trials . Detroit, MI: Visible Ink Press. pp.

101–104 .

ISBN 0-8103-9134-1 .

^ "The News" .

New York Herald . July 24, 1859. p. 4 . Retrieved September 21, 2022 – via Newspapers.com .

^ Historic Ipswich (February 18, 2019).

"Choate Island and Rufus Choate" .

Historic Ipswich . Archived from the original on December 6, 2020 . Retrieved December 6, 2020 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Rufus Choate .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Rufus Choate .

United States Congress.

"Rufus Choate (id: C000375)" .

Biographical Directory of the United States Congress .

Reminiscences of Rufus Choate by Edward Parker, published 1860.

The Works of Rufus Choate: With a Memoir of His Life by Samuel Gilman Brown, published 1862.

Memories of Rufus Choate by Joseph Neilson, published 1884.

Works by Rufus Choate at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) U.S. House of Representatives Preceded by Benjamin Crowninshield Member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Massachusetts's 2nd congressional district 1831 – 1834 Succeeded by Stephen C. Phillips U.S. Senate Preceded by Daniel Webster U.S. senator (Class 1) from Massachusetts 1841 – 1845 Served alongside: Isaac C. Bates Succeeded by Daniel Webster Political offices Preceded by John H. Clifford Attorney General of Massachusetts 1853 – 1854 Succeeded by John H. Clifford v t e Members of the U.S. House of Representatives from Massachusetts 1st district F. Ames Dexter Goodhue Holten Sedgwick Skinner Sedgwick J. Bacon Eustis Quincy Ward Jr.

Mason Gorham Webster Gorham N. Appleton Gorham A. Lawrence Fletcher A. Lawrence Winthrop N. Appleton Winthrop S. Eliot W. Appleton Scudder T. D. Eliot Hall T. D. Eliot Buffington Crapo R. Davis Randall Wright G. Lawrence Treadway Heselton Conte Olver Neal 2nd district Goodhue Foster W. Lyman Sedgwick Ward Sr.

W. Lyman Shepard J. Crowninshield Story Pickman W. Reed Pickering Silsbee Barstow B. Crowninshield Choate Phillips Saltonstall D. King Rantoul Fay Crocker Buffington O. Ames Harris Long E. Morse Gillett Churchill Bowles Kaynor Granfield Clason Furcolo Boland Neal McGovern 3rd district Gerry Bourne Coffin S. Lyman Mattoon Cutler Nelson Livermore White Pickering Nelson Varnum Nelson Osgood Cushing A. Abbott Duncan Edmands Damrell C. Adams Thomas A. Rice Twichell Whiting I Pierce Field B. Dean Field Ranney L. Morse J. Andrew Walker J. R. Thayer R. Hoar C. Washburn J. A. Thayer Wilder Paige F. Foss Casey Philbin Drinan Donohue Early Blute McGovern N. Tsongas Trahan 4th district Sedgwick Dearborn G. Thatcher Wadsworth Foster L. Lincoln Sr.

Hastings Varnum W. Richardson Dana Stearns Fuller E. Everett Sa. Hoar Parmenter Thompson Palfrey Thompson Sabine Walley Comins A. Rice Hooper Frost J. Abbott L. Morse Collins O'Neil Apsley Weymouth Tirrell Mitchell Wilder Winslow Stobbs P. Holmes Donohue Drinan Frank Kennedy III Auchincloss 5th district Partridge Bourne Freeman L. Williams T. Dwight Ely Mills Lathrop Sibley J. Davis L. Lincoln Jr.

Hudson C. Allen W. Appleton Burlingame W. Appleton Hooper Alley Butler Gooch Banks Bowman L. Morse Hayden Banks Sh. Hoar Stevens Knox B. Ames J. Rogers E. Rogers B. Morse Cronin P. Tsongas Shannon Atkins Meehan N. Tsongas Markey Clark 6th district G. Thatcher Leonard J. Reed Sr.

J. Smith Taggart S. Allen Locke Kendall Grennell Alvord Baker Ashmun G. Davis Upham T. Davis Alley Gooch Banks Butler Thompson Loring Stone Lovering Lodge Cogswell Moody Gardner Lufkin A.P. Andrew G. Bates W. Bates Harrington Mavroules Torkildsen Tierney Moulton 7th district Leonard Ward Sr.

Leonard Bullock Bishop Mitchell Barker Baylies Turner Baylies Hulbert Shaw H. Dwight S. Allen Grennell Briggs J. Rockwell Goodrich Banks Gooch Boutwell Brooks Esty E. Hoar Tarbox Butler W. Russell Stone Cogswell W. Everett Barrett Roberts Phelan Maloney W. Connery L. Connery Lane Macdonald Markey Capuano Pressley 8th district Grout G. Thatcher F. Ames Otis Eustis L. Williams Green Gardner Green J. Reed Jr.

Baylies Sampson Hobart Lathrop Bates Calhoun J. Adams Mann Wentworth Knapp Train Baldwin G. Hoar J. M. S. Williams Warren Claflin Candler W Russell C. H. Allen Greenhalge Stevens McCall Deitrick Dallinger H. Thayer Dallinger Healey Goodwin Macdonald O'Neill Kennedy II Capuano Lynch 9th district Varnum Bishop J. Dean Wheaton J. Reed Jr.

Folger J. Reed Jr.

H. Dwight Briggs Jackson Hastings H. Williams Hale Fowler Little De Witt E. Thayer Bailey A. Walker W. Washburn Crocker G. Hoar W. Rice T. Lyman Ely Burnett Candler G. Williams O'Neil Fitzgerald Conry Keliher Murray Roberts Fuller Underhill Luce R. Russell Luce T. H. Eliot Gifford Nicholson Keith McCormack Hicks Moakley Lynch Keating 10th district Goodhue Sewall Read Hastings Upham J. Allen Brigham Wheaton Morton F Baylies Bailey H. A. S. Dearborn W. Baylies Borden H. Williams Borden Burnell Grinnell Scudder Dickinson Chaffee Delano Dawes Crocker Stevens Seelye Norcross W. Rice J. E. Russell J. Walker McEttrick Atwood Barrows Naphen McNary O'Connell Curley Murray Tague Fitzgerald Tague Douglass Tinkham Herter Curtis Martin Heckler Studds Delahunt Keating 11th district Bradbury Bartlett Cutler Stedman A. Bigelow Brigham B. Adams J. Russell Hobart J. Richardson J. Adams J. Reed Jr.

Burnell Goodrich Trafton Dawes Chapin Robinson Whiting II Wallace Coolidge Draper Sprague Powers Sullivan Peters Tinkham Douglass Higgins Flaherty Curley Kennedy O'Neill Burke Donnelly 12th district H. Dearborn I. Parker Lee S. Thatcher Skinner Larned Bidwell Bacon Dewey Hulbert Strong Kendall L. Bigelow Baylies Hodges J. Adams Robinson F. Rockwell Crosby E. Morse Lovering Powers Weeks Curley Gallivan McCormack Keith Studds 13th district Wadsworth Seaver Ruggles Dowse Eustis J. Reed Jr.

Randall Simpkins Greene Weeks Mitchell Carter Luce Wigglesworth Burke 14th district G. Thatcher Cutts C. King J. Holmes Lovering E. Foss Harris Gilmore Olney Frothingham Wigglesworth Martin 15th district Wadsworth Ilsley Whitman Widgery Bradbury Whitman Greene Leach Martin Gifford 16th district S. Thatcher Cook Tallman S. Davis Brown Orr Hill Thacher Walsh Gifford 17th district Bruce Chandler Gannett F. Carr Wood J. Carr Wilson Kinsley 18th district Wilson T. Rice J. Parker 19th district J. Parker Conner Gage Cushman 20th district Hubbard Parris E. Lincoln At-large Cobb v t e United States senators from Massachusetts Class 1 Dalton Cabot Goodhue Mason Adams Lloyd Gore Ashmun Mellen Mills Webster Choate Webster Winthrop Rantoul Sumner Washburn Dawes Lodge Sr.

Butler Walsh Lodge Jr.

J. Kennedy Smith E. Kennedy Kirk Brown Warren Class 2 Strong Sedgwick Dexter Foster Pickering Varnum Otis Lloyd Silsbee Davis Bates Davis Everett Rockwell Wilson Boutwell Hoar Crane J. Weeks Walsh Gillett Coolidge Lodge Jr.

S. Weeks Saltonstall Brooke Tsongas Kerry Cowan Markey v t e ( ← 1848 ) 1852 United States presidential election ( 1856 → ) Democratic Party ( Convention ) Nominees President: Franklin Pierce Vice President: William R. King Other candidates James Buchanan Lewis Cass Stephen A. Douglas William L. Marcy Whig Party ( Convention ) Nominees President: Winfield Scott Vice President: William A. Graham Other candidates Edward Bates Rufus Choate John J. Crittenden Millard Fillmore (incumbent) Daniel Webster Free Soil Party Nominees President: John P. Hale Vice President: George W. Julian Other 1852 elections : House Senate v t e Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees John Adams John Quincy Adams Jane Addams Louis Agassiz Susan B. Anthony John James Audubon George Bancroft Clara Barton Henry Ward Beecher Alexander Graham Bell Daniel Boone Edwin Booth Louis Brandeis Phillips Brooks William Cullen Bryant Luther Burbank Andrew Carnegie George Washington Carver William Ellery Channing Rufus Choate Henry Clay Grover Cleveland James Fenimore Cooper Peter Cooper Charlotte Cushman James Buchanan Eads Thomas Alva Edison Jonathan Edwards Ralph Waldo Emerson David Farragut Stephen Foster Benjamin Franklin Robert Fulton Josiah W. Gibbs William C. Gorgas Ulysses S. Grant Asa Gray Alexander Hamilton Nathaniel Hawthorne Joseph Henry Patrick Henry Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr.

Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.

Mark Hopkins Elias Howe Washington Irving Andrew Jackson Thomas J. Jackson Thomas Jefferson John Paul Jones James Kent Sidney Lanier Robert E. Lee Abraham Lincoln Henry Wadsworth Longfellow James Russell Lowell Mary Lyon Edward MacDowell James Madison Horace Mann John Marshall Matthew Fontaine Maury Albert A. Michelson Maria Mitchell James Monroe Samuel F. B. Morse William T. G. Morton John Lothrop Motley Simon Newcomb Thomas Paine Alice Freeman Palmer Francis Parkman George Peabody William Penn Edgar Allan Poe Walter Reed Franklin D. Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Augustus Saint-Gaudens William Tecumseh Sherman John Philip Sousa Joseph Story Harriet Beecher Stowe Gilbert Stuart Sylvanus Thayer Henry David Thoreau Mark Twain Lillian Wald Booker T. Washington George Washington Daniel Webster George Westinghouse James McNeill Whistler Walt Whitman Eli Whitney John Greenleaf Whittier Emma Willard Frances Willard Roger Williams Woodrow Wilson Orville Wright Wilbur Wright Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Israel Belgium People US Congress Deutsche Biographie Other SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rufus_Choate&oldid=1262340444 " Categories : 1799 births 1859 deaths Choate family Dartmouth College alumni Harvard Law School alumni Massachusetts attorneys general Massachusetts state senators Members of the Massachusetts House of Representatives Politicians from Boston People from Ipswich, Massachusetts United States senators from Massachusetts Massachusetts Whigs Whig Party United States senators Burials at Mount Auburn Cemetery National Republican Party members of the United States House of Representatives from Massachusetts Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees Lawyers from Boston 19th-century members of the Massachusetts General Court 19th-century members of the United States House of Representatives 19th-century United States senators Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from May 2021 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from May 2021 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 10 December 2024, at 22:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rufus Choate 8 languages Add topic

