Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Left-wing liberalism 2 The timeline Toggle The timeline subsection 2.1 Liberal Party (1831) 2.2 Progressive Party (1863) 2.3 New Liberal Party 2.4 Progressive Party (1882) 2.5 Republican Party 2.6 Liberal Alliance 2.7 Brazilian Democratic Movement 2.8 Popular Party 2.9 Liberal Front Party 2.10 Liberal Party (1985) 2.11 Libertarians 2.12 New Party 2.13 MBL 2.14 Livres 3 Liberal leaders 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Liberalism in Brazil 2 languages Français Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Overview of liberalism in Brazil This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Liberalism in Brazil" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is part of a series on Liberalism in Brazil Ideologies Classical liberalism Economic Conservative liberalism Liberal conservatism Neoliberalism Parliamentarianism Right-libertarianism Anarcho-capitalism Social liberalism Third Way Principles Abolitionism Anti-communism Democracy Liberal Federalism Free market Free trade Freedom Institutionalism Localism Private property History Constitutionalist Revolution Coup of the Republic Diretas Já Liberal Congress of 1889 Pernambucan revolt Revolution of 1830 Intellectuals Campos Carlos de Andrade Hipólito da Costa Guidin Franco Landau Meira Penna Merquior Nabuco Simonsen Viscount of Cairu Politicians Afif Alckmin (early) Amoêdo Barbosa Collor de Mello Dutra Guimarães FHC Kubitschek Lott Neves (Aécio) Neves (Tancredo) Tebet (early) Serra Viscount of Mauá Parties Active Brazilian Democratic Movement Brazilian Social Democracy Party Brazil Union Cidadania Citizenship Liberal Party (2006) New Party Social Democratic (2011) Historical Democrats Liberator Party Liberal (1985) Liberal Alliance Progressive League Social Democratic (1945) Social Liberal Party Organisations LIVRES IMIL Media Folha de S.Paulo Correio Braziliense Related topics Free Brazil Movement Politics of Brazil Conservatism Socialism Liberalism portal Libertarianism portal Brazil portal v t e Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Liberalism in Brazil began around 1831, initially emerging as the opposition to conservatism . However, with the republican revolution of 1889, organized liberalism faded away. Liberal parties were established in the twentieth century and from 1966 onwards, the Democratic Movement became liberalism's primary representative. As multi-partyism was established, more parties began to adopt the label of "liberal", although the term was often used by moderate conservative factions.

Three parties in Brazil identify themselves as liberal, but the Liberal Front Party ( Partido da Frente Liberal ) is conservative and a member of the International Democrat Union . The right-leaning Liberal Party (Partido Liberal) could be classified as a conservative-liberal party. The centrist Brazilian Democratic Movement (Movimento Democrático Brasileiro) occupies a liberal position on the political spectrum.

Left-wing liberalism [ edit ] Left-wing liberal movements in Brazil include some centrist parties and organizations rooted in socialism in the past, including Cidadania and Livres .

The timeline [ edit ] Liberal Party (1831) [ edit ] 1831: In resistance to the imperial regime, liberals formed the Liberal Party ( Partido Liberal ) in 1831, loosely connected to the urban petty bourgeoisie . It became the leading progressive party during the monarchy.

1863: A left wing faction formed the Progressive Party .

1868: The Progressive Party reunited with the party.

1869: A left wing faction formed the New Liberal Party.

1882: A new Progressive Party is formed.

1889: After the fall of the monarchy, the party vanished.

Progressive Party (1863) [ edit ] 1863: A left wing faction of the Liberal Party formed the Progressive Party ( Partido Progressista ).

1868: The party reunited with the Liberal Party.

New Liberal Party [ edit ] 1869: A left wing faction of the Liberal Party formed the New Liberal Party , led by Joaquím Nabuco .

Progressive Party (1882) [ edit ] 1882: A left wing faction of the Liberal Party formed the Progressive Party ( Partido Progressista ).

1889: After the fall of the monarchy, the party disappeared.

Republican Party [ edit ] 1870: The Republican Party ( Partido Republicano ), a party of the urban middle class, was formed.

1889: After the fall of the monarchy, the party disappeared.

Liberal Alliance [ edit ] 1930: The liberal bourgeoisie formed the Liberal Alliance ( Aliança Liberal ), led by Getúlio Vargas . After he lost the 1930 election, the party came to power in a revolution.

1934: When Vargas established an authoritarian regime in 1934, the party fell apart.

Brazilian Democratic Movement [ edit ] 1966: The military government allowed the formation of a democratic opposition party in a bi-partisan system, the Brazilian Democratic Movement ( Movimento Democrático Brasileiro ). Liberals were united with social democrats , socialists and right-leaning opponents of the rightist military government. The party was led by Oscar Passos , Pedroso Horta (since 1970) and Ulysses Guimarães .

1979: The party was reorganized into the Brazilian Democratic Movement Party ( Partido do Movimento Democrático Brasileiro , PMDB).

1981: The Popular Party merged into the PMDB.

1988: The Brazilian Social Democracy Party seceded from the Brazilian Democratic Movement.

Popular Party [ edit ] 1980: A liberal faction of the National Renewal Alliance established the liberal Popular Party ( Partido Popular ), led by Tancredo de Almeida Neves .

1981: The Popular Party merged into the Brazilian Democratic Movement.

Liberal Front Party [ edit ] 1985: The center-right Liberal Front Party ( Partido da Frente Liberal ) was formed by a secession from the Democratic Social Party .

2007: PFL changed its name to the Democrats ( Democratas ).

Liberal Party (1985) [ edit ] 1985: The center-right Liberal Party ( Partido Liberal ) was formed.

Libertarians [ edit ] 2005: The Libertarians ( Libertários ) party was formed as a libertarian party with some classic liberal members. The Libertarians have no electoral register and cannot participate in elections.

New Party [ edit ] 2011: The New Party ( Partido Novo ) was formed.

MBL [ edit ] 2014: The Free Brazil Movement ( Movimento Brasil Livre ) was founded.

Livres [ edit ] 2016: The Free movement ( Livres ) was founded.

Liberal leaders [ edit ] Joaquim Nabuco Tancredo Neves Ulysses Guimarães Rui Barbosa Roberto Campos See also [ edit ] History of Brazil Politics of Brazil List of political parties in Brazil Lulism References [ edit ] v t e Liberalism in Latin America and the Caribbean Caribbean Antigua and Barbuda Aruba Bahamas Barbados Cuba Curaçao Dominica Dominican Republic Grenada Haiti Jamaica Puerto Rico Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Sint Maarten Trinidad and Tobago Central America Belize Costa Rica El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Nicaragua Panama North America Mexico South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador French Guiana Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Dependencies not included.

Semi-autonomous territories are in italics.

v t e Liberalism in South America Sovereign states Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Dependencies and other territories Falkland Islands French Guiana South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liberalism_in_Brazil&oldid=1292813948 " Categories : Liberalism in Brazil Liberalism by country Classical liberalism Politics of Brazil Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 28 May 2025, at 23:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Liberalism in Brazil 2 languages Add topic

