Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Theory Toggle Theory subsection 1.1 Evaporative equilibrium 2 Factors influencing the rate of evaporation 3 Thermodynamics 4 Applications Toggle Applications subsection 4.1 Combustion vaporization 4.2 Pre-combustion vaporization 4.3 Film deposition 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Evaporation 87 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Bikol Central Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština ChiShona Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Македонски मराठी Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Runa Simi Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Vaporization of a liquid from its surface This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Evaporation" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Aerosol of microscopic water droplets suspended in the air above a cup of hot tea after the water vapor has sufficiently cooled and condensed. Water vapor is an invisible gas, but the clouds of condensed droplets refract and scatter the sunlight and are thus visible.

Droplets of water vapor in a pan.

Demonstration of evaporative cooling. When the sensor is dipped in ethanol and then taken out to evaporate, the instrument shows progressively lower temperature as the ethanol evaporates.

Rain evaporating after falling on hot pavement Evaporation is a type of vaporization that occurs on the surface of a liquid as it changes into the gas phase.

[ 1 ] A high concentration of the evaporating substance in the surrounding gas significantly slows down evaporation, such as when humidity affects rate of evaporation of water.

[ 2 ] When the molecules of the liquid collide, they transfer energy to each other based on how they collide. When a molecule near the surface absorbs enough energy to overcome the vapor pressure , it will escape and enter the surrounding air as a gas.

[ 3 ] When evaporation occurs, the energy removed from the vaporized liquid will reduce the temperature of the liquid, resulting in evaporative cooling.

[ 4 ] On average, only a fraction of the molecules in a liquid have enough heat energy to escape from the liquid. The evaporation will continue until an equilibrium is reached when the evaporation of the liquid is equal to its condensation. In an enclosed environment, a liquid will evaporate until the surrounding air is saturated.

Evaporation is an essential part of the water cycle . The sun (solar energy) drives evaporation of water from oceans , lakes, moisture in the soil, and other sources of water. In hydrology , evaporation and transpiration (which involves evaporation within plant stomata ) are collectively termed evapotranspiration . Evaporation of water occurs when the surface of the liquid is exposed, allowing molecules to escape and form water vapor; this vapor can then rise up and form clouds. With sufficient energy, the liquid will turn into vapor.

Theory See also: Kinetic theory of gases For molecules of a liquid to evaporate, they must be located near the surface, they have to be moving in the proper direction, and have sufficient kinetic energy to overcome liquid-phase intermolecular forces .

[ 5 ] When only a small proportion of the molecules meet these criteria, the rate of evaporation is low. Since the kinetic energy of a molecule is proportional to its temperature, evaporation proceeds more quickly at higher temperatures. As the faster-moving molecules escape, the remaining molecules have lower average kinetic energy, and the temperature of the liquid decreases. This phenomenon is also called evaporative cooling . This is why evaporating sweat cools the human body.
Evaporation also tends to proceed more quickly with higher flow rates between the gaseous and liquid phase and in liquids with higher vapor pressure . For example, laundry on a clothes line will dry (by evaporation) more rapidly on a windy day than on a still day. Three key parts to evaporation are heat, atmospheric pressure (determines the percent humidity), and air movement.

On a molecular level, there is no strict boundary between the liquid state and the vapor state. Instead, there is a Knudsen layer , where the phase is undetermined. Because this layer is only a few molecules thick, at a macroscopic scale a clear phase transition interface cannot be seen.

[ 6 ] Liquids that do not evaporate visibly at a given temperature in a given gas (e.g., cooking oil at room temperature ) have molecules that do not tend to transfer energy to each other in a pattern sufficient to frequently give a molecule the heat energy necessary to turn into vapor. However, these liquids are evaporating. It is just that the process is much slower and thus significantly less visible.

Evaporative equilibrium Vapor pressure of water vs. temperature. 760 Torr = 1 atm .

If evaporation takes place in an enclosed area, the escaping molecules accumulate as a vapor above the liquid. Many of the molecules return to the liquid, with returning molecules becoming more frequent as the density and pressure of the vapor increases. When the process of escape and return reaches an equilibrium , [ 5 ] the vapor is said to be "saturated", and no further change in either vapor pressure and density or liquid temperature will occur. For a system consisting of vapor and liquid of a pure substance, this equilibrium state is directly related to the vapor pressure of the substance, as given by the Clausius–Clapeyron relation : ln ⁡ ⁡ ( P 2 P 1 ) = − − Δ Δ H v a p R ( 1 T 2 − − 1 T 1 ) {\displaystyle \ln \left({\frac {P_{2}}{P_{1}}}\right)=-{\frac {\Delta H_{\rm {vap}}}{R}}\left({\frac {1}{T_{2}}}-{\frac {1}{T_{1}}}\right)} where P 1 , P 2 are the vapor pressures at temperatures T 1 , T 2 respectively, Δ H vap is the enthalpy of vaporization , and R is the universal gas constant . The rate of evaporation in an open system is related to the vapor pressure found in a closed system. If a liquid is heated, when the vapor pressure reaches the ambient pressure the liquid will boil .

The ability for a molecule of a liquid to evaporate is based largely on the amount of kinetic energy an individual particle may possess. Even at lower temperatures, individual molecules of a liquid can evaporate if they have more than the minimum amount of kinetic energy required for vaporization.

Factors influencing the rate of evaporation Note: Air is used here as a common example of the surrounding gas; however, other gases may hold that role.

Concentration of the substance evaporating in the air If the air already has a high concentration of the substance evaporating, then the given substance will evaporate more slowly.

Flow rate of air This is in part related to the concentration points above. If "fresh" air (i.e., air which is neither already saturated with the substance nor with other substances) is moving over the substance all the time, then the concentration of the substance in the air is less likely to go up with time, thus encouraging faster evaporation. This is the result of the boundary layer at the evaporation surface decreasing with flow velocity, decreasing the diffusion distance in the stagnant layer.

The amount of minerals dissolved in the liquid Inter-molecular forces The stronger the forces keeping the molecules together in the liquid state, the more energy one must get to escape. This is characterized by the enthalpy of vaporization .

Pressure Evaporation happens faster if there is less exertion on the surface keeping the molecules from launching themselves.

Surface area A substance that has a larger surface area will evaporate faster, as there are more surface molecules per unit of volume that are potentially able to escape.

Temperature of the substance the higher the temperature of the substance the greater the kinetic energy of the molecules at its surface and therefore the faster the rate of their evaporation.

Photomolecular effect The amount of light will affect the evaporation. When photons hits the surface area of the liquid they can make individual molecules break free and disappear into the air without any need for additional heat.

[ 7 ] In the US, the National Weather Service measures, at various outdoor locations nationwide, the actual rate of evaporation from a standardized "pan" open water surface. Others do likewise around the world. The US data is collected and compiled into an annual evaporation map. The measurements range from under 30 to over 120 inches (3,000 mm) per year.

Because it typically takes place in a complex environment, where 'evaporation is an extremely rare event', the mechanism for the evaporation of water is not completely understood. Theoretical calculations require prohibitively long and large computer simulations. 'The rate of evaporation of liquid water is one of the principal uncertainties in modern climate modeling.' [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Thermodynamics This section needs expansion . You can help by making an edit request adding to it .

( August 2022 ) Evaporation is an endothermic process , since heat is absorbed during evaporation.

Applications This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "Evaporation" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Industrial applications include many printing and coating processes; recovering salts from solutions; and drying a variety of materials such as lumber, paper, cloth and chemicals.

The use of evaporation to dry or concentrate samples is a common preparatory step for many laboratory analyses such as spectroscopy and chromatography . Systems used for this purpose include rotary evaporators and centrifugal evaporators .

When clothes are hung on a laundry line, even though the ambient temperature is below the boiling point of water, water evaporates. This is accelerated by factors such as low humidity , heat (from the sun), and wind. In a clothes dryer , hot air is blown through the clothes, allowing water to evaporate very rapidly.

The matki/matka , a traditional Indian porous clay container used for storing and cooling water and other liquids.

The botijo , a traditional Spanish porous clay container designed to cool the contained water by evaporation.

Evaporative coolers , which can significantly cool a building by simply blowing dry air over a filter saturated with water.

Combustion vaporization Fuel droplets vaporize as they receive heat by mixing with the hot gases in the combustion chamber. Heat (energy) can also be received by radiation from any hot refractory wall of the combustion chamber.

Pre-combustion vaporization Internal combustion engines rely upon the vaporization of the fuel in the cylinders to form a fuel/air mixture in order to burn well.
The chemically correct air/fuel mixture for total burning of gasoline has been determined to be about 15 parts air to one part gasoline or 15/1 by weight. Changing this to a volume ratio yields 8000 parts air to one part gasoline or 8,000/1 by volume.

Film deposition Main article: Evaporation (deposition) Thin films may be deposited by evaporating a substance and condensing it onto a substrate, or by dissolving the substance in a solvent, spreading the resulting solution thinly over a substrate, and evaporating the solvent. The Hertz–Knudsen equation is often used to estimate the rate of evaporation in these instances.

See also Wikisource has the text of The New Student's Reference Work article  " Evaporation ".

Atmometer (evaporimeter) Cryophorus Crystallisation Desalination Distillation Eddy covariance flux (a.k.a. eddy correlation, eddy flux) Evaporator Evapotranspiration Flash evaporation Heat of vaporization Hertz–Knudsen equation Hydrology (agriculture) Latent heat Latent heat flux Pan evaporation Sublimation (phase transition) (phase transfer from solid directly to gas) Transpiration Phase transitions of matter ( v t e ) To From Solid Liquid Gas Plasma Solid Melting Sublimation Liquid Freezing Vaporization Gas Deposition Condensation Ionization Plasma Recombination References ^ "the definition of evaporate" .

Dictionary.com . Retrieved 2018-01-23 .

^ "Why Does Humidity & Wind Speed Affect Evaporation?" .

Sciencing . 13 March 2018 . Retrieved 2022-08-20 .

^ "Evaporation".

The New Student's Reference Work (1914) . 1914. p. 636.

^ Lohner, Science Buddies, Svenja.

"Chilling Science: Evaporative Cooling with Liquids" .

Scientific American . Retrieved 2018-01-23 .

{{ cite news }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b Silberberg, Martin A. (2006).

Chemistry (4th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. pp.

431 –434.

ISBN 0-07-296439-1 .

^ Gusarov, A. V.; Smurov, I. (2002). "Gas-dynamic boundary conditions of evaporation and condensation: Numerical analysis of the Knudsen layer".

Physics of Fluids .

14 (12): 4242.

Bibcode : 2002PhFl...14.4242G .

doi : 10.1063/1.1516211 .

^ How light can vaporize water without the need for heat ^ Richard Saykally (11 June 2015).

"Five Things We Still Don't Know About Water" .

Nautilus . Retrieved 20 October 2021 .

^ Kotaro Ohashi (18 May 2020).

"Evaporation coefficient and condensation coefficient of vapor under high gas pressure conditions" .

Scientific Reports .

10 (8143) 8143. Nature.

Bibcode : 2020NatSR..10.8143O .

doi : 10.1038/s41598-020-64905-5 .

PMC 7235219 .

PMID 32424295 .

Further reading Sze, Simon Min (25 September 2001).

Semiconductor Devices: Physics and Technology . Wiley.

ISBN 0-471-33372-7 .

Has an especially detailed discussion of film deposition by evaporation.

External links Look up evaporation in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Media related to Evaporation at Wikimedia Commons Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Poland Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐2s2fx
Cached time: 20250818092153
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.404 seconds
Real time usage: 0.542 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1980/1000000
Revision size: 14991/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 63989/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2884/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 51108/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.266/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9479369/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  446.289      1 -total
 24.57%  109.649      1 Template:Reflist
 15.15%   67.609      3 Template:Cite_web
 15.02%   67.042      3 Template:Ambox
 13.32%   59.444      1 Template:Authority_control
 11.35%   50.661      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 10.95%   48.855      1 Template:Short_description
  9.35%   41.735      1 Template:Table_of_phase_transitions
  8.42%   37.577      1 Template:Navbar
  6.47%   28.855      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:10303:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818092153 and revision id 1305889155. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Evaporation&oldid=1305889155 " Categories : Atmospheric thermodynamics Meteorological phenomena Materials science Phase transitions Thin film deposition Gases Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Articles needing additional references from August 2016 All articles needing additional references Articles to be expanded from August 2022 All articles to be expanded Articles needing additional references from March 2025 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 17:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Evaporation 87 languages Add topic

