Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Classical approaches to international law Toggle Classical approaches to international law subsection 1.1 International law in ancient Rome 1.2 Natural law 1.3 Eclectic or Grotian approach 1.4 Legal positivism 2 International relations – international law approaches Toggle International relations – international law approaches subsection 2.1 Realism 2.2 Liberalism 2.3 Rational choice and game theory 2.4 International legal process 3 Policy-oriented perspectives Toggle Policy-oriented perspectives subsection 3.1 New Haven School 3.2 Critical Legal Studies 3.3 Central case approach 3.4 Feminist legal theory 3.5 LGBT legal theory 3.6 Third World Approaches to International Law 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents International legal theories 6 languages العربية Български Français Bahasa Indonesia Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Theories explaining international law This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "International legal theories" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Judicial interpretation Forms Constitutional review Judicial opinion In Catholic canon law In Islamic jurisprudence Kritarchy Statutory interpretation Judicial misconduct Activism Chilling effect Discretion Immunity Restraint Ultra vires General rules of interpretation Accountability Adversarial system Appeal Conflict of laws Forum shopping Jurisdictional arbitrage Lex loci Golden rule Inquisitorial system Interpretation Act Jury nullification Justiciability Letter and spirit of the law Mischief rule Nondelegation doctrine Plain meaning rule Polycentric law Precedent Reasonableness Rule according to higher law Separation of powers Judicial independence Parliamentary sovereignty General theories of interpretation Common good constitutionalism Court administration Judicial reform Jurisprudence Indeterminacy debate Legal realism Legal process Legal formalism Legitimacy Living Constitution / Living tree / Living instrument Opinio juris sive necessitatis Originalism ( original meaning ) Original intent ( legislative intent , legislative history ) Purposive approach Strict constructionism Textualism International Anarchy Hard law International litigation International legal theories Monism and dualism Peremptory norm Soft law Universal jurisdiction v t e International legal theory , or theories of international law , comprise a variety of theoretical and methodological approaches used to explain and analyse the content, formation and effectiveness of international law and institutions and to suggest improvements. Some approaches center on the question of compliance : why states follow international norms in the absence of a coercive power that ensures compliance. Other approaches focus on the problem of the formation of international rules: why states voluntarily adopt international legal norms, that limit their freedom of action, in the absence of a world legislature (centralized legislature, court with compulsory jurisdiction, or an executive with enforcement powers). Other perspectives are policy oriented; they elaborate theoretical frameworks and instruments to criticize the existing rules and make suggestions on how to improve them. Some of these approaches are based on domestic legal theory , others are interdisciplinary , while others have been developed expressly to analyse international law.

Classical approaches to international law [ edit ] International law in ancient Rome [ edit ] The idea of international law in Roman times is a complicated one. For, not only does the Roman Republic and following empire itself dominate a long period of time in history, but also the very debate over whether or not the term "international law" is an applicable term is not yet decided.

[ 1 ] Many scholars and authors define international law as "the law governing relations between sovereign , territorial states." [ 2 ] Any attempt to find a similar parallel in Roman law would find a logical starting point in the ius gentium (the laws of nations).

[ 3 ] The ius gentium began as a Roman recognition of like legal practices and institutions (such as slavery ) that was found at that time in most states.

[ 4 ] This brand of law was in fact private law in itself and mainly dictated the way in which the Roman state was to deal with individual foreigners, not entire states.

[ 4 ] However, when citizenship was granted to all free men in the empire in 212 A.D. ius gentium ceased to cling to its original definition and instead was applied to states as a whole.

[ 2 ] Some semblance of modern international law can therefore be found in this shift. The actual extent of these origins and their relevance to modern law is a topic that has not yet been approached in any depth.

Natural law [ edit ] Many early international legal theorists were concerned with axiomatic truths thought to be reposed in natural law . Sixteenth century natural law writer, Francisco de Vitoria , a professor of theology at the University of Salamanca, examined the questions of the just war , the Spanish authority in the Americas, and the rights of the Native American people .

Eclectic or Grotian approach [ edit ] Hugo Grotius , a Dutch theologian, humanist and jurist played a key role in the development of modern international law. In his De jure Belli ac Pacis Libri Tres ("Three Books on the Law of War and Peace") of 1625, and drawing from the Bible and from St. Augustine 's just war theory , he argued that nations as well as persons ought to be governed by universal principles based on morality and divine justice . Drawing, though, from domestic contract law , he argued that relations among polities ought to be governed by the law of peoples, the jus gentium , established by the consent of the community of nations on the basis of the principle of pacta sunt servanda , that is, on the basis of the observance of commitments. On his part, Christian von Wolff , contended the international community should be a world superstate ( civitas maxima ), having authority over the component member states.

Emmerich de Vattel rejected this view and argued instead for the equality of states as articulated by 18th century natural law. In Le droit des gens , de Vattel suggested that the law of nations was composed of custom and law on the one hand, and natural law on the other.

During the seventeenth century, the basic tenets of the Grotian or eclectic school, especially the doctrines of legal equality , territorial sovereignty , and independence of states, became the fundamental principles of the European political and legal system and were enshrined in the 1648 Peace of Westphalia .

Legal positivism [ edit ] The early positivist school emphasized the importance of custom and treaties as sources of international law. Early positivist scholar Alberico Gentili used historical examples to posit that positive law ( jus voluntarium ) was determined by general consent . Another positivist scholar, Richard Zouche , published the first manual of international law in 1650.

Legal positivism became the dominant legal theory of 18th century and found its way into international legal philosophy. At the time, Cornelius van Bynkershoek asserted that the bases of international law were customs and treaties commonly consented to by various states.

John Jacob Moser emphasized the importance of state practice in international law.

Georg Friedrich von Martens published the first systematic manual on positive international law, Precis du droit des gens moderne de l'Europe . During the 19th century, positivist legal theory became even more dominant due to nationalism and the Hegelian philosophy. International commercial law became a branch of domestic law: private international law , separate from public international law. Positivism narrowed the range of international practice that might qualify as law, favouring " rationality " over " morality " and "ethics" . The 1815 Congress of Vienna marked the formal recognition of the political and international legal system based on the conditions of Europe.

Modern legal positivists consider international law as a unified system of rules that emanates from the states' will. International law, as it is, is an " objective " reality that must be distinguished from law "as it should be." Classic positivism demands rigorous tests for legal validity . Extralegal arguments (i.e., arguments that have no textual, systemic or historical basis on the law) are deemed irrelevant to legal analysis. There is only hard law, no soft law .

[ 5 ] Criticisms of positivist international legal theory include its rigidity, its focus on state consent, without allowing for interpretation, and the fact that it does not allow moral judgements regarding a State's conduct as long as it follows international norms.

International relations – international law approaches [ edit ] Legal scholars have drawn from the four main schools of thought in the areas of political science and international relations : realism , liberalism , institutionalism , and constructivism to examine, through an interdisciplinary approach, the content of legal rules and institutions, to explain why and how international law and legal institutions came to be and why they are effective.

[ 6 ] These methods have led some scholars to reconceptualize international law in general.

[ 7 ] Realism [ edit ] Realism contends that, in an anarchic international system, states' main objective is for survival that obligates them to maximize their relative power in order to preserve their territory and existence. Since international cooperation is possible only inasmuch as it responds to the states' self-interest in maximizing their power and prospects for survival, states do not pursue cooperation on the basis of normative commitments.

[ 8 ] According to Realist legal scholars, states adopt only international legal norms that either enhance their power, formalize the subordination of weaker states, or that they intend to violate deliberately to their own advantage.

[ 9 ] International Law may thus address only peripheral matters that do not impact the states' power or autonomy. Consequently, for realists, international law is a "tenuous net of breakable obligations." [ 10 ] Within the Realist approach, some scholars have proposed an "enforcement theory" according to which international legal norms are effective insofar as they "publicize clear rules, enhance monitoring of compliance, and institutionalize collective procedures for punishing violations, thereby enhancing the deterrent and coercive effects of a stable balance of power ." [ 11 ] Thus, the role of reciprocity and sanctions is underlined. Morrow, for instance, notes that: International politics in modern times generally recognizes no authority above the nation-state. Agreements among states are enforceable only by the agreeing states themselves. This assumption of anarchy poses a paradox for agreements to limit violence during wartime. (...) Reciprocity serves as the main tool to enforce agreements in international politics. Enforcement of an agreement is devolved to the parties themselves. Damaged parties have the option to respond with retaliatory sanctions to a violation of an agreement. The threat of reciprocal sanctions may be sufficient to deter violations, and so agreements can be enforced in international politics.

[ 12 ] Liberalism [ edit ] Based on the liberal international relations theory , some scholars argue that the states' stance towards international law is determined by their domestic politics and, in particular, by the aggregation of the preferences of key domestic individuals and groups toward the rule of law . Thus, democratic states , having a representative government , are more likely than non-democratic states to accept the legal regulation of both domestic and international politics, and more likely to accept and observe international law. Furthermore, democratic societies are linked by a complex net of interstate, transnational and transgovernmental relations so that both their foreign policy bureaucracies and their civil societies are interested in promoting and strengthening transnational cooperation through the creation and observance of international legal norms.

[ 13 ] Hence, the adoption of and the compliance with international legal norms among democratic states should be easier and more peaceful than the observance of international law among non-democratic states. In this regard, Anne-Marie Slaughter notes that: Agreements concluded among liberal States are more likely to be concluded in an atmosphere of mutual trust, a precondition that will facilitate any kind of enforcement. In particular, however, the assumptions that these are agreements reached with the participation of a network of individuals and groups in the participating States, and that these States are committed to the rule of law enforced by national judiciaries should lead to more 'vertical' enforcement through domestic courts. This mode of enforcement contrasts with the traditional 'horizontal' mode involving state responsibility , reciprocity , and countermeasures.

[ 14 ] Rational choice and game theory [ edit ] This approach to law applies theories of economics to identify the legal implications of maximizing behavior inside and outside of markets. Economics is the study of rational choice under limited conditions.

[ 15 ] Rational choice is the assumption that individual actors seek to maximize their preferences.

[ 16 ] Most of the economic theory employed here is neoclassical traditional economics. Economic techniques include price theory, which evaluates strategic interaction between actors.

[ 17 ] Transaction cost economics, which incorporates cost of identifying actors, negotiating, and costs of enforcing agreements into price theory.

Game theory can demonstrate how actors with maximizing behavior might fail to take action increase join gain.

[ 18 ] Public choice applies economic tools to problems outside of markets.
These tools are used to describe and evaluate law. Using these tools, laws are tested for economic efficiency.

[ 19 ] Economic theories are also used to propose changes in the law.

[ 20 ] This approach urges the adoption of laws that maximize wealth.
Potential application of this approach would begin with a text-based interpretation. A secondary concern is whether or not an actual "market" context is functioning well. Thirdly, ways to improve the imperfect market are proposed.
This approach could be used to analyze general legal questions, because this approach provides highly specified rules and provides the rationale for using them.
This approach relies on assumptions that perfect competition exists, and that individuals will behave to maximize their preferences. The empirical presence of these conditions is often difficult to determine.

International legal process [ edit ] The classic International Legal Process is the method of studying how international law is practically applied to, and functions within international policy, as well as the study of how international law can be improved.

[ 21 ] "It concentrates not so much on the exposition of rules and their content as on how international legal rules are actually used by the makers of foreign policy".

[ 22 ] ILP was developed in response to the " realists from the discipline of international relations", [ 23 ] who realized with the beginning of the Cold War how little international law played a role in international affairs. ILP was made a legitimate theory in the 1968 casebook International Legal Process, by Chayes, Ehrlich and Lowenfeld, in which the American legal process method was adapted to create an international legal process.

[ 24 ] ILP describes the way international legal processes work, and the formal and informal ways that foreign offices incorporate international law.

[ 22 ] ILP also measures the extent to which individuals are held accountable for abuses in international conflicts.

[ 25 ] While ILP recognizes that international law does not force decision makers' actions, it suggests that international law serves as a justification, constraint, and organizing device.

[ 25 ] Criticism of ILP's lack of normative qualities in its method resulted in the emergence of a new ILP.

[ 26 ] The New International Legal Process (NLP) incorporates both law as a process and as the values of each society respectively. Unlike the American Legal System, it considers normative values other than democracy, such as "… feminism , republicanism , law and economics, liberalism as well as human rights, peace and protection to the environment." [ 27 ] The NLP is unique in its flexibility in adapting to the evolution of values. This component of the method is important in order to resolve the changing of legal standards over time. The NLP
shows its true departure from the ILP by addressing what happens in the situation of conflict, as well as what should be happening.

Policy-oriented perspectives [ edit ] New Haven School [ edit ] The New Haven School is a policy-oriented perspective on international law pioneered by Myres S. McDougal , Harold D. Lasswell , and W. Michael Reisman .

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] Its intellectual antecedents lie in sociological jurisprudence of Roscoe Pound and the reformist ambitions of the American Legal Realists . From the standpoint of the New Haven approach, jurisprudence is a theory about making social choices. International law itself reflects the expectations of relevant community members about stable patterns of behavior created by assertions of control by legal authorities. The primary jurisprudential and intellectual tasks are the prescription and application of policy in ways that maintain community order and simultaneously achieve the best possible approximation of the community's social goals.

[ 30 ] These normative social goals or values of the New Haven approach include maximizing shared community values, such as wealth, enlightenment, skill, well-being, affection, respect and rectitude.

[ 31 ] The teleological goal of New Haven School jurisprudence is the interpretation of international law as a system of creating minimum world public order, with continued progress toward the development of shared values into an optimum order.

Critical Legal Studies [ edit ] Critical Legal Studies (CLS) emerged as a legal theory in America during the 1970s. It exists to this day as a method of analyzing international law from a highly theoretical perspective.

[ 32 ] The method proposes that the nature of international law is limited because it is determined by language, which is biased and still stuck in the conventional structures of politics and power.

[ 33 ] Critical Legal scholars argue that those structures of power can be found within the binaries that exist in legal language [ 34 ] (man vs. woman, majority vs. minority, etc.). Recognizing the political aspect of international law, these scholars also argue that universality is impossible.

[ 35 ] Criticism of this method suggests that this radical practice is impossible to put into application. It was successful, however, in pushing forward other approaches to international law ( feminist , cultural relativist , etc.) [ 36 ] because of its deep analysis of language, and all the imbalance that it reveals.

Central case approach [ edit ] The central case approach is a method of looking at human rights situations. This approach recognizes the existence of certain universal rights .

[ 37 ] It begins analyzing a human rights issue by constructing a hypothetical ideal situation in which those rights are applied, a standard against which to compare an actual situation. The central case approach then investigates to what extent, and in what ways the actual situation deviates from the ideal (or the central case).

[ 38 ] The central case approach allows for more complexity than the traditional binary method of analysis.

[ 39 ] In binary terms, human rights are simply violated or they are upheld.

[ 40 ] This does not allow for degrees of severity of a human rights violation, which creates a deceptively simplistic view of a situation.

John Finnis developed the concept of a central case as it applied to assessing legal systems; [ 41 ] Tai-Heng Cheng was the first to apply it to human rights. If used by decision-makers, the central case approach could be effective in preventing human rights abuses. It takes into account a society's political and social situations in addition to specific human rights abuses.

[ 38 ] This enables it to detect trends of human rights abuses, and the reasons behind these trends. The depth of a central case analysis exposes the different degrees of human rights abuses that occur, allowing policy makers to focus on the most severe cases and patterns of abuse with more urgency. The central case approach provides an accurate and flexible picture of situations that are in a state of change.

[ 42 ] Whereas a binary appraisal would conclude whether a human right had been violated at one point in time, the central case approach can detect shifting political and social conditions and patterns that give a more nuanced view of the state of human rights.

[ 42 ] Feminist legal theory [ edit ] Feminist legal theory critiques current legal vocabulary and practice by arguing it is patriarchal , presenting men as the norm and women as a deviation from the norm. Feminist theorists propose to change legal language to make it more inclusive of women, or to rethink law completely, so it is possible to promote broader social goals of justice and equality. Feminist methods seek to expose the biases from which international law is written and particularly the notion that women are more vulnerable than men and need special protection under the law. Feminist theorist Hilary Charlesworth criticizes the dialogue of women as victims in need of protection from both men and international law. Additionally, she argues that the irony of the dominant language is that while it aims to especially protect women, the emphasis is on the protection of her honor and not on the protection of her social, cultural and economic rights.

[ 43 ] LGBT legal theory [ edit ] Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender/Transsexual (LGBT) International Law Theory is a critical school of thought that continues to develop as the shortcomings of international law are realized, in regard to the integration of queer theory into international law theory. While human rights conventions have recently begun to generalize in regard to equality and its recipients, in the past, any discussions of sexual orientation and gender identity have gone largely untouched. The movement of LGBT International Law Theory centers on the inclusion and awareness of LGBT rights (and protection of persons ), as well as the integration of queer theory within the realm of international law. As LGBT theory has become more prominent in scholarly works, international courts and international law organizations (particularly the European Union and the United Nations ) have considered workplace discrimination on the basis of sexuality, issues stemming from the definition of family in regard to homosexual unions, the position of transsexuals in the question of sexual orientation, the need for recognition of LGBT rights in regard to general health advocacy and the HIV/AIDS crisis, the inclusion of and LGBT advocacy group within the UN (with advisor status), and the ongoing active persecution of people engaging in homosexual acts, among other issues.

[ 44 ] According to scholar Nancy Levit , the challenges for gay legal theory are twofold: to move away from the frailties of both formal equality and antisubordination theories, and to develop ways of representing sexual minorities that will make them more acceptable, if not valuable, in a broader cultural context, that is the critical body of LGBT International Law Theory.

[ 45 ] Third World Approaches to International Law [ edit ] Third World Approaches to International Law (TWAIL) is a critical approach to international law that is not a "method" in the strict sense of questioning "what the law is". Rather, it is an approach to law that is unified by a particular set of concerns and analytical tools with which to explore them. It is an approach that draws primarily from the history of the encounter between international law and colonized peoples. TWAIL shares many concepts with post-colonial studies, feminist theory , critical legal studies , Marxist theory and critical race theory . TWAIL scholarship prioritizes in its study the power dynamic between the First World and Third World and the role of international law in legitimizing the subjugation and oppression of Third World peoples. TWAIL scholars try to avoid presenting the "Third World" as a unified, coherent place but rather use the term to indicate peoples who have the shared experience of underdevelopment and marginalization .

Contemporary TWAIL scholarship has it origins in works of jurists such as B. S. Chimni, Georges Abi-Saab , F. Garcia-Amador , R.P. Anand , Mohammed Bedjaoui , and Taslim O. Elias . Over the years, several Western scholars have been sympathetic to the Third World's position and made important contributions to this body of scholarship, and these include, scholars such as C.H. Alexandrowicz , Richard Falk , Nico Schrijver and PJ.I.M. de Waart .

David Kennedy and Martti Koskenniemi have also contributed support in their own work.

[ how?

] TWAIL as a loose network of scholars has had several conferences thus far.

See also [ edit ] Public international law Jurisprudence Rule according to higher law Regional integration law Third World Approaches to International Law (TWAIL) Realism Notes [ edit ] ^ Lesaffer, Randall. "Argument from Roman Law in Current International Law: Occupation and Acquisitive Prescription" Volume 16, Number 1 (European Journal of International Law 2005).

^ a b Lesaffer (2005), 25–58.

^ Mousourakis, George "The Historical and Institutional Context of Roman Law" (Ashgate Publishing Company, 2003), 22.

^ a b Mousourakis (2003), 23.

^ Bruno Simma and Andreas L. Paulus "Symposium on method in International Law: The Responsibility of Individuals for Human Rights Abuses in Internal Conflicts: A Positivist View" 93 American Journal of International Law 302 (April, 1999).

^ Abbot, Kenneth W. "Symposium on Method in International Law: International Relations Theory, International Law and the Regime Governing Atrocities in Internal Conflicts." (1999): 361–378.

^ Anne-Marie Slaughter ; Andre S. Tulumello; Stepan Wood, International Law and International Relations Theory: A New Generation of Interdisciplinary Scholarship, 92 American Journal of International Law 367–397 (1998) at p. 369: "We identify three ways that lawyers are using materials and insights from IR theory: to diagnose substantive problems and frame better legal solutions; to explain the structure or function of particular international legal rules or institutions; reconceptualize or reframe particular institutions or international law generally." ^ Hans J. Morgenthau , Positivism, Functionalism, and International Law, 34 American Journal of International Law 260 (1940).

^ William C. Bradford , In The Minds of Men: A Theory of Compliance with the Laws of War (2004) p. 7.

^ Stanley Hoffmann , Conditions of World Order 364 (1956).

^ William C. Bradford , In The Minds of Men: A Theory of Compliance with the Laws of War (2004) p. 8.

^ James D. Morrow, The Laws of War as an International Institution Archived 2014-02-02 at the Wayback Machine , p. 1 (2008) See also: James D. Morrow, Laws of War, Common Conjectures, and Legal Systems in International Politics, 31 Journal of Legal Studies 41 (2002): "International Law must be self-enforcing to be effective. Successful self-enforcement of law among states requires either that they must be willing to live up to their legal obligations regardless of what others do or that reciprocity must deter violations." ^ William C. Bradford , In The Minds of Men: A Theory of Compliance with the Laws of War (2004) p. 9.

^ Anne-Marie Slaughter, International Law in a World of Liberal States, 6 European Journal of International Law (1995) p. 532.

^ Hawley, Frederick Barnard. "The Definition of Economics".The American Economic Review, Vol. 3, No. 3. (September 1913), 606–609.

[1] ^ Hawley 1913, 606–609.

^ Forsythe, David. Human Rights in International Relations (Cambridge University Press 2000).

^ "Game Theory." Encyclopædia Britannica. 2008. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 13 Mar. 2008.

[2] ^ Ratner, Steven R. (1 January 1998). "International Law: The Trials of Global Norms".

Foreign Policy (110): 65– 80.

doi : 10.2307/1149277 .

JSTOR 1149277 .

^ Druzin, Bryan (2014).

"Opening the Machinery of Private Order: Public International Law as a Form of Private Ordering" .

Saint Louis University Law Journal .

58 .

^ O'Connell, Mary Ellen. "Symposium on Method in International Law". The American Society of International Law American Journal of International Law, 1999), 334.

^ a b O'Connell (1999), 334.

^ O'Connell (1999), 336.

^ O'Connell (1999), 335.

^ a b O'Connell (1999), 337.

^ O'Connell (1999), 338.

^ O’Connell (1999), 77.

^ Reisman, Michael. "The View from the New Haven School of International Law" International Law in Contemporary Perspective (Foundation Press, New York, NY 1992).

^ Chen, Lung-chu (December 31, 2014).

An Introduction to Contemporary International Law: A Policy-Oriented Perspective . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-022800-2 – via Google Books.

^ Reisman (2004), 2.

^ Reisman (2004), 5.

^ Steinberg, Richard & Zasloff, Jonathan. "Power and International Law" 100 AM. J. Int'l L. 64, 64–87 (2006).

^ Shaw, Malcolm N. "International Law" (5th ed. 2003) p. 62.

^ Steinberg & Zasloff (2006).

^ Shaw (2003).

^ Lillich, Richard B. "International Human Rights: Problems of Law, Policy, and Practice" (4th ed. 2006) p. 36.

^ Cheng, Tai-Heng. "The Central Case Approach to Human Rights." Pacific Rim Law & Policy 13:257 (2004), 260.

^ a b Cheng (2004), 260.

^ Cheng (2004), 258.

^ Cheng (2004), 257.

^ Finnis, John. "Natural Law and Natural Rights." 9–11 (H.L.A. Hart ed., 1986) (1996).

^ a b Cheng (2004), 261.

^ Charlesworth, Hilary; Chinkin, Christine; Wright, Shelley (October 1991).

"Feminist Approaches to International Law" .

American Journal of International Law .

85 (4): 613– 645.

doi : 10.2307/2203269 .

ISSN 0002-9300 .

JSTOR 2203269 .

^ Sanders, Douglas. "Human Rights And Sexual Orientation in International Law." 11 November 2005. International Gay and Lesbian Law Association.

^ Levit, Nancy. "A Different Kind of Sameness: Beyond Formal Equality and Antisubordination Principles in Gay Legal Theory and Constitutional Doctrine" (Ohio State Law Journal, Vol. 61, 2000) p. 867.

References [ edit ] William C. Bradford , In The Minds of Men: A Theory of Compliance with the Laws of War (2004) Third World Quarterly Vol. 27, No.5 (2006) Antony Anghie, Bhupinder Chimni, Karin Mickelson and Obiora Chinedu Okafor (eds.). ' The Third World and International Order: Law, Politics and Globalization (Leiden: Brill Academic Publishers, Martinus Nijhoff, 2003) Mutua, Makau W.

, "What is TWAIL?" Vol. 31 American Society of International Law Proceedings (2000) Rajagopal, Balakrishnan.

International Law From Below; Development, Social Movements and Third World Resistance (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003) Domingo, Rafael , The New Global Law (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010) Anghie, Anthony.

Imperialism, Sovereignty and the Making of International Law (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 2005) Anne-Marie Slaughter; Andre S. Tulumello; Stepan Wood. "International Law and International Relations Theory: A New Generation of Interdisciplinary Scholarship", 92 American Journal of International Law 367–397 (1998) Weeks, Edythe, Politics of Space Law in a Post Cold War Era: Understanding Regime Change , Northern Arizona University, Ph.D. Dissertation for the Department of Politics and International Affairs, November 2006 External links [ edit ] American Society of International Law, International Legal Theory, volumes 1–12 (1995–2006).

Public International Law as a Form of Private Ordering v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐9b6c8b6ff‐c5wrs
Cached time: 20250813104519
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.410 seconds
Real time usage: 0.485 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1744/1000000
Revision size: 34017/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 61463/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2582/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 55612/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.244/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6411831/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  398.707      1 -total
 29.65%  118.236      1 Template:Reflist
 24.61%   98.127      1 Template:Judicial_interpretation
 24.17%   96.383      1 Template:Sidebar
 21.12%   84.194      3 Template:Cite_journal
 12.10%   48.259      1 Template:Refimprove
 11.98%   47.769      1 Template:Law
 11.67%   46.548      1 Template:Short_description
 11.56%   46.096      1 Template:Navbox
 11.08%   44.182      1 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:39282128:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250813104519 and revision id 1305661725. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=International_legal_theories&oldid=1305661725 " Categories : International law Philosophy of law International relations theory Political philosophy Legal doctrines and principles Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2024 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2024 This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 10:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents International legal theories 6 languages Add topic

