Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Interpretations Toggle Interpretations subsection 1.1 Indian philosophy 1.2 Heraclitus 1.3 Protagoras 1.4 Parmenides 1.5 Socrates 1.6 Plato's synthesis 1.7 Aristotle's contribution 1.8 Avicenna 1.9 Thomas Aquinas 1.10 Leibniz and Kant 1.11 Russell 1.12 Dialetheism 2 Alleged impossibility of its proof or denial 3 In popular culture 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Law of noncontradiction 33 languages العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Law of contradiction ) Logic theorem For the Fargo episode, see The Law of Non-Contradiction .

This article uses forms of logical notation. For a concise description of the symbols used in this notation, see List of logic symbols .

In logic , the law of noncontradiction ( LNC ; also known as the law of contradiction , principle of non-contradiction ( PNC ), or the principle of contradiction ) states that for any given proposition, the proposition and its negation cannot both be simultaneously true, e.g., the proposition " the house is white " and its negation " the house is not white " are mutually exclusive .

Formally , this is expressed as the tautology ¬(p ∧ ¬p). The law is not to be confused with the law of excluded middle which states that at least one of two propositions like "the house is white" and "the house is not white" holds.

One reason to have this law is the principle of explosion , which states that anything follows from a contradiction. The law is employed in a reductio ad absurdum proof.

To express the fact that the law is tenseless and to avoid equivocation , sometimes the law is amended to say "contradictory propositions cannot both be true 'at the same time and in the same sense'".

It is one of the so called three laws of thought ,  along with its complement, the law of excluded middle, and the law of identity . However, no system of logic is built on just these laws, and none of these laws provide inference rules , such as modus ponens or De Morgan's laws .

The law of non-contradiction and the law of excluded middle create a dichotomy in a so-called logical space, the points in which are all the consistent combinations of propositions. Each combination would contain exactly one member of each pair of contradictory propositions, so the space would have two parts which are mutually exclusive and jointly exhaustive. The law of non-contradiction is merely an expression of the mutually exclusive aspect of that dichotomy, and the law of excluded middle is an expression of its jointly exhaustive aspect.

Interpretations [ edit ] This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( May 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) One difficulty in applying the law of non-contradiction is ambiguity in the propositions.

[ 1 ] For instance, if it is not explicitly specified as part of the propositions A and B, then A may be B at one time, and not at another. A and B may in some cases be made to sound mutually exclusive linguistically even though A may be partly B and partly not B at the same time. However, it is impossible to predicate of the same thing, at the same time, and in the same sense, the absence and the presence of the same fixed quality.

Indian philosophy [ edit ] The Buddhist Tripitaka attributes to Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta , who lived in the 6th century BCE, the implicit formulation of the law of noncontradiction, “‘See how upright, honest and sincere Citta, the householder, is’; and, a little later, he also says: ‘See how Citta, the householder, is not upright, honest or sincere.’ To this, Citta replies: ‘if your former statement is true, your latter statement is false and if your latter statement is true, your former statement is false.’” Early explicit formulations of the law of noncontradiction were ontic , with later 2nd century Buddhist philosopher Nagarjuna stating “when something is a single thing, it cannot be both existent and non-existent” similar to Aristotle’s own ontic formulation that “that a thing cannot at the same time be and not be”.

[ 2 ] Heraclitus [ edit ] According to both Plato and Aristotle , [ 3 ] Heraclitus was said to have denied the law of non-contradiction. This is quite likely [ 4 ] if, as Plato pointed out , the law of non-contradiction does not hold for changing things in the world. If a philosophy of Becoming is not possible without change, then (the potential of) what is to become must already exist in the present object. In "We step and do not step into the same rivers; we are and we are not", both Heraclitus's and Plato's object simultaneously must, in some sense, be both what it now is and have the potential (dynamic) of what it might become.

[ 5 ] So little remains of Heraclitus' aphorisms that not much about his philosophy can be said with certainty. He seems to have held that strife of opposites is universal both within and without, therefore both opposite existents or qualities must simultaneously exist, although in some instances in different respects. "The road up and down are one and the same " implies either the road leads both ways, or there can be no road at all. This is the logical complement of the law of non-contradiction. According to Heraclitus, change, and the constant conflict of opposites is the universal logos of nature.

Protagoras [ edit ] Personal subjective perceptions or judgments can only be said to be true at the same time in the same respect, in which case, the law of non-contradiction must be applicable to personal judgments.
The most famous saying of Protagoras is: "Man is the measure of all things: of things which are, that they are, and of things which are not, that they are not".

[ 6 ] However, Protagoras was referring to things that are used by or in some way related to humans. This makes a great difference in the meaning of his aphorism. Properties, social entities, ideas, feelings, judgments, etc. originate in the human mind. However, Protagoras has never suggested that man must be the measure of stars or the motion of the stars.

Parmenides [ edit ] Parmenides employed an ontological version of the law of non-contradiction to prove that being is and to deny the void, change, and motion. He also similarly disproved contrary propositions. In his poem On Nature , he said, the only routes of inquiry there are for thinking: the one that [it] is and that [it] cannot not be is the path of Persuasion (for it attends upon truth) the other, that [it] is not and that it is right that [it] not be, this I point out to you is a path wholly inscrutable for you could not know what is not (for it is not to be accomplished) nor could you point it out... For the same thing is for thinking and for being The nature of the 'is' or what-is in Parmenides is a highly contentious subject. Some have taken it to be whatever exists, some to be whatever is or can be the object of scientific inquiry.

[ 7 ] Socrates [ edit ] In Plato's early dialogues, Socrates uses the elenctic method to investigate the nature or definition of ethical concepts such as justice or virtue. Elenctic refutation depends on a dichotomous thesis, one that may be divided into exactly two mutually exclusive parts, only one of which may be true. Then Socrates goes on to demonstrate the contrary of the commonly accepted part using the law of non-contradiction. According to Gregory Vlastos, [ 8 ] the method has the following steps: Socrates' interlocutor asserts a thesis, for example, "Courage is endurance of the soul", which Socrates considers false and targets for refutation.

Socrates secures his interlocutor's agreement to further premises, for example, "Courage is a fine thing" and "Ignorant endurance is not a fine thing".

Socrates then argues, and the interlocutor agrees, that these further premises imply the contrary of the original thesis, in this case, it leads to: "courage is not endurance of the soul".

Socrates then claims that he has shown that his interlocutor's thesis is false and that its negation is true.

Plato's synthesis [ edit ] Plato 's version of the law of non-contradiction states that "The same thing clearly cannot act or be acted upon in the same part or in relation to the same thing at the same time, in contrary ways" (The Republic (436b)). In this, Plato carefully phrases three axiomatic restrictions on action or reaction: in the same part, in the same relation, at the same time. The effect is to momentarily create a frozen, timeless state , somewhat like figures frozen in action on the frieze of the Parthenon.

[ 9 ] This way, he accomplishes two essential goals for his philosophy. First, he logically separates the Platonic world of constant change [ 10 ] from the formally knowable world of momentarily fixed physical objects.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Second, he provides the conditions for the dialectic method to be used in finding definitions, as for example in the Sophist . So Plato's law of non-contradiction is the empirically derived necessary starting point for all else he has to say.

[ 13 ] In contrast, Aristotle reverses Plato's order of derivation. Rather than starting with experience , Aristotle begins a priori with the law of non-contradiction as the fundamental axiom of an analytic philosophical system.

[ 14 ] This axiom then necessitates the fixed, realist model. Now, he starts with much stronger logical foundations than Plato's non-contrariety of action in reaction to conflicting demands from the three parts of the soul.

Aristotle's contribution [ edit ] The traditional source of the law of non-contradiction is Aristotle 's Metaphysics where he gives three different versions.

[ 15 ] Ontological : "It is impossible that the same thing belong and not belong to the same thing at the same time and in the same respect." (1005b19-20) Psychological : "No one can believe that the same thing can (at the same time) be and not be." (1005b23–24) [ 16 ] Logical (aka the medieval Lex Contradictoriarum ): [ 17 ] "The most certain of all basic principles is that contradictory propositions are not true simultaneously." (1011b13-14) Aristotle attempts several proofs of this law.  He first argues that every expression has a single meaning (otherwise we could not communicate with one another).  This rules out the possibility that by "to be a man", "not to be a man" is meant.  But "man" means "two-footed animal" (for example), and so if anything is a man, it is necessary (by virtue of the meaning of "man") that it must be a two-footed animal, and so it is impossible at the same time for it not to be a two-footed animal.  Thus "it is not possible to say truly at the same time that the same thing is and is not a man" ( Metaphysics 1006b 35).  Another argument is that anyone who believes something cannot believe its contradiction (1008b): Why does he not just get up first thing and walk into a well or, if he finds one, over a cliff?  In fact, he seems rather careful about cliffs and wells.

[ 18 ] Avicenna [ edit ] Avicenna 's commentary on the Metaphysics illustrates the common view that the law of non-contradiction "and their like are among the things that do not require our elaboration." Avicenna's words for "the obdurate" are quite facetious: "he must be subjected to the conflagration of fire, since 'fire' and 'not fire' are one. Pain must be inflicted on him through beating, since 'pain' and 'no pain' are one. And he must be denied food and drink, since eating and drinking and the abstention from both are one [and the same]." [ 19 ] Thomas Aquinas [ edit ] Thomas Aquinas argued that the principle of non-contradiction is essential to the reasoning of human beings ("One cannot reasonably hold two mutually exclusive beliefs at the same time"). He argued that human reasoning without the principle of non-contradiction is utterly impossible because reason itself can't function with two contradictory ideas. Aquinas argued that this is the same both for moral arguments as well as theological arguments and even machinery (“the parts must work together, the machine can’t work if two parts are incompatible”).

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Leibniz and Kant [ edit ] Leibniz and Kant both used the law of non-contradiction to define the difference between analytic and synthetic propositions.

[ 22 ] For Leibniz, analytic statements follow from the law of non-contradiction, and synthetic ones from the principle of sufficient reason .

Russell [ edit ] The principle was stated as a theorem of propositional logic by Russell and Whitehead in Principia Mathematica as: ∗ ∗ 3 ⋅ ⋅ 24 .

⊢ ⊢ .

∼ ∼ ( p .

∼ ∼ p ) {\displaystyle \mathbf {*3\cdot 24} .\ \ \vdash .\thicksim (p.\thicksim p)} [ 23 ] Dialetheism [ edit ] Graham Priest advocates the view that under some conditions , some statements can be both true and false simultaneously, or may be true and false at different times.

Dialetheism arises from formal logical paradoxes , such as the Liar's paradox and Russell's paradox , even though it isn't the only solution to them.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] Alleged impossibility of its proof or denial [ edit ] The law of non-contradiction is alleged to be neither verifiable nor falsifiable, on the ground that any proof or disproof must use the law itself prior to reaching the conclusion. In other words, in order to verify or falsify the laws of logic one must resort to logic as a weapon, an act that is argued to be self-defeating .

[ 27 ] Since the early 20th century, certain logicians have proposed logics that deny the validity of the law.

Logics known as " paraconsistent " are inconsistency-tolerant logics in that there, from P together with ¬P, it does not imply that any proposition follows. Nevertheless, not all paraconsistent logics deny the law of non-contradiction and some such logics even prove it.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] Some, such as David Lewis , have objected to paraconsistent logic on the ground that it is simply impossible for a statement and its negation to be jointly true.

[ 30 ] A related objection is that "negation" in paraconsistent logic is not really negation ; it is merely a subcontrary -forming operator.

[ 31 ] [ full citation needed ] [ 32 ] [ full citation needed ] Those who (like the dialetheists) claim that the Law of Non-Contradiction can be violated are in fact using a different definition of negation, and therefore talking about something else other than the Law of Non-Contradiction which is based on a particular definition of negation and therefore cannot be violated.

[ 33 ] In popular culture [ edit ] The Fargo episode " The Law of Non-Contradiction ", which takes its name from the law, was noted for its several elements relating to the law of non-contradiction, as the episode's main character faces several paradoxes. For example, she is still the acting chief of police while having been demoted from the position, and tries to investigate a man that both was and was not named Ennis Stussy, and who both was and was not her stepfather. It also features the story of a robot who, after having spent millions of years unable to help humanity, is told that he greatly helped mankind all along by observing history.

[ 34 ] See also [ edit ] Contradiction First principle Law of identity Oxymoron Peirce's law Principle of bivalence Principle of sufficient reason Trivialism References [ edit ] ^ "Logic, Ontological Neutrality, and the Law of Non-Contradiction" (PDF) .

Columbeia.edu . 2014.

^ Gillon, Brendan (2011), "Logic in Classical Indian Philosophy" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2024 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2024-03-03 .

^ Aristotle, Metaphysics (IV,1005b) , to suppose that the same thing is and is not, as some imagine that Heraclitus says ^ Heraclitus, Fragments 36,57,59 (Bywater) ^ Cornford, F.M., Plato's Theory of Knowledge , p. 234 ^ (80B1 DK ). According to Plato's Theaetetus , section 152a.

[1] ^ Curd, Patricia, "Presocratic Philosophy", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2011 Edition) , Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2011/entries/presocratics/ ^ Gregory Vlastos, 'The Socratic Elenchus', Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy I , Oxford 1983, 27–58.

^ James Danaher, The Laws of Thought "The restrictions Plato places on the laws of thought (i.e., "in the same respect," and "at the same time,") are an attempt to isolate the object of thought by removing it from all other time but the present and all respects but one." ^ Plato's Divided Line describes the four Platonic worlds ^ Cratylus , starting at 439e ^ "A thing which is F at one time, or in one way, or in one relation, or from one point of view, will be all too often not-F, at another time, in another way" ("Metaphysical Paradox" in Gregory Vlastos, Platonic Studies , p.50) ^ "Two Principles of Noncontradiction" in Samuel Scolnicov, Plato's Parmenides , pp.12-16 ^ Similarly, Kant remarked that Newton " by no means dared to prove this law a priori, and therefore appealed rather to experience " ( Metaphysical Foundations , 4:449) ^ Łukasiewicz (1971) p.487 ^ Whitaker, CWA Aristotle's De Interpretatione: Contradiction and Dialectic page 184 ^ Rijk, Lambertus Marie de (1972).

Peter of Spain (Petrus Hispanus Portugalensis): Tractatus: Called afterwards Summule logicales. First critical ed. From the manuscripts . Van Gorcum.

ISBN 9789023209751 .

^ 1008b, trans. Lawson-Tancred ^ Avicenna, Metaphysics , I.8 53.13–15 (sect. 12 [p. 43] in ed. Michael Marmura); commenting on Aristotle, Topics I.11.105a4–5. The editorial addition (brackets) is present in Marmura's translation.

^ Contradictio: Theorien und Bewertungen des Widerspruchs in der Theologie des Mittelalters . Mohr Siebeck. 2005.

ISBN 978-3-16-148741-5 .

^ Weidemann, Hermann (1981).

" "Socrates est": Zur Logik singulärer Existenzaussagen nach Thomas von Aquin" .

Sprache und Erkenntnis im Mittelalter, 2. Halbbd . pp.

753– 758.

doi : 10.1515/9783110837711.753 .

ISBN 978-3-11-083771-1 .

^ Wilson, Catherine (2018), "Leibniz's Influence on Kant" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2018 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2021-02-20 .

^ Alfred North Whitehead , Bertrand Russell (1910), Principia Mathematica , Cambridge , pp.

116– 117 [2] .

^ Priest, Graham; Berto, Francesco; Weber, Zach (2018), "Dialetheism" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2018 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2022-07-10 ^ Hájek, Petr; Paris, Jeff; Shepherdson, John (2000).

"The Liar Paradox and Fuzzy Logic" .

The Journal of Symbolic Logic .

65 (1): 339– 346.

doi : 10.2307/2586541 .

ISSN 0022-4812 .

JSTOR 2586541 .

S2CID 6865763 .

^ "Russell's Paradox | Brilliant Math & Science Wiki" .

brilliant.org . Retrieved 2023-10-19 .

^ S.M. Cohen, Aristotle on the Principle of Non-Contradiction " Aristotle's solution in the Posterior Analytics is to distinguish between episteme (scientific knowledge) and nous (intuitive intellect). First principles, such as PNC, are not objects of scientific knowledge - since they are not demonstrable - but are still known, since they are grasped by nous.

" ^ The law of non-contradiction : new philosophical essays . Oxford: Clarendon Press. 2004.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199265176.003.0024 .

ISBN 9780199265176 .

^ Carnielli, Walter; Rodrigues, Abilio.

"An epistemic approach to paraconsistency: a logic of evidence and truth" (PDF) .

Pittsburg . Retrieved January 20, 2024 .

^ Lewis (1982) ^ Slater (1995) ^ Béziau (2000) ^ Loke, A.T.E. (2024).

"The Law of Non-contradiction and Global Philosophy of Religion" .

SOPHIA .

63 (4): 619– 635.

doi : 10.1007/s11841-024-01001-5 .

^ "Is 'Fargo' Still 'Fargo' If It's In Los Angeles? You Betcha!" .

Uproxx . May 3, 2017 . Retrieved May 6, 2017 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Aristotle (1998). Lawson-Tancred, H. (ed.).

Aristotle's Metaphysics . Penguin.

Béziau, J. Y. (2000). What is paraconsistent logic. Frontiers of paraconsistent logic, 95-111.

Lewis, David (1982), "Logic for equivocators", reprinted in Papers in Philosophical Logic, Cambridge University Press (1997), p. 97-110.

Łukasiewicz, Jan (1971) [1910 in Polish], "On the Principle of Contradiction in Aristotle", Review of Metaphysics , 24 : 485– 509 .

Slater, B. H. (1995). Paraconsistent logics?. Journal of Philosophical logic, 24(4), 451-454.

Further reading [ edit ] Benardete, Seth (1989).

Socrates' Second Sailing: On Plato's Republic . University of Chicago Press.

External links [ edit ] S. M. Cohen, " Aristotle on the Principle of Non-Contradiction ", Canadian Journal of Philosophy , Vol. 16, No. 3.

James Danaher (2004), " The Laws of Thought ", The Philosopher , Vol. LXXXXII No. 1.

Paula Gottlieb, " Aristotle on Non-contradiction " ( Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy ).

Laurence Horn , " Contradiction " ( Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy ).

Graham Priest and Francesco Berto, " Dialetheism " ( Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy ).

Graham Priest and Koji Tanaka, " Paraconsistent logic " ( Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy ).

v t e Mathematical logic General Axiom list Cardinality First-order logic Formal proof Formal semantics Foundations of mathematics Information theory Lemma Logical consequence Model Theorem Theory Type theory Theorems ( list ) and paradoxes Gödel's completeness and incompleteness theorems Tarski's undefinability Banach–Tarski paradox Cantor's theorem, paradox and diagonal argument Compactness Halting problem Lindström's Löwenheim–Skolem Russell's paradox Logics Traditional Classical logic Logical truth Tautology Proposition Inference Logical equivalence Consistency Equiconsistency Argument Soundness Validity Syllogism Square of opposition Venn diagram Propositional Boolean algebra Boolean functions Logical connectives Propositional calculus Propositional formula Truth tables Many-valued logic 3 finite ∞ Predicate First-order list Second-order Monadic Higher-order Fixed-point Free Quantifiers Predicate Monadic predicate calculus Set theory Set hereditary Class ( Ur- ) Element Ordinal number Extensionality Forcing Relation equivalence partition Set operations: intersection union complement Cartesian product power set identities Types of sets Countable Uncountable Empty Inhabited Singleton Finite Infinite Transitive Ultrafilter Recursive Fuzzy Universal Universe constructible Grothendieck Von Neumann Maps and cardinality Function / Map domain codomain image In / Sur / Bi -jection Schröder–Bernstein theorem Isomorphism Gödel numbering Enumeration Large cardinal inaccessible Aleph number Operation binary Set theories Zermelo–Fraenkel axiom of choice continuum hypothesis General Kripke–Platek Morse–Kelley Naive New Foundations Tarski–Grothendieck Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Ackermann Constructive Formal systems ( list ), language and syntax Alphabet Arity Automata Axiom schema Expression ground Extension by definition conservative Relation Formation rule Grammar Formula atomic closed ground open Free/bound variable Language Metalanguage Logical connective ¬ ∨ ∧ → ↔ = Predicate functional variable propositional variable Proof Quantifier ∃ !

∀ rank Sentence atomic spectrum Signature String Substitution Symbol function logical/constant non-logical variable Term Theory list Example axiomatic systems ( list ) of arithmetic : Peano second-order elementary function primitive recursive Robinson Skolem of the real numbers Tarski's axiomatization of Boolean algebras canonical minimal axioms of geometry : Euclidean : Elements Hilbert's Tarski's non-Euclidean Principia Mathematica Proof theory Formal proof Natural deduction Logical consequence Rule of inference Sequent calculus Theorem Systems axiomatic deductive Hilbert list Complete theory Independence ( from ZFC ) Proof of impossibility Ordinal analysis Reverse mathematics Self-verifying theories Model theory Interpretation function of models Model equivalence finite saturated spectrum submodel Non-standard model of arithmetic Diagram elementary Categorical theory Model complete theory Satisfiability Semantics of logic Strength Theories of truth semantic Tarski's Kripke's T-schema Transfer principle Truth predicate Truth value Type Ultraproduct Validity Computability theory Church encoding Church–Turing thesis Computably enumerable Computable function Computable set Decision problem decidable undecidable P NP P versus NP problem Kolmogorov complexity Lambda calculus Primitive recursive function Recursion Recursive set Turing machine Type theory Related Abstract logic Algebraic logic Automated theorem proving Category theory Concrete / Abstract category Category of sets History of logic History of mathematical logic timeline Logicism Mathematical object Philosophy of mathematics Supertask Mathematics portal v t e Classical logic General Quantifiers Predicate Connective Tautology Truth tables Truth function Truth value Well-formed formula Logicism Problem of multiple generality Associativity Distribution Validity Soundness Classical logics Term Propositional First-order Second-order Higher-order Principles Commutativity of conjunction Excluded middle Bivalence Noncontradiction Monotonicity of entailment Explosion Rules De Morgan's laws Material implication Transposition modus ponens modus tollens modus ponendo tollens Constructive dilemma Destructive dilemma Disjunctive syllogism Hypothetical syllogism Absorption Introduction Negation Double negation Existential Universal Biconditional Conjunction Disjunction Elimination Double negation Existential Universal Biconditional Conjunction Disjunction People Bernard Bolzano George Boole Georg Cantor Richard Dedekind Augustus De Morgan Gottlob Frege Kurt Gödel Hugh MacColl Giuseppe Peano Charles Sanders Peirce Bertrand Russell Ernst Schröder Henry M. Sheffer Alfred Tarski Willard Van Orman Quine Ludwig Wittgenstein Jan Łukasiewicz Works Begriffsschrift Function and Concept The Principles of Mathematics Principia Mathematica Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Law_of_noncontradiction&oldid=1304973771 " Categories : Classical logic Theorems in propositional logic Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from May 2025 All articles that may contain original research All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from July 2016 This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 08:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Law of noncontradiction 33 languages Add topic

