Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Criticism 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Rainbow gravity theory 6 languages العربية Català Español Français Português Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Physics theory "Rainbow gravity" redirects here. For the Periphery song, see Juggernaut: Alpha .

The rainbow gravity theory suggests that gravity affects different wavelengths in the same way that a prism affects light.

Rainbow gravity (or "gravity's rainbow" [ 1 ] ) is a theory that different wavelengths of light experience different gravity levels and are separated in the same way that a prism splits white light into the rainbow.

[ 2 ] This phenomenon would be imperceptible in areas of relatively low gravity, such as Earth, but would be significant in areas of extremely high gravity, such as a black hole . As such the theory claims to disprove that the universe has a beginning or Big Bang , as the big bang theory calls for all wavelengths of light to be impacted by gravity to the same extent.

[ 3 ] The theory was first proposed in 2003 by physicists Lee Smolin and João Magueijo , and claims to bridge the gap between general relativity and quantum mechanics.

[ 3 ] Scientists are currently attempting to detect rainbow gravity using the Large Hadron Collider .

[ 4 ] Background [ edit ] Rainbow gravity theory's origin is largely the product of the disparity between general relativity and quantum mechanics . More specifically, "locality," or the concept of cause and effect that drives the principles of general relativity, is mathematically irreconcilable with quantum mechanics.

[ 5 ] This issue is due to incompatible functions between the two fields; in particular, the fields apply radically different mathematical approaches in describing the concept of curvature in four-dimensional space-time .

[ 5 ] Historically, this mathematical split begins with the disparity between Einstein 's theories of relativity, which saw physics through the lens of causality , and classical physics , which interpreted the structure of space-time to be random and inherent.

[ 6 ] The prevailing notion about cosmic change is that the universe is expanding at a constantly accelerating rate; moreover, it is understood that as one traces the universe's history backwards one finds that it was, at one point, far denser. If true, the Rainbow gravity theory prohibits a singularity such as that which is postulated in the Big Bang. This indicates that, when viewed in reverse, the universe slowly approaches a point of terminal density without ever reaching it, implying that the universe does not possess a point of origin.

Criticism [ edit ] There are stringent constraints on energy-dependent speed-of-light scenarios.

[ 7 ] Based on these, Sabine Hossenfelder has strongly criticised the rainbow gravity concept, stating that "It is neither a theory nor a model, it is just an idea that, despite more than a decade of work, never developed into a proper model. Rainbow gravity has not been shown to be compatible with the standard model. There is no known quantization of this approach and one cannot describe interactions in this framework at all. Moreover, it is known to lead to non-localities which are ruled out already. For what I am concerned, no papers should get published on the topic until these issues have been resolved." [ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Steady-state model Eternal inflation Cyclic model References [ edit ] ^ Zyga, Lisa (15 January 2015).

"Black holes do not exist where space and time do not exist, says new theory" .

phys.org . Retrieved 28 March 2015 .

^ Kestin, Greg (13 Dec 2013).

"Universe May Have Been Around Since Forever, According to Rainbow Gravity Theory" .

NovaNext .

^ a b Moskowitz, Clara (9 Dec 2013).

"In a 'Rainbow' Universe Time May Have No Beginning" .

Scientific American .

^ Knapton, Sarah (23 Mar 2015).

"Big Bang theory could be debunked by Large Hadron Collider" .

The Telegraph .

^ a b Slavnov, D. A. (6 July 2012). "Possibility of reconciling quantum mechanics with general relativity theory".

Theoretical and Mathematical Physics .

171 (3): 848– 861.

Bibcode : 2012TMP...171..848S .

doi : 10.1007/s11232-012-0080-z .

ISSN 0040-5779 .

S2CID 85454483 .

^ O’Hara, Paul (1 September 2005). "Quantum Mechanics and the Metrics of General Relativity".

Foundations of Physics .

35 (9): 1563– 1584.

arXiv : gr-qc/0502078 .

Bibcode : 2005FoPh...35.1563O .

doi : 10.1007/s10701-005-6483-z .

ISSN 0015-9018 .

S2CID 15735651 .

^ Hossenfelder, Sabine (9 April 2010). "Bounds on an Energy-Dependent and Observer-Independent Speed of Light from Violations of Locality".

Phys. Rev. Lett .

104 (14): 140402.

arXiv : 1004.0418 .

Bibcode : 2010PhRvL.104n0402H .

doi : 10.1103/PhysRevLett.104.140402 .

PMID 20481922 .

S2CID 5755427 .

^ Hossenfelder, Sabine (25 March 2015).

"No, the LHC will not make contact with parallel universes" .

Backreaction . Retrieved 17 October 2015 .

v t e Theories of gravitation Standard Newtonian gravity (NG) Newton's law of universal gravitation Gauss's law for gravity Poisson's equation for gravity History of gravitational theory General relativity (GR) Introduction History Mathematics Exact solutions Resources Tests Post-Newtonian formalism Linearized gravity ADM formalism Gibbons–Hawking–York boundary term Alternatives to general relativity Paradigms Classical theories of gravitation Quantum gravity Theory of everything Classical Poincaré gauge theory Einstein–Cartan Teleparallelism Bimetric theories Gauge theory gravity Composite gravity f ( R ) gravity Infinite derivative gravity Massive gravity Modified Newtonian dynamics, MOND AQUAL Tensor–vector–scalar Nonsymmetric gravitation Scalar–tensor theories Brans–Dicke Scalar–tensor–vector Conformal gravity Scalar theories Nordström Whitehead Geometrodynamics Induced gravity Degenerate Higher-Order Scalar-Tensor theories Quantum-mechanical Euclidean quantum gravity Canonical quantum gravity Wheeler–DeWitt equation Loop quantum gravity Spin foam Causal dynamical triangulation Asymptotic safety in quantum gravity Causal sets DGP model Rainbow gravity theory Unified-field-theoric Kaluza–Klein theory Supergravity Unified-field-theoric and quantum-mechanical Noncommutative geometry Semiclassical gravity Superfluid vacuum theory Logarithmic BEC vacuum String theory M-theory F-theory Heterotic string theory Type I string theory Type 0 string theory Bosonic string theory Type II string theory Little string theory Twistor theory Twistor string theory Generalisations / extensions of GR Liouville gravity Lovelock theory (2+1)-dimensional topological gravity Gauss–Bonnet gravity Jackiw–Teitelboim gravity Pre-Newtonian theories and toy models Aristotelian physics CGHS model RST model Mechanical explanations Fatio–Le Sage Entropic gravity Gravitational interaction of antimatter Physics in the medieval Islamic world Theory of impetus Related topics Gravitational wave Graviton Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rainbow_gravity_theory&oldid=1294786922 " Categories : Physical cosmology Astrophysics theories Theories of gravity Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 June 2025, at 20:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rainbow gravity theory 6 languages Add topic

