Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Catabolic hormones 2 Etymology 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Catabolism 59 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Set of metabolic pathways that breaks down molecules into smaller units For the accelerated changes that occur when certain chemical agents are introduced, see Catalysis .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Catabolism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Schematic breakdown of large biomolecules to release energy for fueling the cell metabolism by producing ATP , the energy currency of the cell Carbon Catabolism pathway map for free energy including carbohydrate and lipid sources of energy Catabolism ( / k ə ˈ t æ b ə l ɪ z ə m / ) is the set of metabolic pathways that breaks down molecules into smaller units that are either oxidized to release energy or used in other anabolic reactions.

[ 1 ] Catabolism breaks down large molecules (such as polysaccharides , lipids , nucleic acids , and proteins ) into smaller units (such as monosaccharides , fatty acids , nucleotides , and amino acids , respectively). Catabolism is the breaking-down aspect of metabolism , whereas anabolism is the building-up aspect.

Cells use the monomers released from breaking down polymers to either construct new polymer molecules or degrade the monomers further to simple waste products, releasing energy. Cellular wastes include lactic acid , acetic acid , carbon dioxide , ammonia , and urea . The formation of these wastes is usually an oxidation process involving a release of chemical free energy, some of which is lost as heat , but the rest of which is used to drive the synthesis of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). This molecule acts as a way for the cell to transfer the energy released by catabolism to the energy-requiring reactions that make up anabolism .

Catabolism is a destructive metabolism and anabolism is a constructive metabolism. Catabolism, therefore, provides the chemical energy necessary for the maintenance and growth of cells. Examples of catabolic processes include glycolysis , the citric acid cycle , the breakdown of muscle protein in order to use amino acids as substrates for gluconeogenesis , the breakdown of fat in adipose tissue to fatty acids , and oxidative deamination of neurotransmitters by monoamine oxidase .

Catabolic hormones [ edit ] There are many signals that control catabolism. Most of the known signals are hormones and the molecules involved in metabolism itself.

Endocrinologists have traditionally classified many of the hormones as anabolic or catabolic, depending on which part of metabolism they stimulate. The so-called classic catabolic hormones known since the early 20th century are cortisol , glucagon , and adrenaline (and other catecholamines ). In recent decades, many more hormones with at least some catabolic effects have been discovered, including cytokines , orexin (known as hypocretin ), and melatonin .

[ citation needed ] Hormone Function [ 2 ] Cortisol Released from the adrenal gland in response to stress; its main role is to increase blood glucose levels by gluconeogenesis .

Glucagon Released from alpha cells in the pancreas either when starving or when the body needs to generate additional energy; it stimulates the breakdown of glycogen in the liver to increase blood glucose levels; its effect is the opposite of insulin ; glucagon and insulin are a part of a negative-feedback system that stabilizes blood glucose levels.

Adrenaline Released in response to the activation of the sympathetic nervous system ; increases heart rate and heart contractility, constricts blood vessels, is a bronchodilator that opens (dilates) the bronchi of the lungs to increase air volume and oxygen supply in the lungs, and stimulates gluconeogenesis .

Etymology [ edit ] The word catabolism is from Neo-Latin , which got the roots from Greek : κάτω kato , "downward" and βάλλειν ballein , "to throw".

See also [ edit ] Autophagy Dehydration synthesis Hydrolysis Nocturnal post absorptive catabolism Psilacetin § Pharmacology Sarcopenia References [ edit ] ^ de Bolster, M.W.G. (1997).

"Glossary of Terms Used in Bioinorganic Chemistry: Catabolism" . International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry. Archived from the original on 2017-01-21 . Retrieved 2007-10-30 .

^ This article incorporates text available under the CC BY 4.0 license.

Betts, J Gordon; Desaix, Peter; Johnson, Eddie; Johnson, Jody E; Korol, Oksana; Kruse, Dean; Poe, Brandon; Wise, James; Womble, Mark D; Young, Kelly A (June 8, 2023).

Anatomy & Physiology . Houston: OpenStax CNX. 24.1 Overview of metabolic reactions.

ISBN 978-1-947172-04-3 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Catabolism at Wikimedia Commons v t e Metabolism , catabolism , anabolism General Metabolic pathway Metabolic network Primary nutritional groups Energy metabolism Aerobic respiration Glycolysis → Pyruvate decarboxylation → Citric acid cycle → Oxidative phosphorylation ( electron transport chain + ATP synthase ) Anaerobic respiration Electron acceptors other than oxygen Fermentation Glycolysis → Substrate-level phosphorylation ABE Ethanol Lactic acid Specific paths Protein metabolism Protein synthesis Catabolism (protein→peptide→amino acid) Amino acid Amino acid synthesis Amino acid degradation (amino acid→pyruvate, acetyl CoA, or TCA intermediate) Urea cycle Nucleotide metabolism Purine metabolism Nucleotide salvage Pyrimidine metabolism Purine nucleotide cycle Carbohydrate metabolism ( carbohydrate catabolism and anabolism ) Human Glycolysis ⇄ Gluconeogenesis Glycogenolysis ⇄ Glycogenesis Pentose phosphate pathway Fructolysis Polyol pathway Galactolysis Leloir pathway Glycosylation N-linked O-linked Nonhuman Photosynthesis Anoxygenic photosynthesis Chemosynthesis Carbon fixation DeLey-Doudoroff pathway Entner-Doudoroff pathway Xylose metabolism Radiotrophism Lipid metabolism ( lipolysis , lipogenesis ) Fatty acid metabolism Fatty acid degradation ( Beta oxidation ) Fatty acid synthesis Other Steroid metabolism Sphingolipid metabolism Eicosanoid metabolism Ketosis Reverse cholesterol transport Other Metal metabolism Iron metabolism Ethanol metabolism Phospagen system (ATP-PCr) Chlororespiration Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Catabolism&oldid=1294245751 " Category : Metabolism Hidden categories: Articles with imported Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 text Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2023 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2010 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 June 2025, at 14:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Catabolism 59 languages Add topic

