Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Later developments and related models 3 References 4 Resources Toggle the table of contents Bertrand–Edgeworth model 3 languages العربية Español Euskara Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Economic Model In microeconomics , the Bertrand–Edgeworth model of price-setting oligopoly explores what happens when firms compete to sell a homogeneous product (a good for which consumers buy only from the cheapest available seller) but face limits on how much they can supply. Unlike in the standard Bertrand competition model, where firms are assumed to meet all demand at their chosen price, the Bertrand–Edgeworth model assumes each firm has a capacity constraint: a fixed maximum output it can sell, regardless of price. This constraint may be physical (as in Edgeworth ’s formulation) or may depend on price or other conditions.

A key result of the model is that pure-strategy price equilibria may fail to exist, even with just two firms, because firms have an incentive to undercut competitors' prices until they hit their capacity constraints. As a result, the model can lead to price cycles or the emergence of mixed-strategy equilibria, where firms randomize over prices.

History [ edit ] Joseph Louis François Bertrand (1822–1900) developed the model of Bertrand competition in oligopoly. This approach was based on the assumption that there are at least two firms producing a homogenous product with constant marginal cost (this could be constant at some positive value, or with zero marginal cost as in Cournot). Consumers buy from the cheapest seller. The Bertrand– Nash equilibrium of this model is to have all (or at least two) firms setting the price equal to marginal cost.  The argument is simple: if one firm sets a price above marginal cost then another firm can undercut it by a small amount (often called epsilon undercutting , where epsilon represents an arbitrarily small amount) thus the equilibrium is zero (this is sometimes called the Bertrand paradox ).

The Bertrand approach assumes that firms are willing and able to supply all demand: there is no limit to the amount that they can produce or sell.

Francis Ysidro Edgeworth considered the case where there is a limit to what firms can sell (a capacity constraint):  he showed that if there is a fixed limit to what firms can sell, then there may exist no pure-strategy Nash equilibrium (this is sometimes called the Edgeworth paradox ).

[ 1 ] Martin Shubik developed the Bertrand–Edgeworth model to allow for the firm to be willing to supply only up to its profit maximizing output at the price which it set (under profit maximization this occurs when marginal cost equals price).

[ 2 ] He considered the case of strictly convex costs, where marginal cost is increasing in output.

Shubik showed that if a Nash equilibrium exists, it must be the perfectly competitive price (where demand equals supply, and all firms set price equal to marginal cost). However, this can only happen if market demand is infinitely elastic (horizontal) at the competitive price. In general, as in the Edgeworth paradox, no pure-strategy Nash equilibrium will exist.

Huw Dixon showed that in general a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium will exist when there are convex costs.

[ 3 ] Dixon’s proof used the Existence Theorem of Partha Dasgupta and Eric Maskin .

[ 4 ] Under Dixon's assumption of (weakly) convex costs, marginal cost will be non-decreasing. This is consistent with a cost function where marginal cost is flat for a range of outputs, marginal cost is smoothly increasing, or indeed where there is a kink in total cost so that marginal cost makes a discontinuous jump upwards.

Later developments and related models [ edit ] There have been several responses to the non-existence of pure-strategy equilibrium identified by Francis Ysidro Edgeworth and Martin Shubik . Whilst the existence of mixed-strategy equilibrium was demonstrated by Huw Dixon , it has not proven easy to characterize what the equilibrium actually looks like. However, Allen and Hellwig [ 5 ] were able to show that in a large market with many firms, the average price set would tend to the competitive price.

It has been argued that non-pure strategies are not plausible in the context of the Bertrand–Edgworth model. Alternative approaches have included: Firms choose the quantity they are willing to sell up to at each price. This is a game in which price and quantity are chosen: as shown by Allen and Hellwig [ 6 ] and in a more general case by Huw Dixon [ 7 ] that the perfectly competitive price is the unique pure-strategy equilibrium.

Firms have to meet all demand at the price they set as proposed by Krishnendu Ghosh Dastidar [ 8 ] or pay some cost for turning away customers.

[ 9 ] Whilst this can ensure the existence of a pure-strategy Nash equilibrium, it comes at the cost of generating multiple equilibria. However, as shown by Huw Dixon , if the cost of turning customers away is sufficiently small, then any pure-strategy equilibria that exist will be close to the competitive equilibrium.

Introducing product differentiation , as proposed by Jean-Pascal Benassy.

[ 10 ] This is more of a synthesis of monopolistic competition with the Bertrand–Edgeworth model, but Benassy showed that if the elasticity of demand for the firms output is sufficiently high, then any pure strategy equilibrium that existed would be close to the competitive outcome.

"Integer pricing" as explored by Huw Dixon .

[ 11 ] Rather than treat price as a continuous variable , it is treated as a discrete variable .  This means that firms cannot undercut each other by an arbitrarily small amount, one of the necessary ingredients giving rise to the non-existence of a pure strategy equilibrium. This can give rise to multiple pure-strategy equilibria, some of which may be distant from the competitive equilibrium price. More recently, Prabal Roy Chowdhury [ 12 ] has combined the notion of discrete pricing with the idea that firms choose prices and the quantities they want to sell at that price as in Allen–Hellwig.

Epsilon equilibrium in the pure-strategy game.

[ 13 ] In an epsilon equilibrium, each firm is within epsilon of its optimal price.  If the epsilon is small, this might be seen as a plausible equilibrium, due perhaps to menu costs or bounded rationality . For a given ε ε > 0 {\displaystyle \varepsilon >0} , if there are enough firms, then an epsilon-equilibrium exists (this result depends on how one models the residual demand – the demand faced by higher-priced firms given the sales of the lower-priced firms).

Myopic Stable .

[ 14 ] The Myopic Stable Set of the game offers a solution in pure strategies based on better reply dynamics. When the set of pure-strategy Nash equilibria is nonempty—such as when capacities are either sufficiently large or small—it coincides with the Myopic Stable Set. For intermediate capacity levels, the Nash equilibrium involves mixed strategies. In these cases, all prices within the support of the mixed-strategy equilibrium are included in the Myopic Stable Set. Thus, the Myopic Stable Set  provides an alternative and unified foundation for understanding pricing in oligopolistic markets.

References [ edit ] ^ Edgeworth, Francis (1889). "The pure theory of monopoly".

, reprinted in Collected Papers relating to Political Economy . Vol. 1.

Macmillan . 1925.

^ Shubik, M. (1959).

Strategy and Market Structure: Competition, Oligopoly, and the Theory of Games . New York: John Wiley and Sons.

ISBN 9780598679451 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Dixon, H. D. (1984). "The existence of mixed-strategy equilibria in a price-setting oligopoly with convex costs".

Economics Letters .

16 ( 3– 4): 205– 12.

doi : 10.1016/0165-1765(84)90164-2 .

hdl : 10068/527249 .

^ Dasgupta, P.; Maskin, E. (1986). "The Existence of Equilibrium in Discontinuous Economic Games, I: Theory".

Review of Economic Studies .

53 (1): 1– 26.

doi : 10.2307/2297588 .

JSTOR 2297588 .

^ Allen, B.; Hellwig, M. (1986). "Bertrand–Edgeworth oligopoly in large markets".

Review of Economic Studies .

53 (2): 175– 204.

doi : 10.2307/2297646 .

hdl : 10068/139451 .

JSTOR 2297646 .

^ Allen, Beth; Hellwig, Martin (May 1986). "Price-Setting Firms and the Oligopolistic Foundations of Perfect Competition".

Papers and Proceedings of the Ninety-Eighth Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association .

76 (2).

American Economic Review : 387– 392.

JSTOR 1818802 .

(subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries) ^ Dixon, Huw (1992).

"The Perfectly competitive outcome as the equilibrium in an Edgeworthian price–quantity game" (PDF) .

Economic Journal .

102 (411): 301– 309.

doi : 10.2307/2234515 .

JSTOR 2234515 .

(subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries) ^ Dastidar, Krishnendu Ghosh (January 1995).

"On the Existence of Pure Strategy Bertrand Equilibrium" .

Journal of Economic Theory .

5 (1).

Springer : 19– 32.

doi : 10.1007/bf01213642 .

S2CID 153890403 .

^ Dixon, Huw (December 1990). "Bertrand–Edgeworth Equilibria when Firms Avoid Turning Customers Away".

Journal of Industrial Economics .

39 (2).

Wiley-Blackwell : 131– 46.

doi : 10.2307/2098489 .

JSTOR 2098489 .

(subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries) ^ Benassy, Jean-Pascal (April 1989).

"Market Size and Substitutability in Imperfect Competition: A Bertrand–Edgeworth–Chamberlin Model" .

Review of Economic Studies .

56 (2).

Wiley–Blackwell : 217– 34.

doi : 10.2307/2297458 .

JSTOR 2297458 .

(subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries) ^ Dixon, Huw David (July 1993).

"Integer Pricing and Bertrand–Edgeworth Oligopoly with Strictly Convex Costs: Is It Worth More Than a Penny?" .

Bulletin of Economic Research .

45 (3).

Wiley–Blackwell : 257– 68.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-8586.1993.tb00570.x .

^ Chowdhury, P. R. (May 2008).

"Equilibrium with a large number of firms" .

International Journal of Industrial Organization .

26 (3): 746– 761.

doi : 10.1016/j.ijindorg.2007.05.009 .

(subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries) ^ Dixon, H. (1987).

"Approximate Bertrand Equilibria in a replicated Industry" .

Review of Economic Studies .

54 (1): 47– 62.

doi : 10.2307/2297445 .

JSTOR 2297445 .

(subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries) ^ Bos, Iwan; Marini, Marco; Saulle, Riccardo D. (2024).

"Myopic Oligopoly Pricing" .

Games and Economic Behavior : 377– 412.

doi : 10.1016/j.geb.2024.03.014 .

hdl : 11577/3520425 .

ISSN 1573-7187 .

(subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries) Resources [ edit ] Edgeworth and modern oligopoly, Theory Xavier Vives The Pure Theory of Monopoly, Francis Edgeworth v t e Microeconomics Major topics Aggregation Budget set Consumer choice Convexity and non-convexity Cost Average Marginal Opportunity Implicit Social Sunk Transaction Cost–benefit analysis Deadweight loss Distribution Economies of scale Economies of scope Elasticity Cross elasticity of demand Income elasticity of demand Price elasticity of demand Price elasticity of supply Equilibrium General Exchange Externality Firms Goods and services Goods Service Household Income–consumption curve Information Indifference curve Intertemporal choice Market Market failure Market structure Competition Monopolistic Perfect Duopoly Monopoly Bilateral Complementary Monopsony Oligopoly Oligopsony Pareto efficiency Preferences Price Price controls Price ceiling Price floor Price discrimination Price signal Price system / Free Pricing Production Profit Public goods Rationing Rent Returns to scale Risk aversion Scarcity Shortage / Excess supply Substitution effect Surplus Social choice Supply and demand Demand / Law of demand Supply / Law of supply Uncertainty Utility Expected Marginal Wage Subfields Behavioral Business Computational Development Statistical decision theory Econometrics Engineering economics Civil engineering economics Evolutionary Experimental Game theory Green Industrial organization Institutional Labour Law Managerial Mathematical Microfoundations of macroeconomics Operations research Optimization Welfare See also Economics Applied Macroeconomics Political economy Business portal Category v t e Game theory Glossary Game theorists Games Traditional game theory Definitions Asynchrony Bayesian regret Best response Bounded rationality Cheap talk Coalition Complete contract Complete information Complete mixing Confrontation analysis Conjectural variation Contingent cooperator Coopetition Cooperative game theory Dynamic inconsistency Escalation of commitment Farsightedness Game semantics Hierarchy of beliefs Imperfect information Incomplete information Information set Move by nature Mutual knowledge Non-cooperative game theory Non-credible threat Outcome Perfect information Perfect recall Ply Preference Rationality Sequential game Simultaneous action selection Spite Strategic complements Strategic dominance Strategic form Strategic interaction Strategic move Strategy Subgame Succinct game Topological game Tragedy of the commons Uncorrelated asymmetry Equilibrium concepts Backward induction Bayes correlated equilibrium Bayesian efficiency Bayesian game Bayesian Nash equilibrium Berge equilibrium Bertrand–Edgeworth model Coalition-proof Nash equilibrium Core Correlated equilibrium Cursed equilibrium Edgeworth price cycle Epsilon-equilibrium Gibbs equilibrium Incomplete contracts Inequity aversion Individual rationality Iterated elimination of dominated strategies Markov perfect equilibrium Mertens-stable equilibrium Nash equilibrium Open-loop model Pareto efficiency Payoff dominance Perfect Bayesian equilibrium Price of anarchy Program equilibrium Proper equilibrium Quantal response equilibrium Quasi-perfect equilibrium Rational agent Rationalizability Rationalizable strategy Satisfaction equilibrium Self-confirming equilibrium Sequential equilibrium Shapley value Strong Nash equilibrium Subgame perfect equilibrium Trembling hand equilibrium Strategies Appeasement Bid shading Cheap talk Collusion Commitment device De-escalation Deterrence Escalation Fictitious play Focal point Grim trigger Hobbesian trap Markov strategy Max-dominated strategy Mixed strategy Pure strategy Tit for tat Win–stay, lose–switch Games All-pay auction Battle of the sexes Nash bargaining game Bertrand competition Blotto game Centipede game Coordination game Cournot competition Deadlock Dictator game Trust game Diner's dilemma Dollar auction El Farol Bar problem Electronic mail game Gift-exchange game Guess 2/3 of the average Keynesian beauty contest Kuhn poker Lewis signaling game Matching pennies Obligationes Optional prisoner's dilemma Pirate game Prisoner's dilemma Public goods game Rendezvous problem Rock paper scissors Stackelberg competition Stag hunt Traveler's dilemma Ultimatum game Volunteer's dilemma War of attrition Theorems Arrow's impossibility theorem Aumann's agreement theorem Brouwer fixed-point theorem Competitive altruism Folk theorem Gibbard–Satterthwaite theorem Gibbs lemma Glicksberg's theorem Kakutani fixed-point theorem Kuhn's theorem One-shot deviation principle Prim–Read theory Rational ignorance Rational irrationality Sperner's lemma Zermelo's theorem Subfields Algorithmic game theory Behavioral game theory Behavioral strategy Compositional game theory Contract theory Drama theory Graphical game theory Heresthetic Mean-field game theory Negotiation theory Quantum game theory Social software Key people Albert W. Tucker Alvin E. Roth Amos Tversky Antoine Augustin Cournot Ariel Rubinstein David Gale David K. Levine David M. Kreps Donald B. Gillies Drew Fudenberg Eric Maskin Harold W. Kuhn Herbert Simon Herbert Scarf Hervé Moulin Jean Tirole Jean-François Mertens Jennifer Tour Chayes Ken Binmore Kenneth Arrow Leonid Hurwicz Lloyd Shapley Martin Shubik Melvin Dresher Merrill M. Flood Olga Bondareva Oskar Morgenstern Paul Milgrom Peyton Young Reinhard Selten Robert Aumann Robert Axelrod Robert B. Wilson Roger Myerson Samuel Bowles Suzanne Scotchmer Thomas Schelling William Vickrey Combinatorial game theory Core concepts Combinatorial explosion Determinacy Disjunctive sum First-player and second-player win Game complexity Game tree Impartial game Misère Partisan game Solved game Sprague–Grundy theorem Strategy-stealing argument Zugzwang Games Chess Chomp Clobber Cram Domineering Hackenbush Nim Notakto Subtract a square Sylver coinage Toads and Frogs Mathematical tools Mex Nimber On Numbers and Games Star Surreal number Winning Ways for Your Mathematical Plays Search algorithms Alpha–beta pruning Expectiminimax Minimax Monte Carlo tree search Negamax Paranoid algorithm Principal variation search Key people Claude Shannon John Conway John von Neumann Evolutionary game theory Core concepts Bishop–Cannings theorem Evolution and the Theory of Games Evolutionarily stable set Evolutionarily stable state Evolutionarily stable strategy Replicator equation Risk dominance Stochastically stable equilibrium Weak evolutionarily stable strategy Games Chicken Stag hunt Applications Cultural group selection Fisher's principle Mobbing Terminal investment hypothesis Key people John Maynard Smith Robert Axelrod Mechanism design Core concepts Algorithmic mechanism design Bayesian-optimal mechanism Incentive compatibility Market design Monotonicity Participation constraint Revelation principle Strategyproofness Vickrey–Clarke–Groves mechanism Theorems Myerson–Satterthwaite theorem Revenue equivalence Applications Digital goods auction Knapsack auction Truthful cake-cutting Other topics Bertrand paradox Chainstore paradox Computational complexity of games Helly metric Multi-agent system PPAD-complete Mathematics portal Commons WikiProject Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bertrand–Edgeworth_model&oldid=1297133290 " Categories : Economics models Competition (economics) Game theory Oligopoly Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Pages containing links to subscription-or-libraries content Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2020 This page was last edited on 24 June 2025, at 09:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bertrand–Edgeworth model 3 languages Add topic

