Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Behavior of the strong interaction Toggle Behavior of the strong interaction subsection 2.1 Within hadrons 2.2 Between hadrons 3 Unification 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Strong interaction 100 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Patois Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Тыва дыл Українська اردو Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Strong force ) Binding of quarks in subatomic particles "Color force" redirects here. For the company, see Color Force .

An animation of color confinement , a property of the strong interaction. If energy is supplied to the quarks as shown, the gluon tube connecting quarks elongates until it reaches a point where it "snaps" and the energy added to the system results in the formation of a quark– antiquark pair. Thus single quarks are never seen in isolation.

An animation of the strong interaction between a proton and a neutron, mediated by pions . The colored small double circles inside are gluons .

In nuclear physics and particle physics , the strong interaction , also called the strong force or strong nuclear force , is one of the four known fundamental interactions . It confines quarks into protons , neutrons , and other hadron particles, and also binds neutrons and protons to create atomic nuclei, where it is called the nuclear force .

Most of the mass of a proton or neutron is the result of the strong interaction energy; the individual quarks provide only about 1% of the mass of a proton. At the range of 10 −15 m (1 femtometer , slightly more than the radius of a nucleon ), the strong force is approximately 100 times as strong as electromagnetism , 10 6 times as strong as the weak interaction , and 10 38 times as strong as gravitation .

[ 1 ] In the context of atomic nuclei, the force binds protons and neutrons together to form a nucleus and is called the nuclear force (or residual strong force ).

[ 2 ] Because the force is mediated by massive, short lived mesons on this scale, the residual strong interaction obeys a distance-dependent behavior between nucleons that is quite different from when it is acting to bind quarks within hadrons. There are also differences in the binding energies of the nuclear force with regard to nuclear fusion versus nuclear fission . Nuclear fusion accounts for most energy production in the Sun and other stars . Nuclear fission allows for decay of radioactive elements and isotopes , although it is often mediated by the weak interaction. Artificially, the energy associated with the nuclear force is partially released in nuclear power and nuclear weapons , both in uranium or plutonium -based fission weapons and in fusion weapons like the hydrogen bomb .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] History [ edit ] Before 1971, physicists were uncertain as to how the atomic nucleus was bound together. It was known that the nucleus was composed of protons and neutrons and that protons possessed positive electric charge , while neutrons were electrically neutral. By the understanding of physics at that time, positive charges would repel one another and the positively charged protons should cause the nucleus to fly apart. However, this was never observed. New physics was needed to explain this phenomenon.

A stronger attractive force was postulated to explain how the atomic nucleus was bound despite the protons' mutual electromagnetic repulsion . This hypothesized force was called the strong force , which was believed to be a fundamental force that acted on the protons and neutrons that make up the nucleus.

In 1964, Murray Gell-Mann , and separately George Zweig , proposed that baryons , which include protons and neutrons, and mesons were composed of elementary particles. Zweig called the elementary particles "aces" while Gell-Mann called them "quarks"; the theory came to be called the quark model .

[ 5 ] The strong attraction between nucleons was the side-effect of a more fundamental force that bound the quarks together into protons and neutrons. The theory of quantum chromodynamics explains that quarks carry what is called a color charge , although it has no relation to visible color.

[ 6 ] Quarks with unlike color charge attract one another as a result of the strong interaction, and the particle that mediates this was called the gluon .

Behavior of the strong interaction [ edit ] The strong interaction is observable at two ranges, and mediated by different force carriers in each one. On a scale less than about 0.8 fm (roughly the radius of a nucleon), the force is carried by gluons and holds quarks together to form protons, neutrons, and other hadrons. On a larger scale, up to about 3 fm, the force is carried by mesons and binds nucleons ( protons and neutrons ) together to form the nucleus of an atom .

[ 2 ] In the former context, it is often known as the color force , and is so strong that if hadrons are struck by high-energy particles, they produce jets of massive particles instead of emitting their constituents (quarks and gluons) as freely moving particles. This property of the strong force is called color confinement .

Two layers of strong interaction Interaction range held carrier result Strong < 0.8 fm quark gluon hadron Residual Strong 1–3 fm hadron meson nucleus Within hadrons [ edit ] The fundamental couplings of the strong interaction, from left to right: (a) gluon radiation, (b) gluon splitting and (c,d) gluon self-coupling.

The word strong is used since the strong interaction is the "strongest" of the four fundamental forces. At a distance of 10 −15 m, its strength is around 100 times that of the electromagnetic force , some 10 6 times as great as that of the weak force, and about 10 38 times that of gravitation .

The strong force is described by quantum chromodynamics (QCD), a part of the Standard Model of particle physics. Mathematically, QCD is a non-abelian gauge theory based on a local (gauge) symmetry group called SU(3) .

The force carrier particle of the strong interaction is the gluon, a massless gauge boson . Gluons are thought to interact with quarks and other gluons by way of a type of charge called color charge . Color charge is analogous to electromagnetic charge, but it comes in three types (±red, ±green, and ±blue) rather than one, which results in different rules of behavior. These rules are described by quantum chromodynamics (QCD), the theory of quark–gluon interactions.
Unlike the photon in electromagnetism, which is neutral, the gluon carries a color charge. Quarks and gluons are the only fundamental particles that carry non-vanishing color charge, and hence they participate in strong interactions only with each other. The strong force is the expression of the gluon interaction with other quark and gluon particles.

All quarks and gluons in QCD interact with each other through the strong force. The strength of interaction is parameterized by the strong coupling constant . This strength is modified by the gauge color charge of the particle, a group-theoretical property.

The strong force acts between quarks. Unlike all other forces (electromagnetic, weak, and gravitational), the strong force does not diminish in strength with increasing distance between pairs of quarks. After a limiting distance (about the size of a hadron ) has been reached, it remains at a strength of about 10 000 N , no matter how much farther the distance between the quarks.

[ 7 ] : 164 As the separation between the quarks grows, the energy added to the pair creates new pairs of matching quarks between the original two; hence it is impossible to isolate quarks. The explanation is that the amount of work done against a force of 10 000 N is enough to create particle–antiparticle pairs within a very short distance. The energy added to the system by pulling two quarks apart would create a pair of new quarks that will pair up with the original ones. In QCD, this phenomenon is called color confinement ; as a result, only hadrons, not individual free quarks, can be observed. The failure of all experiments that have searched for free quarks is considered to be evidence of this phenomenon.

The elementary quark and gluon particles involved in a high energy collision are not directly observable. The interaction produces jets of newly created hadrons that are observable. Those hadrons are created, as a manifestation of mass–energy equivalence, when sufficient energy is deposited into a quark–quark bond, as when a quark in one proton is struck by a very fast quark of another impacting proton during a particle accelerator experiment. However, quark–gluon plasmas have been observed.

[ 8 ] Between hadrons [ edit ] Main article: Nuclear force A Feynman diagram (shown by the animation in the lead) with the individual quark constituents shown, to illustrate how the fundamental strong interaction gives rise to the nuclear force . Straight lines are quarks, while multi-colored loops are gluons (the carriers of the fundamental force).

While color confinement implies that the strong force acts without distance-diminishment between pairs of quarks in compact collections of bound quarks (hadrons), at distances approaching or greater than the radius of a proton, a residual force (described below) remains. It manifests as a force between the "colorless" hadrons, and is known as the nuclear force or residual strong force (and historically as the strong nuclear force ).

The nuclear force acts between hadrons, known as mesons and baryons . This "residual strong force", acting indirectly, transmits gluons that form part of the virtual π and ρ mesons , which, in turn, transmit the force between nucleons that holds the nucleus (beyond hydrogen-1 nucleus) together.

[ 9 ] The residual strong force is thus a minor residuum of the strong force that binds quarks together into protons and neutrons. This same force is much weaker between neutrons and protons, because it is mostly neutralized within them, in the same way that electromagnetic forces between neutral atoms ( van der Waals forces ) are much weaker than the electromagnetic forces that hold electrons in association with the nucleus, forming the atoms.

[ 7 ] Unlike the strong force, the residual strong force diminishes with distance, and does so rapidly. The decrease is approximately as a negative exponential power of distance, though there is no simple expression known for this; see Yukawa potential . The rapid decrease with distance of the attractive residual force and the less rapid decrease of the repulsive electromagnetic force acting between protons within a nucleus, causes the instability of larger atomic nuclei, such as all those with atomic numbers larger than 82 (the element lead).

Although the nuclear force is weaker than the strong interaction itself, it is still highly energetic: transitions produce gamma rays .

[ clarification needed ] The mass of a nucleus is significantly different from the summed masses of the individual nucleons. This mass defect is due to the potential energy associated with the nuclear force. Differences between mass defects power nuclear fusion and nuclear fission .

Unification [ edit ] The so-called Grand Unified Theories (GUT) aim to describe the strong interaction and the electroweak interaction as aspects of a single force, similarly to how the electromagnetic and weak interactions were unified by the Glashow–Weinberg–Salam model into electroweak interaction . The strong interaction has a property called asymptotic freedom , wherein the strength of the strong force diminishes at higher energies (or temperatures). The theorized energy where its strength becomes equal to the electroweak interaction is the grand unification energy . However, no Grand Unified Theory has yet been successfully formulated to describe this process, and Grand Unification remains an unsolved problem in physics .

If GUT is correct, after the Big Bang and during the electroweak epoch of the universe, the electroweak force separated from the strong force. Accordingly, a grand unification epoch is hypothesized to have existed prior to this.

See also [ edit ] Physics portal Mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics Mathematical formulation of the Standard Model Nuclear binding energy QCD matter Quantum field theory Yukawa interaction References [ edit ] ^ Relative strength of interaction varies with distance. See for instance Matt Strassler 's essay, "The strength of the known forces" .

^ a b "The four forces: the strong interaction Duke University Astrophysics Dept website" .

^ Ragheb, Magdi.

"Chapter 4 Nuclear Processes, The Strong Force" (PDF) . University of Illinois. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-12-18 . Retrieved 2023-10-03 .

^ "Lesson 13: Binding energy and mass defect" .

Furry Elephant physics educational site . Archived from the original on 2023-05-28 . Retrieved 2023-10-03 .

^ Wilczek, Frank (1982). "Quantum chromodynamics: The modern theory of the strong interaction".

Annual Review of Nuclear and Particle Science .

32 (1): 177– 209.

Bibcode : 1982ARNPS..32..177W .

doi : 10.1146/annurev.ns.32.120182.001141 .

^ Feynman, R.P.

(1985).

QED: The Strange Theory of Light and Matter . Princeton University Press. p. 136.

ISBN 978-0-691-08388-9 .

The idiot physicists, unable to come up with any wonderful Greek words anymore, call this type of polarization by the unfortunate name of 'color', which has nothing to do with color in the normal sense.

^ a b Fritzsch, H. (1983).

Quarks: The Stuff of Matter . Basic Books. pp.

167–168 .

ISBN 978-0-465-06781-7 .

^ "Quark–gluon plasma is the most primordial state of matter" .

About.com Education . Archived from the original on 2017-01-18 . Retrieved 2017-01-16 .

^ "3. The Strong Force" (PDF) . Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 October 2021 . Retrieved 10 January 2023 .

Further reading [ edit ] Christman, J.R. (2001).

"MISN-0-280: The Strong Interaction " (PDF) .

Ding, Minghui; Roberts, Craig; Schmidt, Sebastian, eds. (2024).

Strong Interactions in the Standard Model: Massless Bosons to Compact Stars .

MDPI .

ISBN 978-3-7258-1502-9 .

{{ cite book }} : |journal= ignored ( help ) Halzen, F.

; Martin, A.D.

(1984).

Quarks and Leptons: An Introductory Course in Modern Particle Physics . John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 978-0-471-88741-6 .

Kane, G.L.

(1987).

Modern Elementary Particle Physics . Perseus Books.

ISBN 978-0-201-11749-3 .

Morris, R. (2003).

The Last Sorcerers: The Path from Alchemy to the Periodic Table . Joseph Henry Press.

ISBN 978-0-309-50593-2 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Strong interaction .

v t e Fundamental interactions of physics Physical forces Strong interaction fundamental residual Electroweak interaction weak interaction electromagnetism Gravitation Hypothetical forces Fifth force Quintessence Glossary of physics Particle physics Philosophy of physics Universe v t e Standard Model Background Particle physics Fermions Gauge boson Higgs boson Quantum field theory Gauge theory Strong interaction Color charge Quantum chromodynamics Quark model Electroweak interaction Weak interaction Quantum electrodynamics Fermi's interaction Weak hypercharge Weak isospin Constituents CKM matrix Spontaneous symmetry breaking Higgs mechanism Mathematical formulation of the Standard Model Beyond the Standard Model Evidence Hierarchy problem Dark matter Cosmological constant problem Strong CP problem Neutrino oscillation Theories Technicolor Kaluza–Klein theory Grand Unified Theory Theory of everything Supersymmetry MSSM NMSSM Split supersymmetry Supergravity Quantum gravity String theory Superstring theory Loop quantum gravity Causal dynamical triangulation Canonical quantum gravity Superfluid vacuum theory Twistor theory Experiments Gran Sasso INO LHC SNO Super-K Tevatron Category Commons Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐qmljg
Cached time: 20250811235317
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.522 seconds
Real time usage: 0.656 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1619/1000000
Revision size: 18235/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 59753/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1141/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 65881/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.335/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9643804/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  551.258      1 -total
 24.61%  135.663      1 Template:Reflist
 17.55%   96.763      5 Template:Cite_web
 15.59%   85.946      3 Template:Navbox
 13.34%   73.542      1 Template:Fundamental_interactions
 13.32%   73.443      1 Template:Short_description
  7.81%   43.072      4 Template:Val
  7.73%   42.585      1 Template:Clarify
  7.58%   41.798      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.32%   40.380      6 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:27984:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250811235317 and revision id 1303352608. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Strong_interaction&oldid=1303352608 " Categories : Fundamental interactions Nuclear physics Quantum chromodynamics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2025 CS1 errors: periodical ignored This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 13:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Strong interaction 100 languages Add topic

