Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Relevance 2 Definitions 3 Criteria for assessing historical significance 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Historical significance 1 language العربية Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Historiographical concept Some would say the Ferranti MRT is "just" a clipboard with a built in calculator, but others claim it has historical significance as "the world's first application-specific handheld computer ".

Historical significance is a historiographical key concept that explores and seeks to explain the selection of particular social and cultural past events for remembrance by human societies. This element of selection involved in both ascribing and analyzing historical significance is one factor in making the discipline of history distinct from the past.

[ 1 ] Historians consider knowledge of dates and events within and between specific historical periods the primary content of history, also known as "first-order knowledge" or substantive concepts. In contrast, historical significance is an example of a subject specific secondary key concept or "second-order knowledge" also known as a meta-concept, [ 2 ] or disciplinary concept, [ 3 ] which is typically used to help organize knowledge within a subject area, frame suitable areas of inquiry, provide the framework upon which substantive knowledge can be built, and map learner progression within a subject discipline.

[ 4 ] Specifically with regards to historical significance, the way dates and events are chosen and ascribed relative significance is not fixed and can change over time according to which criteria were used to form the judgement of significance as well as how those criteria were chosen themselves in the first place. This aspect to significance has been described as: “a flexible relationship between us and the past” .

[ 5 ] Historical significance is often regarded as involving judging why a particular person or event is remembered and why another is not, it is this aspect of reasoned and evaluative judgement about historical significance that makes history writing differ from being simply a record of past events.

[ 6 ] "as soon as we turn to questions of significance—of why something happened versus the mere fact of its happening—history becomes an act of judgment." [ 7 ] This emphasis on exploring what has been deemed significant by certain societies in contrast to what has been left out of the historical record has led to historical significance often being paired with the concept of historical silence , which looks at why and how certain social class, racial, and/or ethnic groups have not featured in the historical record or whose contributions have not been seen as significant at particular times, and in particular contexts.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Thus historical significance is not an intrinsic or fixed property of a particular historical event but rather more of an assessment of who, why, and how that event was judged significant enough to be remembered.

[ 12 ] With this potential fluidity in mind, it therefore follows that any assessment of historical significance should not be seen as fixed or permanent.

[ 13 ] "historical significance is not an enduring or unchanging characteristic of any particular event. It is a contingent quality that depends on the perspective from which that event is subsequently viewed." [ 13 ] Relevance [ edit ] A key concept for the study of history and public life in most societies regardless of topic, historical significance makes judgements about what is important to be remembered about the past and why, through its reflections on historical aspects to contemporary culture and society [ 14 ] including historical reputations, events, issues, [ 15 ] monuments, [ 16 ] and what is chosen to be emphasized in history writing itself.

[ 9 ] Examining what has been included and what has been left out of the historical record can be an effective tool for guiding students to understand how cultural background affects their perception of history.

[ 17 ] The teaching of how to assess what has been considered significant and what has been left out has been described as: "surely a fundamental corner-stone of a liberal and democratic education and a pre-requisite for effective citizenship." [ 18 ] The relevance of historical significance can also be demonstrated by its near ubiquitous appearance in provincial, national and international history curriculums including, but not limited to: the Singapore National Curriculum, [ 19 ] the English National Curriculum, [ 20 ] the IB Diploma History Guide, [ 21 ] the New Zealand National Curriculum, [ 22 ] and the Australian National Curriculum.

[ 23 ] Definitions [ edit ] There are many definitions of historical significance. For example, UNESCO includes any site as a world heritage site, provided it: "bear[s] a unique or at least exceptional testimony to a cultural tradition or to a civilization" .

[ 24 ] Other notable examples include the following, the International Baccalaureate Diploma History Guide which includes historical significance as one of its six historical concepts alongside the other five: Perspectives, Change, Continuity, Causation and Consequence. The IBO define historical significance as including: "the record that has been preserved through evidence or traces of the past, and/or the aspects that someone has consciously decided to record and communicate" .

[ 21 ] This definition has overlaps with that provided by the Historical Thinking Project which includes significance as one of its six key concepts of historical thinking: "A historical person or event can acquire significance if we, the historians, can link it to larger trends and stories that reveal something important for us today" .

[ 25 ] Criteria for assessing historical significance [ edit ] Historical significance is typically assessed by judging an event against pre-defined criteria and numerous criteria for assessing historical significance have been proposed.

[ 12 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] However, these criteria are always subjective, and therefore debatable.

[ 24 ] There can also be important differences between what is seen as significant in terms of the dominant national narratives of particular countries, what is taught in schools, and how certain groups such as minority groups may see the significance of a particular event.

[ 30 ] Thus describing any event as historically significant or non-significant remains open to challenge.

[ 24 ] Typically significance teaching models are not designed to be used as checklists but rather unique disciplinary lenses or principles for examining relative historical significance commonly attached to a historical event or historical personage's actions.

[ 12 ] These could include different subdivisions of significance such as: contemporary significance, causal significance, pattern significance, symbolic significance, revelatory significance, and present significance.

[ 31 ] References [ edit ] ^ Bergman, Karin (2020-10-20).

"How younger students perceive and identify historical significance" .

History Education Research Journal .

17 (2).

doi : 10.14324/HERJ.17.2.03 .

ISSN 2631-9713 .

S2CID 228960478 .

^ van Drie, Jannet; van Boxtel, Carla (June 2008).

"Historical Reasoning: Towards a Framework for Analyzing Students' Reasoning about the Past" (PDF) .

Educational Psychology Review .

20 (2): 87– 110.

doi : 10.1007/s10648-007-9056-1 .

ISSN 1040-726X .

S2CID 18301284 .

^ Ofsted.

"Developing disciplinary thinking through disciplinary concepts" .

Research review series: history . Retrieved 22 March 2022 .

^ Cambridge Assessment (18 March 2022).

"Getting started with Key Concepts" .

Cambridge Assessment International Examinations . Retrieved 18 March 2022 .

^ Seixas, Peter (2013).

The big six : historical thinking concepts . Tom Morton, Jill Colyer, Stefano Fornazzari. Toronto: Nelson Education. p. 17.

ISBN 978-0-17-654154-5 .

OCLC 809317321 .

^ Coffin, C (2006).

Historical Discourse: The language of time, cause and evaluation . London: Continuum. pp.

129– 130.

ISBN 0826487769 .

^ Wineburg, Samuel S. (2001).

Historical thinking and other unnatural acts : charting the future of teaching the past . Philadelphia: Temple University Press. pp.

249– 250.

ISBN 1-56639-855-X .

OCLC 45304687 .

^ Levstik, Linda S. (2008).

Researching history education : theory, method, and context . Keith C. Barton. New York. pp.

273– 291.

ISBN 978-1-4106-1676-0 .

OCLC 1022560730 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b Trouillot, Michel-Rolph (2015).

Silencing the past : power and the production of history . Boston: Beacon Press. p. 27.

ISBN 978-0-8070-8053-5 .

OCLC 924271500 .

^ Miles, James (2019-05-27).

"Historical silences and the enduring power of counter storytelling" .

Curriculum Inquiry .

49 (3): 253– 259.

doi : 10.1080/03626784.2019.1633735 .

ISSN 0362-6784 .

S2CID 201328431 .

^ Misco, Thomas (2008-04-01).

" "We did also save people": A Study of Holocaust Education in Romania After Decades of Historical Silence" .

Theory & Research in Social Education .

36 (2): 61– 94.

doi : 10.1080/00933104.2008.10473367 .

ISSN 0093-3104 .

S2CID 144534854 .

^ a b c Counsell, C. (2004).

"Looking through a Josephine-Butler shaped window: Focusing pupils' thinking on historical significance" .

Teaching History, 114 : 30– 36 – via Historical Association.

^ a b "Significance" .

Historical Association . Retrieved 17 March 2022 .

^ National History Day.

"Historical Significance" (PDF) .

NHD Rule Book : 8. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2022-06-26 . Retrieved 2022-03-19 .

^ Wrenn, Andrew (2011). "Significance".

Debates in History Teaching . Routledge. pp.

148– 149.

ISBN 978-0-203-83145-8 .

^ Harcourt, Michael; Fountain, Gregor; Sheehan, Mark (2011).

"Historical significance and sites of memory" (PDF) .

He W H a K A a R O a N O : 26– 31.

^ Stephanie Levesque (Winter 2005).

"Teaching second-order concepts in Canadian history: The importance of "historical significance" " (PDF) . University of Western Ontario.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 April 2017 . Retrieved 14 March 2019 .

^ Phillips, Robert (1 March 2002).

"Historical significance – the forgotten 'Key Element'?" .

Teaching History 106 .

^ Singapore Ministry of Education (2021).

"HISTORY TEACHING AND LEARNING SYLLABUSES" (PDF) .

The Singapore National Curriculum : 6.

^ Department for Education.

"History programmes of study: key stage 3 National curriculum in England" (PDF) . Retrieved 18 March 2022 .

^ a b Baccalaureate, International (2015).

Diploma Programme History Guide . IBO. p. 93.

^ New Zealand Ministry of Education.

"History Glossary" .

NCEA Education . Retrieved 19 March 2022 .

^ The Australian National Curriculum.

"Historical knowledge and understanding strand" .

Australian Curriculum . Retrieved 18 March 2022 .

^ a b c "Debating Historical Significance" (PDF) . Edge Hill University.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 March 2019 . Retrieved 12 March 2019 .

^ Centre for the Study of Historical Consciousness.

"Historical Significance" .

THE HISTORICAL THINKING PROJECT .

^ "Lesson notes" . Cambridge University.

Archived from the original on 13 January 2017.

^ Fulton, David (2014).

The Guided Reader to Teaching and Learning History . Routledge. pp.

108– 14.

ISBN 9781136472848 .

^ Partington, Geoffrey (1980).

The Idea of an Historical Education . NFER Publishing Company.

ISBN 9780856332029 .

^ Cercadillo, Lis (2006). " 'Maybe they haven't decided yet what is right:' English and Spanish perspectives on teaching historical significance".

Teaching History (125): 6– 9.

ISSN 0040-0610 .

JSTOR 43260148 .

^ Lévesque, S (2009).

Thinking historically: Educating students for the twenty-first century . University of Toronto Press. pp.

54– 56.

ISBN 978-1442610996 .

^ Cercadillo, L. (2006).

" 'Maybe they haven't decided yet what is right': English and Spanish perspectives on teaching historical significance" .

Teaching History, 125 : 6– 9.

External links [ edit ] Models for teaching historical significance Historical significance and sites of memory Debating historical significance Archived 2019-03-15 at the Wayback Machine Some ideas for teaching significance v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Historical_significance&oldid=1301073504 " Categories : History Historiography Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 23:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Historical significance 1 language Add topic

