Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Kant's usage 2 Practical Uses 3 See also 4 Footnotes Toggle the table of contents Analytic reasoning 7 languages العربية Català Español فارسی Português Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ability to look at information and discern patterns Analytical reasoning , also known as analytical thinking , [ 1 ] refers to the ability to look at information, be it qualitative or quantitative in nature, and discern patterns within the information. Analytical reasoning involves breaking down large problems into smaller components [ 2 ] and using deductive reasoning with no specialised knowledge, such as: comprehending the basic structure of a set of relationships; recognizing logically equivalent statements; and inferring what could be true or must be true from given facts and rules. Analytical reasoning is axiomatic in that its truth is self-evident. In contrast, synthetic reasoning requires that we include empirical observations. The specific terms "analytic" and "synthetic" themselves were introduced by Kant (1781) at the beginning of his Critique of Pure Reason .

Kant's usage [ edit ] In the philosophy of Immanuel Kant , analytic reasoning represents judgments made upon statements that are based on the virtue of the statement's own content.  No particular experience, beyond an understanding of the meanings of words used, is necessary for analytic reasoning.

[ 3 ] For example, " John is a bachelor.

" is a given true statement.  Through analytic reasoning, one can make the judgment that John is unmarried . One knows this to be true since the state of being unmarried is implied in the word bachelor ; no particular experience of John is necessary to make this judgement.

To suggest that John is married —given that he is a bachelor —would be self-contradictory.

Practical Uses [ edit ] Business and finance employers look for people who can group elements of a task and reintroduce sections as a coherent singular component that can be more easily accomplished in order to move through a complete task little by little. Analytic reasoning is used by businesses to assess the patterns of change in their market, employees ideally being able to recognize this statistic through raw data.

[ 4 ] Basically, having good analytic reasoning is the ability to recognize trends and patterns after considering data.

As a result, some universities use the terms "analytical reasoning" and "analytical thinking" to market themselves.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] One such university defines it as "A person who can use logic and critical thinking to analyze a situation." [ 7 ] Other campuses go deeper on the topic.

[ 8 ] They may also correlate this with other future careers, such as: Philosophy Civics Natural science Social science Management See also [ edit ] Analytic-synthetic distinction Logic Critical thinking Lateral thinking Deductive reasoning Analytical skill Analysis Analysis paralysis Creative thinking Intuitive thinking Systems thinking Strategic thinking Footnotes [ edit ] ^ "csu.edu" (PDF) .

Analytical Thinking .

^ Baldwin, Amy (2020-03-27).

"7.3 Analytical Thinking - College Success | OpenStax" .

openstax.org . Retrieved 2024-02-02 .

^ See Stephen Palmquist, "Knowledge and Experience - An Examination of the Four Reflective 'Perspectives' in Kant's Critical Philosophy", Kant-Studien 78:2 (1987), pp.170-200; revised and reprinted as Chapter IV of Kant's System of Perspectives (Lanham: University Press of America, 1993).

^ "Problem Solving, Critical Thinking, and Analytical Reasoning Skiills [ sic ] Sought by Employers - Radford University" .

www.radford.edu . Retrieved 2021-10-02 .

^ "Analytical Reasoning Certificate" .

University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire . Retrieved 2022-05-09 .

^ "Analytic Reasoning" .

Academics . Retrieved 2022-05-09 .

^ "Problem Solving, Critical Thinking, and Analytical Reasoning Skiills Sought by Employers - Radford University" .

www.radford.edu . Retrieved 2022-05-09 .

^ "Analytic Reasoning" (PDF) .

gened.umd.edu . November 9, 2020.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Analytic_reasoning&oldid=1265147999 " Categories : Philosophical logic Reasoning Aptitude Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 December 2024, at 10:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Analytic reasoning 7 languages Add topic

