Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Founding 1.2 Second founding 1.3 Twentieth century 2 Organisation Toggle Organisation subsection 2.1 Sites 2.2 Recruitment 2.3 Divisions 2.4 Libraries 2.5 Affiliations 2.6 Domestic partnerships 2.7 International partnerships 3 Academics Toggle Academics subsection 3.1 Publishing 3.2 Foundation 3.3 Rankings and reputation 4 Notable alumni Toggle Notable alumni subsection 4.1 Mathematics and physics 4.2 Philosophy 4.3 History and literature 4.4 Social sciences and economics 4.5 Government and politics 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Notes 6.2 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents École normale supérieure (Paris) 68 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Magyar Македонски مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Picard Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Scots Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from École Normale Supérieure ) Institution of higher learning in Paris, France Not to be confused with École normale supérieure Paris-Saclay .

Several terms  redirect here. For other uses, see École Normale Supérieure (disambiguation) and École Normale (disambiguation) .

École normale supérieure – PSL Entrance of the historic building of the ENS, at Rue d'Ulm 45.

Other names Normale sup' , ENS Ulm, Ulm, ENS Paris, ENS Type École normale supérieure , grande école , EPSCP [ 1 ] (administrative) Established 1794 ; 231 years ago ( 1794 ) [ 2 ] Founder National Convention Parent institution PSL University Budget $130 million [ 3 ] President Pierre-Louis Lions [ 4 ] Director Frédéric Worms [ 5 ] Academic staff 1,400 [ 3 ] (630 teaching fellows, 170 professors and 580 post-doctoral researchers) Students 2,400 [ 3 ] Undergraduates 300 [ 3 ] Postgraduates 1,400 [ 3 ] Doctoral students 700 [ 3 ] Address rue d'Ulm , Paris , 75005 , France Campus Urban : 4 main sites in Paris and its suburbs (5th & 14th arrondissements , Montrouge ) Colours Purple Affiliations Conférence des grandes écoles Website ens.psl.eu The École normale supérieure – PSL ( French pronunciation: [ekɔl nɔʁmal sypeʁjœʁ] ; also known as ENS , Normale sup' , Ulm or ENS Paris ) is a grande école in Paris , France . It is one of the constituent members of Paris Sciences et Lettres University (PSL).

[ 6 ] Due to its selectivity, historical role, and influence within French society, the ENS is generally considered the most prestigious of the grandes écoles , as well as one of the most prestigious higher education institutions in France.

[ 7 ] Its pupils are generally referred to as normaliens , while its alumni are sometimes referred to as archicubes .

[ 8 ] The school was founded in 1794 during the French Revolution , [ 9 ] to provide homogeneous training of high-school teachers in France, but it later closed. The school was subsequently reestablished by Napoleon I as pensionnat normal from 1808 to 1822, before being recreated in 1826 and taking the name École normale in 1830. When other institutes called écoles normales were created in 1845, the word supérieure (meaning upper) was added to form the current name. In 1936, the institution started providing university-level education.

[ 10 ] As a grande école , the vast majority of the academic staff hosted at the ENS also belong to external institutions such as one of the Parisian universities , the CNRS and the EHESS . Generalistic in its recruitment and organisation, the ENS is the only grande école in France to have departments of research in all the natural, social, and human sciences. Its alumni include 14 Nobel Prize laureates, [ 11 ] of which 8 are in Physics , 12 Fields Medalists , more than half the recipients of the CNRS 's Gold Medal , several hundred members of the Institut de France , as well as several French and foreign politicians and statespeople.

[ 12 ] History [ edit ] Founding [ edit ] The current institution finds its roots in the creation of the École normale de l'an III by the post-revolutionary National Convention led by Robespierre in 1794. The school was created based on a recommendation by Joseph Lakanal and Dominique-Joseph Garat , who were part of the commission on public education. The École normale was intended as the core of a planned centralised national education system. The project was also conceived as a way to reestablish trust between the Republic and the country's elites, which had been alienated to some degree by the Reign of Terror . The decree establishing the school, issued on 30 October 1794 ( 9 brumaire an III ), states in its first article that "There will be established in Paris an école normale (literally, a normal school ), where, from all the parts of the Republic, citizens already educated in the useful sciences shall be called upon to learn, from the best professors in all the disciplines, the art of teaching." The inaugural course was given on 20 January 1795 and the last on 19 May of the same year at the Museum of Natural History . The goal of these courses was to train a body of teachers for all the secondary schools in the country and thereby to ensure a homogenous education for all. These courses covered all the existing sciences and humanities and were given by scholars such as: scientists Monge , Vandermonde , Daubenton , Berthollet and philosophers Bernardin de Saint-Pierre and Volney were some of the teachers. The school was closed as a result of the arrival of the French Directory but this école normale was to serve as a basis when the school was founded for the second time by Napoleon I in 1808.

On 17 March 1808, Napoleon created by decree a pensionnat normal within the imperial University of France charged with "training in the art of teaching the sciences and the humanities".

[ 13 ] The establishment was opened in 1810, its strict code including a mandatory uniform. By then a sister establishment had been created by Napoleon in Pisa under the name of Scuola Normale Superiore (SNS), which continues to exist today and still has close ties to the Paris school. Up to 1818, the students are handpicked by the academy inspectors based on their results in the secondary school. However, the " pensionnat " created by Napoleon came to be perceived under the Restoration as a nexus of liberal thought and was suppressed by then-minister of public instruction Denis-Luc Frayssinous in 1824.

Second founding [ edit ] The main entrance to the ENS on Rue d'Ulm. The school moved into its current premises in 1847.

An école préparatoire was created on 9 March 1826 at the site of Collège Louis-le-Grand . This date can be taken as the definitive date of creation of the current school. After the July Revolution, the school regained its original name of École normale and in 1845 was renamed École normale supérieure . During the 1830s, under the direction of philosopher Victor Cousin , the school enhanced its status as an institution to prepare the agrégation by expanding the duration of study to three years, and was divided into its present-day Sciences and Letters divisions.

[ 14 ] In 1847 the school moved into its current quarters at the rue d'Ulm, next to the Panthéon in the 5th arrondissement of Paris.

[ 15 ] This helped it gain some stability, which was further established under the direction of Louis Pasteur .

Having been recognised as a success, a second school was created on its model at Sèvres for girls in 1881, followed by other schools at Fontenay , Saint-Cloud (both of which later moved to Lyon , and Cachan ). The school's status evolved further at the beginning of the twentieth century.

In 1903 it was integrated into the University of Paris as a separate college, [ 16 ] perhaps as a result of its exposure to national attention during the Dreyfus Affair , in which its librarian Lucien Herr and his disciples, who included the socialist politician Jean Jaurès and the writers Charles Péguy and Romain Rolland spearheaded the campaign to overturn the wrongful conviction pronounced against Captain Alfred Dreyfus .

[ 17 ] The first female student – Marguerite Rouvière – was accepted in 1910, which made headline news in France and polarised opinion.

[ 18 ] The ranks of the school were significantly reduced during the First World War , but the 1920s marked a degree of expansion of the school, which had among its students at this time such figures as Raymond Aron , Jean-Paul Sartre , Vladimir Jankélévitch and Maurice Merleau-Ponty .
The high sacrifice paid by normaliens in the First World War was recognized by the award of the croix de guerre avec citation à l ordre de l armée in 1925.

[ 19 ] Twentieth century [ edit ] After the Second World War , in which some of its students were players in the Resistance , the school became more visible and increasingly perceived as a bastion of the communist left . Many of its students belonged to the French Communist Party . This leftist tradition continued into the 1960s and 1970s, during which an important fraction of French Maoists came from ENS. In 1953 it was made autonomous from the University of Paris , [ 20 ] but it was perceived ambivalently by the authorities as a nexus of protest, particularly due to the teachings delivered there by such controversial figures as political philosopher Louis Althusser . As of now, by law, ENS comes under the direct authority of the Minister for Higher Education and Research .

[ 21 ] The fallout from the May 1968 protests caused the President of the Republic, Georges Pompidou , himself a former student at the school, to force the resignation of its director, Robert Flacelière and to appoint his contemporary Jean Bousquet as his successor [ citation needed ] . Both Flacelière and Bousquet were distinguished classicists.

The school continued to expand and include new subjects, seeking to cover all the disciplines of natural and social sciences and in line with this policy a new concours was opened in 1982, to reinforce the teaching of social sciences at the school.

[ 14 ] The concours , called B/L (the A/L concours standing for the traditional letters and human sciences), emphasises proficiency in mathematics and economics alongside training in philosophy and literature.

For a long time, most women were taught at a separate ENS, the École normale supérieure de jeunes filles at Sèvres . However, women were not explicitly barred entry until a law of 1940, and some women were students at Ulm before this date, such as the philosopher Simone Weil [ 22 ] and the classicist Jacqueline de Romilly . In 1985, after heated debates, the two institutions were merged into a single entity, with its main campus at the historic site at the rue d'Ulm in Paris .

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] Organisation [ edit ] École normale supérieure is a grande école , a French institution of higher education that is separate from, but parallel and connected to, the main framework of the French public university system . Similar to the Ivy League in the United States, Russel Group in the UK, and C9 League in China, grandes écoles are elite academic institutions that admit students through an extremely competitive process.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] Grandes écoles typically have much smaller class sizes and student bodies than public universities in France, and many of their programs are taught in English, and while most are more expensive than French universities, École normale supérieure charges the same tuition fees: for 2021/2022, they were €243 to register for the master's degree.

[ 28 ] International internships, study abroad opportunities, and close ties with government and the corporate world are a hallmark of the grandes écoles .

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Degrees from École normale supérieure are accredited by the Conférence des Grandes Écoles [ 31 ] and awarded by the Ministry of National Education (France) ( French : Ministère de l'Éducation nationale ).

[ 32 ] Alumni go on to occupy elite positions in government, the administration, and corporate firms in France.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] Sites [ edit ] The quadrangle at the main ENS building on rue d'Ulm is known as the Cour aux Ernests – the Ernests being the goldfish in the pond.

The École normale supérieure is one of a few schools that still occupy a campus in the heart of Paris. The historic Paris ENS campus is located around the rue d'Ulm, the main building being at 45 rue d'Ulm in the 5th arrondissement of Paris , which was built by architect Alphonse de Gisors and given to ENS by law in 1841.

[ 35 ] Above the entrance door are sculptures of two female figures who respectively represent letters and sciences. They are portrayed sitting on either side of a medallion of Minerva , who represents wisdom. A formalised version of this frontal piece is used as the school's emblem.

The main site at 45 rue d'Ulm is organized around a central courtyard, the Cour aux Ernests. Another courtyard south of this one, the Cour Pasteur, separates the school from the apartment buildings of the rue Claude-Bernard. These buildings house the administrative functions of the school, and some of its literary departments (philosophy, literature, classics and archeology), its mathematics and computer science departments, as well as its main human sciences library. The site's monument aux morts , which was inaugurated in 1923 and stands as a reminder of the normaliens who died in the First World War , is a work by Paul Landowski .

[ 36 ] Several auxiliary buildings surround this main campus in adjacent streets. The closest one, opposite the main entrance, at 46 rue d'Ulm, houses the school's biology department and laboratories as well as a part of its student residences. The seat of the school's physics and chemistry departments, inaugurated in 1936 by Léon Blum and Albert Lebrun , lies north of the school on rue Lhomond, while further up the rue d'Ulm its number 29 houses secondary libraries and the school's department of cognitive sciences.

ENS has a second campus on Boulevard Jourdan (previously the women's college), in the 14th arrondissement of Paris, which is home to the school's research department of social sciences, law, economics and geography, as well as further student residences. The site has been undergoing major reconstruction since 2015. In 2017, President Francois Hollande inaugurated a new building on site, which is home to the ENS economics department, the school's social science library, and the Paris School of Economics , an ENS project.

The school has a secondary site in the suburb of Montrouge , which houses some of its laboratories alongside those of Paris Descartes University . It features green areas and sporting facilities as well as some 200 student rooms. A fourth site in the town of Villejuif, south of Paris, hosts some of the school's biology laboratories.

Recruitment [ edit ] The school is very small in student numbers. Its core of students, who are called normaliens , are selected via a competitive exam called a concours (baccalaureate + 2 years). Preparation for the concours takes place in preparatory classes which last two years (see grandes écoles ). Two hundred normaliens are thus recruited every year, half of them in the sciences and the same number in the humanities, and receive a monthly salary (around €1,350/month in 2018), and in exchange they sign a ten-year contract to work for the state. Although it is seldom applied in practice, this exclusivity clause is redeemable (often by the hiring firm).

Other students called " normaliens étudiants " can be selected but they do not have their study paid. They are selected with the preparation of a research project (baccalaureate + 2–4 years). 
PhD students at ENS are either graduate students from the ENS doctoral school [ 37 ] or from another doctoral school co-accredited by ENS.

[ 38 ] Since 2016 PhD students preparing their doctoral research at ENS are awarded a PhD from PSL University.
ENS also welcomes selected foreign students (the "international selection"), participates in various graduate programs, and has extensive research laboratories. The foreign students selected often receive a scholarship which covers their expenses.

The students selected via the concours remain at the school for a length of time ranging from four to six years.

Normaliens from France and other European Union countries are considered civil servants in training.

[ 39 ] Many students devote at least one of those years to the agrégation , which allows them to teach in high schools or universities. Faculty recruitment is selective, with between zero and one ENS professorship open per year [ citation needed ] . Faculty recruitments usually happen upon previous incumbent retirements. In informal ENS jargon, ENS full professors are popularly called PdPs (" professeurs des professeurs )" because traditionally ENS was created to educate future professors [ citation needed ] .

Divisions [ edit ] The school's Cour aux Ernests under a coat of snow (2013).

Founded to train high school teachers through the agrégation , ENS is now an institution training researchers, professors, high-level civil servants, and business and political leaders. It focuses on the association of training and research, with an emphasis on freedom of curriculum. The school's resources are equally divided between its "Letters" (social and human sciences and literature) and its "Sciences" (natural sciences and mathematics) sections. The school's fifteen departments and its thirty-five units of research ( unités mixtes de recherches or UMR in French) work in close coordination with other public French research institutions such as the CNRS .

[ citation needed ] The school has seven departments in its "Sciences" section: mathematics ; [ 40 ] physics ; [ 41 ] computer science ; [ 42 ] chemistry ; [ 43 ] biology ; [ 44 ] geoscience ; [ 45 ] and cognitive science .

[ 46 ] It also has eight departments in its "Letters" section: philosophy ; [ 47 ] literature ; [ 48 ] history ; [ 49 ] classics ; [ 50 ] social science ; [ 51 ] economics [ 52 ] (this section is the base of Paris School of Economics ); [ 53 ] geography ; [ 54 ] and art history and theory .

[ 55 ] In addition to these fifteen departments, a language laboratory [ 56 ] for non-specialists offers courses in most major world languages to all the students. Additional centres of research and laboratories gravitate around the departments, which function as nodes of research.

[ citation needed ] The emphasis is placed squarely on interdisciplinarity . Students who entered from a scientific concours (thus having mainly studied in their preparatory school maths , physics , and chemistry or biology) are encouraged to attend courses in the literary departments. Conversely, maths and physics introductory courses are on offer for the students from the "literary" departments. The ENS graduate degree, instituted in 2006, requires students to attend a certain number of courses not related to their major.

[ 57 ] Libraries [ edit ] The École normale supérieure has a network, known as Rubens, of ten libraries shared over its sites, which taken together make up the third largest library in France.

[ 58 ] The catalogue is available for consultation online.

[ 59 ] Entrance to the libraries is reserved for domestic and international researchers of doctoral level, as well as to the teachers at the school, normaliens , other ENS students, and PSL Research University students. The main library, devoted to literature, classics, and human sciences, dates back to the nineteenth century when it was greatly expanded by its director, the famous dreyfusard Lucien Herr . Its main reading room is protected as a monument historique .

[ 60 ] This main library, which covers several thousand square metres, is one of the largest free access funds of books in France, with upwards of 800,000 books readily available and more than 1,600 periodicals. Its classics section is part of the national network of specialised libraries (Cadist).

[ 61 ] A secondary library concerned with social science, economics, and law is located at the Jourdan campus for social science. This library has more than 150,000 books in the subjects it covers [ citation needed ] . The school also has specialised libraries in archeology, cognitive sciences, mathematics and computer science, theoretical physics. A recently unified natural sciences library was opened in 2013, aiming to bring together in a central place on rue d'Ulm the libraries of physics, chemistry, biology and geoscience.

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] The school also features two specialised centres for documentation, the Bibliothèque des Archives Husserl , and the Centre d'Archives de Philosophie, d'Histoire et d'Edition des Sciences.

Affiliations [ edit ] Two other écoles normales supérieures were established in the 20th century: the École Normale Supérieure de Lyon (sciences and humanities); and the École normale supérieure Paris-Saclay (pure and applied sciences, sociology, economics and management, English language). More recently, the fourth école normale supérieure was created in January 2014 under the name of École Normale Supérieure de Rennes (pure and applied sciences, economics and management, law school, sport) in Brittany . All four together form the informal ENS-group [ citation needed ] .

The École normale supérieure is also an institution of PSL Research University , a union of several higher education institutions, all located in Paris, which aims at achieving cooperation and developing synergies between its member institutions to promote French research abroad.

[ 64 ] In addition to this, the École normale supérieure cooperates in Atomium Culture , the first permanent platform for European excellence that brings together some of Europe's leading universities, newspapers and businesses.

[ 65 ] The school is a member of the Conference of University Presidents and of the Conference of Grandes Écoles .

Domestic partnerships [ edit ] Its educational project being based on research, ENS seeks to train its students to become researchers. The main objective of the education given is getting a doctorate, and more than 85% of normaliens achieve this [ citation needed ] . The students are free to choose their own course of study but must at least attain a master's degree in research. Since, traditionally, the institution does not have the powers to grand university degrees, students have to follow courses in other universities in Paris. To this end, ENS cultivates a large number of partnerships and conventions with other higher education institutions to create master's degrees which are co-presided by two institutions. ENS works closely with the École des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales (EHESS), the Paris-Sorbonne University , the Panthéon-Sorbonne University , HEC Paris and ESSEC Business School in particular to deliver joint diplomas to a certain number of students who have followed courses shared between the two institutions. It is also the main partner in the Paris School of Economics project which it has launched along with the EHESS , the École Nationale de la Statistique et de l'Administration Économique (ENSAE) and the École des Ponts . This project seeks to create a unified Master's-level economics school in Paris.

[ 66 ] International partnerships [ edit ] The Scuola Normale Superiore in Pisa , Italy , which was founded as a branch of ENS and retains very close links to it.

The Scuola Normale Superiore in Pisa was founded in 1810 as a branch of the École normale supérieure by Napoleon and later gained independence.

[ 67 ] ENS and its Italian twin have retained very close links since this time and since 1988 a special partnership has 80 normaliens going to Pisa every year while half the class of the SNS spend a year at the Paris school. During its history and due to the far reach of the French Empire during the colonial era, many schools have been created around the world based on the ENS model, from Haiti (in Port-au-Prince ) to Vietnam (in Hanoi) to the Maghreb (in Tunis, Casablanca, Oran, and Rabat to name but a few) and Subsaharan Africa (in Nouakchott, Libreville, Yaoundé, Dakar, Niamey, Bangui for example). ENS maintains good relations and close links with these institutions. In 2005, ENS opened a branch at the East China Normal University (ECNU) in Shanghai , whose French name was changed to École normale supérieure de l'Est de la Chine to reflect the agreement, and a joint doctoral program between the two institutions was launched.

[ 68 ] ENS welcomes international researchers for one-year stays through the mediation of the Paris Institute of Advanced Research and the Villa Louis-Pasteur. The Blaise Pascal, Marie Curie, Condorcet and Lagrange research places ( chaires ) also allow researchers from abroad to stay for more than a year at ENS laboratories. ENS also is a member of the Franco-Chinese laboratory Saladyn since 2013.

[ 69 ] It has been hosting an antenna of New York University 's Erich Maria Remarque Institute since 2007.

[ 70 ] Furthermore, ENS has partnerships for research at Master's and Doctorate levels, sending its students to universities around the world to complete their tuition. It also shares thesis habilitation with universities abroad, meaning that somes theses can be written with support from both the ENS and one of its partner institutions. It is also customary for students in the literary and linguistic subjects to go to teach for one year in universities abroad with the position of junior fellows. These exchange and cooperation programs link ENS with universities such as the University of Beijing in China, Freie Universität Berlin in Germany, the universities of Cambridge , Edinburgh and Oxford in the United Kingdom, Trinity College in Dublin, McGill University in Montréal, and the universities at Berkeley , Columbia , Cornell , Harvard , Princeton , Stanford , and Yale in the United States.

[ 71 ] Academics [ edit ] Publishing [ edit ] Since 2001, the École normale supérieure's internet portal, called Diffusion des savoirs ("Spreading knowledge") has offered access to more than 2000 recordings of conferences and seminars that have taken place at the school, in all sciences natural and social.

[ 72 ] The school also has launched its own short conference platform, Les Ernest, [ 73 ] which shows renowned specialists speaking for fifteen minutes on a given subject in a wide scope of disciplines.

In 1975 the school founded its university press, first called Presses de l'ENS then renamed in 1997 to Editions Rue d'Ulm. This press, which operates on a small scale, publishes specialist academic books mainly in the spheres of literature and the social sciences. Some 300 works are available on line on in the press's bookshop, and about 25 new titles are published every year.

[ 74 ] Foundation [ edit ] In 1986, an ENS foundation was created and recognised as a fondation d'utilité publique by law.

[ 75 ] It contributes to the development of the school, most notably by encouraging and facilitating the reception of foreign students and researchers. The Foundation, presided by Alain-Gérard Slama, manages some investments into financed positions for foreign researchers in ENS-associated laboratories. It has for example financed the Louis Pasteur villa, situated close by ENS, which welcomes foreign researchers for extended stays. It has also contributed to financing several positions for scientists in ENS laboratories, for instance in research on telecom network security with France Télécom and on "artificial vision" with the Airbus foundation.

Rankings and reputation [ edit ] Further information: Paris Sciences et Lettres University § International university rankings In France, ENS has been regarded since the late 19th century as one of foremost grandes écoles . However, the ENS system is different from that of most higher education systems outside France, thus making it difficult to compare with foreign institutions; in particular, it is much smaller than a typical English collegiate university. It is ranked as the second "small university" worldwide behind California Institute of Technology by the 2016 Times Higher Education Smaller Universities Ranking (a ranking of institutions of fewer than 5000 students).

[ 76 ] It is generally regarded as the premier French institute for higher education and research, and it is currently ranked first among French universities by the ARWU and Times.

[ 77 ] Notable alumni [ edit ] Main article: List of École Normale Supérieure people Louis Pasteur was a student at the school before directing it for many years.

Throughout its history, a sizeable number of ENS alumni, some of them known as normaliens , have become notable in many varied fields, both academic and otherwise, ranging from Louis Pasteur , the chemist and microbiologist famed for inventing pasteurisation , to philologist Georges Dumézil , novelist Julien Gracq and socialist Prime Minister Léon Blum .

Mathematics and physics [ edit ] Évariste Galois , the founder of Galois theory and group theory , was an early student at ENS, then still called École préparatoire, in the 1820s, at the same time as fellow mathematician Augustin Cournot . Though mathematics continued to be taught at the school throughout the 19th century, its real dominance of the mathematic sphere would not emerge until after the First World War, with a young generation of mathematicians led by André Weil , known for his foundational work in number theory and algebraic geometry (also the brother of fellow student, philosopher Simone Weil ). This rejuvenation continued into the 1930s, as exemplified by the 1935 launch of the influential Nicolas Bourbaki project, whose work permeated the field of mathematics throughout the 20th century. In 1940 former student Henri Cartan was appointed professor at the school like his father Élie Cartan , carrying the school's importance in the field still further with his work in algebraic topology . His teaching, which continued until 1965, was vastly influential in shaping his students, who included Yvonne Choquet-Bruhat , Gustave Choquet , Jacques Dixmier , Roger Godement , René Thom and Jean-Pierre Serre .

[ 78 ] Denis Auroux , a famous symplectic geometer at Harvard University, is also an acclaimed Normalien.

Since the 1936 establishment of the Fields Medal , often called the "Nobel Prize for mathematics", eleven normaliens have been recipients, contributing to ENS's reputation as one of the world's foremost training grounds for mathematicians: Laurent Schwartz , Jean-Pierre Serre (also a recipient of the inaugural Abel Prize in 2003), René Thom , Alain Connes , Jean-Christophe Yoccoz , Pierre-Louis Lions , Laurent Lafforgue , Wendelin Werner , Cédric Villani , Ngô Bảo Châu and Hugo Duminil-Copin .

Alexander Grothendieck , also a Fields medallist, though he was not a normalien , received a substantial part of his training at the school. These twelve former students have made ENS the institution with the most Fields medallist alumni of any institution worldwide. Former student Yves Meyer was also awarded the Abel prize.

In addition, eight normaliens have gone on to receive the Nobel Prize in Physics : Claude Cohen-Tannoudji , Pierre-Gilles de Gennes , Albert Fert , Alfred Kastler , Gabriel Lippmann , Louis Néel , Jean Baptiste Perrin and Serge Haroche , while other ENS physicists include such major figures as Paul Langevin , famous for developing Langevin dynamics and the Langevin equation . Alumnus Paul Sabatier won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry .

Philosophy [ edit ] Its position as a leading institution in the training of the critical spirit has made ENS into France's premier training ground for future philosophers and producers of what has been called by some "French theory". Its position as a philosophical birthplace can be traced back to its very beginnings, with Victor Cousin a student in the early 19th century. Two ENS philosophers won the Nobel Prize in Literature for their writings, Henri Bergson and Jean-Paul Sartre .

Raymond Aron , the founder of French anti-communist thought in the 1960s and Sartre's great adversary, was a student from the same year as Sartre, and they were both near contemporaries of phenomenologist Maurice Merleau-Ponty , musicologist Vladimir Jankélévitch and historian of philosophy Maurice de Gandillac . Among the few female students, philosopher and mystic Simone Weil was accomplishing her years of study at the same time.

Jean Hyppolite , the founder of Hegelian studies in France, also studied at the school at this time and later influenced many of its students.

Epistemologists Georges Canguilhem and Jean Cavaillès , the latter also known as a Résistance hero, were educated at ENS as well.

Simone Weil attended the École normale supérieure in the 1920s and beat classmate Simone de Beauvoir to first place in philosophy.

Later, Marxist political thinker Louis Althusser was a student at ENS and taught there for many years, and many of his disciples later became known for their own thought: among them were Étienne Balibar , philosopher Alain Badiou , who still teaches at the school as an emeritus professor, and Jacques Rancière . Still later, in the 1940s and 1950s, the world-renowned thinker Michel Foucault , founder of the history of systems of thought and future professor at the Collège de France was a student a few years ahead of the founder of deconstruction , Jacques Derrida and the thinker of individuation Gilbert Simondon . The tradition continues today through such philosophers as Jacques Bouveresse , Jean-Luc Marion , Claudine Tiercelin , Francis Wolff and Quentin Meillassoux , and the school has also produced prominent public intellectuals like Stéphane Hessel and such New Philosophers as Bernard-Henri Lévy and Benny Lévy .

Contributing to ENS's role as the centre of the structuralist school of thought, alongside Althusser and Foucault, major psychoanalyst and psychiatrist Jacques Lacan taught there in the 1960s, notably giving his course, The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis , in 1964. This period of his teaching is significant as it is the one in which it acquired "a much larger audience" than before and represented a "change of front" from his previous work.

[ 79 ] During this time the school became a focal point of the École freudienne de Paris , and many of Lacan's disciples were educated there, including psychoanalysts Jacques-Alain Miller and Jean-Claude Milner , the first president of the World Association of Psychoanalysis .

History and literature [ edit ] One of the school's foremost specialities has always been the teaching of history, and as such it has produced a large number of renowned historians who have been important in the development of their subject, starting with Numa Denis Fustel de Coulanges , Ernest Lavisse and Jérôme Carcopino , all students of the school in the second half of the nineteenth century who later would come back to direct it. Around the turn of the century two men who would become the founders of the Annales School , Marc Bloch and Lucien Febvre , studied at the school.

Jacqueline de Romilly and Pierre Grimal , respectively historians of Ancient Greece and Ancient Rome , were both students at the school starting in 1933. Sinologist Marcel Granet , medievalist Jacques Le Goff , Egyptologist Gaston Maspero , archaeologist Paul Veyne , ancien régime specialist Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie and Pre-Columbian civilisation anthropologist Jacques Soustelle were all students at the school, as well as Georges Dumézil , who revolutionised comparative philology and mythography with his analyses of sovereignty in Proto-Indo-European religion and formulated the trifunctional hypothesis of social class in ancient societies.

Jean-Paul Sartre attended the school at the same time as his intellectual foe Raymond Aron .

The school has a long-standing reputation as a training ground for men and women of letters, and its alumni include novelist and dramatist Jean Giraudoux , many of whose plays among which The Trojan War Will Not Take Place and Amphitryon 38 have become staple elements of the French theatrical repertory; and acclaimed novelist Julien Gracq , whose 1951 novel The Opposing Shore is now considered a classic. Poet Paul Celan and Nobel Prize in Literature winner Samuel Beckett were both teachers at the school.

Jules Romains , the founder of Unanimism , essayists Paul Nizan and Robert Brasillach , novelist Nobel Prize in Literature winner Romain Rolland and poet Charles Péguy are a few other examples of major authors who were educated there. The school has also long been a centre for literary criticism and theory, from one-time director Gustave Lanson to major twentieth-century figures of the field such as Paul Bénichou , Jean-Pierre Richard and Gérard Genette . The founder of the influential Négritude movement, Martinican poet Aimé Césaire , prepared and passed the entrance exam from the Lycée Louis-le-Grand where he was friends with future President of Senegal and fellow Négritude author Léopold Sédar Senghor , who failed the entrance exam. Around this same period Algerian novelist, essayist and filmmaker Assia Djebar , who would become one of the most prominent voices of Arab feminism , was a student at the school, as well as Belgian writer Éric-Emmanuel Schmitt .

Social sciences and economics [ edit ] There is a tradition of social sciences at the school, and Émile Durkheim , regarded as one of the founders of the discipline of sociology , was a student at the school in 1879, around the same time as Théodule Ribot , a psychologist well known for developing Ribot's Law .

Pierre Bourdieu , who studied dynamics of power in society and its transmission over generations and became a vocal critic of the French system of grandes écoles and notably ENS as the standard-bearer of that system, studied at ENS in the early 1950s, at the same time as his later intellectual adversary, individualist Raymond Boudon , both of them having taken and passed the agrégation in philosophy at the end of their studies at the school. Other major ENS sociologists and anthropologists include Maurice Halbwachs , Alain Touraine and Philippe Descola . The school also has a tradition of geography, with the founder of modern French geography and of the French School of Geopolitics Paul Vidal de La Blache having been a student at the school starting in 1863.

As for economics, its history at the school is less long, as it was not among the subjects first taught at the school. However, Gérard Debreu won the 1983 Bank of Sweden Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel , and there is a growing output of economists from ENS, as evidenced by the young generation of French economists represented by Emmanuel Saez , winner of the 2009 John Bates Clark Medal , Esther Duflo , who won the same medal in 2010 and the Nobel prize in 2019, and Thomas Piketty , author of the 2013 bestseller Capital in the Twenty-First Century . Since its creation in 2000, ten of the twenty recipients of the Prize of the best young French economist have been ENS alumni, including Antoine Bozio (who now teaches at EHESS ), Camille Landais ( LSE ), Emmanuel Farhi ( Harvard ), Pascaline Dupas ( Stanford ) and Xavier Gabaix (Harvard).

Government and politics [ edit ] ENS has never had a public policy division, but some of its students have become leading statesmen and politicians.

Third Republic Prime Ministers Jules Simon , Léon Blum , Édouard Herriot and Paul Painlevé as well as socialist leader Jean Jaurès were early examples of this trend. At this time, quite a few ENS former students and intellectuals were drawn to socialism , such as Pierre Brossolette who became a Resistance hero and a major national leader during World War II. The institution has continued to be seen as a left-wing school since then. Later, as ENS came increasingly to be seen by some as an antechamber to the École nationale d'administration , more young students drawn to politics and public policy began to be attracted to it, such as future President of the Republic Georges Pompidou , Prime Ministers Alain Juppé and Laurent Fabius , and ministers such as Bruno Le Maire and Michel Sapin , former Ministers of Finance of France.

See also [ edit ] Grande école École normale supérieure (for the generic term) École normale supérieure de Lyon École normale supérieure Paris-Saclay Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa Jeune République List of École Normale Supérieure people Alumni of the École Normale Supérieure Academic staff of the École Normale Supérieure École nationale d'administration École nationale supérieure des mines de Paris Paris Sciences et Lettres – Quartier latin Atomium Culture Paris School of Economics Centrale Graduate School (in French) Écoles de l'an III scientifiques References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ "L'Institution - École normale supérieure - Paris" . Archived from the original on 29 November 2014 . Retrieved 20 November 2014 .

^ "Grandes dates | ENS" .

ens.psl.eu .

Archived from the original on 10 August 2020 . Retrieved 1 July 2020 .

^ a b c d e f "Faits et chiffres – École normale supérieure – Paris" . Ens.fr. Archived from the original on 7 December 2013 . Retrieved 15 May 2014 .

^ "Decree of 11 June 2009" . French Ministry of Higher Education.

Archived from the original on 22 April 2021 . Retrieved 20 November 2014 .

^ "Frédéric Worms nommé à la tête de l'École normale supérieure" .

acteurspublics.fr . Retrieved 1 April 2024 .

^ Robert J. Smith (1983).

"The Ecole Normale Supérieure and the Third Republic" .

Histoire de l'Éducation .

18 (1). Albany, State University of New York Press: 123– 127.

Archived from the original on 6 February 2021 . Retrieved 1 May 2020 .

^ Karady, Victor (1973).

"Trois Études Sur L'école Normale Supérieure" .

L'Année sociologique (1940/1948-) .

24 : 223– 233.

ISSN 0066-2399 .

JSTOR 27888250 .

Archived from the original on 3 November 2023 . Retrieved 3 November 2023 .

^ "Small vocabulary for the use of the normaliens | ENS" .

www.ens.psl.eu .

Archived from the original on 3 November 2023 . Retrieved 3 November 2023 .

^ "ENS Cachan Bretagne – Les écoles de l'an III" . Bretagne.ens-cachan.fr.

Archived from the original on 26 April 2012 . Retrieved 15 May 2014 .

^ Ferrand, Michèle (30 January 2014), Rogers, Rebecca (ed.), "La mixité à dominance masculine : l'exemple des filières scientifiques de l'École normale supérieure d'Ulm-Sèvres" , La mixité dans l'éducation : Enjeux passés et présents , Sociétés, Espaces, Temps (in French), Lyon: ENS Éditions, pp.

181– 193, ISBN 978-2-84788-424-1 , archived from the original on 3 November 2023 , retrieved 3 November 2023 ^ Clynes, Tom (7 October 2016).

"Hsu & Wai survey of universities worldwide ranked by ratio of Nobel laureates to alumni" .

Nature .

538 (7624): 152.

doi : 10.1038/nature.2016.20757 .

PMID 27734890 .

S2CID 4466329 .

^ "Top universities – University profiles" . Top Universities.

Archived from the original on 27 November 2021 . Retrieved 19 November 2014 .

^ Law of 10 May 1806 relative to the creation of the Imperial University, article 118.

^ a b "Historical article on ENS by Pollens" . lemonde.fr. 24 March 2005. Archived from the original on 13 October 2016 . Retrieved 12 October 2016 .

^ Serge Benoît, "La rue d'Ulm", in Christian Hottin (ed.), Universités et grandes écoles à Paris : les palais de la science , Paris, Action artistique de la ville de Paris , 1999, p. 177.

^ Decree of 10 November 1903 ( Pascale Hummel, Pour une histoire de l'École normale supérieure: Source d'archives 1794-1993 , Éditions Rue d'ULM via OpenEdition, 2013 Archived 3 January 2018 at the Wayback Machine ).

^ Adolphus Ballard, James Tait. (2010.) The Ecole Normale Supérieure and the Third Republic Archived 3 November 2023 at the Wayback Machine , Suny Press, p. 73.

^ Brasseur, Roland (April 2011). "Quelques scientifiques ayant enseigné en classe préparatoire aux grandes écoles".

Bulletin de l'Union des Professeurs de Spéciales (234). Paris.

^ 1926, p. 26).
AUx oRIGINES DE IJ\ KHAGNE 31
grecque, soit une explication d'allemand, ou d'anglais, ou d'italien, ou d'espagnol, soit une seconde interrogation sur I'histoire ou la philosophie ,. On avait donc tenté, semble-t-il, d'éliminer de l'écrit la plupart des épreuves qui demandaient un travail de révision trop intense, incompatible avec les quelques mois de préparation passés dans les centres de préparation mili- taires. Ces épreuves, reléguées a l'oral, voyaient d'ailleurs leur programme considérablement limité par rapport a celui des concours ordinaires. Ainsi, en histoire, les connaissances exigées portaient sur la France de 1789 a la fin du Directoire et sur u I'Empire allemand, I'Autriche-Hongrie, l'Angleterre et l'Amérique dans la seconde moitié du xrx" siècle >.
L'organisation de ce concours spécial avait naturellement pour but, on I'a vu, de sauvegarder les droits des khàgneux dont la mobilisation et les années au front avaient interrompu les études. De son cóté, la III" République entendait ainsi reconstituer le plus rapidement possible cette ( élite u que son système scolaire était chargé de promouvoir et que la guerre venait de décimer. Et, de fait, la session spéciale de 1919 déboucha sur une promotion plus importante que les promotions habituelles, mais aussi, en termes relatifs, sur un pourcentage de réussites plus élevé qu'a l'habitude. Sur 233 candidats littéraires inscrits, 70 furent regus normaliens et 75 boursiers de licence ls. A titre de comparaison, avant et après le conflit mondial, pour un nombre a peu près égal de candidats, les promotions littéraires comptaient un peu moins d'une trentaine de membres, et une vingtaine de bourses de licence étaient allouées.
D'une manière générale, et toujours dans le double dessein de préserver les droits des mobilisés et' de reconstituer des cadres vidés par la guerre, beaucoup d'examens et de concours universitaires de I'année 1919 et des années suivantes furent largement ouverts aux démobilisés : par exemple, l'agrégation d'histoire et de géographie de 1920 compta, pour sa session normale, sept regus - dont le premier fut Pierre Gaxotte -, ¤t, pour sa < session spéciale >, vingt-six regus.
L'École normale supérieure en 1919.
Du fait de la guerre, se cÒtoyèrent donc a l'École normale supérieure, en 1919 et dans les années suivantes, des élèves d'àges et d'expériences très différents. La promotion spéciale de 1919 comprenait des mobilisés de l'été 1914 et des soldats appelés sous les drapeaux au cours des années suivantes. Des élèves reQus au Concours de 1914 ei mobilisés aussitót après, tel Marcel Déat, commengaient, en réalité, eux aussi leur scolarité rue d'Ulm en 1919. Les survivants des promotions 1912 et 1913 reprenaient leurs années de scolarité a I'Ecole, interrompues par la guerre avant I'agrégation. Les élèves des promo- tions 191ó, 1917 ou 1918 continuaient leurs études ou les reprenaient, certains
ayant été mobilisés après leur réussite au concours. Enfin, les élèves du concours normal de 1919 entamaient, eux aussi, leurs années d'études. Un texte de Paul Dupuy, qui fut pendant plusieurs décennies < surveillant
13. Joumal Officiel, 21 juillet 1925, p. ó859.

^ Decree of 3 February 1953 ( Pascale Hummel, Pour une histoire de l'École normale supérieure: Source d'archives 1794-1993 , Éditions Rue d'ULM via OpenEdition, 2013 Archived 3 January 2018 at the Wayback Machine ).

^ The decree of 26 August 1987 states that the Minister for Higher Education and Research has authority over ENS in the same way rectors have authority over universities, thus ensuring ENS's independence from the mainstream university system.

^ "Encyclopedia of Bourges biography of Simone Weil" . encyclopedie-bourges.com.

Archived from the original on 10 April 2016 . Retrieved 12 October 2016 .

^ Decree of 24 July 1985 relative to the creation of public establishments of a scientific nature (EPCSCP).

^ "Article on the fusion of ENS Lyon and ENS-LSH referencing the former merger of Ulm and Sèvres" .

Le Monde.fr . lemonde.fr. 23 December 2009.

Archived from the original on 13 October 2016 . Retrieved 12 October 2016 .

^ "France's educational elite" .

Daily Telegraph . 17 November 2003.

Archived from the original on 27 July 2018 . Retrieved 5 February 2019 .

^ Pierre Bourdieu (1998).

The State Nobility: Elite Schools in the Field of Power . Stanford UP. pp.

133– 35.

ISBN 9780804733465 .

Archived from the original on 28 September 2023 . Retrieved 5 February 2022 .

^ What are Grandes Ecoles Institutes in France?

^ "FAQ about International selection" .

PSL . École normale supérieure.

Archived from the original on 5 February 2022 . Retrieved 5 February 2022 .

^ "FT European Business Schools Ranking 2021: France dominates" .

Financial Times . 5 December 2021. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022 . Retrieved 26 January 2022 .

^ "Higher Education in France" . BSB.

Archived from the original on 25 January 2022 . Retrieved 26 January 2022 .

^ "Conférence des grandes écoles: commission Accréditation" . Conférence des grandes écoles.

Archived from the original on 20 January 2022 . Retrieved 21 January 2022 .

^ "Etablissements dispensant des formations supérieures initiales diplômantes conférant le grade de master" .

Ministry of France, Higher Education . Ministère de l'Enseignement supérieur, de la Recherche et de l'Innovation . Retrieved 16 January 2022 .

^ Monique de Saint-Martin , « Les recherches sociologiques sur les grandes écoles : de la reproduction à la recherche de justice », Éducation et sociétés 1/2008 (No. 21), p. 95-103.

lire en ligne Archived 7 January 2022 at the Wayback Machine sur Cairn.info ^ Valérie Albouy et Thomas Wanecq, Les inégalités sociales d'accès aux grandes écoles Archived 9 June 2021 at the Wayback Machine (2003), INSEE ^ Jean Leclant, "L'École normale supérieure et l'Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres : passé, présent et futur", Comptes-rendus des séances de l'Académie des inscriptions et belles-lettres , 1999, 138, no. 4.

^ Serge Benoît, "La rue d'Ulm", p. 179.

^ "ENS Doctoral School" .

Archived from the original on 23 October 2019 . Retrieved 23 October 2019 .

^ "ENS PhD programs" .

Archived from the original on 23 October 2019 . Retrieved 23 October 2019 .

^ "Law granting ENS students the status of civil servants" . Légifrance (French government legal database).

Archived from the original on 1 March 2023 . Retrieved 22 November 2014 .

^ "DMA – Department of Mathematics" .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2013 . Retrieved 21 November 2014 .

^ "FIP – Department of Physics" .

Archived from the original on 29 November 2014 . Retrieved 21 November 2014 .

^ "DI – Department of Computer Science" .

Archived from the original on 5 May 2019 . Retrieved 23 August 2019 .

^ "Department of Chemistry" .

Archived from the original on 22 June 2018 . Retrieved 21 November 2014 .

^ "Department of Biology" .

Archived from the original on 18 December 2020 . Retrieved 21 November 2014 .

^ "TAO – Department of Geoscience" .

Archived from the original on 16 May 2016 . Retrieved 21 November 2014 .

^ "DEC – Department of Cognitive Science" .

Archived from the original on 30 March 2018 . Retrieved 21 November 2014 .

^ "Department of Philosophy" .

Archived from the original on 18 December 2020 . Retrieved 21 November 2014 .

^ "LILA – Department of Literature and Language" .

Archived from the original on 3 May 2019 . Retrieved 21 November 2014 .

^ "Department of History" .

Archived from the original on 11 August 2020 . Retrieved 21 November 2014 .

^ "CEA – Department of Classics" .

Archived from the original on 21 January 2021 . Retrieved 21 November 2014 .

^ "Jourdan – Department of Social Science" .

Archived from the original on 29 November 2014 . Retrieved 21 November 2014 .

^ "Department of Economics" .

Archived from the original on 12 October 2016 . Retrieved 12 October 2016 .

^ "Paris School of Economics" .

Archived from the original on 12 October 2012 . Retrieved 21 November 2014 .

^ "Department of Geography" .

Archived from the original on 4 November 2020 . Retrieved 21 November 2014 .

^ "Passerelle des arts – Department for the History and Theory of Art" .

Archived from the original on 16 April 2020 . Retrieved 21 November 2014 .

^ "ECLA - ENS Language Laboratory" .

Archived from the original on 9 October 2016 . Retrieved 12 October 2016 .

^ "The ENS diploma" .

Archived from the original on 29 November 2014 . Retrieved 22 November 2014 .

^ "Article from the Nouvel obs " . bibliobs.nouvelobs.fr. 2 December 2011.

Archived from the original on 25 October 2014 . Retrieved 22 November 2014 .

^ "Halley integrated catalogue of the Rubens libraries" .

Archived from the original on 9 February 2011 . Retrieved 14 February 2015 .

^ Base Mérimée : PA00132985 , Ministère français de la Culture.

(in French) ^ Y. Desrichard, Administration et bibliothèques , 2006, p. 174-176 ^ "ENS sciences expérimentales" .

Archived from the original on 2 November 2014 . Retrieved 22 November 2014 .

^ "ENSSIB – French record of new libraries" . Archived from the original on 14 July 2014 . Retrieved 22 November 2014 .

^ "Paris Sciences et Lettres – history" . Archived from the original on 3 May 2015 . Retrieved 22 November 2014 .

^ "Atomium culture – member universities" .

Archived from the original on 13 March 2010 . Retrieved 22 November 2014 .

^ "PSE – master's page" .

Archived from the original on 22 November 2014 . Retrieved 21 November 2014 .

^ "Scuola Normale Superiore – history" . sns.it. Archived from the original on 29 November 2014 . Retrieved 20 November 2014 .

^ "People's Daily Online - Article on ENS - East China Normal University partnership" . peopledaily.com.cn. 22 June 2005.

Archived from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 12 October 2016 .

^ "The International CNRS Laboratory " SALADYN " " (PDF) . ambafrance-cn.org.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 December 2013 . Retrieved 21 November 2014 .

^ "Remarque at ENS" .

Archived from the original on 10 October 2016 . Retrieved 21 November 2014 .

^ "ENS – list of partnerships" (PDF) . .ens.fr.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 November 2014 . Retrieved 20 November 2014 .

^ "Online "Savoirs" platform" .

Archived from the original on 18 November 2014 . Retrieved 21 November 2014 .

^ "Online "Les Ernest" platform" .

Archived from the original on 29 November 2014 . Retrieved 21 November 2014 .

^ "Home" .

presses.ens.fr .

Archived from the original on 21 September 2011 . Retrieved 2 April 2007 .

^ "Fondation ENS – accueil" .

Archived from the original on 5 April 2015 . Retrieved 14 February 2015 .

^ "Times Higher Education Ranking of Small Universities" .

THE Times . 25 January 2016.

Archived from the original on 21 April 2016 . Retrieved 15 October 2016 .

^ "Times Ranking of French Universities" .

THE Times . 18 May 2016.

Archived from the original on 9 May 2023 . Retrieved 15 October 2016 .

^ Belhoste, Bruno (1996).

"Article on the Bicentenary book directed by Jean-François Sirinelli" .

Histoire de l'éducation .

69 (1): 81– 86.

doi : 10.3406/hedu.1996.2809 .

Archived from the original on 23 December 2017 . Retrieved 12 October 2016 .

^ Lacan, Jacques. "Report on the 1964 Seminar".

Hurly-Burly 5 , p. 17.

Bibliography [ edit ] Ballard, Adolphus & Tait, James, The Ecole Normale Supérieure and the Third Republic , SUNY Press , 2010 Brasillach, Robert , Notre avant-guerre , Plon , 1941.

Collective, Le Livre du centenaire , Hachette , 1895.

Collective, Notre Ecole normale , Belles lettres , 1994.

Collective, Les Normaliens peints par eux-mêmes , Chamerot et Renouard, 1895.

Dimoff, Paul, La Rue d'Ulm à la Belle époque (1899–1903) , G. Thomas, 1970.

Dufay, François & Dufort, Pierre-Bertrand, Les Normaliens. De Charles Péguy à Bernard-Henri Lévy, un siècle d'histoire , J.-C. Lattès, 1993.

Ferrand, Michèle, Imbert, Françoise & Marry, Catherine, L'Excellence scolaire : une affaire de famille. Le cas des normaliennes et normaliens scientifiques , L'Harmattan , 1999.

Flacelière, Robert , Normale en péril , Presses universitaires de France, 1971.

Herriot, Edouard , Normale , Société nouvelle d'édition, 1932.

Hummel, Pascale, Humanités normaliennes. L'enseignement classique et l'érudition philologique dans l'École normale supérieure au XIXe siècle , Les Belles Lettres , No. 298, 1995.

Hummel, Pascale, Regards sur les études classiques au XIXe siècle. Catalogue du fonds Morante , Paris, Presses de l'École normale supérieure , 1990.

Hummel, Pascale, Pour une histoire de l'École normale supérieure : sources d'archives (1794–1993) , National Archives, Presses de l'École normale supérieure , 1995.

Israël, Stéphane, Les Études et la guerre. Les normaliens dans la tourmente , Éditions Rue d'Ulm , 2005.

Judson Ladd, Adoniram, École normale supérieure: An Historical Sketch , Herald Publications Company, Grand Forks, N.D., 1907.

online text Lanson, Gustave , " L'École normale supérieure ", La Revue des deux Mondes , 1926.

online text Archived 11 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine Masson, Nicole, L'École normale supérieure : Les chemins de la liberté , collection « Découvertes Gallimard » (nº 221), série Mémoire des lieux.

Gallimard , 1994.

Méchoulan, Eric & Mourier, Pierre-FrançoisÉric Méchoulan, Normales Sup' : des élites pour quoi faire ?

, L'Aube , 1994.

Nusimovici, Michel, Les écoles de l'an III , 2010.

Peyrefitte, Alain , Rue d'Ulm. Chroniques de la vie normalienne , Fayard , 1994.

Rolland, Romain , Le Cloître de la rue d'Ulm , Albin Michel , 1952.

Rosset, Clément , En ce temps-là , Minuit , 1992.

Sirinelli, Jean-François, Génération intellectuelle. Khâgneux et normaliens dans l'entre-deux-guerres , Fayard, 1988.

Sirinelli, Jean-François (ed.), École normale supérieure: le livre du bicentenaire , Presses universitaires de France , 1994.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to École Normale Supérieure .

ENS Official website v t e French écoles normales supérieures ENS (Paris) ENS Paris-Saclay ENS de Lyon ENS de Rennes v t e Conférence des Grandes écoles Engineering grandes écoles Institut Agro Rennes-Angers AgroParis Tech Bordeaux Sciences Agro Institut Agro Dijon Arts et Métiers ParisTech Chimie ParisTech CNAM CPE Lyon CY Tech EBI École centrale Lille Lyon Centrale Méditerranée Nantes Paris ECAM ECAM Lyon ECAM Rennes ECE Paris École nationale des ponts et chaussées École de l'air et de l'espace École navale ECPM EFREI EI Cesi EIGSI EIVP École des mines Alès Albi-Carmaux Douai Nancy Nantes Mines Paris – PSL Saint-Étienne ENAC ENGEES ENIB ENIM ENISE ENITIAA ENSAE Paris ENSAI ENSAIA ENSAIT ENSC Lille Montpellier Mulhouse Rennes ENSCBP Bordeaux ENSEA ENSEIRB-MATMECA ENSEM ENSG-Géologie IGN ENSGSI ENSIC ENSICAEN ENSIIE ENSISA ENSSAT ENSTA Paris ENSTIB ENTPE École polytechnique EPITA EPF EPMI ESA ESAIP ESB ESCOM ESEO ESIEA ESIEE Amiens ESIEE Engineering ESIGELEC ESITC Caen ESME-Sudria ESPCI Paris ESTACA ESTIA ESTP Grenoble INP ENSE 3 ENSIMAG ENSGI PAGORA PHELMA ESISAR HEI ICAM IFP School INP Toulouse ENSEEIHT ENSIACET ENIT ENM ENSAT EIP INSA CVL Hauts-de-France Lyon Rennes Rouen Strasbourg Toulouse Institut d'optique Graduate School IPSA ISA ISAE ISAT ISARA Lyon ISEN Brest Lille Toulon ISEP ISIMA ISMANS ITECH Lyon Institut agro Montpellier Polyméca ENSCI ENSTA Bretagne ENSMA Supméca Supmicrotech Polytech Group Annecy-Chambéry Angers Clermont-Ferrand Grenoble Lille Lyon Marseille Montpellier Nancy Nantes Nice Orléans Paris-Saclay Sorbonne Tours SIGMA Clermont Institut Mines-Télécom Bretagne Évry Lille Paris ESILV Sup'Biotech Télécom Physique Strasbourg Unilasalle UTBM UTC UTT VetAgro Sup Business schools Audencia BSB EDC Paris EDHEC Emlyon Business School EMLV EM Normandie EM Strasbourg Brest Business School La Rochelle BS Clermont ESC Pau ESC Rennes ESCEM ESCP Business School ESDES ESSCA ESSEC European Business School Paris Grenoble Grenoble IAE ESC Troyes HEC Paris ICD ICN IÉSEG INSEAD INSEEC IPAG ISC Paris ISG KEDGE Montpellier NEOMA PSB Skema Telecom Toulouse Others CELSA Sorbonne University CFJ Paris EHESP ENA ENAC Alumni ENSFEA ENS ENS Paris-Saclay ENS LSH ENS Lyon ENS Rennes ENSA Nancy ENSBA ENSCI–Les Ateliers ENV Alfort Académie militaire de la Gendarmerie nationale ESA ESM Saint-Cyr ESA HEC Alumni IFM INP-ENVT ISIT École de design Nantes Atlantique Sciences Po Grenoble Université Paris-Dauphine Oniris Union des industries et métiers de la métallurgie Universities abroad Fondation 2ie Hassania School of Public Works École Nationale Supérieure des Mines de Rabat (Mines Rabat) Louvain School of Engineering Gembloux Agro-Bio Tech HEC Lausanne HEC Montréal HEC Liège Management School Institut national des postes et télécommunications Polytechnique Montréal Solvay Brussels School of Economics and Management École supérieure des communications de Tunis Technical University of Madrid University of Lisbon Accredited degrees Bilan d'aptitude délivré par les grandes écoles Mastère spécialisé MSc v t e French scientific research facilities University-grade institutes Universities Autonomous institutes Écoles normales supérieures Grands établissements Public research institutes IRSTEA (agriculture) CNRS (fundamental sciences) INED (demography) INRA (agronomy) IFSTTAR (transports and civil engineering) INRIA (computer science and control) INSERM (medicine) IRD (development) Public industry BRGM (geoscience) CEA (nuclear industry and renewables) IFREMER (maritime applications) ONERA (aerospace) v t e Public universities and Grandes Écoles in France (EPSCP) Universities Aix-Marseille Amiens Angers Antilles Artois Avignon Besançon Bordeaux Bordeaux Montaigne Brest Bretagne-Sud Caen Chambéry Corse Dijon Évry Le Havre Guyane Limoges Littoral Lyon Lyon 1 Lyon 2 Lyon 3 Le Mans Montpellier 3 Mulhouse Nîmes Nouvelle-Calédonie Orléans Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne 3 Sorbonne Nouvelle 4 & 6 Sorbonne 8 Paris 10 Nanterre 12 Paris-East Créteil 13 Sorbonne Paris North Pau Perpignan Poitiers Polynésie française Reims Rennes Rennes 2 La Réunion La Rochelle Rouen Saint-Étienne Strasbourg Toulon Toulouse Jean Jaurès Paul Sabatier INPT Tours Versailles Collegiate Paris 2 Assas 5 & 7 Cité 11 Saclay Clermont-Ferrand Toulouse Capitole Lille Nantes Rennes Cergy Montpellier Nice Côte d'Azur Gustave Eiffel Polytechnic University of Hauts-de-France Polytechnic Institute of Paris Grands établissements PSL University 9 Paris Dauphine University University of Lorraine Grenoble Alpes University Grandes écoles Grands établissements Institutes of Technology Grenoble Lorraine Toulouse Bordeaux Clermont-Auvergne Agro ParisTech Arts et Métiers ParisTech Collège de France Conservatoire national des arts et métiers CentraleSupélec École des ponts ParisTech École Nationale des Chartes ENSSIB École nationale supérieure maritime École pratique des hautes études EHESP INSEP Institut de Physique du Globe de Paris Institut Agro Dijon Montpellier Rennes-Angers Institut Mines-Télécom Paris Évry Albi Alès Saint-Étienne Brest-Rennes-Nantes-Toulouse Lille-Douai Institut national d'histoire de l'art Institut national des langues et civilisations orientales Institut supérieur de l'aéronautique et de l'espace VetAgro Sup National Museum of Natural History Oniris Nantes Paris Observatory School for Advanced Studies in the Social Sciences Écoles centrales École centrale de Lille École centrale de Lyon École centrale de Marseille École centrale de Nantes École Centrale Paris Institut national des sciences appliquées Centre Val-de-Loire Euro-Méditerranée Hauts-de-France Lyon Rennes Rouen Strasbourg Toulouse Universities of Technology Belfort-Montbéliard Compiègne Troyes Écoles normales supérieures École normale supérieure École normale supérieure Paris-Saclay École normale supérieure de Lyon École normale supérieure de Rennes Institutes of Political Studies Paris Aix-en-Provence Bordeaux Grenoble Lille Lyon Rennes Saint-Germain-en-Laye Strasbourg Toulouse Fontainebleau École nationale d'ingénieurs de Saint-Etienne (ENISE) ENSAIT ENTPE Supméca Groups University of Burgundy - Franche-Comté University of Lyon Normandy University Paris-Est Sup Sorbonne Paris Cité Alliance Federal University of Toulouse Category List Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐g9sgw
Cached time: 20250817044847
Cache expiry: 1278676
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.047 seconds
Real time usage: 1.274 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7460/1000000
Revision size: 76966/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 275494/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10027/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 277862/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.622/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16072209/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1014.844      1 -total
 40.25%  408.471      1 Template:Reflist
 27.68%  280.858     54 Template:Cite_web
 18.36%  186.366      1 Template:Infobox_university
 17.53%  177.931      1 Template:Infobox
  9.36%   95.006      6 Template:Navbox
  8.15%   82.736      6 Template:Lang
  6.17%   62.657      1 Template:Écoles_normales_supérieures
  5.76%   58.415      1 Template:Short_description
  5.64%   57.252      8 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:317478:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044847 and revision id 1294112165. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=École_normale_supérieure_(Paris)&oldid=1294112165 " Categories : Universities in Paris Buildings and structures in the 5th arrondissement of Paris Écoles Normales Supérieures Grandes écoles University of Paris 1794 establishments in France Educational institutions established in 1794 Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2022 Articles containing French-language text Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university Pages using infobox university with the affiliations parameter Pages with French IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 Commons category link is on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 5 June 2025, at 17:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents École normale supérieure (Paris) 68 languages Add topic

