Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Extreme depth effects 2 Applications 3 Physiological and medical aspects Toggle Physiological and medical aspects subsection 3.1 Decompression sickness 3.2 Inert gas narcosis 3.3 Work of breathing 3.4 High-pressure nervous syndrome 3.5 Compression arthralgia 3.6 Dysbaric osteonecrosis 3.7 Oxygen toxicity 3.8 Thermal balance of the diver 3.9 Health effects of living under saturation conditions 3.10 Nutrition 4 Operating procedures Toggle Operating procedures subsection 4.1 Personnel requirements 4.2 Compression 4.3 Storage depth 4.3.1 Split level storage depth 4.4 Atmosphere control 4.5 Deployment of divers 4.6 Lock-in, lock-out, and transfer under pressure 4.7 Lock-on, lock-off, and the bell run 4.8 Excursions from storage depth 4.9 Decompression from saturation 4.9.1 Intermediate storage depths 4.9.2 Decompression following a recent excursion 4.9.3 Emergency decompression 4.10 Duration of exposure and surface intervals 5 Architecture of a surface saturation facility Toggle Architecture of a surface saturation facility subsection 5.1 Accommodation chambers 5.2 Transfer chamber 5.3 Personnel transfer capsule 5.3.1 Bell handling system 5.4 Decompression chamber 5.5 Mating flange for transportable chamber 5.6 Supply lock 5.7 Trunking 5.8 Standards and classification 6 Auxiliary and support equipment Toggle Auxiliary and support equipment subsection 6.1 Life support systems 6.1.1 Life support system operation 6.2 Hot water system 6.3 Emergency heating of the bell 6.4 Communication systems 6.5 Breathing gas 6.5.1 Bulk gas supplies 6.5.2 Gas distribution 6.5.3 Gas reclaim systems 6.5.3.1 Demand supplied 6.5.3.2 Free-flow push-pull 6.6 Sanitation system 6.7 Control consoles 6.7.1 Gas management panel 6.7.2 Saturation life support panel 6.7.3 Dive control panel 6.8 Fire suppression system 6.9 Built in breathing systems 6.10 Hyperbaric rescue and escape systems 7 Platforms Toggle Platforms subsection 7.1 Underwater habitats 8 Depth records 9 Safety and risk Toggle Safety and risk subsection 9.1 Incidence of decompression sickness 9.2 Oxygen content of breathing gases 9.3 Chamber hygiene 9.4 Minimum gas requirements 9.5 Training and registration 10 Working conditions 11 Economics 12 In arts and media 13 See also 14 References 15 Further reading 16 External links Toggle the table of contents Saturation diving 13 languages Български Dansk Deutsch Español Français 한국어 עברית 日本語 Norsk bokmål Română Suomi Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Diving mode and decompression technique Saturation diver working on the USS Monitor wreck at 70 m (230 ft) depth] Saturation diver conducting deep-sea salvage operations Saturation diving is an ambient pressure diving technique which allows a diver to remain at working depth for extended periods during which the body tissues become saturated with metabolically inert gas from the breathing gas mixture. Once saturated, the time required for decompression to surface pressure will not increase with longer exposure. The diver undergoes a single decompression to surface pressure at the end of the exposure of several days to weeks duration. The ratio of productive working time at depth to unproductive decompression time is thereby increased, and the health risk to the diver incurred by decompression is minimised. Unlike other ambient pressure diving, the saturation diver is only exposed to external ambient pressure while at diving depth.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The extreme exposures common in saturation diving make the physiological effects of ambient pressure diving more pronounced, and they tend to have more significant effects on the divers' safety, health, and general well-being. Several short and long term physiological effects of ambient pressure diving must be managed, including decompression stress , [ 3 ] high pressure nervous syndrome (HPNS), [ 2 ] compression arthralgia , [ 4 ] dysbaric osteonecrosis , oxygen toxicity , [ 5 ] inert gas narcosis , [ 6 ] high work of breathing , [ 7 ] and disruption of thermal balance.

[ 8 ] Most saturation diving procedures are common to all surface-supplied diving, but there are some which are specific to the use of a closed bell, the restrictions of excursion limits, and the use of saturation decompression.
Surface saturation systems transport the divers to the worksite in a closed bell,  use surface-supplied diving equipment , and are usually installed on an offshore platform or dynamically positioned diving support vessel .
Divers operating from underwater habitats may use surface-supplied equipment from the habitat or scuba equipment , and access the water through a wet porch , but will usually have to surface in a closed bell, unless the habitat includes a decompression chamber .

[ 9 ] The life support systems provide breathing gas, climate control, and sanitation for the personnel under pressure, in the accommodation and in the bell and the water. There are also  communications, fire suppression  and other emergency services.

[ 10 ] Bell services are provided via the bell umbilical and distributed to divers through excursion umbilicals.

[ 1 ] [ 10 ] Life support systems for emergency evacuation are independent of the accommodation system as they must travel with the evacuation module.

[ 11 ] Saturation diving is a specialized mode of diving ; of the 3,300 commercial divers employed in the United States in 2015, [ 12 ] 336 were saturation divers.

[ 13 ] Special training and certification is required, as the activity is inherently hazardous, and a set of standard operating procedures, emergency procedures, and a range of specialised equipment is used to control the risk, that require consistently correct performance by all the members of an extended diving team.

[ 6 ] [ 14 ] The combination of relatively large skilled personnel requirements, complex engineering, and bulky, heavy equipment required to support a saturation diving project make it an expensive diving mode, but it allows direct human intervention at places that would not otherwise be practical, and where it is applied, it is generally more economically viable than other options, if such exist.

[ 15 ] History [ edit ] See also: History of underwater diving On December 22, 1938, Edgar End and Max Nohl made the first intentional saturation dive by spending 27 hours breathing air at 101 feet sea water (fsw) (30.8 metres sea water (msw) in the County Emergency Hospital recompression facility in Milwaukee, Wisconsin . Their decompression lasted five hours leaving Nohl with a mild case of decompression sickness that resolved with recompression .

[ 16 ] Albert R. Behnke proposed the idea of exposing humans to increased ambient pressures long enough for the blood and tissues to become saturated with inert gases in 1942.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] In 1957, George F. Bond began the Genesis project at the Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory proving that humans could in fact withstand prolonged exposure to different breathing gases and increased environmental pressures.

[ 17 ] [ 19 ] Once saturation is achieved, the amount of time needed for decompression depends on the depth and gases breathed, and does not increase with further exposure. This was the beginning of saturation diving and the US Navy's Man-in-the-Sea Program .

[ 20 ] The first commercial saturation dives were performed in 1965 by Westinghouse to replace faulty trash racks at 200 feet (61 m) on the Smith Mountain Dam .

[ 16 ] In the same year, the Conshelf III experiment was carried out by Jacques Cousteau and a group of divers for three weeks at the depth of 100 m.

[ 21 ] Peter B. Bennett is credited with the invention of trimix breathing gas as a method to eliminate high pressure nervous syndrome . In 1981, at the Duke University Medical Center , Bennett conducted an experiment called Atlantis III , which involved subjecting volunteers to a pressure of 2250 fsw (686 msw), and slowly decompressing them to atmospheric pressure over a period of over 31 days, setting an early world record for depth-equivalent pressure in the process. A later experiment, Atlantis IV , encountered problems as one of the volunteers experienced euphoric hallucinations and hypomania .

[ 22 ] Early experiments in saturation diving were often done in underwater habitats, usually serviced by surface vessels, but in relatively exposed waters the advantage of being able to abandon the site in bad conditions encouraged the use of saturation facilities on board the support vessel, where logistics are simplified.

[ 5 ] The history of commercial saturation diving is closely linked to offshore oil and gas extraction. In the early 1960s exploration of the North Sea started on the premise that the Dutch gas fields might extend under the sea. This was borne out when the Gulf Tide drill rig hit the Ekofisk reservoir in 1969, and in 1971 Shell oil found the Brent oilfield between Norway and Shetland . From this time to the 1990s the industry developed the procedures and equipment for saturation diving from pioneering and experimental, with a somewhat dubious safety record, to a mature industry with greatly improved occupational health and safety.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] The first US Navy saturation procedures were published in the US Navy Diving Manual revision 2 of 1979. They allowed an upward excursion to start decompression, used a constant decompression rate deeper than 60 msw and varied rates from 60 msw to surface. Decompression was interrupted for a night stop and an afternoon stop, and partial pressure of oxygen was constant deeper than the fire risk zone, after which oxygen fraction was limited.

[ 5 ] When the North Sea drilling started, there was little diving support infrastructure in Europe, and the high wages attracted divers from the Gulf of Mexico oilfields, who introduced the fibre reinforced resin lightweight demand helmets from Kirby Morgan , hot water suits from Diving Unlimited International , and the U.S. Navy Diving Manual , at the time the leading set of offshore diving procedures. Research and development money was available, and new technical developments were supported by the European Economic Community . A major challenge was developing saturation diving practices suitable to the common North Sea depth range of 100 to 180 m.

[ 23 ] During the early drilling stages most of the diving work was for relatively short periods and was generally suitable for bell bounce diving , but the development of oilfield seabed infrastructure required much longer diver interventions, and saturation diving procedures were developed to suit. By 1982, a large amount of shallow maintenance work was becoming necessary, which brought in more air diving to service the rigs. By 2017 about 80% of North Sea diving was heliox saturation diving and the other 20% shallow air diving.

[ 23 ] Excursion dives without decompression stops can be done both upward and downward from saturation storage pressure within limits, allowing the divers a range of working depths, and if work is required beyond excursion range, the divers can be compressed or decompressed in storage to suit the changed depth range. Further work was done by the United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit on excursion dives from February 1974 to June 1976, and the results published in the 1984 U.S. Navy Diving Manual.

[ 23 ] These tables used a partial pressure of oxygen of 0.35 to 0.4 bar during decompression, with quite slow decompression rates, which varied with the depth, getting slower as the depth decreased, with a 6-hour stop from midnight and a two-hour stop from 14:00 and a gas fraction limit of 22% for the last part of the ascent to reduce fire risk. The tables allowed decompression to start directly after return from a dive provided there had not been an upward excursion, as this was found to increase the risk of bubble development.

[ 23 ] At the same time, the commercial diving contractor Compagnie maritime d'expertises (COMEX) had been developing slightly different decompression procedures, in which the oxygen partial pressures were higher, between 0.6 and 0.8 bar, and the ascent rates were faster to take advantage of the high P O 2 . Continuous decompression without night stops was used, and excursions were allowed.  Over time these were revised to use lower P O 2 and slower ascent rates, particularly at the shallower depths. Competing tables were thought to be used to gain competitive advantage, so in 1988 the Norwegian Petroleum Directorate organised a conference on saturation decompression safety under Val Hempleman , [ 23 ] and in 1990 a conference to harmonise the saturation tables to be used in the Norwegial sector of the North Sea used input from five contractors. In 1999 the NORSOK U100 standard was published, which was a compromise using aspects of several of the tables, and has proven in use to be sufficiently conservative with a good safety record.

[ 23 ] In the 1980s the Royal Navy were using an oxygen partial pressure of 0.42 bar for decompression from saturation, which is slightly higher than the 0.40 bar of the US Navy table. This reduced the time for decompression by a small percentage.

[ 25 ] The 1981 salvage of the gold on HMS Edinburgh at 256 m was the first commercial use of helium reclaim systems,and set a new depth record for sustained commercial saturation diving.

[ 26 ] Saturation decompression in the Brazil oilfields took a slightly different route, and was originally based on company tables, until Brazil produced their own legislation in 1988, similar to that of the UK's Health and Safety Executive . In 2004 revised legislation was closer to the COMEX procedures.

[ 23 ] There have been no major research projects since the Norwegian deep diving contracts, and since then commercial procedures have evolved through cumulative empirical adjustments based on the experience of freelance personnel moving between companies, changes due to mergers and takeovers between contractors, and guidance by regulations, industry standards and client requirements.

[ 5 ] By 2017 the system had settled into a chamber P O 2 of 0.5 bar while deeper than 15 msw, and limited to 22 to 23% at the end of decompression to limit fire risk.

[ 23 ] Extreme depth effects [ edit ] A breathing gas mixture of oxygen, helium and hydrogen ( hydreliox ) was developed for use at extreme diving pressures to reduce the effects of high pressure nervous syndrome. Between 1978 and 1984, a group of divers at Duke University in North Carolina conducted the Atlantis series of onshore hyperbaric chamber deep experimental dives.

[ 22 ] In 1981, during an extreme depth test dive to 686 metres (2251 ft) they breathed a conventional heliox mixture with difficulty and experienced tremors and memory lapses.

[ 22 ] [ 27 ] A ( hydreliox ) gas mixture was used during a similar  experimental chamber dive by three divers for the French Comex S.A.

offshore diving contractor in 1992. On 18 November 1992, Comex stopped the dive at a pressure of 675 meters of sea water (msw) (2215 fsw) because the divers were suffering from insomnia and fatigue. All three divers were willing to continue, but the research leader decided to decompress the chamber to 650 msw (2133 fsw). On 20 November, Comex diver Theo Mavrostomos was allowed to continue but spent only two hours at 701 msw (2300 fsw), although the intention had been to spend four and a half days at this depth and perform planned tasks.

[ 27 ] Applications [ edit ] See also: Commercial offshore diving and Underwater habitat Iremis da Vinci at the Albert Dock Basin, Port of Leith. A multi-purpose diving support vessel, built in the Republic of Korea in 2011, and registered at Majuro, Marshall Islands, it is 115.4m long and has a gross tonnage of 8691t.

Saturation diving has applications mainly in commercial offshore diving, scientific diving and marine salvage, and occasionally for military objectives.

[ 9 ] [ 6 ] Commercial offshore diving , sometimes shortened to just offshore diving, is a branch of commercial diving , with divers working in support of the exploration and production sector of the oil and gas industry in places such as the Gulf of Mexico in the United States, the North Sea in the United Kingdom and Norway, and along the coast of Brazil. The work in this area of the industry includes maintenance of oil platforms and the building of underwater structures. In this context " offshore " implies that the diving work is done outside of national boundaries and territorial waters , often in the exclusive economic zone of the continental shelf . Saturation diving work in support of the offshore oil and gas industries is usually contract based.

[ 28 ] Saturation diving is standard practice for bottom work at many of the deeper offshore sites, and allows more effective use of the diver's time while reducing the risk of decompression sickness. Surface oriented air diving is more usual in shallower water.

[ 3 ] Saturation diving for other industrial and military applications, such a marine salvage or underwater construction, are also likely to use a surface saturation system as a base for operations, but scientific saturation diving is more likely to operate from an underwater habitat.

[ 29 ] [ 9 ] Tektite I habitat Underwater habitats are underwater structures in which people can live for extended periods and carry out most of the basic human functions of a 24-hour day, such as working, resting, eating, attending to personal hygiene, and sleeping. In this context ' habitat ' is generally used in a narrow sense to mean the interior and immediate exterior of the structure and its fixtures, but not its surrounding marine environment . Most early underwater habitats lacked regenerative systems for air, water, food, electricity, and other resources. However, recently some new underwater habitats allow for these resources to be delivered using pipes, or generated within the habitat, rather than manually delivered.

[ 30 ] Scientific saturation diving is relatively more likely to be done from an underwater habitat, where the scientists expect to spend a lot of time in the vicinity of the habitat, and to do laboratory work in the habitat along with field work outside.

[ 9 ] Physiological and medical aspects [ edit ] The extreme exposures common in saturation diving make the physiological effects common to other modes of ambient pressure diving more pronounced, and they tend to have more significant effects on the divers' safety, health, and general well-being. Several physiological effects of ambient pressure diving must be managed.

[ 3 ] [ 22 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] [ 2 ] [ 4 ] [ 8 ] Decompression sickness [ edit ] Further information: Decompression sickness Decompression sickness (DCS) is a potentially fatal condition caused by bubbles of inert gas, which can occur in divers' bodies as a consequence of the pressure reduction as they ascend. To prevent decompression sickness, divers have to limit their rate of ascent, to reduce the concentration of dissolved gases in their body sufficiently to avoid bubble formation and growth. This protocol, known as decompression , can last for several hours for dives in excess of 50 metres (160 ft) when divers spend more than a few minutes at these depths. The longer divers remain at depth, the more inert gas is absorbed into their body tissues, and the time required for decompression increases rapidly.

[ 32 ] This presents a problem for operations that require divers to work for extended periods at depth, as the time spent decompressing can exceed the time spent doing useful work by a large margin. However, after somewhere around 72 hours under any given pressure, depending on the ingassing model used, divers' bodies become saturated with inert gas, and no further uptake occurs. From that point onward, no increase in decompression time is necessary. The practice of saturation diving takes advantage of this by providing a means for divers to remain at depth pressure for days or weeks. At the end of that period, divers need to carry out a single saturation decompression, which is much more efficient and a lower risk than making multiple short dives, each of which requires a lengthy decompression time. By making the single decompression slower and longer, in the controlled conditions and relative comfort of the saturation habitat or decompression chamber, the risk of decompression sickness during the single exposure is further reduced.

[ 3 ] Inert gas narcosis [ edit ] Main article: Nitrogen narcosis Inert gas narcosis is a reversible alteration in consciousness that occurs while diving at depth. It is caused by the anesthetic effect of certain gases at high partial pressure . It can occur during shallow dives, but does not usually become noticeable at depths less than 30 metres (98 ft). Except for helium and probably neon , all gases that can be breathed have a narcotic effect, although widely varying in degree.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] As depth increases, the mental impairment may become hazardous. Divers can learn to cope with some of the effects of narcosis, but it is impossible to develop a tolerance . Narcosis can affect all ambient pressure divers, although susceptibility varies widely among individuals and from dive to dive.

Narcosis may be completely reversed in a few minutes by ascending to a shallower depth, with no long-term effects. To dive at greater depths, as narcosis and oxygen toxicity become critical risk factors, gas mixtures such as trimix or heliox are used. These mixtures prevent or reduce narcosis by replacing some or all of the inert fraction of the breathing gas with non-narcotic helium.
There is a synergy between carbon dioxide toxicity and inert gas narcosis which is recognised but not fully understood. Conditions where high work of breathing due to gas density occur tend to exacerbate this effect.

[ 7 ] Work of breathing [ edit ] Main article: Work of breathing Work of breathing (WOB) is the energy expended to inhale and exhale a breathing gas .

[ 35 ] In a normal resting state the work of breathing constitutes about 5% of the total body oxygen consumption. It can increase considerably due to constraints on gas flow imposed by breathing apparatus , ambient pressure , or breathing gas composition. Work of breathing is affected by several factors in underwater diving at ambient pressure. There are physiological effects of immersion, physical effects of ambient pressure and breathing gas mixture, and mechanical effects of the gas supply system.

[ 36 ] Density of a given gas mixture is proportional to absolute pressure at a constant temperature throughout the range of respirable pressures, and resistance to flow is a function of flow velocity, density and viscosity.

[ 36 ] When the density exceeds about 6g/litre the exercise tolerance of the diver becomes significantly reduced, [ 37 ] and by 10 g/litre it is marginal. At this stage even moderate exertion may cause a carbon dioxide buildup that cannot be reversed by increased ventilation, as the work required to increase ventilation produces more carbon dioxide than is eliminated by the increased ventilation, and flow may be choked by the effects of dynamic airway compression. This effect can be delayed by using lower density gas such as helium in the breathing mix to keep the combined density below 6 g/litre.

[ 36 ] Carbon dioxide retention as a consequence of excessively high work of breathing may cause direct symptoms of carbon dioxide toxicity, and synergistic effects with nitrogen narcosis and CNS oxygen toxicity which is aggravated by cerebral vasodilation due to high carbon dioxide levels causing increased dosage of oxygen to the brain.

[ 36 ] High-pressure nervous syndrome [ edit ] Main article: High-pressure nervous syndrome High-pressure nervous syndrome (HPNS) is a neurological and physiological diving disorder that results when a diver descends below about 500 feet (150 m) while breathing a helium–oxygen mixture. The effects depend on the rate of descent and the depth, with slow descent reducing the effects.

[ 38 ] HPNS is a limiting factor in future deep diving, but can be reduced by using a small percentage of nitrogen in the gas mixture.

[ 39 ] Hydrogen in the breathing gas also appears to reduce the effects of HPNS, but the effect has not been extensively studied due to the fire and explosion hazard involved in managing mixtures which contain hydrogen and oxygen.

[ 40 ] There is some circumstantial evidence that HPNS symptoms increase when chamber temperature is too high.

[ 2 ] Compression arthralgia [ edit ] Main article: Compression arthralgia Compression arthralgia is a deep aching pain in the joints caused by exposure to high ambient pressure at a relatively high rate of compression, experienced by underwater divers . The pain may occur in the knees, shoulders, fingers, back, hips, neck or ribs, and may be sudden and intense in onset and may be accompanied by a feeling of roughness in the joints.

[ 4 ] Onset commonly occurs around 60 msw (meters of sea water), and symptoms are variable depending on depth, compression rate and personal susceptibility. Intensity increases with depth and may be aggravated by exercise. Compression arthralgia is generally a problem of deep diving, particularly deep saturation diving, where at sufficient depth even slow compression may produce symptoms. The use of trimix can reduce the symptoms.

[ 41 ] Spontaneous improvement may occur over time at depth, but this is unpredictable, and pain may persist into decompression. Compression arthralgia may be easily distinguished from decompression sickness as it starts during descent, is present before starting decompression, and resolves with decreasing pressure, the opposite of decompression sickness. The pain may be sufficiently severe to limit the diver's capacity for work, and may also limit the depth of downward excursions.

[ 4 ] Dysbaric osteonecrosis [ edit ] Further information: Dysbaric osteonecrosis Saturation diving (or more precisely, long term exposure to high pressure) is associated with aseptic bone necrosis , a form of ischaemic bone disease caused by nitrogen bubbles formed during decompression, although it is not yet known if all divers are affected or only especially sensitive ones. The joints are most vulnerable to osteonecrosis . The connection between high-pressure exposure, decompression procedure and osteonecrosis is not fully understood.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 ] [ 45 ] Oxygen toxicity [ edit ] Main article: Oxygen toxicity Both acute and chronic oxygen toxicity are significant risks in saturation diving. The storage breathing gas exposes the divers to one continuous level of oxygen concentration for extended periods, on the order of a month at a time, which requires the gas in the habitat to be maintained at a long term tolerable partial pressure, generally around 0.4 bar, which is well tolerated, and allows for quite large accidental deviations without causing hypoxia. This may be increased during decompression, but as decompression may take over a week, the safely tolerable increase is limited, and at lower pressures oxygen partial pressure is also limited by fire hazard considerations.

[ 46 ] [ 6 ] Bell and excursion gas composition must suit the planned dive profile. A higher oxygen partial pressure may be tolerable over the working period, but it may be logistically preferable to use the same gas used for storage.

Bailout gas may have a higher oxygen content. At one time the recommended bailout oxygen partial pressure was significantly higher than used in the main gas supply.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] The choice of decompression gas is also a balance between efficacy for flushing inert gas and avoiding pulmonary oxygen toxicity, and it can be balanced between the risks based on the time required for the decompression, which in turn is affected by the oxygen partial pressure A P O 2 of 0.6 bar was used by some tables, when the exposure was not excessive, but with deeper exposures the decompression takes longer and the P O 2 must be reduced.

[ 5 ] A survey of offshore saturation diving contractors showed that the trend in 2024 was a mode of 0.5 bar with a maximum of 0.53 bar and minimum of 0.49 bar for decompression.

[ 5 ] Thermal balance of the diver [ edit ] Further information: Thermal balance of the underwater diver , Diving hazards § Loss of body heat , and Thermoregulation Heat transfer to and via gases at higher pressure than atmospheric is increased as higher-density gases have a higher heat capacity . This effect is also modified by changes in breathing gas composition necessary for reducing narcosis and work of breathing , to limit oxygen toxicity and to accelerate decompression . Since helium conducts heat readily, divers in a helium based atmosphere will lose or gain heat fast if the gas temperature is too low or too high. These effects decrease the tolerable temperature range in a saturation habitat.

[ 8 ] The heat loss situation is very different in the saturation living areas, which are temperature and humidity controlled, in the dry bell, and in the water.

[ 10 ] The temperature in the living quarters must be kept high enough to prevent hypothermia, typically in the range from 85 to 93 °F (29 to 34 °C), depending on the storage pressure.

[ 49 ] The alveoli of the lungs are very effective at heat and humidity transfer. Inspired gas that reaches them is heated to core body temperature and humidified to saturation in the time needed for gas exchange, regardless of the initial temperature and humidity. This heat and humidity are lost to the environment in open circuit breathing systems. When heat loss exceeds heat generation, body temperature will fall.

[ 8 ] Exertion increases heat production by metabolic processes, but when breathing gas is cold and dense, heat loss due to the increased volume of gas breathed to support these metabolic processes can result in a net loss of heat, even if the heat loss through the skin is minimised.

[ 8 ] Heat loss to breathing gas is less for the diver on surface supply compared to open circuit bailout, as the breathing gas from the umbilical will not be significantly colder than water temperature, while gas supplied from the first stage bailout regulator can be several degrees below freezing, but heat loss is greater when deeper due to the higher density of the breathing gas inducing a greater thermal capacity for a given breath volume. Heating the gas before breathing reduces this heat loss from the body core. The use of helium diluent reduces heat loss by this mechanism as it has a lower heat capacity due to lower density. The high thermal conductivity of helium is irrelevant in this situation.

[ 8 ] Health effects of living under saturation conditions [ edit ] There is some evidence of long term cumulative reduction in lung function in saturation divers, [ 50 ] and long term cumulative exposure to high oxygen partial pressures is associated with accelerated development of cataracts .

[ 31 ] Dysbaric osteonecrosis is considered a consequence of decompression injury rather than living under saturation conditions.

[ 51 ] Saturation divers are frequently troubled by superficial infections such as skin rashes , otitis externa and athlete's foot , which occur during and after saturation exposures. This is thought to be a consequence of raised partial pressure of oxygen, and relatively high temperatures and humidity in the accommodation.

[ 52 ] [ 25 ] Saturation diving is known to be associated with endothelial dysfunction and inflammatory stress , but this is followed by recovery, making a rest period between saturation exposures important. The current practice appears to be sufficient, as a divers has passed the saturation medical examination at the age of 61, but further data is needed to allow more confident assessment, and to identify if there are any interactions between effects of saturation and bounce diving and use of alternative breathing gases.

[ 5 ] Imbert et al (2019) surveyed saturation divers regarding post decompression effects. A large minority reported headaches and fatigue for up to ten days during and after most decompressions, but recovered to pre-decompression state. This effect is ascribed to acclimatisation to change in oxygen partial pressure during saturation and decompression, with minor changes in hematocrit and hemoglobin concentrations, and appears to be reversible without treatment. Allowing time for recovery is one of the reasons for limiting the duration of exposures and length of the surface interval.

[ 53 ] The saturation environment has been reported to alter redox homeostasis , immunological function, fluid balance , and haematological variables. Muscle mass loss has often been reported, and may be associated with reductions in protein synthesis , increased basal metabolism and changes to metabolic fuel utilisation. The small living spaces may reduce the diver's ability to maintain familiar levels of physical activity.

[ 54 ] Nutrition [ edit ] The saturation environment is thought to be disruptive to physiological and metabolic homeostasis, and saturation diving requires a high energy intake, estimated at between 44 and 52 kcal/kg body mass per day, varying depending on the underwater activity. Nutrition should support red blood cell production and reduction of free radicals, and support endogenous antioxidant reserves. Sufficient hydration should be maintained, and carbohydrates should be adequate for the underwater work.

[ 54 ] Operating procedures [ edit ] See also: Surface-supplied diving skills Saturation diving allows professional divers to live and work at pressures greater than 50 msw (160 fsw) for days or weeks at a time, though lower pressures have been used for scientific work from underwater habitats. This type of diving allows for greater economy of work and enhanced safety for the divers.

[ 6 ] After working in the water, they rest and live in a dry pressurized habitat on, or connected to, a diving support vessel , oil platform or other floating work station, at approximately the same pressure as the work depth. The diving team is compressed from surface pressure only once, at the beginning of the work period, and decompressed to surface pressure once, after the entire work period of days or weeks. Between the initial compression and final decompression, the storage depth may be altered a small number of times.

[ 5 ] There are accepted safe upward and downward excursion limits based on the storage depth. Excursions to greater depths require decompression when returning to storage depth, and excursions to shallower depths are also limited by decompression obligations to avoid decompression sickness during the excursion.

[ 6 ] Most of the diving skills required for saturation diving are the same as for surface-oriented surface-supplied diving. Other personnel work in support of the divers, to supervise and operate the support equipment.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] [ 57 ] Increased use of underwater remotely operated vehicles (ROVs) and autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs) for routine or planned tasks means that saturation dives are becoming less common, though complicated underwater tasks requiring complex manual actions remain the preserve of the deep-sea saturation diver.

[ 58 ] Personnel requirements [ edit ] A saturation diving team requires at the minimum the following personnel: [ 59 ] A diving supervisor (on duty during any diving operations) Two life-support supervisors (working shifts while there are divers under pressure) Two life-support technicians (also working shifts) Two divers in the bell (working diver and bellman – they may alternate during the dive) One surface stand-by diver (on duty when the bell is in the water) One tender for the surface stand-by diver In some jurisdictions there will also be a diving medical practitioner on standby, but not necessarily on site, and some companies may require a diving medical technician on site. The actual personnel actively engaged in aspects of the operation are usually more than the minimum, as the minimum is required for a single shift per day, and where multiple shifts are used for better utilisation of assets, more dive team staff are needed. A two diver bell can support six divers working three 8-hour shifts, and a three diver bell can support 9 divers.

[ 59 ] Saturation systems are advertised with accommodations for 6 to 24 occupants. The largest systems will usually operate two bells, and may be configured for multiple storage depths.

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] Compression [ edit ] Compression to storage depth, also refrred to as blowdown, [ 5 ] is generally at a limited rate [ 62 ] to minimize the risk of HPNS and compression arthralgia . Norwegian standards specifies a maximum compression rate of 1 msw per minute, and a rest period at storage depth after compression and before diving.

[ 62 ] There is considerable variation in the recommended compression rates among the statutory and commercial proprietary procedures compared in a 2024 study, but no significant evidence that any of them are problematic.

[ 2 ] Initial system atmosphere is generally air at atmospheric pressure, so aproximately 0.21 bar oxygen and 0.79 bar nitrogen.

[ 6 ] Storage depth [ edit ] Storage depth, also known as living depth, is the pressure in the accommodation sections of the saturation habitat—the ambient pressure under which the saturation divers live when not engaged in lock-out activity. Any change in storage depth involves a compression or a decompression, both of which are stressful to the occupants, and therefore dive planning should minimize the need for changes of living depth and excursion exposures, and storage depth should be as close as practicable to the working depth, taking into account all relevant safety considerations.

[ 62 ] After compression to storage depth there is generally a hold time at constant pressure before divers are deployed on a working dive.

[ 5 ] Split level storage depth [ edit ] If the range of depths requiring saturation diver intervention is too large for excursions based on a single storage depth, the accommodation can be divided into sections at differing storage depths, allowing a wider range of intervention depths. This is referred to as spit level storage. Each section of the accommodation that has a different storage depth must have its own access to the transfer chamber that is independent of the sections pressurised to other depths. The bell and transfer chamber are pressurised to suit the divers using them at the time.

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] Atmosphere control [ edit ] The hyperbaric atmosphere in the accommodation chambers and the bell are controlled to ensure that the risk of long term adverse effects on the divers is acceptably low. Most saturation diving is done on heliox mixtures, with partial pressure of oxygen in accommodation areas kept around 0.40 to 0.48 bar (most commonly 0.40 to 0.42 bar [ 5 ] ), which is near the upper limit for long term exposure. Carbon dioxide is removed from the chamber gas by recycling it through scrubber cartridges. The levels are generally limited to a maximum of 0.005 bar partial pressure, equivalent to 0.5% surface equivalent. Most of the balance is helium, with a small amount of nitrogen and trace residuals from the air in the system before compression.

[ 6 ] These traces tend to reduce during the saturation period as gas is lost and replaced with heliox.

[ 5 ] Odours and other impurites may be removed by activated carbon filters. Humidity and temperature are also controlled for health and comfort.

[ 65 ] Bell operations and lockouts may also be done at between 0.4 and 0.6 bar oxygen partial pressure, but often use a higher partial pressure of oxygen, between 0.6 and 0.9 bar, [ 66 ] (0.6 to 0.8 bar [ 5 ] ) which lessens the effect of pressure variation due to excursions away from holding pressure, thereby reducing the probability and amount of bubble formation due to these pressure changes. In emergencies a partial pressure of 0.6 bar of oxygen can be tolerated for over 24 hours, but this is avoided where possible. Carbon dioxide can also be tolerated at higher levels for limited periods. US Navy limit is 0.02 bar for up to 4 hours. Nitrogen partial pressure starts at 0.79 bar from the initial air content before compression, but tends to decrease over time as the system loses gas to lock operation, and is topped up with helium.

[ 6 ] During pre-decompression hold time , the partial pressure of oxygen may be increased to 0.48 to 0.5 bar to provide a larger oxygen window . During decompression the oxygen partial pressure is maintained at this level until the oxygen fraction reaches 21% to 24%, after which it is retained at constant fraction until surfacing to reduce the fire hazard.

[ 5 ] Deployment of divers [ edit ] See also: Surface-supplied diving skills Typical bell with stage and conventional clump weight system Deployment of divers from a surface saturation complex requires the diver to be transferred under pressure from the accommodation area to the underwater workplace. This is generally done by using a closed diving bell , also known as a Personnel Transfer Capsule, which is clamped to the lock flange of the accommodation transfer chamber and the pressure equalized with the accommodation transfer chamber for transfer to the bell. The lock doors can then be opened for the divers to enter the bell. The divers will suit up before entering the bell and complete the pre-dive checks. The pressure in the bell will be adjusted to suit the depth at which the divers will lock out while the bell is being lowered, so that the pressure change can be slow without unduly delaying operations.

[ 6 ] The bell is deployed over the side of the vessel or platform using a gantry or A-frame or through a moon pool . Deployment usually starts by lowering the clump weight, which is a large ballast weight suspended from a cable which runs down one side from the gantry, through a set of sheaves on the weight, and up the other side back to the gantry, where it is fastened. The weight hangs freely between the two parts of the cable, and due to its weight, hangs horizontally and keeps the cable under tension. The bell hangs between the parts of the cable, and has a fairlead on each side which slides along the cable as it is lowered or lifted. The bell hangs from a cable attached to the top. As the bell is lowered, the fairleads guide it down the clump weight cables to the workplace.

[ 67 ] Section of an umbilical for a diving bell The bell umbilical is separate from the divers' umbilicals, which are connected on the inside of the bell. The bell umbilical is deployed from a large drum or umbilical basket and care is taken to keep the tension in the umbilical low but sufficient to remain near vertical in use and to roll up neatly during recovery.

[ 67 ] A device called a bell cursor may be used to guide and control the motion of the bell through the air and the splash zone near the surface, where waves can move the bell significantly.

[ 67 ] Once the bell is at the correct depth, the final adjustments to pressure are made and after final checks, the supervisor instructs the divers to lock out of the bell. The hatch is at the bottom of the bell and can only be opened if the pressure inside is balanced with the ambient water pressure. The bellman tends the working diver's umbilical through the hatch during the dive. If the diver experiences a problem and needs assistance, the bellman will exit the bell and follow the diver's umbilical to the diver and render whatever help is necessary and possible. Each diver carries back-mounted bailout gas, which should be sufficient to allow a safe return to the bell in the event of an umbilical gas supply failure.

[ 68 ] : 12 Breathing gas is supplied to the divers from the surface through the bell umbilical. If this system fails, the bell carries an on-board gas supply which is plumbed into the bell gas panel and can be switched by operating the relevant valves. On-board gas is generally carried externally in several storage cylinders of 50 litres capacity or larger, connected through pressure regulators to the gas panel.

[ 68 ] : 12 Helium is a very effective heat transfer material, and divers may lose heat rapidly if the surrounding water is cold. To prevent hypothermia, hot-water suits are commonly used for saturation diving, and the breathing gas supply may be heated. Heated water is produced at the surface and piped to the bell through a hot-water line in the bell umbilical, then is transferred to the divers through their excursion umbilicals.

[ 59 ] : 10–8 The umbilicals also have cables for electrical power to the bell and helmet lights, and for voice communications and closed circuit video cameras. In some cases the breathing gas is recovered to save the expensive helium. This is done through a reclaim hose in the umbilicals, which ducts exhaled gas exhausted through a reclaim valve on the helmet, through the umbilicals and back to the surface, where the carbon dioxide is scrubbed and the gas boosted into storage cylinders for later use.

[ 10 ] Lock-in, lock-out, and transfer under pressure [ edit ] See also: Transfer under pressure Lock-in (also lock in) is the process of passing from the outside ambient pressure to an internally pressurised space. In saturation diving the internal space of the accommodation is generally at a significantly higher pressure than the outside, and an airlock is needed as an intermediate compartment. Locking into the bell from the water is done at equal pressures so an intermediate airlock is not required. The opposite process, called lock-out (or lock out), is passing out of the internally pressurised space to ambient pressure surroundings.

[ 69 ] When the diver transfers from one hyperbaric chamber to another at an internal pressure that is different from the external ambient pressure, the procedure is called transfer under pressure.

[ 2 ] [ 6 ] [ 59 ] Lock-on, lock-off, and the bell run [ edit ] Lock-on (or lock on) is the airtight connection of one pressurised compartment to another, and lock-off (or lock off) is the separation of two connected pressurised compartments from each other. An intermediate airlock or trunking space is needed which is equalised from ambient pressure to internal pressure after the seal has been made, and vented to ambient before disconnection.

[ 70 ] A bell run is the time from when a pressurised bell is locked off the transfer chamber with divers in it to the time it is locked back on, but excluding the transfer under pressure.

[ 2 ] Excursions from storage depth [ edit ] It is quite common for saturation divers to need to work over a range of depths while the saturation system can only maintain one or two storage depths at any given time. A change of depth from storage depth during a dive is known as an excursion from storage depth, and divers can make excursions upwards (ascending excursion) and downwards (descending excursion) , or both upwards and downwards (mixed excursion). The depth range between maximum and minimum excursion depth is called the excursion range or excursion window. Any excursion will impose both compression and decompression stress on the diver.

[ 2 ] Excursions can be made within specific limits, based on the storage depth, without incurring a decompression stop obligation when returning to storage depth, just as there are no-stop limits when returning to surface pressure for surface oriented diving. The allowed depth change may be the same in both directions, or sometimes less upward than downward. Excursion limits are generally based on a 6 to 8 hour time limit, as this is the standard time limit for a diving shift.

[ 71 ] Each publisher of excursion limits also specifies the conditions under which their limits are valid, and these conditions vary. Some require a longer stabilisation period before the excursion, or between the excursion and start of decompression, others allow excursions on consecutive dives [ 2 ] These excursion limits imply a significant change in gas load in all tissues for a maximum excursion for 6 to 8 hours, and experimental work has shown that both venous blood and brain tissue are likely to develop small asymptomatic bubbles after a full shift at both the upward and downward excursion limits. These bubbles remain small due to the relatively small pressure ratio between storage and excursion pressure, and are generally resolved by the time the diver is back on shift, and residual bubbles do not accumulate over sequential shifts. However, any residual bubbles pose a risk of growth if decompression is started before they are eliminated.

[ 71 ] Ascent rate during excursions is limited, to minimize the risk and amount of bubble formation. Bubble formation during an excursion starts during or after the ascent phase of that excursion.

[ 66 ] [ 1 ] [ 2 ] An upward excursion is a decompression from saturation, analogous to an ascent to altitude from sea level, or a hypobaric decompression , followed by a return to initial pressure, while a downward excursion is analogous to a surface oriented dive, followed by a non-saturation decompression back to the initial pressure.

Inner ear decompression sickness is a relatively frequent symptom of DCS as a consequence of excursions in deep saturation dives, in comparison to its very low frequency in decompressions from bounce dives.

[ 72 ] After some incidences of decompression sickness following the earlier excursion limits, the US Navy derived an empirical formula in 1989 for unlimited duration upward excursions from storage depth, using experimental data for storage depths from 36 to 1100 fsw.

[ 73 ] UEXD = ((0.1574 × D1 + 6.197) 0.5 - 1) ÷ 0.0787 where UEXD = Upward excursion distance, and D1 = pre-excursion storage depth in fsw.

A minimum interval between maximum excursions of 48 hours was specified, and a minimum P O 2 of 0.42ATA for the breathing gas.

[ 73 ] Commercial diving contractors have developed their own excursion limits based on experience in the field, and there are limits specified by other regulatory dive tables that are more conservative. Available data does not indicate that any of these procedures are inherently unsafe, or that upwards excursions are inherently more risky than downward, [ 71 ] though mathematical modeling suggests that reducing the pre-decompression hold time is likely to result in higher risk of decompression sickness after a major excursion.

[ 2 ] Decompression from saturation [ edit ] See also: Decompression practice § Saturation decompression , and Decompression theory § Saturation decompression When a diver breathes pressurized gas at depths greater than about 6 m, metabolically inert gases are needed in the mixture to dilute oxygen to non-toxic levels. These gases dissolve harmlessly into the body's tissues, but if they come out of solution too quickly during decompression, they form bubbles in the tissues which can cause decompression sickness ("the bends"), a harmful and potentially fatal condition. To prevent this, divers must follow a controlled decompression process, allowing these inert gases to be safely eliminated through the lungs. However, once a diver’s tissues reach full saturation for a given gas mixture and pressure, no additional inert gas accumulates, meaning decompression time remains the same regardless of further exposure.

[ 6 ] [ 3 ] If divers work and live at pressure for a long period, and are decompressed only at the end of the period, the risks associated with decompression are limited to this single exposure. As decompression is done in the relative safety and comfort of a saturation habitat, it is done on a very conservative profile, minimising the risk of bubble formation, growth and the consequent injury to tissues. A consequence of these procedures is that saturation divers are more likely to suffer decompression sickness symptoms in the slowest tissues, [ 74 ] whereas bounce divers are more likely to develop bubbles in faster tissues.

[ 6 ] Saturation diving takes advantage of this by having divers remain in that saturated state. When not in the water, the divers live in a sealed environment which maintains their pressurised state; this can be an ambient pressure underwater habitat or a saturation system at the surface, with transfer to and from the pressurised living quarters to the equivalent depth underwater via a closed, pressurised diving bell . This may be maintained for up to several weeks, and divers are decompressed to surface pressure only once, at the end of their tour of duty. By limiting the number of decompressions in this way, and using a conservative decompression schedule the risk of decompression sickness is significantly reduced, and the total time spent decompressing is minimized. Saturation divers typically breathe a helium–oxygen mixture to prevent nitrogen narcosis , and limit work of breathing , but at shallow depths saturation diving can be done on nitrox mixtures. Most of the physiological and medical aspects of diving to the same depths are much the same in saturation and bell-bounce ambient pressure diving, or are less of a problem, but there are medical and psychological effects of living under saturation for extended periods.

[ 6 ] Three major origins of commercial saturation procedures can be identified: US Navy, Comex and NORSOK, and there has been a tendency in commercial saturation diving to empirically adapt procedures according to the needs of the contractor and industry experience. Although there are differences due to history and local adaptation, the general tendency is towards considerable similarity in storage partial pressure of oxygen and decompression rates from relatively deep depths.

[ 5 ] There are some common rules of accepted good practice: A final decompression is not started with an upward excursion; a stabilising period, the pre-decompression hold time , is used between an excursion dive and the start of decompression, during which the content of oxygen is raised from the partial pressure used for storage to the higher partial pressure used for decompression; and divers are encouraged to perform mild exercise during decompression.

[ 5 ] Decompression from a saturation dive is a slow process. The rate of decompression typically ranges between 3 and 6 fsw (0.9 and 1.8 msw) per hour. The US Navy Heliox saturation decompression rates require a partial pressure of oxygen to be maintained at between 0.44 and 0.48 atm when possible, but not to exceed 23% by volume, to restrict the risk of fire.

[ 1 ] US Navy heliox saturation decompression table [ 1 ] Depth Ascent rate 1600 to 200 fsw (488 to 61 msw) 6 fsw (1.83 msw) per hour 200 to 100 fsw (61 to 30 msw) 5 fsw (1.52 msw) per hour 100 to 50 fsw (30 to 15 msw) 4 fsw (1.22 msw) per hour 50 to 0 fsw (15 to 0 msw) 3 fsw (0.91 msw) per hour For practicality the decompression is done in increments of 1 fsw at a rate not exceeding 1 fsw per minute, followed by a stop, with the average complying with the table ascent rate. Decompression is done for 16 hours in 24, with the remaining 8 hours split into two rest periods. A further adaptation generally made to the schedule is to stop at 4 fsw for the time that it would theoretically take to complete the decompression at the specified rate, i.e. 80 minutes, and then complete the decompression to surface at 1 fsw per minute. This is done to avoid the possibility of losing the door seal at a low pressure differential and losing the last hour or so of slow decompression.

[ 1 ] Intermediate storage depths [ edit ] Operational requirements may require work to be done at depths which are further from storage depth then the safe limits for excursions. Multiple decompressions are considered to impose greater physiological stress on the divers, and reduce the advantages of saturation diving, so when necessary, they are generally limited to one of three profile types: a maximum decompression dose , equivalent to a specified total accumulated depth change, or a maximum total number of decompressions , regardless of the total change in pressure, generally one intermediate decompression and one intermediate compression, before final decompression, and known as the "W" profile, or not to allow further compression once decompression has been started . This is known as a "V" profile. Serial compressions with intermediate storage depths are allowed until the maximum depth, and decompression may occur in stages with intermediate storage depths, until final decompression to surface.

[ 5 ] Decompression to an intermediate storage depth is called intermediate decompression.

[ 2 ] Decompression following a recent excursion [ edit ] Neither the excursions nor the decompression procedures currently in use have been found to cause decompression problems in isolation. However, there appears to be significantly higher risk when excursions are followed by decompression before non-symptomatic bubbles resulting from excursions have totally resolved. Starting decompression while bubbles are present appears to be the significant factor in many cases of otherwise unexpected decompression sickness during routine saturation decompression.

[ 71 ] The Norwegian standards do not allow decompression following directly on an excursion.

[ 62 ] Emergency decompression [ edit ] Emergency decompression is occasionally necessary due to unforeseen circumstances. By its nature there are few precedents and no clinical testing, and procedures tend to be adapted to circumstances. Procedures that have been used and worked have used the a combination of one or more of the following options to accelerate decompression: [ 75 ] An initial excursion Relatively high ascent rates Higher oxygen partial pressure than normally considered desirable to maximise the oxygen window.

Very little is known with confidence about how best to decompress from saturation in an emergency. A DMAC consensus document has been issued with tentative advice on possible procedures based on a balance of perceived risk. These procedures are not supported by experience or experimental work as there is very little of either, and constitute an educated guess at best. The risk of symptomatic decompression sickness is expected to increase as the rate of decompression increases, with earlier pain only symptoms, and more serious symptoms developing later or at higher decompression rates.

[ 76 ] Existing decompression tables for accelerated saturation decompression from the US Navy, Duke Tables, and Comex procedures were considered inadequate for the emergency scenarios envisaged, although they are faster than the schedules in general commercial use.

[ 76 ] Recommendations include the use of high oxygen partial pressures before and during decompression, with the actual partial pressure chosen depending on the predicted total duration of the decompression. Environmental factors such as dehydration, stress, gas contamination and confinement are considered likely to affect the risk. It is considered of high importance to maintain hydration at high levels. Intravenous administration may be appropriate.

[ 76 ] The emergency decompression should be planned to make use of all the expected time available, at the slowest practicable rate, using the highest oxygen partial pressure appropriate for the time scale. Environmental control of the chamber should maintain temperature as closely as possible, and divers should move around enough to aid circulation, but not exercise strenuously. It is considered safer in an accelerated decompression to slow down the decompression, or stop and recompress if the situation changes than to start slow and accelerate decompression if the situation deteriorates.

[ 76 ] Duration of exposure and surface intervals [ edit ] The Diving Medical Advisory Council recommends that under normal circumstances the duration of a saturation dive, including compression and decompression, should not exceed 28 days, and the interval between saturation exposures should generally equal the duration of the previous exposure, with a cumulative exposure of not more than 182 days in any 12-month period.

[ 77 ] There is less guidance available regarding intervals between saturation and deep gas bounce diving or air diving.

[ 5 ] Architecture of a surface saturation facility [ edit ] Schematic plan of a simple saturation system showing the main pressure vessels for human occupation DDC – Living chamber DTC – Transfer chamber PTC – Personnel transfer chamber (bell) RC – Recompression chamber SL – Supply lock Illustration of US Navy Saturation Fly-away Decompression System Personnel Transfer Capsule.

Saturation diving systems are a variation of pressure vessels for human occupancy , which are subject to rules for life support, operations, maintenance, and structural design. The "saturation system", "saturation complex" or "saturation spread" typically comprises either an underwater habitat or a surface complex which includes one or more living chambers, a transfer chamber, at least one supply lock, and a submersible decompression chamber , [ 78 ] which is commonly referred to in commercial diving and military diving as the diving bell , [ 79 ] personnel transfer capsule (PTC), or  submersible decompression chamber (SDC).

[ 6 ] The system can be permanently installed on a ship or ocean platform, but is more commonly capable of being moved from one vessel to another by crane. To facilitate transportation of the components, it is standard practice to construct the components as modular units based on the intermodal container system, some of which may be stackable to save deck space.

[ 80 ] The entire system is managed from a control room ("van"), where pressure (depth), chamber atmosphere and other system parameters are monitored and controlled. The diving bell is the elevator or lift that transfers divers from the accommodations to the work site. Typically, it is mated to the system utilizing a removable clamp and is separated from the transfer chamber shell by a trunking spool through which the divers transfer between bell and transfer chamber. At the completion of work or a mission, the saturation diving team is decompressed gradually back to atmospheric pressure by the slow release of system pressure. The process normally involves only one decompression, thereby mitigating the time-consuming and comparatively risky process of in-water staged decompression, or surface decompression (sur-D O 2 ) operations normally associated with non-saturation mixed gas diving.

[ 3 ] More than one living chamber can be linked to the transfer chamber through trunking so that diving teams can be stored at different depths where this is a logistical requirement. Extra chambers can be fitted to transfer personnel into and out of the system while under pressure and to treat divers for decompression sickness if this should be necessary.

[ 10 ] The divers use surface-supplied umbilical diving equipment, usually utilizing deep diving breathing gas , such as helium and oxygen mixtures, stored in large capacity, high pressure gas storage cylinders .

[ 3 ] The gas supplies are plumbed to the control room, from where they are routed to supply the system components. The bell is fed via a large, multi-part umbilical that supplies breathing gas, electricity, communications and hot water. The bell is also fitted with externally mounted breathing gas cylinders for emergency use.

[ 10 ] While in the water the divers will often use a hot water suit to protect against the cold.

[ 81 ] The hot water comes from heaters at the surface and is pumped down to the diver via the bell's umbilical and then through the diver's umbilical.

[ 10 ] Accommodation chambers [ edit ] Accommodation chamber of a saturation spread The accommodation chambers are where the divers live when they are not diving. They include facilities for eating, personal hygiene, sleeping and recreation. It is also where the divers are compressed and decompressed, and where they prepare for diving and clean up after diving. An accommodation chamber may be as small as 100 square feet, [ 82 ] but the chamber size of modular systems is mainly constrained by the space available in a 40ft intermodal container frame for each modular component. The accommodation area is generally made of multiple compartments, each separate unit joined to the rest of the system by short lengths of cylindrical trunking (manways) for access. It is usually possible to isolate each compartment from the others using internal pressure doors at each manway and at each external access point.

[ 10 ] Catering and laundry are provided from outside the system and locked in and out as required. A modular chamber may be 2.3m diameter or less.

[ 83 ] [ 84 ] Accommodation may be provided for up to 24 divers in a large system, which would probably have two 3-diver bells and allow for split level diving.

[ 61 ] [ 60 ] Where a hyperbaric lifeboat or escape module is provided there will be escape trunking fitted between the accommodation and the rescue and escape system module. The rescue and escape module or modules must be sufficient for all divers in saturation, so there may be more than one of them.

[ 2 ] Transfer chamber [ edit ] The transfer chamber, also known as a wet pot , is where the bell is mated to the surface saturation system for transfer under pressure (TUP). It is a wet surface chamber where divers prepare for a dive and strip off and clean their gear after return. Connection to the bell may be overhead, through the bottom hatch of the bell, or lateral, through a side door.

[ 10 ] The transfer chamber may also serve as a shower and toilet compartment in a small system.

[ 85 ] In a more complex system each living chamber may have its own wet pot shower and toilet chamber, which makes split level diving more convenient. A large system with two bells may have two transfer chambers, which can be isolated from each other and used simultaneously at different pressures.

[ 2 ] Personnel transfer capsule [ edit ] Closed diving bell Interior of a closed diving bell showing part of the gas panel A closed diving bell , also known as personnel transfer capsule or submersible decompression chamber, is used to transport divers between the workplace and the accommodations chambers. The bell is a cylindrical or spherical pressure vessel with a hatch at the bottom, and may mate with the surface transfer chamber at the bottom hatch or at a side door. Bells are usually designed to carry two or three divers, one of whom, the bellman , stays inside the bell at the bottom and is stand-by diver to the working divers. Each diver is supplied by an umbilical from inside the bell. The bell has a set of high pressure gas storage cylinders mounted on the outside containing on-board reserve breathing gas. The on-board gas and main gas supply are distributed from the bell gas panel, which is controlled by the bellman. The bell may have viewports and external lights.

[ 1 ] The divers' umbilicals are stored on racks inside the bell during transfer, and are tended by the bellman during the dive.

[ 59 ] : ch.13 Bell handling system [ edit ] See also: Diving bell §  Deployment of a modern diving bell The bell handling system lowers the diving bell of the US Navy's saturation fly-away diving system into the water The bell is deployed from a gantry or A-frame , also known as a bell launch and recovery system (LARS), [ 59 ] : ch.13 on the vessel or platform , using a winch . Deployment may be over the side or through a moon pool .

[ 1 ] The handling system must be able to support the dynamic loads imposed by operating in a range of weather conditions.

It must be able to move the bell through the air/water interface (splash zone) in a controlled way, fast enough to avoid excessive movement caused by wave action.

A bell cursor may be used to limit lateral motion through and above the splash zone.

It must keep the bell clear of the vessel or platform to prevent impact damage or injury.

It must have sufficient power for fast retrieval of the bell in an emergency, and fine control to facilitate mating of the bell and transfer flange, and to accurately place the bell at the bottom.

It must include a system to move the bell between the mating flange of the transfer chamber and the launch/retrieval position.

Decompression chamber [ edit ] See also: Decompression chamber A decompression/recompression chamber may be included in the system so that divers can be given treatment for decompression sickness without inconveniencing the rest of the occupants. The decompression chamber may also be used as an entry lock, and to decompress occupants who may need to leave before scheduled. In a large, split level system two decompression chambers may be provided. This chamber can be used to decompress divers leaving saturation while the next team is compressed in the living chambers [ 2 ] Mating flange for transportable chamber [ edit ] See also: Transportable recompression chamber One or more of the external doors may be provided with a mating flange or collar to suit a portable or transportable chamber, which can be used to evacuate a diver under pressure. The closed bell can be used for this purpose, but lighter and more easily portable chambers are also available. There will usually also be a mating flange for the hyperbaric rescue and escape system.

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] Supply lock [ edit ] A small lock, also known as an equipment lock or medical lock, is used for transfer of supplies into and out of the pressurized system. This would normally include food, medical supplies, clothing, bedding etc. Various diameters are available, and a supply lock can be an integral part of a chamber or a bolt-on item connected to a general purpose  access flange.

[ 88 ] Trunking [ edit ] The pressurised compartments of the system are connected through access trunking (also known as manways): relatively short and small diameter spools bolted between the external flanges of the larger compartments, with pressure seals, forming passageways between the chambers, which can be isolated by pressure doors.

[ 10 ] Trunking diameter tends to be consistent across a saturation system and a common inside diameter is about 600mm to 800mm.

[ 89 ] Wall thickness and flange and bolt dimensions must be compatible with maximum working pressure of the system. Trunking must allow access depending on application. Vertical access through the bottom hatch of a bell underwater must have space for the diver's bailout set.

Standards and classification [ edit ] See also: Pressure Vessel for Human Occupancy Design, manufacture, testing and maintenance may be required to comply with national occupational safety and health regulations for inshore work and IMCA requirements or the equivalent for offshore work.

[ 90 ] Saturation systems are generally designed manufactured and classified to the standards of a recognised classification society like Lloyds Register , Bureau Veritas , American Bureau of Shipping or Det Norske Veritas for quality assurance.

[ 91 ] [ 83 ] [ 89 ] Relevant standards and guidance include: [ 92 ] IMCA D 024: DESIGN for saturation (bell) diving systems provides guidance on the inspection, testing, and certification of saturation diving systems.

[ 93 ] [ 92 ] IMCA D 052: Guidance on Hyperbaric Evacuation Systems.

[ 11 ] [ 92 ] IMCA D 053: DESIGN for the Hyperbaric Reception Facility (HRF) forming part of a Hyperbaric Evacuation System (HES).

[ 92 ] .

Auxiliary and support equipment [ edit ] Life support systems [ edit ] Saturation system control panel The life support system provides breathing gas and other services to support life for the personnel under pressure. It includes the following components: [ 10 ] Breathing gas supply, distribution and recycling equipment: scrubbers, filters, boosters, compressors, mixing, monitoring, and storage facilities [ 10 ] Chamber climate control system – control of temperature and humidity, and filtration of gas [ 10 ] Instrumentation, control, monitoring and communications equipment [ 10 ] Fire suppression systems [ 10 ] Sanitation systems [ 10 ] The life support system for the bell provides and monitors the main supply of breathing gas, and the control station monitors the deployment and communications with the divers. Primary gas supply, power and communications to the bell are through a bell umbilical, made up from a number of hoses and electrical cables twisted together and deployed as a unit.

[ 1 ] These services are extended to the divers through the diver umbilicals (excursion umbilicals).

[ 10 ] The accommodation life support system maintains the chamber environment within the acceptable range for health and comfort of the occupants. Temperature, humidity, breathing gas quality, sanitation systems, and equipment function are monitored and controlled.

[ 1 ] Each diver is provided with underwater breathing apparatus , which is usually a lightweight demand helmet , but could also be an equivalent band mask , which can be open-circuit or use a gas reclaim system to recover most of the helium based gas. The breathing apparatus is supplied from the surface via the bell and excursion umbilicals, or from the bell emergency gas supply, or the diver's personal bailout set, which may be open of closed circuit . The diver also wears thermal protection in the form of a hot water suit , dry suit or wetsuit depending on the water temperature and depth.

Life support system operation [ edit ] See also: Life-support technician A person who operates a saturation diving system is called a life support technician (LST).

[ 68 ] : 23 The life support system is operated by the life-support technicians under the life-support supervisor , who are part of the saturation diving team . There will be at least two life support technicians working shifts, as one must be on duty at all times while there are divers under pressure.

[ 94 ] The pressure, oxygen and carbon dioxide content of the breathing gas, and temperature and humidity of the environment is monitored and controlled. Sewage disposal from the habitat, and locking food, stores and equipment into and out of the chambers are also controlled from outside by life support personnel. The LST is also responsible for communication with the divers in saturation, managing transfer of personnel into and out of the accommodation chambers, maintaining the hyperbaric rescue craft and hyperbaric evacuation of the divers in an emergency.

[ 95 ] [ 96 ] Hot water system [ edit ] See also: Hot water suit Divers working in cold water, particularly when breathing helium-based gases (which increase the rate of heat transfer), may rapidly lose body heat and suffer from hypothermia. Hypothermia is uncomfortable, unhealthy, can be life-threatening, and reduces diver effectiveness. This can be ameliorated with a hot water system. A diver hot water system heats filtered seawater and pumps it to the divers through the bell and diver umbilicals. This water can also be used to heat the breathing gas before it is inhaled. The divers' breathing gas is mainly heated on dives below 150 metres, and the ambient water temperature, depth, and hot water flow rate will determine the temperature to which the water is heated to so that it will then keep the diver warm when it flows through the diver's hot water suit.

[ 1 ] [ 10 ] Emergency heating of the bell [ edit ] There is a need for emergency heating of divers trapped in a closed diving bell. The breathing gas may be helium based, at a high pressure, and the ambient water temperature may be quite low, down to 2 °C, with a typical temperature in the North Sea of about 5 °C. The bell itself is usually made of steel, a good thermal conductor, and the quality of bell insulation is variable, so the internal atmosphere tends to match the water temperature fairly soon after the primary heating fails. Divers trapped in bells for long periods have been subjected to various degrees of hypothermia when the primary heating systems failed. There have been deaths attributed to this cause .

[ 97 ] Passive systems were the first to be developed to a stage where they were considered functionally sufficient, and are relatively simple, economical and immediately available, and are used as standard equipment when applicable. Personal insulation for the diver, in the form of an insulated bag, combined with a breathing gas heat exchanger to conserve the heat of exhaled gas, and heat liberated by a personal carbon dioxide scrubber kept within the insulation layer round the diver is usually sufficient to keep the divers in thermal balance while waiting for rescue. The scrubber has an orinasal mask, and the bag is secured to the inside of the bell by a harness, to prevent the diver from collapsing if rendered unconscious, and potentially blocking access to the bell by rescuers.

[ 97 ] Communication systems [ edit ] Main article: Diver communications § Voice communications Helium and high pressure both cause hyperbaric distortion of speech . The process of talking underwater is influenced by the internal geometry of the life support equipment and constraints on the communications systems as well as the physical and physiological influences of the environment on the processes of speaking and vocal sound production.

[ 98 ] : 6, 16 The use of breathing gases under pressure or containing helium causes problems in intelligibility of diver speech due to distortion caused by the different speed of sound in the gas and the different density of the gas compared to air at surface pressure. These parameters induce changes in the vocal tract formants , which affect the timbre , and a slight change of pitch . Several studies indicate that the loss in intelligibility is mainly due to the change in the formants.

[ 99 ] The difference in density of the breathing gas causes a non-linear shift of low-pitch vocal resonance, due to resonance shifts in the vocal cavities, giving a nasal effect, and a linear shift of vocal resonances which is a function of the velocity of sound in the gas, known as the Donald Duck effect. Another effect of higher density is the relative increase in intensity of voiced sounds relative to unvoiced sounds. The contrast between closed and open voiced sounds and the contrast between voiced consonants and adjacent vowels decrease with increased pressure.

[ 100 ] Change of the speed of sound is relatively large in relation to depth increase at shallower depths, but this effect reduces as the pressure increases, and at greater depths a change in depth makes a smaller difference.

[ 99 ] Helium speech unscramblers are a partial technical solution. They improve intelligibility of transmitted speech to surface personnel.

[ 100 ] The communications system may have four component systems.

[ 1 ] The hardwired intercom system, an amplified voice system with speech unscrambler to reduce the pitch of the speech of the occupants of the pressurized system. This system will provide communications between the main control console and the bell and accommodation chambers. This two-way system is the primary communications mode.

[ 1 ] Wireless through-water communications between bell and main control console is a backup system in case of failure of the hardwired system with the bell.

[ 1 ] Closed circuit video from cameras on the bell and diver helmets allow visual monitoring of the dive and the divers by the supervisor.

[ 1 ] A sound powered phone system may be provided as a backup voice communication system between bell and control console.

[ 1 ] Breathing gas [ edit ] Further information: Breathing gas § For diving and other hyperbaric use A breathing gas for saturation diving must be suitable for use over a period of several weeks without unacceptable risk of permanent harmful effects on the diver. There must be sufficient oxygen to maintain normal metabolism, but not so much as to present toxicity problems or a raised fire hazard.

[ 6 ] It must support life during significant short term changes in pressure which may occur during the course of a planned dive or reasonably foreseeable contingency, and should allow the safest and most efficient reasonably practicable decompression. It must have a low enough density that work of breathing is acceptable, and must not cause other excessive detriments to the diver's performance or health. The requirements, and therefore the preferred mixture, vary between different stages of the overall saturation exposure, so different gas mixtures may be used during blowdown and day to day living in the surface chambers (storage), diving excursions in and from the bell, and normal or emergency decompression. Keeping the gas within the requirements for each of these applications may necessitate more than one supply in use when divers are locked out of storage, and constant monitoring and adjustment of the accommodation atmosphere.

[ 5 ] Bulk gas supplies [ edit ] See also: Gas cylinder Helium Quad: breathing gas storage asset Gas storage and blending equipment are provided to pressurize and flush the system, and treatment gases should be available appropriate to the planned storage depths. Bulk stock of premixed gas is usually provided to suit the planned depth of the operation, and separate bulk stock of helium and oxygen to make up additional requirements, adjust chamber gas composition as the oxygen is used up, and mix decompression gas.

[ 10 ] Bulk gas is usually stored in manifolded groups of storage cylinders known as "quads", which usually carry about 16 high pressure cylinders, each of about 50 litres internal volume mounted on a frame for ease of transport, or larger frames carrying larger capacity high pressure "tubes". These tube frames are usually designed to be handled by intermodal container handling equipment, so are usually made in one of the standard sizes for intermodal containers.

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] Gas distribution [ edit ] See also: Diving bell § Breathing gas distribution The gas management and distribution of a saturation system will typically include bulk gas storage cylinders, gas transfer compressors or boosters, gas reclaim system (helium recovery system) and gas distribution panels and piping systems. This equipment may be located away from the accommodation and bell handling equipment if that is more convenient, but will be connected to it by pipes or hoses. Continuous monitoring of the breathing gases in use will generally be done at the saturation control room.

[ 103 ] Gas reclaim systems [ edit ] Schematic diagram of a heliox breathing gas reclaim system BGP: bell gas panel S1: first water separator BP1: bell back-pressure regulator U: bell umbilical F1: first gas filter BP2: topside back-pressure regulator R1, R2: serial gas receivers F2: second gas filter B: booster pump Sc1, Sc2: parallel scrubbers C: gas cooler S2: last water separator VT: volume tank PR: pressure regulator MGP: main gas panel See also: Diving helmet § Reclaim helmets , and Diving helmet § Pus-pull helmets A helium reclaim system (or push-pull system) may be used to recover helium based breathing gas after use by the divers as this is more economical than losing it to the environment in open circuit systems.

[ 78 ] The recovered gas is passed through a scrubber system to remove carbon dioxide, filtered to remove odours and other impurities, and pressurised into storage containers, where it may be mixed with oxygen to the required composition.

[ 104 ] Alternatively the recycled gas can be more directly recirculated to the divers.

[ 105 ] During extended diving operations very large amounts of breathing gas are used. Helium is an expensive gas and can be difficult to source and supply to offshore vessels in some parts of the world. A closed circuit gas reclaim system can save around 80% of gas costs by recovering about 90% of the helium based breathing mixture. Reclaim also reduces the amount of gas storage required on board, which can be important where storage capacity is limited. Reclaim systems are also used to recover gas discharged from the saturation system during decompression.

[ 104 ] Demand supplied [ edit ] A demand supplied reclaim system will typically consist of the following components: [ 104 ] [ 105 ] Topside components: [ 104 ] [ 105 ] A reclaim control console, which controls and monitors the booster pump, oxygen addition, diver supply pressure, exhaust hose pressure and make-up gas addition.

A gas reprocessing unit, with low-pressure carbon dioxide scrubber towers, filters, receivers, and back-pressure regulator which will remove carbon dioxide and excess moisture in a condensation water trap. Other gases and odours can be removed by activated carbon filters.

A gas booster, to boost the pressure of the reclaimed gas to the storage pressure.

A gas volume tank A storage system of pressure vessels to hold the boosted and reconstituted gas mixture until it is used. This functions as a buffer to allow for the variations of gas volume in the rest of the system due to pressure changes.

Dive control panel A bell gas supply panel, to control the supply of gas to the bell.

Underwater components: [ 104 ] [ 105 ] The bell umbilical, with the supply and exhaust hoses between the topside system and the bell.

Internal bell gas panel to supply the gas to the divers, and bell reclaim equipment, which controls the exhaust hose back-pressure, and can shut off the reclaim hose if the diver's gas supply is interrupted. A scrubber for the bell atmosphere and water trap would be included.

Diver excursion umbilicals, with supply and exhaust hoses between the bell and the divers Reclaim helmets which supply gas to the divers on demand, with reclaim back-pressure regulators which exhaust the exhaled gas to the return line.

Bell back-pressure regulator with water trap In operation the gas supply from the reclaim system is connected to the topside gas panel, with a backup supply at a slightly lower pressure from mixed gas storage which will automatically cut in if the reclaim supply pressure drops. The bellman will set onboard gas supply to a slightly lower pressure than surface supply pressure to the bell gas panel, so that it will automatically cut in if surface supply is lost. After locking out of the bell the diver will close the diverter valve and open the return valve on the helmet, to start the gas reclaim process. Once this is running, the reclaim control panel will be adjusted to make up the metabolic oxygen usage of the diver into the returned gas. This system will automatically shut down oxygen addition if the flow of exhaled gas from the diver fails, to avoid an excessive oxygen fraction in the recycled gas. There is an indicator light to show whether the return gas is flowing.

[ 105 ] The gas supplied to the diver's helmet passes through the same hoses and demand valve as for the open circuit system, but the exhaled gas passes out into the reclaim valve at slightly above ambient pressure, which is considerably above atmospheric pressure, so the flow must be controlled to prevent dropping the helmet internal pressure and causing the demand valve to free-flow. This is achieved by using back-pressure regulators to control the pressure drop in stages. The reclaim valve itself is a demand triggered back-pressure regulator, and there is another back-pressure regulator at the bell gas panel, and one at the surface before the receiver tanks. Each of these back-pressure regulators is set to allow about a 1 bar pressure drop.

[ 105 ] Exhaust gas returns to the bell through the diver's umbilical exhaust hose, where it passes through a water separator and trap then through a back-pressure regulator which controls the pressure in the exhaust hose and which can be monitored on a pressure gauge in the bell and adjusted by the bellman to suit the excursion depth of the diver. The gas then passes through the bell umbilical exhaust hose to the surface via a non-return valve and another water trap. When the gas enters the surface unit it goes through a coalescing water separator and micron particle filter, and a float valve, which protects the reclaim system from large volumes of water in the event of a leak at depth. Another back-pressure regulator at the surface controls the pressure in the bell umbilical. The gas then passes into the receiver tanks, where oxygen is added at a flow rate calculated to compensate for metabolic use by the diver.

[ 10 ] Before entering the boosters, the gas passes through a 0.1 micron filter. The gas is then boosted to storage pressure. Redundant boosters are provided to keep the system running while a booster is serviced. The boosters are automatically controlled to match the diver's gas consumption, and the boosted gas passes through a scrubber where the carbon dioxide is removed by a material like sodalime. Like the boosters, there are at least two scrubbers in parallel, so that they can be isolated, vented and repacked alternately while the system remains in operation. The gas then passes through a cooling heat exchanger to condense out any remaining moisture, which is removed by another 1 micon coalescing filter before it reaches the volume storage tank, where it remains until returned to the gas panel to be used by the divers. While in the volume tank, the gas can be analysed to ensure that it is suitable for re-use, and that the oxygen fraction is correct and carbon dioxide has been removed to specification before it is delivered to the divers.

[ 10 ] If necessary any lost gas can be compensated by topping up the volume tank from the high pressure storage. Gas from the volume tank is fed to the topside gas panel to be routed back to the bell and diver.

[ 105 ] Free-flow push-pull [ edit ] See also: Diving helmet § Push-pull helmets In a free-flow push-pull system, the gas is circulated from the  bell or habitat atmosphere to the diver through the umbilical under slightly raised pressure provided by a pump (push), flow into the helmet is controlled by a regulator valve set to ambient pressure at a flow rate greater than peak inhalation flow, passes through the helmet, and is part of it is breathed by the diver. A back-pressure regulator controls return flow to the bell or habitat, driven by a suction pump (pull). Flow is continuous, and work of breathing is virtually unaffected by the gas delivery system.

[ 106 ] Sanitation system [ edit ] The sanitation system includes hot and cold water supply for washbasins and showers, drainage, and marine toilets with holding tank and discharge system.

[ 1 ] Clean hot and cold fresh water is supplied either from a holding tank/accumulator at higher pressure than the habitat pressure or directly from a booster pump. The water is fed into the chamber where it is used through a hull penetration with a quarter-turn shut off valve on the outside and a non-return valve on the inside.

[ 85 ] The usual site for the sanitation system is in the transfer chamber, [ 85 ] but there are systems where each living chamber has an attached sanitation chamber.

[ 83 ] Toilets have a valve interlock system to ensure that the discharge cannot be operated while in use. After use a LST will open the external drain valve. The internal drain valve is opened to depressurise the holding tank then closed and the toilet drain valve opened while the contents are drained into the holding tank, then closed. The holding tank interior drain valve is opened again to discharge the contents to the exterior drain pipe. then closed again and finally the external valve is closed.

[ 85 ] Control consoles [ edit ] It is common for the control room  of a modular system to be installed in an ISO intermodal container for convenience of transport. There are three main control panels, for life support, dive control and gas management.

[ 14 ] Gas management panel [ edit ] The gas management panel includes pressure regulation of gases from high pressure storage, and distribution to the consumers. Gases will include air, oxygen and heliox mixes [ 14 ] Saturation life support panel [ edit ] The chamber control panel will typically include depth gauges for each compartment, including trunking, blowdown and exhaust valves, oxygen monitoring and other gas analysis equipment, make-up system for oxygen replenishment, valves for supplying therapeutic breathing mixture, closed circuit television monitoring displays, and monitoring systems with alarms for temperature and pressure in the system chambers.

[ 14 ] Dive control panel [ edit ] The dive control panel will include depth gauges for bell internal and external pressure, diver and bellman depth, and trunking pressure for transfer to the accommodation chambers. There will also be breathing gas pressure gauges and control valves for each diver, and blowdown and exhaust valves for the bell interior, diver communications systems with speech unscramblers, a through-water emergency communications system to the bell, controls, monitors and recording equipment for helmet and bell mounted video cameras, oxygen analysers for diver breathing gas, oxygen and carbon dioxide analysers for bell and reclaim gas, alarms for reclaim gas flow, dynamic positioning and hot water supply.

[ 14 ] Fire suppression system [ edit ] See also: Fire suppression system Firefighting systems include hand held fire extinguishers to automatic deluge sprinkler systems . Special fire extinguishers which do not use toxic materials and which will discharge adequately under pressure must be used. In the event of a fire, toxic gases may be released by burning materials, and the occupants will have to use the built-in breathing systems (BIBS) until the chamber gas has been flushed sufficiently. As far as possible, the contents of saturation system, including firefighting materials, should minimise the production of highly toxic combustion products. When a system with oxygen partial pressure 0.48 bar is pressurized to more than about 70 msw (231 fsw), the oxygen fraction is too low to support combustion (less than 6%), and the fire risk is low. During the early stages of compression and towards the end of decompression the oxygen levels will support combustion, and greater care must be taken.

[ 1 ] Built in breathing systems [ edit ] Main article: Built-in breathing system Built in breathing systems are installed for emergency use and for treatment of decompression sickness. They supply breathing gas appropriate to the current function, which is supplied from outside the pressurized system and also vented to the exterior, so the exhaled gases do not contaminate the chamber atmosphere.

[ 1 ] Hyperbaric rescue and escape systems [ edit ] Main article: Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Hyperbaric escape module Hyperbaric escape module launch control room Hyperbaric rescue chamber recovery drill A saturated diver who needs to be evacuated in an emergency should preferably be transported without a significant change in their environmental pressure. Hyperbaric evacuation requires pressurised transportation equipment, and could be required in a range of situations: [ 107 ] The support vessel at risk of capsize or sinking.

[ 107 ] Unacceptable fire or explosion hazard.

[ 107 ] Failure of the hyperbaric life support system.

[ 107 ] A medical problem which cannot be dealt with on site.

[ 107 ] A "lost" bell (a bell which has been broken free of lifting cables and umbilical; the actual position of the bell is usually still known with considerable accuracy).

[ 107 ] A hyperbaric lifeboat or rescue chamber may be provided for emergency evacuation of saturation divers from a saturation system.

[ 78 ] This would be used if the platform is at immediate risk due to fire or sinking, and allows the divers under saturation to get clear of the immediate danger. A hyperbaric lifeboat is self-contained and can be operated by a surface pressure crew while the chamber occupants are under pressure. It must be self-sufficient for several days at sea, in case of a delay in rescue due to sea conditions. It is possible to start decompression after launching if the occupants are medically stable, but seasickness and dehydration may delay the decompression until the module has been recovered.

[ 11 ] : Ch. 2 The rescue chamber or hyperbaric lifeboat will generally be recovered for completion of decompression due to the limited onboard life support and facilities. The recovery plan will include a standby vessel to perform the recovery.

[ 108 ] The International Maritime Organization (IMO) and International Marine Contractors Association IMCA recognise that though the number of hyperbaric evacuations which have been successfully carried out is small, and the likelihood of an incident needing hyperbaric evacuation is extremely low, the risk is sufficient to justify requiring the equipment to be available. The original meaning for the term hyperbaric evacuation system covered the system that actually transported the divers away from the working hyperbaric system such as a hyperbaric rescue chamber, a self-propelled hyperbaric lifeboat, or hyperbaric rescue vessel , all of which float and carry short term life-support systems of varied endurance, but it has more recently come to include all of the equipment that would support a hyperbaric evacuation, such as a life support package that can be connected to a recovered hyperbaric rescue unit, to provide interim life support until decompression facilities are available, and the hyperbaric reception facility where divers can be decompressed and treated in relative comfort. The four main classes of problem that must be managed during a hyperbaric evacuation are thermal balance, motion sickness, dealing with metabolic waste products, and severely cramped and confined conditions.

[ 11 ] : Ch. 2 [ 90 ] Bell to bell transfer may be used to rescue divers from a lost or entrapped bell. This will generally occur at or near the bottom, and the divers transfer between bells at ambient water pressure.

[ 107 ] It is possible in some circumstances to use a bell as a rescue chamber to transport divers from one saturation system to another. This may require temporary modifications to the bell, and is only possible if the mating flanges of the systems are compatible.

[ 107 ] Platforms [ edit ] Further information: Diving support vessel and Dynamic positioning Most saturation diving is done offshore, in the vicinity of drilling and production platforms, or for salvage work, and requires precise positioning of the bell during the dive. In deep water this is usually done from a specialised diving support vessel , or a suitable vessel of opportunity on which a saturation system has been temporarily installed. Positioning can either be by a substantial anchor pattern , which may interfere with other anchoring spreads already established, and which presents its own set of hazards, or by dynamic positioning, which must be sufficiently reliable and fail-safe for the expected conditions.

[ 91 ] [ 89 ] Heave compensation gear may be used to limit vertical movement when the bell is in the water and clear of the cursor, particularly at working depth when the diver may be locked out and the bell is open to ambient pressure.

[ 59 ] Underwater habitats [ edit ] Main article: Underwater habitat The German saturation habitat Helgoland Scientific saturation diving is usually conducted by researchers and technicians known as aquanauts living in an underwater habitat , a structure designed for people to live in for extended periods, where they can carry out almost all basic human functions: working, resting, eating, attending to personal hygiene, and sleeping, all while remaining under pressure beneath the surface.

[ 9 ] [ 109 ] An underwater habitat has to meet the needs of human physiology and provide suitable environmental conditions, and the one which is most critical is breathing gas of suitable quality. Others concern the physical environment ( pressure , temperature , light , humidity ), the chemical environment (drinking water, food, waste products , toxins ) and the biological environment (hazardous sea creatures, microorganisms , marine fungi ). Much of the science covering underwater habitats and their technology designed to meet human requirements is shared with diving , diving bells , surface saturation systems, submersible vehicles , submarines , and spacecraft .

[ 17 ] Numerous ambient pressure underwater habitats have been designed, built and used around the world since the early 1960s, either by private individuals, research institutions, or by government agencies. They have been used almost exclusively for research and exploration . Research has been devoted particularly to the physiological processes and limits of breathing gases under pressure, for aquanaut and astronaut training, as well as for research on marine ecosystems. Access to and from the exterior is generally vertically through a hole in the bottom of the structure called a moon pool or wet porch. The habitat may include a decompression chamber, or personnel transfer to the surface may be via a closed diving bell.

[ 110 ] [ 111 ] [ 17 ] Depth records [ edit ] See also: Deep diving The diving depth record for offshore diving was achieved in 1988 by a team of professional divers (Th. Arnold, S. Icart, J.G. Marcel Auda, R. Peilho, P. Raude, L. Schneider) of the Comex S.A.

industrial deep-sea diving company performing pipe line connection exercises at a depth of 534 meters of sea water (msw) (1752 fsw) in the Mediterranean Sea during a record scientific dive.

[ 112 ] [ 113 ] [ 114 ] In the real working conditions of the offshore oil industry, in Campos Basin, Brazil, Brazilian saturation divers from the DSV Stena Marianos (later Mermaid Commander (2006)) performed a manifold installation for Petrobras at 316 metres (1,037 ft) depth in February 1990. When a lift bag attachment failed, the equipment was carried by the bottom currents to 328 metres (1,076 ft) depth, and the Brazilian diver Adelson D'Araujo Santos Jr. made the recovery and installation.

[ 115 ] In 1992, Greek diver Theodoros Mavrostomos of the Comex S.A. achieved a simulated 701 m (2,300 ft) of seawater depth in an on shore hyperbaric chamber . He took 43 days to complete the record experimental dive, where a hydrogen–helium–oxygen gas mixture was used as breathing gas .

[ 27 ] [ 116 ] [ 117 ] [ 118 ] [ 119 ] [ 120 ] The complexity, medical problems and accompanying high costs of professional diving to such extreme depths and the development of deep water atmospheric diving suits and ROVs in offshore oilfield drilling and production have effectively eliminated the need for ambient pressure manned intervention at extreme depths for some applications.

[ 121 ] Safety and risk [ edit ] See also: Commercial offshore diving § Health and safety , and Commercial offshore diving § Historical issues The primary purpose of saturation diving is to extend the useful working time for dives without increasing the exposure to risk of decompression sickness There is also a secondary benefit that the reduced compression rates that are possible can reduce or avoid HPNS and compression arthralgia, making deeper dives practicable. There is a trade-off against other risks associated with living under high-pressure saturation conditions, and the financial cost is high due to the complex infrastructure and expensive equipment and consumables required. The risk of decompression sickness is reduced at the cost of increased risk due to being committed to the saturation environment for the duration of the decompression schedule associated with the storage depth. Hyperbaric evacuation from saturation is possible, but not universally available, and is logistically complicated. Having an evacuation system on standby is expensive.

[ 11 ] Some notable saturation diving incidents include: Byford Dolphin diving bell accident – Explosive decompression of an occupied saturation chamber Drill Master diving accident – Fatal diving bell accident off Norway in 1974 Star Canopus diving accident – Fatal offshore diving bell accident in 1978 Stena Seaspread diving accident – Saturation diving bell incident with successful rescue in the North Sea in 1981 Venture One diving accident – Saturation diving fatality in the North Sea in 1977 Waage Drill II diving accident – Fatal saturation diving accident in the North Sea in 1975 Wildrake diving accident – Fatal offshore diving accident in Scotland, 1979 Bibby Topaz diving accident, documented by the 2019 film Last Breath Incidence of decompression sickness [ edit ] It is difficult to assess decompression risk in recent saturation decompressions as the data is generally not available, however it is known to be very uncommon since 2000, with some operators not having any cases in a 10 year period, while in the early days it was in the order of 1%. Saturation decompression is most likely to produce joint pain symptoms in the late stages of decompression. Venous gas bubbles are generally detected  without symptomatic DCS, but this has also become rare.

[ 5 ] Oxygen content of breathing gases [ edit ] In nominal conditions, the human body functions normally with an oxygen partial pressure of about 0.21 bar. In saturation conditions a partial pressure of approximately double this value is chosen for the accommodations as it gives a large margin in case of accidental pressure loss – pressure in the chamber could drop by 50% and still support consciousness, allowing the divers to respond effectively to the emergency. This has actually happened, and the divers were able to close off necessary internal valves and pressure was duly restored. This partial pressure is approaching the upper limits of long term tolerability, so higher partial pressures can only be used for shorter exposures where there is a more urgent need. This is typically the case when the divers are in the water, particularly if there is an in-water depth excursion from storage depth, and during final decompression, where the  efficacy of decompression is strongly dependent on the oxygen window .

[ 5 ] In an emergency decompression the partial pressure may be increased to a level where temporary lung injury may occur as this is likely to be less severe than decompression sickness.

[ 75 ] Chamber hygiene [ edit ] The closed, warm, humid, and hyperoxic internal environment of a saturation facility is conducive to microbial growth and associated infections, particularly of the external ear canal and minor soft tissue injuries. Potential sources include contaminated water supplies, food and equipment. Gram negative bacteria are a common problem. Good personal hygiene, adequate cleaning and disinfection of the chamber, and maintaining a relatively low humidity can reduce these risks. Routine microbial analysis can ensure that cleaning and disinfection is effective.

[ 65 ] Minimum gas requirements [ edit ] A saturation diving operation must be able to recover from any reasonably foreseeable contingency with minimum risk to the health of the divers, and one possible contingency is a substantial loss of gas from the accommodations. Sufficient backup gas must be provided to recompress and carry out a controlled decompression. Even with exhaled gas reclaim, there is unavoidable loss of diver and bell gas and the quantity of planned backup and bailout gas is also based on working  depth and number of planned dives. Therapeutic gas supplies are also required in case of need, and their quantity is also based on the number of divers and maximum operational depth.

[ 122 ] Training and registration [ edit ] See also: Diver training Training of saturation divers generally takes place at commercial diving schools registered to train saturation divers, and having the required infrastructure and equipment.

[ 123 ] Diver training standards for saturation divers are published by a small number of organisations, and there is some international recognition of equivalence. The prerequisites for starting training are generally that the diver is already qualified as a bell diver and has a specified number of dives and hours of experience since qualifying.

[ 14 ] Training of saturation divers generally starts with a competent and at least moderately experienced surface oriented bell diver and concentrates on the additional knowledge and skills required for saturation diving. There is a large additional technical component related to the specialised equipment.
For the South African Department of Labour Class I Diver, the additional knowledge and skills include: [ 55 ] A basic knowledge of the history of mixed gas and saturation diving, An understanding of modular and diving support vessel based saturation diving systems, saturation life-support systems including environmental control, diver heating systems, sump drains and hyperbaric toilet discharges An understanding and practical operating skills for closed diving bells, their standard and emergency equipment, handling systems, bell and excursion umbilicals and personal diving equipment, and their testing and maintenance requirements, An understanding and practical operating skills for transfer under pressure and closed bell diving from 4-point moored and dynamically positioned vessels An understanding of gas supplies and saturation consumables, including minimum gas requirements, gas transfer pumps, gas blending, and gas reclaim systems, An understanding and practical experience in committing divers to saturation, and pressurisation An understanding of split level saturation diving Knowledge of the minimum personnel requirements for saturation diving operations and the responsibilities of the diving team members, including the superintendent, supervisor, life support supervisor, life support technician, support and systems technicians, gas man, and the bellman and diver, and experience and skills as diver and bellman Knowledge of saturation decompression procedures, emergency saturation decompression and hyperbaric evacuation and practical experience of standard procedures and simulated emergency procedures.

Certification as a level 2 first aider, with additional knowledge of saturation hygiene, saturation first aid requirements and the deep diving compression disorders, high pressure nervous syndrome and compression arthralgia.

Working conditions [ edit ] The living and working conditions of the saturation diver are unusual. There are shifting demands and large contrasts. The diver is required to be adaptable to the variations in work and coworkers, and to do so for several weeks at a time. The future of the occupation is uncertain and linked to the oil and gas industry. The work environment and living conditions on contract tend to be monotonous, but they are interspersed with periods of leisure. There is a conflict between family commitments and extended work periods in relative isolation, but in the continuous close proximity with a small group of co-workers. The job is prestigious, the pay is good, and there are fairly long periods of leisure between jobs. The occupation needs mental endurance, flexibility, and willingness to adapt and learn. Maintaining personal routines may help in maintaining mental health. The quality of the team can have a large effect on the members. The ability to get along well with each other and mutual trust are important to cooperation and efficiency in a group who depend on each other for safety and sometimes for survival. A sense of humour is an advantage, though there is a tendency for this to be relatively dark, possibly due to the high risk environment.

[ 124 ] Economics [ edit ] Offshore saturation diving was developed as a tool for a job. The procedures and equipment evolved to meet the demand for the specific work, and in the development years of offshore petroleum extraction, money was available for research and development. As oilfield diving operations became deeper, the ratio of productive time on the job compared to decompression reduced for surface oriented diving, and the possibility of improving the cost benefit balance by reducing overall unproductive and relatively high risk decompression time became more financially attractive.

[ 24 ] Saturation diving incurs significant costs and provides significant benefits.

[ 15 ] The use of observation and work class ROVs has been integrated with saturation diving, which has improved efficiency and safety.

[ 125 ] [ 68 ] The initial investment includes the purchase and installation of specialized equipment and the infrastructure required to support the system. Operational expenses of running the system are also large, and include skilled personnel in an intermittently competitive and volatile economic environment heavily dependent on current oil price. Regular maintenance and occasionally repair, replacement, and upgrading, is essential to ensure that the equipment remains safe and efficient and sufficiently flexible to adapt to changing needs and standards.  The cost of the appropriate gas mixtures for breathing and pressurization is high, and availability of helium is variable.

[ 15 ] The large capital outlay required to set up a saturation system made it desirable to utilise the hardware as much as possible, which encouraged the use of specialist contractors.

[ 24 ] [ 28 ] The often fatal or crippling consequences of human error or equipment failure made health and safety concerns important. The offshore location of much of the work made industry self-regulation possible and desirable, but occasionally government intervention was necessary to prevent excessive cutting of corners for profit forcing competitors to follow the lead of the least ethical practices.

[ 15 ] Although the costs are high there are several compelling benefits that can justify the investment for some types of operations.

[ 15 ] A big advantage is increased operational efficiency. Productive working time is greatly enhanced when the decompression time is moved to the end of the job, allowing workers to spend more time on the task, particularly on complex projects, where knowledge and experience on the particular task is retained within the working group.

[ 15 ] The controlled saturation living environment, although stressful and relatively uncomfortable, is less stressful and uncomfortable than the surface oriented alternative, and the safety advantage of a single slow decompression minimises health related hazards and risks.

[ 15 ] Saturation diving also allows work at depths that would not be possible by surface oriented diving due to health limits on the speed of compression to those depths.

[ 15 ] In arts and media [ edit ] For saturation diving in fiction, see: The Abyss – 1989 film by James Cameron Dykket (The Dive) (1989) – Norwegian action thriller film by Tristan de Vere Cole Goliath Awaits – 1981 American made-for-television mini-series by Kevin Connor The Neptune Factor – 1973 film by Daniel Petrie Pioneer (Pionér) – 2013 Norwegian thriller film Pressure (2015 film) – Action film by Ron Scalpello Sphere – 1987 novel by Michael Crichton In 2019, Netflix released Last Breath , a documentary which tells the story of Chris Lemons, a saturation diver who survived 38 minutes without a surface-supplied breathing gas supply after the vessel's dynamic positioning system failed during a storm, setting off a red alert . The two working divers started returning to the bell , but the ship drifted from the work site, dragging the bell with it, and his umbilical was snagged and severed under the load. He was able to return to the workplace using his bailout set, so was easily found by an ROV from the ship, but his bailout gas was insufficient for the time it took to get the ship back on position for a rescue attempt from the bell. Although presumed dead by support crew aboard the vessel, he was recovered by the second diver and successfully resuscitated in the bell. It has been hypothesised that his survival may have been a result of hypothermia , high partial pressure of oxygen in the bailout gas, or a combination. The ROV video footage shows him twitching while unconscious, which is consistent with an oxygen toxicity blackout.

[ 126 ] [ 127 ] See also [ edit ] Saturation diving contractors: Acergy – Former offshore engineering company Boskalis – Dutch dredging and heavylift company Compagnie maritime d'expertises ( Comex ) – French offshore diving contractor Smit International – A Dutch company Subsea 7 – Luxembourgish-domiciled subsea engineering, construction, and services company Technip – Company in project management, engineering, and construction for the energy industry Regulatory and advisory bodies, registration authorities: Association of Diving Contractors International ( ADCI ) – Non-profit organization for promoting standards and knowledge for commercial diving Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme ( ADAS ) – Australian based international occupational diver accreditation organisation Department of Employment and Labour – Department of the South African government responsible for matters related to employment Diving Medical Advisory Council ( DMAC ) – Independent organisation of diving medical specialists from Northern Europe Health and Safety Executive ( HSE ) – United Kingdom government agency International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum ( IDRCF ) – International forum of professional diver accreditation organisations International Diving Schools Association ( IDSA ) – Organisation to develop common standards for commercial diver training International Marine Contractors Association ( IMCA ) – International trade association for the marine contracting industry United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit ( NEDU ) – US military research and development unit Manufacturers of saturation diving equipment: James Fisher & Sons – British shipowner and provider of marine engineering services Kirby Morgan – Brand of underwater diving equipment Diving helmet#Manufacturers Major projects which used saturation diving Salvage of HMS Edinburgh (16) Salvage of Kursk submarine disaster Alternative technology: Surface oriented diving – Underwater diving in which the diver starts and finishes at surface pressure Bell bounce diving – Surface oriented diving using a closed bell Transfer under pressure diving ( TUP diving ) – Surface oriented diving from a closed bell and a chamber for decompression Atmospheric diving suit – Articulated pressure-resistant anthropomorphic housing for an underwater diver Remotely operated underwater vehicle – A tethered underwater mobile device operated by a remote crew References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s US Navy (2006).

"15" .

US Navy Diving Manual, 6th revision . United States: US Naval Sea Systems Command. Archived from the original on 2 May 2008 . Retrieved 15 June 2008 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Compression and excursion parameters for saturation dives 0-250 msw (PDF) .

2023-69 (Report) (Revision 1 ed.). NUI. 22 January 2024.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 January 2025 . Retrieved 14 June 2025 .

^ a b c d e f g Beyerstein, G. (2006). Lang, M. A.; Smith, N. E. (eds.).

Commercial Diving: Surface-Mixed Gas, Sur-D-O2, Bell Bounce, Saturation . Proceedings of Advanced Scientific Diving Workshop. Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC.

^ a b c d Campbell, Ernest (10 June 2010).

"Compression arthralgia" .

Scubadoc's Diving Medicine Online .

Archived from the original on 28 January 2013 . Retrieved 29 November 2013 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u Imbert, Jean-Pierre; Matity, Lyubisa; Massimelli, Jean-Yves; Bryson, Philip (31 March 2024).

"Review of saturation decompression procedures used in commercial diving" .

Diving Hyperb Med .

54 (1): 23– 38.

doi : 10.28920/dhm54.1.23-38 .

PMC 11065503 .

PMID 38507907 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p US Navy Diving Manual, 6th revision . United States: US Naval Sea Systems Command. 2006. Archived from the original on 2 May 2008 . Retrieved 24 April 2008 .

^ a b Mitchell, Simon (20–22 April 2023).

Developments in CO 2 monitoring . Rebreather Forum 4. Valletta, Malta.

Archived from the original on 16 April 2024 . Retrieved 16 April 2024 – via GUE.

^ a b c d e f Neves, João; Thomas, Christian (25 April 2018).

"Fighting Exposure – Is Helium a "cold" gas?" .

www.tdisdi.com .

Archived from the original on 8 December 2021 . Retrieved 8 February 2024 .

^ a b c d e Miller, James W.; Koblick, Ian G.

(1984).

Living and Working in the Sea . New York, NY: Van Nostrand Reinhold Company. pp.

115– 116.

ISBN 0-442-26084-9 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u Crawford, J. (2016). "8.5.1 Helium recovery systems".

Offshore Installation Practice (revised ed.). Butterworth-Heinemann. pp.

150– 155.

ISBN 9781483163192 .

^ a b c d e Guidance on Hyperbaric Evacuation Systems IMCA D052 (PDF) . London, UK: International Marine Contractors Association. May 2013.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2021-02-27 . Retrieved 2019-10-18 .

^ "Commercial Divers" .

www.bls.gov .

Archived from the original on 21 April 2021 . Retrieved 24 April 2018 .

^ "Commercial Diving Operations" .

Federal Register . 9 February 2015.

Archived from the original on 25 April 2018 . Retrieved 24 April 2018 .

^ a b c d e f "Professional Diving Centre 6 man saturation system" .

www.professionaldivingcentre.com .

Archived from the original on 22 March 2020 . Retrieved 22 March 2020 .

^ a b c d e f g h "The Economics of Saturation Diving Systems_ Costs and Benefits" .

www.slideserve.com . 18 Jun 2024 . Retrieved 17 June 2025 .

^ a b Kindwall, Eric P. (1990). "A short history of diving and diving medicine.". In Bove, Alfred A.; Davis, Jefferson C. (eds.).

Diving Medicine (2nd ed.). WB Saunders Company. pp.

6– 7.

ISBN 0-7216-2934-2 .

^ a b c d Miller, James W.; Koblick, Ian G. (1984).

Living and working in the sea . Best Publishing Company. p. 432.

ISBN 1-886699-01-1 .

^ Behnke, Albert R. (1942). "Effects of High Pressures; Prevention and Treatment of Compressed-air illness".

Medical Clinics of North America .

26 (4): 1212– 1237.

doi : 10.1016/S0025-7125(16)36438-0 .

^ Murray, John (2005).

" "Papa Topside", Captain George F. Bond, MC, USN" (PDF) .

Faceplate .

9 (1): 8– 9. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 February 2012 . Retrieved 15 January 2010 .

^ Shilling, Charles (1983). "Papa Topside".

Pressure, Newsletter of the Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society .

12 (1): 1– 2.

ISSN 0889-0242 .

^ "Cousteau's Conshelf I, II & III" .

www.cousteau.org . 17 May 2019 . Retrieved 1 September 2024 .

^ a b c d Camporesi, Enrico M. (1 May 2004). Moon, R. E.; Piantadosi, C. A.; Camporesi, E. M. (eds.).

The Atlantis Series and Other Deep Dives .

Dr. Peter Bennett Symposium Proceedings . Durham, N.C.: Divers Alert Network.

^ a b c d e f g h i Balestra, Costantino; Germonpré, Peter (14 April 2017). "2. Saturation diving".

Diving Deeper into SCUBA... Science: Practical and Theoretical Knowledge . Acrodacrolivres.

ISBN 9782512007364 .

^ a b c Gjerde, Kristin Øye; Ryggvik, Helge (2014).

North Sea Divers (PDF) . Translated by Rolf E. Gooderham. Stavanger: Wigestrand Forlag.

ISBN 978-82-8140-171-6 .

^ a b Leitch, D.R. (August 1985).

"Complications of saturation diving" .

Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine .

78 (8): 634– 637.

doi : 10.1177/014107688507800807 .

PMC 1289835 .

PMID 4020797 .

^ "HMS Edinburgh" (PDF) .

www.jfdglobal.com .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 October 2024 . Retrieved 14 June 2025 .

^ a b c "Technology: Dry run for deepest dive" .

New Scientist . No. 1849. 28 November 1992.

Archived from the original on 5 October 2023 . Retrieved 22 February 2009 .

^ a b "Career in diving" .

Guidance . UK Health and Safety Executive.

Archived from the original on 22 June 2016 . Retrieved 3 July 2016 .

^ NOAA Diving Program (U.S.) (28 Feb 2001). Joiner, James T. (ed.).

NOAA Diving Manual, Diving for Science and Technology (4th ed.). Silver Spring, Maryland: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research, National Undersea Research Program.

ISBN 978-0-941332-70-5 .

^ Ceurstemont, Sandrine (23 April 2007).

"Regenerative water and air supply in underwater Habitat" .

FirstScience.com . Archived from the original on 2010-01-26 . Retrieved 6 December 2018 .

^ a b Bennett, Michael H.; Cooper, Jeffrey S. (10 August 2022).

"Hyperbaric Cataracts" .

www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov . StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID 29261974 .

Archived from the original on 23 July 2022 . Retrieved 27 February 2023 .

^ a b Tikuisis, Peter; Gerth, Wayne A. (2003). "Decompression Theory". In Brubakk, Alf O; Neuman, Tom S (eds.).

Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving (5th Rev ed.). United States: Saunders. pp.

419– 54.

ISBN 0-7020-2571-2 .

^ Bennett & Rostain (2003) , p. 305.

^ Bauer, Ralph W.; Way, Robert O. (1970).

"Relative narcotic potencies of hydrogen, helium, nitrogen, and their mixtures" .

Archived from the original on 2016-07-01 . Retrieved 2012-08-01 .

^ Medical Dictionary for the Health Professions and Nursing. S.v. "work of breathing." Retrieved September 8, 2015, from http://medical-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/work+of+breathing Archived 2023-07-29 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b c d Mitchell, Simon (2015).

"Respiratory failure in technical diving" .

www.youtube.com . DAN Southern Africa.

Archived from the original on 9 October 2021 . Retrieved 6 October 2021 .

^ Anthony, Gavin; Mitchell, Simon J. (2016). Pollock, N.W.; Sellers, S.H.; Godfrey, JM (eds.).

Respiratory Physiology of Rebreather Diving (PDF) .

Rebreathers and Scientific Diving. Proceedings of NPS/NOAA/DAN/AAUS June 16–19, 2015 Workshop . Wrigley Marine Science Center, Catalina Island, CA. pp.

66– 79.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2023-08-11 . Retrieved 2019-11-21 .

^ Bennett, Peter B.; Rostain, Jean Claude (2003). "The High Pressure Nervous Syndrome". In Brubakk, Alf O.; Neuman, Tom S. (eds.).

Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving (5th Rev ed.). United States: Saunders. pp.

323– 57.

ISBN 0-7020-2571-2 .

^ Smith, E. B. (1980). M. J., Halsey (ed.).

Techniques for Diving Deeper than 1,500 feet . 23rd Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society Workshop. UHMS Publication Number 40WS(DD)6-30-80.

Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society .

^ Larry "Harris" Taylor, Ph.D.

"Diving With Gas Mixes Other Than Air" . Author preprint; the article was published in Watersport.

Archived from the original on 2008-05-29 . Retrieved 2025-04-27 .

^ Bennett, PB ; Blenkarn, GD; Roby, J; Youngblood, D (1974). "Suppression of the high pressure nervous syndrome (HPNS) in human dives to 720 ft. and 1000 ft. by use of N2/He/02".

Undersea Biomedical Research .

Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society .

^ Brubakk, A. O.; Neuman, T. S., eds. (2003).

Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving (5th Rev ed.). United States: Saunders Ltd. p. 800.

ISBN 0-7020-2571-2 .

^ Coulthard, A.; Pooley, J.; Reed, J.; Walder, D. (1996). "Pathophysiology of dysbaric osteonecrosis: a magnetic resonance imaging study".

Undersea and Hyperbaric Medicine .

23 (2): 119– 120.

ISSN 1066-2936 .

OCLC 26915585 .

PMID 8840481 .

^ British Medical Research Council Decompression Sickness Central Registry and Radiological Panel (1981). "Aseptic bone necrosis in commercial divers. A report from the Decompression Sickness Central Registry and Radiological Panel".

Lancet .

2 (8243): 384– 8.

doi : 10.1016/s0140-6736(81)90831-x .

PMID 6115158 .

S2CID 35741112 .

^ Hutter, CD (April 2000). "Dysbaric osteonecrosis: a reassessment and hypothesis".

Med Hypotheses .

54 (4): 585– 90.

doi : 10.1054/mehy.1999.0901 .

PMID 10859644 .

^ Kot, Jacek; Sicko, Zdzislaw; Doboszynski, Tadeusz (2015).

"The Extended Oxygen Window Concept for Programming Saturation Decompressions Using Air and Nitrox" .

PLOS ONE .

10 (6): 1– 20.

Bibcode : 2015PLoSO..1030835K .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0130835 .

PMC 4482426 .

PMID 26111113 .

^ Oxygen content in open circuit bailout bottles for heliox saturation diving.

DMAC 04 revision 2 (Report). Diving Medical Advisory Council. May 2016.

^ Partial Pressure of O2 in Bail-Out Bottles.

DMAC 04 (Report). Diving Medical Advisory Council. January 1981.

^ Ferguson, Sherri (1 August 2017).

"Saturation Diving" . DAN . Retrieved 16 June 2025 .

^ Thorsen, E.; Segadal, K.; Kambestad, B.K.; Gulsvik, A. (11–18 August 1990).

Reduced pulmonary function in saturation divers correlates with diving exposure . Joint Annual Scientific Meeting with the International Congress for Hyperbaric Medicine and the European Undersea Biomedical Society. Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society, Inc.

^ White, T.C.; Davis, D.D.; Cooper, J.S. (31 July 2023).

"Dysbaric Osteonecrosis" . Treasure Island, FL: StatPearls [Internet].

PMID 29493935 .

Archived from the original on 27 August 2021 . Retrieved 26 April 2025 .

^ Ahlen, C.; Brubakk, A.O.; Svarva, P.; Iversen, O.J. (6–11 June 1989).

Growth of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in an heliox atmosphere . Annual Scientific Meeting of the Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society. Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society, Inc.

^ Imbert, Jean Pierre; Balestra, Costantino; Kiboub, Fatima Zohra; Loennechen, Øyvind; Eftedal, Ingrid (11 January 2019).

"Commercial Divers' Subjective Evaluation of Saturation" .

Frontiers in Psychology .

9 : 2774.

doi : 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02774 .

PMC 6340096 .

PMID 30692957 .

^ a b Deb, S. K.; Swinton, P. A.; Dolan, E. (7 January 2016).

"Nutritional considerations during prolonged exposure to a confined, hyperbaric, hyperoxic environment: recommendations for saturation divers" .

Extreme Physiology & Medicine .

5 : 1.

doi : 10.1186/s13728-015-0042-9 .

PMC 4704397 .

PMID 26744625 .

^ a b Diving Advisory Board (October 2007).

Class II Training Standard (Revision 5 ed.). South African Department of Labour.

^ Diving Advisory Board (October 2007).

Class II Training Standard (Revision 5 ed.). South African Department of Labour.

^ Diving Advisory Board (October 2007).

Class III Training Standard (Revision 5 ed.). South African Department of Labour.

^ Morales, Rogelio; Keitler, Peter; Maier, P.; Klinker, Gudrun (2009).

An Underwater Augmented Reality system for commercial diving operations . OCEANS 2009, MTS/IEEE Biloxi - Marine Technology for Our Future: Global and Local Challenges.

doi : 10.23919/OCEANS.2009.5422365 .

^ a b c d e f g "13 – Closed bell diving".

Guidance for diving supervisors IMCA D 022 (Revision 1 ed.). London, UK: International Marine Contractors Association. August 2016. pp.

13– 3.

^ a b "Technip 24 man saturation system" .

www.jfdglobal.com . Retrieved 14 June 2024 .

^ a b Midtbø, Gunvor Hatling (May 2013).

"Under Pressure: Perils of the deep" . Retrieved 14 June 2025 .

^ a b c d NORSOK U-100:2014, Manned underwater operations (PDF) (4th ed.). Oslo, Norway: Standards Norway. June 2014.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2023-06-08 . Retrieved 2023-06-08 .

^ Kulkarni, A.C. (31 March 2021).

"Saturation diver fatality due to hydrogen sulphide while working on a subsea pipe line" .

Diving Hyperb Med .

51 (1): 94– 97.

doi : 10.28920/dhm51.1.94-97 .

PMC 8313767 .

PMID 33761548 .

^ "Saturation and Air Diving (Systems)" .

www.shelfsubsea.com . Retrieved 13 June 2025 .

^ a b "Saturation Diving Chamber Hygiene" (PDF) .

www.dmac-diving.org (Revision 2 ed.). The Diving Medical Advisory Committee. June 2025 . Retrieved 11 June 2025 .

^ a b "chapter 8".

Saturation Diving Manual . Vol. Smit Subsea OPM-03-09 (Revision 2 ed.). Smit Subsea SHE-Q. June 2011.

^ a b c Bevan, John, ed. (2005). "Section 5.1".

The Professional Divers's Handbook (second ed.). Gosport, Hampshire: Submex Ltd. p. 200.

ISBN 978-0950824260 .

^ a b c d "IMCA International Code of Practice for Offshore Diving" (PDF) .

IMCA D 014 Rev. 2 . London: International Marine Contractor's Association. February 2014 . Retrieved 22 July 2016 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Bell Run and Bell Lock-Out Times, and Bell Run Times in Relation to Habitats" . Health and Safety Executive. 23 September 1998.

Archived from the original on 3 June 2025 . Retrieved 12 May 2025 .

^ "Diving bell TUP O-ring seal damage" .

Safety Flash IMCA SF 09/17 . IMCA. 3 May 2017.

Archived from the original on 19 March 2025 . Retrieved 12 May 2025 .

^ a b c d Flook, Valerie (2004).

Excursion tables in saturation diving – decompression implications of current UK practice (PDF) .

Research report 244 (Report). Aberdeen United Kingdom: Prepared by Unimed Scientific Limited for the Health and Safety Executive.

ISBN 0-7176-2869-8 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 December 2013 . Retrieved 27 November 2013 .

^ Doolette, David J.; Mitchell, Simon J. (2022). "Extended lifetimes of bubbles at hyperbaric pressure may contribute to inner ear decompression sickness during saturation diving".

Journal of Applied Physiology .

133 (3): 517– 523.

doi : 10.1152/japplphysiol.00121.2022 .

PMID 35834629 .

^ a b Thalmann, E.D. (June 1990).

Testing of revised unlimited-duration upward excursions during helium-oxygen saturation dives (PDF) .

Report4-89 (Report). Panama City, Florida: Navy Experimental Diving Unit – via diving-rov-specialists.com.

^ Berghage, T.E. (1976). "Decompression sickness during saturation dives".

Undersea Biomedical Research .

3 (4): 387– 398.

PMID 10897865 .

^ a b Imbert, Jean-Pierre; Massimelli, Jean-Yves; Kulkarni, Ajit; Matity, Lyubisa; Bryson, Philip (20 December 2022).

"A review of accelerated decompression from heliox saturation in commercial diving emergencies" .

Diving and Hyperbaric Medicine .

52 (4): 245– 259.

doi : 10.28920/dhm52.4.245-259 .

PMC 9767825 .

PMID 36525682 .

^ a b c d Accelerated Emergency Decompression from Saturation in Commercial Diving Operations (PDF) .

Report of a Workshop held on 13 April 2011 in London, UK (Report). London, UK: Diving Medical Advisory Council.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 April 2024 . Retrieved 23 April 2024 .

^ The Duration of Saturation Exposures and Surface Intervals following Saturations (PDF) .

DMAC 21 Rev. 2 (Report). The Diving Medical Advisory Committee. June 2006.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2024-02-02 . Retrieved 2024-02-02 .

^ a b c Lettnin, Heinz (1999).

International textbook of Mixed Gas Diving . Flagstaff, AZ: Best Publishing Company.

ISBN 0-941332--50-0 .

^ Bevan, J. (1999). "Diving bells through the centuries".

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal .

29 (1).

ISSN 0813-1988 .

OCLC 16986801 .

^ "Modular Saturation Diving System" (PDF) .

aqueossubsea.com .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 June 2024 . Retrieved 9 June 2025 .

^ Mekjavić, B.; Golden, F. S.; Eglin, M.; Tipton, M. J. (2001). "Thermal status of saturation divers during operational dives in the North Sea".

Undersea and Hyperbaric Medicine .

28 (3): 149– 55.

PMID 12067151 .

^ "The Saturation Diver Interview: Fredoon Kapadia – The Underwater Centre Blog" .

The Underwater Centre Blog . 22 May 2017.

Archived from the original on 20 August 2017 . Retrieved 24 April 2018 .

^ a b c "Modular saturation systems" . Retrieved 11 June 2025 .

^ "GSP SAT - Diving System" (PDF) .

gspholding.com .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 July 2024 . Retrieved 12 June 2025 .

^ a b c d Torboli, Massimo.

"Sanitation system in Saturation diving habitats" .

JP Technology Magazine .

Archived from the original on 12 June 2025 . Retrieved 12 June 2025 .

^ "Chapter 1 Hyperbaric Evacuation Systems".

Rules and Regulations for the Construction & Classification of Submersibles & Diving Systems: Part 7 Hyperbaric Rescue Facilities .

International Maritime Organization . July 2022.

^ Marine guidance note MGN 83 (M): Guidelines and Specifications for Hyperbaric Evacuation Systems (PDF) (Report). Southampton, UK: Maritime and Coastguard Agency. September 1998.

^ "Chamber Medical Locks & Equipment Locks" .

www.comanex.fr . Retrieved 9 June 2025 .

^ a b c "AF05 Saturation diving system - Model AF05" (PDF) .

www.ranadiving.it . Retrieved 10 June 2025 .

^ a b IMO: Code of Safety for Diving Systems, 1995. IMO808E (Report).

International Maritime Organization . 1997.

Archived from the original on 2023-06-29 . Retrieved 2023-07-04 .

^ a b "In Built Saturation Diving Systems" .

www.smp-ltd.com +access-date=11 June 2025 .

Archived from the original on 19 March 2025 . Retrieved 11 June 2025 .

^ a b c d Cadieux, Christian (August 2021).

Saturation diving handbook (PDF) . Vol. Book 1 of 4, Definition and elements for preparation. Diving & ROV specialists.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2024-05-17 . Retrieved 2025-06-12 .

^ DESIGN for saturation (bell) diving systems .

IMCA D024 (Report) (Revision 3.4 ed.). London, UK: IMCA. October 2024.

^ "Diving Regulations 2009" .

Occupational Health and Safety Act 85 of 1993 – Regulations and Notices – Government Notice R41. Annexure B – Minimum manning levels . Pretoria: Government Printer. Archived from the original on 4 November 2016 . Retrieved 3 November 2016 – via Southern African Legal Information Institute.

^ "Life Support Technician" . imca-int.com/careers.

Archived from the original on 12 March 2018 . Retrieved 12 March 2018 .

^ Laursen, Chris.

"Life Support Technician" . Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme . Retrieved 12 March 2018 .

^ a b Diver Emergency Heating Report (1984) (PDF) .

IMCA D 059 (Report). IMCA. March 2017.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 May 2024 . Retrieved 2 May 2024 – via www.trauma-training.org/.

^ Hollien, H.; Rothman, H. B. (2013).

"Diver Communication" . In Drew, E. A. (ed.).

Underwater Research . Elsevier. pp.

1– 78.

ISBN 9780323150316 .

Archived from the original on 2023-10-05 . Retrieved 2021-03-04 .

^ a b Daymi, M.A.; Kamoun, L.; Malherbe, J. C.; Bengayed, M. (10 March 2005).

"Optimization of an hyperbaric speech transcoder" (PDF) .

Advances in Engineering Software .

36 (7). Elsevier: 436– 441.

doi : 10.1016/j.advengsoft.2005.01.006 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 September 2017 . Retrieved 2 September 2017 .

^ a b Fant, G.; Lindqvist-Gauffin, J. (1968). Pressure and gas mixture effects on diver's speech.

Dept. for Speech, Music and Hearing – Quarterly Progress and Status Report. STL-QPSR (Report). Vol. 9. KTH Computer science and communication. pp.

007– 017.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.415.541 .

^ "High Pressure Gas Storage Tube Trailers" .

www.easonindustrial.com . Retrieved 8 April 2024 .

^ "UG: Gas Kelly Tubes & Banks" .

www.uniquegroup.com . Retrieved 8 April 2024 .

^ "Integrated saturation systems" .

www.jfdglobal.com .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2025 . Retrieved 11 June 2025 .

^ a b c d e Bevan, John, ed. (2005). "Section 5.3".

The Professional Divers's Handbook (second ed.). Gosport, Hampshire: Submex Ltd. p. 238.

ISBN 978-0950824260 .

^ a b c d e f g "Reclaim Basic Set Up" (PDF) .

www.subseasa.com .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 May 2020 . Retrieved 10 March 2020 .

^ "Arawak system" .

www.therebreathersite.nl . Retrieved 21 October 2024 .

^ a b c d e f g h Bevan, John, ed. (2005). "Section 13.2".

The Professional Divers's Handbook (second ed.). Gosport, Hampshire: Submex Ltd. p. 321.

ISBN 978-0950824260 .

^ "Thrust Hyperbaric Offshore Recovery (THOR) Systems" .

Thrust Maritime .

Archived from the original on 19 June 2016 . Retrieved 27 June 2016 .

^ "Helgoland" (in German). Archived from the original on 2 December 2007.

^ Lombardi, Michael (11 September 2023).

"Back to Basics – Understanding Why We Do Not have Big Permanent Underwater Habitats Today" .

oceanopportunity.com .

Archived from the original on 12 February 2025 . Retrieved 14 June 2025 .

^ "Lesson Plan. Aquarius Technology: Building an Underwater Habitat" (PDF) .

www.coris.noaa.gov . Retrieved 14 June 2025 .

^ Ciesielski, T.; Imbert, J-P. (1–4 May 1989).

Hydrogen Offshore Diving to a Depth of 530 m: Hydra VIII .

Offshore Technology Conference (Report). Houston, Texas: Comex Services.

Archived from the original on 5 October 2023 . Retrieved 6 September 2013 .

^ "Extreme Environment Engineering Departement Hyperbaric Experimental Centre – History" . Archived from the original on 5 October 2008 . Retrieved 22 February 2009 .

^ Tara Patel (3 October 1992).

"Technology: Hydrogen helps divers take a deep breath" .

New Scientist . No. 1841.

Archived from the original on 5 December 2022 . Retrieved 5 December 2022 .

^ "The origins of deep sea diving in Brazil" (in Brazilian Portuguese). Scuba Rec – Recife Scuba Diver's Center – Brazil.

Archived from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 6 March 2016 .

^ Lafay, V.; Barthelemy, P.; Comet, B.; Frances, Y.; Jammes, Y. (March 1995). "ECG changes during the experimental human dive HYDRA 10 (71 atm/7,200 kPa)".

Undersea and Hyperbaric Medicine .

22 (1): 51– 60.

PMID 7742710 .

^ "HYDRA 8 and HYDRA 10 test projects" . Comex S.A. Archived from the original on January 5, 2009 . Retrieved 22 February 2009 .

^ COMEX Hyperbaric Experimental Center 1965 – 2000 36 years of deep diving and submarine techniques development. From Helium to Hydrogen and From 70 to 701 msw (PDF) .

CEH/D01064-rev.9/R&D-VL-E-25/02/2004 (Report). Marseilles, France: COMEX SA. 25 February 2004. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 October 2007 . Retrieved 16 May 2017 .

^ "Portrait of Theo Mavrotomos, legend and diving recordman – The CLICK-DIVE Magazine" .

Archived from the original on 2022-12-05 . Retrieved 2022-12-05 .

^ "Comex" .

www.divingheritage.com .

Archived from the original on 2022-01-19 . Retrieved 2022-12-05 .

^ "What is an ROV?" .

oceanexplorer.noaa.gov .

Archived from the original on 4 June 2025 . Retrieved 13 June 2025 .

^ Minimum quantities of gas required offshore .

IMCA D 050 (Report) (Revision 1.1 ed.). London, UK: IMCA. March 2021.

^ Diving Advisory Board (2007).

Code of Practice for Commercial Diver Training, Revision 3 (PDF) . Pretoria: South African Department of Labour. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 November 2016 . Retrieved 17 December 2018 .

^ Romsbotn, S.; Eftedal, I.; Vaag, J.R. (28 April 2022).

"A Work Environment Under Pressure: Psychosocial Job Demands and Resources Among Saturation Divers" .

Front Public Health .

10 : 765197.

Bibcode : 2022FrPH...1065197R .

doi : 10.3389/fpubh.2022.765197 .

PMC 9095950 .

PMID 35570940 .

^ "IMCA Issues ROV Guide During Diving Ops" .

www.offshore-energy.biz . Offshore Energy. 2 February 2015 . Retrieved 10 February 2021 .

^ "Last Breath: Real-life drama of the North Sea diver who cheated death" .

The Independent . 15 April 2019.

Archived from the original on 18 May 2019 . Retrieved 6 June 2019 .

^ Evans, Chris (4 April 2019).

"The Last Breath: how diver Chris Lemons survived without oxygen for 30 minutes on the seabed" .

inews.co.uk .

Archived from the original on 4 July 2019 . Retrieved 22 June 2019 .

Further reading [ edit ] Haux, Gerhard (1982).

Subsea Manned Engineering . Carson, California U.S.A.: Best Publishing Company.

ISBN 0-941332-00-4 .

Crawford, J (2016).

Offshore Installation Practice (revised ed.). Butterworth-Heinemann.

ISBN 9781483163192 .

Whistler, Simon; Carpenter, Oliver (2025). da Silva, Jennifer; Trujillo, Luis C. (eds.).

"Everything You Need to Know: Deep Sea Saturation Diving" . Megaprojects . Retrieved 8 April 2025 – via YouTube.

Gjerde, Kristin Øye; Ryggvik, Helge (2014).

North Sea Divers (PDF) . Translated by Rolf E. Gooderham. Stavanger: Wigestrand Forlag.

ISBN 978-82-8140-171-6 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Saturation diving .

Saturation Diving on www.divingheritage.com Banbury, Jen (9 May 2018).

"The Weird, Dangerous, Isolated Life of the Saturation Diver" .

Atlas Obscura .

NORSOK STANDARD U-100 Manned underwater operations Edition, 4 June 2014 CCO Ltd - Reinforce the US Navy saturation diving procedures,  10 January 2019 Archived 8 June 2023 at the Wayback Machine Saturation Diving - all bell run movie (scenes behind the work ") by Charles Moura – A video of a routine saturation bell run, mostly filmed inside the bell, at a pressure of 78 msw, on 26th September 2020.

v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐cckd7
Cached time: 20250817202038
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.487 seconds
Real time usage: 2.923 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 19822/1000000
Revision size: 183905/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 768095/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8516/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 37/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 545439/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.411/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22615260/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2290.716      1 -total
 45.76% 1048.290      1 Template:Reflist
 15.66%  358.714     36 Template:Annotated_link
 12.97%  297.175     30 Template:Cite_book
 11.51%  263.642     49 Template:Cite_web
  7.94%  181.779      1 Template:Underwater_diving
  7.73%  177.156      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  6.32%  144.676     22 Template:Cite_journal
  4.41%  100.922      1 Template:Short_description
  4.38%  100.234     35 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:489941:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817202038 and revision id 1304972448. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Saturation_diving&oldid=1304972448 " Categories : Professional diving Surface supplied diving procedures Decompression practice Underwater diving modes Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1: long volume value All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Brazilian Portuguese-language sources (pt-br) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from June 2025 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 07:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Saturation diving 13 languages Add topic

