Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Spectrum 2 Subtypes 3 Variability 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Shell star 10 languages Afrikaans Català Español Français Македонски 日本語 Русский Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of star Pleione in the Pleiades is a shell star.

A shell star is a star having a spectrum that shows extremely broad absorption lines , plus some very narrow absorption lines.  They typically also show some emission lines , usually from the Balmer series but occasionally of other lines.  The broad absorption lines are due to rapid rotation of the photosphere , the emission lines from an equatorial disk, and the narrow absorption lines are produced when the disc is seen nearly edge-on.

Shell stars have spectral types O7.5 to F5, with rotation velocities of 200–300 km/s, not far from the point when the rotational acceleration would disrupt the star.

Spectrum [ edit ] The shell stars are defined as a group by the existence of rotationally broadened photospheric spectral lines in combination with very narrow absorption lines .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Emission lines are frequently present but not regarded as a defining feature.  The exact spectral lines present vary to some extent: Balmer emission lines are very common, but may be weak or absent in cooler stars; FeII lines are common but not always present; helium lines may be seen in the hottest stars.  The photospheric lines are rotationally broadened showing projected velocities of 200 km/s or more.

[ 3 ] The line profiles in shell star spectra are complex, with variable wings, cores, and superpositions of absorption and emission features.  In some cases, particular absorption of emission features are only visible as modifications to a line profile, or a weakening of another line.  This leads to double and triple-peaked lines, or asymmetric lines.

[ 2 ] Shell stars very commonly have emission lines and thus are often Be stars , although they can also occur in spectral classes O, A, and occasionally F.

[ 2 ] Subtypes [ edit ] Shell stars have been subdivided into four categories, although these categories are no longer recognised as meaningful and are rarely seen in modern publications: [ 3 ] early Be stars of spectral types O7.5 to B2.5 middle Be stars of types B3 to B6.5, late Be stars of types B7 to B9.5, and A-F shell stars ranging from A0 to F5.

The vast majority of known shell stars are of spectral class B.  However, partly because of this many cooler shell stars have remained undetected.

[ 1 ] The Be phenomenon, and hence the term Be star itself, is now widely applied to similar stars not only of spectral class B, but also A and sometimes O and F.

Variability [ edit ] Shell stars often show variability in their spectra and brightness.  The shell features may come and go, with the star changing from a shell star to a normal B star or Be star.  Shell stars which show irregular variability due to changes in, or the disappearance of, the "shell" are called Gamma Cassiopeiae variables .

[ 4 ] Pleione and Gamma Cassiopeiae itself are both variable stars that have intermittent shell episodes where strong shell features appear in the spectrum and the brightness increases or decreases significantly.  At other times the shell is not detectable in the spectrum, and even the emission lines may disappear.

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] 1 Delphini References [ edit ] ^ a b Bohlender, D. (2016). "Searching for and Monitoring Ae and a Shell Stars at the DAO".

Bright Emissaries: Be Stars as Messengers of Star-Disk Physics .

506 : 275.

Bibcode : 2016ASPC..506..275B .

^ a b c d Rivinius, Th.; Štefl, S.; Baade, D. (2006).

"Bright Be-shell stars" .

Astronomy and Astrophysics .

459 (1): 137.

Bibcode : 2006A&A...459..137R .

doi : 10.1051/0004-6361:20053008 .

^ a b Slettebak, A. (1982).

"Spectral types and rotational velocities of the brighter Be stars and A-F type shell stars" .

Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series .

50 : 80, 55– 83.

Bibcode : 1982ApJS...50...55S .

doi : 10.1086/190820 .

^ "vartype.txt" .

cdsarc.u-strasbg.fr ( FTP ).

(To view documents see Help:FTP ) in Samus, N.N.; Durlevich, O.V. (eds.).

"Combined General Catalog of Variable Stars (GCVS)" .

Further reading [ edit ] Porter, John M. (1996).

"On the rotational velocities of Be and Be-shell stars" .

Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society .

280 (3): L31 – L35 .

Bibcode : 1996MNRAS.280L..31P .

doi : 10.1093/mnras/280.3.L31 .

Quirrenbach, A.; Buscher, D. F.; Mozurkewich, D.; Hummel, C. A.; Armstrong, J. T. (1994). "Maximum-entropy maps of the Be shell star zeta Tauri from optical long-baseline interferometry".

Astronomy and Astrophysics .

283 : L13.

Bibcode : 1994A&A...283L..13Q .

v t e Stars List Formation Accretion Molecular cloud Bok globule Young stellar object Protostar Pre-main-sequence Herbig Ae/Be T Tauri Herbig–Haro object Hayashi track Henyey track Evolution Main sequence Red-giant branch Horizontal branch Red clump Asymptotic giant branch post-AGB super-AGB Blue loop Planetary nebula Protoplanetary Wolf–Rayet nebula PG1159 Dredge-up OH/IR Instability strip Luminous blue variable Stellar population Supernova Superluminous Hypernova Classification Early Late Main sequence O B A F G K M Subdwarf O B WR OB Subgiant Giant Blue Red Yellow Bright giant Supergiant Blue Red Yellow Hypergiant Yellow Carbon S CN CH White dwarf Chemically peculiar Am Ap/Bp CEMP HgMn He-weak Barium Lambda Boötis Lead Technetium Be Shell B[e] Helium Extreme Blue straggler Remnants Compact star Parker's star White dwarf Helium planet Neutron Radio-quiet Pulsar Binary X-ray Magnetar Stellar black hole X-ray binary Burster SGR Hypothetical Blue dwarf Black dwarf Exotic Boson Electroweak Strange Preon Planck Dark Dark-energy Quark Q Black hole star Black Hawking Quasi-star Gravastar Thorne–Żytkow object Iron Blitzar White hole Nucleosynthesis Deuterium burning Lithium burning Proton–proton chain CNO cycle Helium flash Triple-alpha process Alpha process C burning Ne burning O burning Si burning s-process r-process p-process Nova Symbiotic Remnant Luminous red nova Recurrent Micronova Supernova Structure Core Convection zone Microturbulence Oscillations Radiation zone Atmosphere Photosphere Starspot Chromosphere Stellar corona Alfvén surface Stellar wind Bubble Bipolar outflow Accretion disk Protoplanetary disk Proplyd Asteroseismology Helioseismology Circumstellar dust Cosmic dust Circumstellar envelope Eddington luminosity Kelvin–Helmholtz mechanism Properties Designation Dynamics Effective temperature Luminosity Kinematics Magnetic field Absolute magnitude Mass Metallicity Rotation Gravity darkening Starlight Variable Photometric system Color index Hertzsprung–Russell diagram Color–color diagram Strömgren sphere Kraft break Star systems Binary Contact Common envelope Eclipsing Symbiotic Multiple Cluster Open Globular Super Planetary system Earth-centric observations Sun Solar eclipse Solar radio emission Solar System Sunlight Pole star Circumpolar Constellation Asterism Magnitude Apparent Extinction Photographic Radial velocity Proper motion Parallax Photometric-standard Lists Proper names Arabic Chinese Extremes Most massive Highest temperature Lowest temperature Largest volume Smallest volume Brightest Historical brightest Most luminous Nearest bright Most distant With resolved images With multiple exoplanets Brown dwarfs Red dwarfs White dwarfs Milky Way novae Supernovae Candidates Remnants Planetary nebulae Timeline of stellar astronomy Related Substellar object Brown dwarf Desert Sub Planet Galactic year Galaxy Guest Gravity Intergalactic Neutron star merger Planet-hosting stars Stellar collision Stellar engulfment Tidal disruption event Category Stars portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Shell_star&oldid=1292504333 " Categories : Star types Shell stars Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 27 May 2025, at 08:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Shell star 10 languages Add topic

