Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Objectives, strategies and guiding principles Toggle Objectives, strategies and guiding principles subsection 1.1 Objectives 1.2 Strategies 1.3 Guiding principles 2 Structure 3 History 4 Related organizations 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents AUSCANNZUKUS 4 languages فارسی Polski Русский Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia AUSCANNZUKUS member states Military command agreement AUSCANNZUKUS is an abbreviation for the naval Command, Control, Communications and Computers (C4) interoperability organization involving the Anglosphere nations of Australia , Canada , New Zealand , the United Kingdom , and the United States . It is also used as a security caveat in the UKUSA Community , where it is also known as " Five Eyes ." [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Objectives, strategies and guiding principles [ edit ] The organization's vision and mission, [ 4 ] objectives, strategies and guiding principles, [ 5 ] and Structure [ 6 ] are presented on the AUSCANNZUKUS Information Portal.

Objectives [ edit ] To achieve internal sharing and understanding of Maritime C4 knowledge.

To produce products and processes to achieve Maritime C4 interoperability.

To increase external sharing and understanding of AUSCANNZUKUS.

[ 5 ] Strategies [ edit ] Establish C4 policy and standards.

Identify C4 interoperability requirements and risks.

Identify, develop and utilize new technologies.

Exchange information on national C4 capabilities, plans, and projects.

To improve national awareness of AUSCANNZUKUS.

Leverage exercises, experiments and demonstrations to deliver capability.

Inform and influence multi national defence fora.

[ 5 ] Guiding principles [ edit ] The focus of all activities is to be on the requirements of the naval warfighter.

All knowledge-sharing initiatives are to aim at providing innovative options, which are affordable to all AUSCANNZUKUS navies.

All relevant information is to be shared with appropriate joint and combined organizations.

[ 5 ] AUSCANZUKUS structure.

Structure [ edit ] The current AUSCANNZUKUS organization consists of the supervisory board, C4 Committee, and various other subordinate groups.

[ 6 ] History [ edit ] Early in World War II communications interoperability between Allied forces was poor. During March 1941 the first high-level proposals to formally structure combined operations between the United States and the United Kingdom were considered; these discussions were the genesis of the current Combined Communications Electronics Board (CCEB).

[ 7 ] The origins of the AUSCANNZUKUS organization arose from dialogue between Admiral Arleigh Burke , USN, and Admiral Lord Louis Mountbatten , RN, in 1960.  Their intention was to align naval communications policies and prevent, or at least limit, any barriers to interoperability, with the imminent introduction of sophisticated new communications equipment. AUSCANNZUKUS matured to the current five-nation organization in 1980 when New Zealand became a full member.

[ 7 ] The organization's remit has expanded over the years, and its mission now includes fostering knowledge sharing and C4 interoperability between the navies of the five nations in order to increase operational effectiveness.

[ 4 ] Related organizations [ edit ] AUSCANNZUKUS liaises closely with Washington-based management groups of the Combined Communications Electronics Board (CCEB),
Multinational Interoperability Council (MIC), [ 8 ] A merican, B ritish, C anadian, A ustralian and N ew Z ealand Armies' Interoperability Program ( ABCANZ Armies ), Air and Space Interoperability Council (ASIC (Air Force)) [ 9 ] [ 10 ] and The Technical Cooperation Program (TTCP).

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] See also [ edit ] ABCANZ Armies Air and Space Interoperability Council (air forces) Allied technological cooperation during World War II AUKUS ANZUS CANZUK Combined Communications Electronics Board (communication-electronics) Commonwealth of Nations Five Eyes (intelligence) The Technical Cooperation Program (technology and science) Tizard Mission UKUSA Agreement (signal intelligence) References [ edit ] ^ McGregor, Richard.

"Global Insight: US spying risks clouding 'five eyes' vision" .

Financial Times . Retrieved 30 August 2013 .

^ Lee, Michael.

"Snowden leak reaffirms Australia's four spy installations" .

ZDNet . Retrieved 13 August 2013 .

^ Gurney, Matt.

"Canada Navy Spy Case" .

National Post . Archived from the original on 13 August 2013 . Retrieved 13 August 2013 .

^ a b "AUSCANNZUKUS Information Portal" . Auscannzukus.net. 2008-10-05. Archived from the original on 2010-12-29 . Retrieved 2011-11-04 .

^ a b c d "AUSCANNZUKUS Overview" . Auscannzukus.net. 2010-03-01 . Retrieved 2011-11-04 .

[ dead link ] ^ a b "AUSCANNZUKUS Structure" . Auscannzukus.net. 2010-03-01 . Retrieved 2011-11-04 .

[ dead link ] ^ a b "AUSCANNZUKUS History" . Auscannzukus.net. 2010-03-01 . Retrieved 2011-11-04 .

[ dead link ] ^ "Multinational Interoperability Council" . Archived from the original on 2014-11-12.

^ "Air and Space Interoperability Council" . Dtic.mil. Archived from the original on January 4, 2008 . Retrieved 2011-11-04 .

^ "Air and Space Interoperability Council" . airstandards.org. Archived from the original on 2013-05-16 . Retrieved 2012-11-07 .

^ "Welcome To The Technical Cooperation Program" . osd.mil. Archived from the original on 2012-07-01 . Retrieved 2013-06-15 .

^ "Auscannzukus Links" . Auscannzukus.net. 2010-03-01 . Retrieved 2011-11-04 .

[ dead link ] External links [ edit ] AUSCANNZUKUS structure v t e Australia–United Kingdom relations Diplomatic posts High Commission of Australia, London High Commissioners of Australia to the United Kingdom British High Commission, Canberra High Commissioners of the United Kingdom to Australia Diplomacy Australia–United Kingdom Free Trade Agreement Nauru Island Agreement Commonwealth of Nations 1981 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting 2002 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting 2011 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting Judicial Committee of the Privy Council Royal tours of Australia Royal visits to Rockhampton, Queensland Incidents Sue v Hill Military relations AUSCANNZUKUS ANZUK AUKUS Five Eyes UKUSA Agreement Five Power Defence Arrangements Southeast Asia Treaty Organization British Army in Australia British Army regiments in Australia between 1810 and 1870 RAAF Overseas Headquarters British Commonwealth Air Training Plan Second Australian Imperial Force in the United Kingdom Legislation New South Wales Act 1823 South Australia Act 1834 South Australia Act 1842 Australian Constitutions Act 1850 Papua Act 1905 Statute of Westminster 1931 Statute of Westminster Adoption Act 1942 Australia Act 1986 Australian Constitution (Public Record Copy) Act 1990 Treaties Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property Treaty of Bern Berne Convention (1906) International Agreement for the suppression of the White Slave Traffic Agreement for the Suppression of the Circulation of Obscene Publications International Opium Convention Paris Convention of 1919 Declaration recognising the Right to a Flag of States having no Sea-coast International Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Women and Children Svalbard Treaty Geneva Convention on Prisoners of War (1929) Geneva Convention on the Wounded and Sick Nuclear tests British nuclear tests at Maralinga Operation Blowdown Operation Hurricane Operation Totem McClelland Royal Commission Related 1919 England to Australia flight Australian Astronomical Observatory Anglo-Australian Telescope Australian State Coach Australian War Memorial, London Big Brother Movement Britain–Australia Society CANZUK Sports rivalries Monarchy of Australia Palace letters Ten Pound Poms A Bride from the Bush The Queen in Australia Category:Australia–United Kingdom relations v t e Canada–United Kingdom relations Diplomatic posts High Commission of Canada, London British High Commission, Ottawa High Commissioners of the United Kingdom to Canada Canada House Macdonald House, London Earnscliffe Diplomacy Select Committee of the House of Commons on the Civil Government of Canada Carnarvon Terms British Empire Economic Conference Imperial Preference First Quebec Conference Quebec Agreement Montreal Laboratory Second Quebec Conference Agreement Concerning the Shipwrecked Vessel RMS Titanic Commonwealth of Nations Judicial Committee of the Privy Council Royal tours of Canada Incidents Epsom riot Chanak Crisis King–Byng affair Aldershot riot James Cross Military relations British Commonwealth Air Training Plan Operation Fish RCAF Overseas Headquarters British Army Training Unit Suffield Five Eyes UKUSA Agreement Legislation British North America Acts Clergy Reserves in Canada Act 1840 Canada Corn Act 1843 Constitution Act, 1867 Rupert's Land Act 1868 Constitution Act, 1871 Constitution Act, 1886 Naval Aid Bill Statute of Westminster 1931 Newfoundland Act Canada Act 1982 Treaties Convention for the Protection of Submarine Telegraph Cables Treaty of Washington (1871) Treaty of Bern International Agreement for the suppression of the White Slave Traffic Berne Convention (1906) Boundary Waters Treaty of 1909 Agreement for the Suppression of the Circulation of Obscene Publications Brussels Collision Convention North Pacific Fur Seal Convention of 1911 International Opium Convention Migratory Bird Treaty Paris Convention of 1919 Svalbard Treaty International Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Women and Children Declaration recognising the Right to a Flag of States having no Sea-coast Brussels Agreement (1924) Related British Association of Canadian Studies British Coal Corp v R British Newfoundland Development Corporation British timber trade Canada Gate Canada Memorial CANTAT-1 CANTAT-2 TAT-1 Canadian cricket tours of England Canadian cricket team in Scotland in 2009 CANZUK Proposed Canadian annexation of the Turks and Caicos Islands Sir John Rose, 1st Baronet Tornrak Category:Canada–United Kingdom relations v t e New Zealand–United Kingdom relations Diplomatic posts High Commission of New Zealand, London High Commissioners of New Zealand to the United Kingdom British High Commission, Wellington High Commissioners of the United Kingdom to New Zealand Diplomacy Nauru Island Agreement New Zealand–United Kingdom Free Trade Agreement Commonwealth of Nations 1995 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting Judicial Committee of the Privy Council Royal tours of New Zealand Incidents Tom Weal Hart v O'Connor Meridian Global Funds Management Asia Ltd v Securities Commission R v Attorney General for England and Wales Murder of Grace Millane Military relations AUSCANNZUKUS ANZUK AUKUS Five Eyes UKUSA Agreement Five Power Defence Arrangements Southeast Asia Treaty Organization British Commonwealth Air Training Plan Operation Midford Legislation New Zealand Constitution Act 1846 New Zealand Constitution Act 1852 Statute of Westminster 1931 Statute of Westminster Adoption Act 1947 New Zealand Constitution Amendment Act 1947 New Zealand Constitution Amendment (Request and Consent) Act 1947 British Nationality and New Zealand Citizenship Act 1948 Constitution Act 1986 Imperial Laws Application Act 1988 Treaties Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property Treaty of Bern Berne Convention (1906) International Agreement for the suppression of the White Slave Traffic Agreement for the Suppression of the Circulation of Obscene Publications International Opium Convention Paris Convention of 1919 Declaration recognising the Right to a Flag of States having no Sea-coast International Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Women and Children Svalbard Treaty Geneva Convention on Prisoners of War (1929) Geneva Convention on the Wounded and Sick Related CANZUK New Zealand War Memorial, London Monarchy of New Zealand Ten Pound Poms Category:New Zealand–United Kingdom relations v t e United Kingdom–United States relations Diplomatic posts Embassy of the United Kingdom, Washington, D.C.

Ambassadors of the United Kingdom to the United States British ambassador's residence Embassy of the United States, London Macdonald House, London Ambassadors of the United States to the United Kingdom Winfield House British Consulate-General, Boston Consulate of the United States, Liverpool United States Special Envoy for Northern Ireland Texas Legation Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs Diplomacy Treaty of Paris (1783) Jay Treaty Monroe–Pinkney Treaty Treaty of Ghent Rush–Bagot Treaty Treaty of 1818 Webster–Ashburton Treaty Oregon Treaty Clayton–Bulwer Treaty Lyons–Seward Treaty of 1862 Shanghai International Settlement Treaty of Washington (1871) Halifax Fisheries Commission Treaty of Berlin (1889) Bering Sea Arbitration Great Rapprochement Olney–Pauncefote Treaty Tripartite Convention Hay–Pauncefote Treaty Boundary Waters Treaty of 1909 Anglo-French Financial Commission Migratory Bird Treaty Balfour Mission Conference of Ambassadors Washington Naval Conference Four-Power Treaty Washington Naval Treaty Convention Between the United States and Great Britain (1930) Destroyers-for-bases deal U.S.–British Staff Conference (ABC–1) Lend-Lease Atlantic Charter Arcadia Conference Second Washington Conference Bermuda Conference Washington Conference (1943) First Quebec Conference Quebec Agreement Moscow Declarations Anglo-American Petroleum Agreement Second Quebec Conference Malta Conference (1945) Moscow Conference (1945) Bermuda Agreement Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry Anglo-American loan US–UK Mutual Defence Agreement United Nations Security Council Resolution 135 Nassau Agreement Polaris Sales Agreement Bermuda II Agreement Guadeloupe Conference 1993 United Kingdom–United States Maritime Boundary Treaties UK–US extradition treaty of 2003 Extradition Act 2003 Agreement Concerning the Shipwrecked Vessel RMS Titanic Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action New Atlantic Charter British-American Parliamentary Group Friends of Wales Caucus Conflicts American Revolution United States Declaration of Independence American Revolutionary War War of 1812 Origins Chesapeake–Leopard affair United States declaration of war on the United Kingdom Aroostook War Pig War (1859) Incidents Embargo Act of 1807 Arbuthnot and Ambrister incident Caroline affair Oregon boundary dispute Hermosa Creole mutiny Paulet affair Mosquito Coast Bombardment of Greytown Passenger Cases Trent Affair Chesapeake Affair Ellen Southard Alabama Claims Murchison letter Venezuelan crisis of 1895 Alaska boundary dispute Hindu–German Conspiracy Impact Pan Am Flight 103 Scottish Court in the Netherlands Trial JPMorgan Chase Bank v. Traffic Stream (BVI) Infrastructure Ltd.

British Guantanamo Bay detainees Dixie Chicks controversy 190th Fighter Squadron, Blues and Royals friendly fire incident Detention of U.S. and UK diplomats in Zimbabwe Release of Abdelbaset al-Megrahi Julian Assange Death of Linda Norgrove FTC v. Balls of Kryptonite The United States of America v Nolan Steele dossier Christopher Steele Trump Tower wiretapping allegations Death of Harry Dunn 2024 US air base drone incursions in the United Kingdom Military relations AUKUS British Defence Staff – US CIA activities in the United Kingdom Diego Garcia Expulsion of the Chagossians Five Eyes ECHELON UKUSA Agreement International Maritime Security Construct Iraq War Bush–Blair 2003 Iraq memo Montreal Laboratory Operation Sky Shield Operation Vigilant Warrior Project E Project Emily RAF Ascension Island RNAD Coulport Southeast Asia Treaty Organization Strategic Air Command in the United Kingdom Tizard Mission Trident RNAD Coulport United States Naval Facility, Barbados US–UK airstrikes on Yemen War Plan Red World War I Supreme War Council World War II European theatre Diplomatic history of World War II United Kingdom–United States relations in World War II Allied technological cooperation during World War II Arnold Scheme British Security Co-ordination Alexander Halpern British contribution to the Manhattan Project British hydrogen bomb programme British nuclear testing in the United States British Purchasing Commission Combined Food Board Combined Munitions Assignments Board Combined Production and Resources Board Combined Raw Materials Board Combined Shipping Adjustment Board Eagle Squadrons Europe first Four-Power Authorities Four Power Naval Commission Operation Bolero Tripartite Naval Commission Related History of United Kingdom–United States relations Special Relationship Resolute desk United Kingdom and the American Civil War Cotton diplomacy United States v England (1950 FIFA World Cup) American studies in the United Kingdom Bermuda–United States relations Cayman Islands–United States relations British Invasion Second British Invasion Fountain of Time The Ghost Shirt North Atlantic triangle USA House American Ambulance Great Britain The Atlantic Bridge British-American Project British International School of Boston British War Relief Society Cambridge–MIT Institute Friends of Ireland (U.S. Congress) Marshall Aid Commemoration Commission Marshall Scholarship Mont Tremblant Conference Royal Oak Foundation UK Fulbright Commission AC-2 Apollo (cable system) PTAT-1 TAT-3 TAT-7 TAT-8 TAT-11 TAT-12/13 TGN Atlantic Ariel programme Ariel 1 Ariel 2 Yo, Blair Queen Elizabeth II September 11th Garden Kingdom of Hanover–United States relations 18th-century American piracy of British literature Albion's Seed The Evil Empire: 101 Ways That England Ruined the World Drunk Enough to Say I Love You?

Letter from America President Trump – The Piers Morgan Interview Category:United Kingdom–United States relations Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=AUSCANNZUKUS&oldid=1299549858 " Categories : Anglosphere International military organizations Military technology Military standardization Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2013 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 July 2025, at 02:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents AUSCANNZUKUS 4 languages Add topic

