Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Ecology Toggle Ecology subsection 2.1 Species 3 See also 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Cited text Toggle the table of contents Prostrate shrub 15 languages Башҡортса Беларуская Чӑвашла Deutsch Eesti فارسی Français Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Қазақша Lietuvių Malagasy Polski Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Shrub with a trailing habit Gastrolobium minus , a prostrate shrub native to Western Australia , popular in horticulture A prostrate shrub is a woody plant , most of the branches of which lie upon or just above the ground, rather than being held erect as are the branches of most trees and shrubs.

Background [ edit ] Prostration may occur because the supporting tissues in stems are not strong enough to support the weight of the plant, causing the plant to bend until it reaches the ground. Alternatively, it may occur because of a genetic disposition for branches to grow horizontally on or just under the ground; for example, as a strategy to avoid overly strong sunlight. Finally, environmental factors such as strong winds laden with sand or salt may tend to prune away erect branches, thereby creating a prostrate habit in plants that may not be predisposed to prostration.

Ecology [ edit ] Prostrate shrubs are used in horticulture as groundcovers and in hanging baskets , and to bind soils and prevent erosion in remedial landscaping . They are also important components of rock gardens . The shrinking size of urban gardens has meant an increase in demand for and desirability of dwarf and prostrate forms of many garden plants. More recently, prostrate shrubs have received attention for their usefulness in planting green roofs and green walls , where they can contribute to environmental conservation .

Prostrate plant forms may arise from deliberate breeding and hybridisation, such as the groundcover grevilleas , including Grevillea "Poorinda Royal Mantle", [ 1 ] and G.

"Bronze Rambler", [ 2 ] or by selection of forms of plants growing in exposed areas. The windswept coastal heathlands and cliffs of far southeastern New South Wales have yielded Banksia 'Roller Coaster' and Banksia 'Pygmy Possum' .

[ 3 ] These are flattened varieties of less than 0.5 m in height of the species Banksia integrifolia and Banksia serrata , respectively, both of which grow to sizeable trees of 10 m (30 ft) or more in height.

[ 3 ] The origin of others is unclear; Cootamundra Wattle ( Acacia baileyana ) is a popular and widely used garden plant in Australia, a prostrate form of which is also in cultivation. Its origin is unknown, possibly a chance seedling in cultivation. It itself is a popular garden plant, its cascading horizontal branches good for rockeries.

[ 4 ] Species [ edit ] Many species of roses grow as long canes that can spread prostrate on the ground, and some of these have been hybridized to form climbing and rambling roses that can be allowed to grow on the ground without support, as well as varieties known as " carpet roses " that are intended to be grown as ground covers.

[ 5 ] Prostrate juniper, Juniperus communis subsp.

alpina is a naturally occurring form of a popular evergreen .

[ 6 ] Many species of Cotoneaster , such as C. apiculatus , are prostrate ornamentals, [ 7 ] as are the closely related Pyracanthas , and the humilis variant of sweetbox, Sarcococca hookeriana var.

humilis . Heaths ( Erica carnea and related species) and heathers ( Calluna vulgaris ) are prostrate shrubs often featured prominently in rock gardens.

[ 8 ] Wintergreens such as Gaultheria humifusa and Gaultheria procumbens are also prostrate growers.

[ 9 ] Although, strictly speaking, herbaceous, the North American bunchberry ( Cornus canadensis ), a member of the dogwood genus, can appear as a prostrate shrub when growing in the garden.

[ 10 ] Many daphnes , particularly those derived from Daphne odora , are prostrate growers, including forms that are highly fragrant and have variegated leaves, although they are short-lived.

[ 11 ] Some forms of the culinary herb rosemary ( Rosmarinus officinalis ) form prostrate shrubs when grown in Mediterranean climates , although they die back to the ground when grown where winters are colder.

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Cushion plant Subshrub References [ edit ] ^ Stewart, p. 114 ^ Stewart, p. 110 ^ a b Stewart, p. 102 ^ Stewart, p. 156 ^ "Rose | Description, Species, Images, & Facts" . 7 March 2024.

^ Adams, R. P. (2004).

Junipers of the World: The genus Juniperus . Victoria: Trafford.

ISBN 1-4120-4250-X .

^ Huxley, A., ed. (1992).

New RHS Dictionary of Gardening . Macmillan ISBN 0-333-47494-5 .

^ Manning, John; Paterson-Jones, Colin (2007).

Field Guide to Fynbos . Struik Publishers, Cape Town. p. 224.

ISBN 978-1-77007-265-7 .

^ Borealforest: Gaultheria procumbens ^ Eyde, Richard H. (1988). "Comprehending Cornus: puzzles and progress in the systematics of the dogwoods".

Botanical Review .

54 (3): 233– 351.

Bibcode : 1988BotRv..54..233E .

doi : 10.1007/bf02868985 .

JSTOR 4354115 .

S2CID 12507834 .

^ Flora, The Gardener's Bible, ABC Publishing, Sydney, 2005 ^ National Non-Food Crops Centre .

"Rosemary" . Retrieved on 2009-04-23.

Cited text [ edit ] Stewart, Angus (2001).

Gardening on the Wild Side . Sydney: ABC Books.

ISBN 0-7333-0791-4 .

v t e Botany History Outline Subdisciplines Archaeobotany Astrobotany Bryology Dendrology Ethnobotany Paleobotany Phycology Phytochemistry Phytogeography Geobotany Plant anatomy Plant ecology Plant intelligence Plant pathology Plant physiology Plant groups Algae Archaeplastida Bryophyte Non-vascular plants Vascular plants Fern Lycophyte Spermatophytes Gymnosperm Angiosperm Plant anatomy Plant morphology ( glossary ) Plant cells Cell wall Phragmoplast Plastid Plasmodesma Vacuole Tissues Cork Ground tissue Mesophyll Meristem Storage organs Vascular tissue Vascular bundle Wood Vegetative Bulb Root Rhizoid Rhizome Shoot Bud Leaf Cataphyll Petiole Sessility Stem Reproductive (incl. Flower) Archegonium Antheridium Androecium Pollen Stamen Anther Filament Staminode Tapetum Flower Aestivation Flower development Floral diagram Floral formula Floral symmetry Whorl Fruit Anatomy Berry Capsule Nut Pyrena Seed Dispersal Endosperm Gametophyte Gynandrium Gynoecium Carpel Ovary Locule Ovule Stigma Style Hypanthium (Floral cup) Inflorescence Bract Pedicellate Raceme Umbel Perianth Tepal Petal Sepal Plant embryo Receptacle Sporophyll Sporophyte Surface structures Cuticle Epicuticular wax Epidermis Nectar Stoma Thorns, spines, and prickles Trichome Plant physiology Materials Aleurone Apical dominance Bulk flow Cellulose Nutrition Photosynthesis Chlorophyll Phytomelanin Plant hormones Respiration Gas Exchange Cellular respiration Sap Starch Sugar Transpiration Turgor pressure Plant growth and habit Habit Cushion plants Rosettes Shrubs Prostrate shrubs Subshrubs Succulent plants Trees Vines Lianas Herbaceous plants Secondary growth Woody plants Reproduction Evolution Ecology Alternation of generations Double fertilization Evolutionary development Evolutionary history timeline Flora Germination Pollination Artificial Pollinators Pollen tube Self Sporangium Microsporangia Microspore Megasporangium Megaspore Spore Plant taxonomy Biological classification Botanical nomenclature Botanical name Correct name Author citation International Code of Nomenclature (ICN) ICN for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP) Cultivated plant taxonomy Citrus taxonomy Cultigen Cultivar Group Grex History of plant systematics Herbarium International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT) Plant taxonomy systems Taxonomic rank Practice Agronomy Floriculture Forestry Horticulture Phytochemical Lists Related Botanical terms Botanists by author abbreviation Botanical expeditions Individual trees Oldest trees Superlative trees Tallest trees Plants Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Prostrate_shrub&oldid=1289519911 " Categories : Shrubs Plant morphology Garden plants Groundcovers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 May 2025, at 04:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Prostrate shrub 15 languages Add topic

