Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early examples 2 Environmental factors 3 Negative impacts 4 Cities with notable systems Toggle Cities with notable systems subsection 4.1 North America 4.2 Asia 4.3 Europe 4.4 Australia 5 Gallery 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Skyway 18 languages العربية Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia עברית Latina Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Polski Română Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Elevated type of pedway For other uses, see Skyway (disambiguation) .

"Skywalk" redirects here. For other uses, see Skywalk (disambiguation) .

"Sky bridge" redirects here. For other uses, see, see Skybridge .

Skyways in the Peachtree Center district of Atlanta A Han dynasty (202 BC – 220 AD) Chinese miniature model of two residential towers joined by a skyway A skyway , skybridge , skywalk , or sky walkway is an elevated type of pedway connecting two or more buildings in an urban area , or connecting elevated points within mountainous recreational zones. Urban skyways very often take the form of enclosed or covered footbridges that protect pedestrians from the weather. Open-top modern skyways in mountains now often have glass bottoms. Sometimes enclosed urban skywalks are made almost totally from glass, including ceilings, walls and floors. Also, some urban skyways function strictly as linear parks designed for walking.

In North America skyways are usually owned by businesses, and are therefore not public spaces as compared with sidewalks . However, in Asia, such as Bangkok's and Hong Kong's skywalks, they are built and owned separately by the city government, connecting between privately run rail stations or other transport with their own footbridges, and run many kilometers. Skyways usually connect on the first few floors above the ground-level floor, though they are sometimes much higher, as in the Petronas Towers . The space in the buildings connected by skyways is often devoted to retail business, so areas around the skyway may operate as a shopping mall . Non-commercial areas with closely associated buildings, such as university campuses, can often have skyways and/or tunnels connecting buildings.

The world's largest discontinuous skyway network – Calgary, Alberta, Canada's " +15 Walkway " system – has a total length of 16 km (9.9 mi).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The Minneapolis Skyway System is the world's largest continuous system and spans 9.5 miles (15.3 km) [ 3 ] [ 4 ] connecting 80 blocks in downtown Minneapolis , Minnesota, United States.

On a smaller scale, terminals of large airports are often connected by skywalk systems, as at Manchester Airport , United Kingdom; in many airports, retractable jet bridges provide a direct connection between airplanes and terminals.

Some cities have the equivalent of a skyway underground, and there are also mixed subway–skyway systems; see underground city .

Early examples [ edit ] The Bridge of Sighs in Venice , Italy Florence , Italy, Vasari Corridor , connects Palazzo Vecchio to Uffizi and then to Palazzo Pitti , 16th century Venice , Italy, Bridge of Sighs , connects Doge's Palace and prison, 16th century Copenhagen , Denmark: skywalk connecting courts building to adjacent uses, 18th century Faaborg , Funen , Denmark: skywalk in centrum, 18th century Environmental factors [ edit ] The Hansasilta skyway crossing over the Itäväylä Highway in Itäkeskus , Helsinki , Finland Besides pedestrian safety and convenience, the chief reasons assigned by urban planners for skywalk development are decrease of traffic congestion , reduction in vehicular air pollution and separation of people from vehicular noise . A number of cities (for example, Spokane, Washington) have given intricate analysis to skywalk systems employing computer models to optimize skywalk layout.

[ 5 ] Negative impacts [ edit ] There is debate about the negative impact on urban areas of skyways. Robertson (1988) noted the negative impacts to street activities, and reductions to the property value at ground level.

[ 6 ] Woo (2012) found that skywalk systems could be negatively associated with promoting consumerism.

[ 7 ] Cui (2015) called for more research into the impact of skyways in developing countries.

[ 8 ] The Cincinnati Skywalk in Ohio was dismantled because of these concerns.

[ 9 ] Cities with notable systems [ edit ] North America [ edit ] There are significant skyway networks in many cities in the US Midwest , such as Minneapolis , Saint Paul , Des Moines , Cedar Rapids , Rochester , and Duluth .

[ 10 ] Most networks in North America are privately owned. Notable exceptions are skyways in Saint Paul and in New York ( High Line ), which are publicly owned.

[ 11 ] City System Length Blocks connected Link Atlanta, Georgia Peachtree Center 14 blocks map Arlington, Virginia Rosslyn Skywalks map Calgary, Alberta +15, +30, or +45 Walkway 16 kilometres (9.9 mi) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] ~64 blocks map Cedar Rapids, Iowa Cedar Rapids Skywalk System 1.15 miles (1.85 km) 15 blocks map Charlotte, North Carolina Overstreet Mall 1.5 miles (2.4 km) 10 blocks Chicago, Illinois Chicago Pedway 40 blocks Dallas, Texas Dallas Pedestrian Network 3 miles (4.8 km) 36 blocks, in two separate networks map Des Moines, Iowa Skywalk 4 miles (6.4 km) [ 12 ] 30 blocks map Detroit, Michigan 10 buildings, ~ 8 blocks map Duluth, Minnesota Skywalk 3 miles (4.8 km) [ 13 ] ~17 blocks map Edmonton, Alberta Edmonton Pedway 13 kilometres (8.1 mi) ~13 blocks map Fargo, North Dakota 6 blocks Grand Rapids, Michigan Skywalk > 1 mile (1.7 km) 7 blocks – connects 12,000-seat VanAndel Arena, JW Marriott, Amway Grand Plaza and Marriott Courtyard hotels as well as 1,000,000 sq ft (93,000 m 2 ) DeVos Place Convention Center Halifax, Nova Scotia , Canada Downtown Halifax Link Houston, Texas Houston Downtown Tunnel System > 6 miles (9.7 km) including tunnels ~35 blocks (95 total) map Indianapolis, Indiana Indianapolis Skywalk Connects the Indiana Convention Center , Indianapolis Artsgarden , Lucas Oil Stadium , Circle Centre Mall , Indianapolis Union Station , JW Marriott Indianapolis , and 11 other hotels.

[ 14 ] map Kansas City, Missouri "The Link" Crown Center 6 Las Vegas Strip Skyways are provided in lieu of street-level pedestrian crossings.

Lincoln, Nebraska 7 blocks Los Angeles, California Calvin S Hamilton Pedway 10 blocks Map Louisville, Kentucky Louie Link A glassed-in skywalk called the Louie Link stretches six city blocks and links together the Kentucky International Convention Center (KICC), Fourth Street Live!, three hotels (Galt House Hotel & Suites, Marriott and Hyatt Regency), and 2,300 hotel rooms. In 2010 it was extended from the Galt House to the new $16 million Skywalk Garage, an eight-level, 860-space parking facility on Third Street, and a second skywalk connects from the garage across Third Street to the new KFC Yum! Center map Mankato, Minnesota City Center Campus ~ 0.5 miles (0.80 km) 8 blocks map Milwaukee, Wisconsin Milwaukee Skywalk 1.75 mi (2.82 km) About 8 blocks. Notable connected buildings include: The Avenue , 310W , Hyatt Regency , Baird Center , Chase Tower , Empire Building , 100 East Wisconsin , Hilton Milwaukee City Center map Minneapolis, Minnesota Minneapolis Skyway System 9.5 miles (15.3 km) [ 3 ] [ 4 ] >80 blocks map New York High Line > 1.45 miles (2.33 km) The pedestrian skyway and linear park on 10 m height on former elevated railway. Connects to Hudson Yards and One Manhattan West map Oklahoma City, Oklahoma Oklahoma City Underground ~30 buildings Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 16 blocks map Rochester, New York 20 buildings over 13 blocks map Saint Paul, Minnesota Skyway > 5 miles (8.0 km) [ 15 ] 47 blocks map Sioux City, Iowa 13 blocks map Spokane, Washington 16 blocks map Toronto, Ontario SkyWalk 0.7 km 2 blocks – Metro Toronto Convention Centre South Building and Union Station (Toronto) Winnipeg, Manitoba Winnipeg Walkway 18 blocks Asia [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( November 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A skybridge connects the two towers of Petronas Towers in Kuala Lumpur Skybridge atop Marina Bay Sands in Singapore The highest cantilevered skybridge between separate buildings in the world is in the Raffles City Chongqing skyscrapers complex in Chongqing , China. The world's longest pedestrian hanging skywalk, at 430 meters, is the Zhangjiajie Glass Bridge , which sits between mountain peaks in China. The highest cantilevered skybridge as construction element of building exist atop of Kingdom Centre in Riyadh , Saudi Arabia .

The world's highest 2-story skybridge, 170 m above the ground and 58 m long, between the two towers on 41st and 42nd floors in Petronas Twin Towers dual skyscrapers in Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia, which also has an elevated, air-conditioned walkway from the Kuala Lumpur Convention Centre to Bukit Bintang shopping district. Malaysia also has the mountainarian tourist pedestrian glass-bottom Langkawi Sky Bridge in Kedah , Langkawi .

One of the most famous similar cantilevered skybridges, that looks like uppered [ check spelling ] ship from the bird's-eye and submarine from the ground, known in Singapore's Marina Bay Sands resort complex of skyscrapers.

One of the most impressionable hanging pedestrian skybridges, supported by two giant hands, Golden Bridge now attracts tourists in Ba Na Hills near Da Nang , Vietnam.

In Bangkok , Thailand there are more than 5.4 km of covered wide dedicated elevated skywalks [ 16 ] with lighting. These were developed due to lack of proper sidewalks as well as street hawkers and local merchants taking advantage of any sidewalk space as makeshift commercial real estate . Common reasons skywalks were built include to avoid street pollution, dust, wetness from food vendors and/or rain, potholes, long queues, crowds, and uneven pavement, supporting urbanism but probably most importantly, tourism receipts. Most skywalks connect to a BTS station and utilize space underneath the rail line and BTS pillar supports. These skywalks have connector ramps which connect stations to malls seamlessly and are paid for by the malls themselves, otherwise the city and BTS fund walkway development. A 50km long extension project was shelved in 2011 due to funding issues, [ 17 ] nevertheless the system is growing organically.

In Hong Kong , there are numerous foot bridge networks across the city. Particularly large networks exists around elevated or at grade MTR stations and connections between malls and housing estates in new town centers. The largest network spans Admiralty , Central and parts of Sheung Wan districts in the CBD and consists of the Central Elevated and Central–Mid-Levels Walkway systems which link up over 40 major office buildings. The Central–Mid-Levels walkway system is the longest outdoor covered escalator system in the world according to Guinness World Records .

[9] [10] Other large systems exist in Tsuen Wan and Mong Kok .

The Mumbai Skywalk Project , India is a discontinuous network of over 50 km of skywalks in Mumbai Metropolitan Region , India. The skyways connect Mumbai Suburban Railway stations to important junctions, each 1 to 2 km in length. The first of these is a 1.3 km (0.8 mi) long skywalk connecting the suburban regions of Bandra and Kurla .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] Europe [ edit ] The Highlight Towers in Munich, Germany Brussels , Belgium has a skyway between the two Belgacom Towers .

London has skywalks on the Barbican Estate and London Wall . The City of London Pedway Scheme was devised as part of the post World War II reconstruction plans for London, it was put into effect mainly from the mid-1950s to the mid-1960s and eventually abandoned by the 1980s.

Shad Thames has picturesque skyways between former warehouses, used in part to roll barrels between them.

Liverpool conceived a project of building skyways around the city centre during the 1960s.

[ 21 ] The project saw bridges linking key buildings around the city centre, such as James Street railway station , Moorfields railway station and New Hall Place . Crime and low usage of the bridges stopped the project being fully imagined and by the end of the year 2000 nearly all of bridges had been removed, though evidence of the scheme still exists in some places.

[ 22 ] Sheffield , South Yorkshire has a famous skyway between two blocks of flats in the Park Hill Estate housing block with the phrase " I Love You Will U Marry Me " graffitied onto it. It has since become the subject of songs by local singers and bands such as Arctic Monkeys and Yungblud .

The twin towers of the Highlight Towers in Munich, Germany are joined by two skyways made of glass and steel.

The Promenade Plantée in the 12th arrondissement of Paris , France includes pedestrian bridges and a linear park on an aqueduct of a former railway.

Australia [ edit ] Melbourne , Australia, four blocks and Airport Gallery [ edit ] Bridge of Sighs in Oxford Vasari Corridor in Florence The Bridge of Aspiration, a skybridge in Covent Garden , London Hotel Kupa, Prague - Háje , Czechia German Mining Museum in Bochum Skyway in Interlaken , Switzerland A Skyway serving as part of a café, Münster , Germany Skyway in Munich , Bavaria A Brutalist skyway at the University of Leeds , England An inside view of the skybridge of Petronas Towers This skyway at London Gatwick Airport is designed to allow aircraft to pass under A three-storey bridge at The Core Shopping Centre in Calgary Skyway at 6th Avenue at Pine St in Seattle The skyway system in Taipei Promenade Plantée in Paris The Pinnacle@Duxton in Singapore Neues Rathaus in Leipzig See also [ edit ] Catwalk – A narrow footbridge or walkway to allow workers access to parts of a structure Footbridge – A bridge for pedestrians Glass Bridge , skywalk with glass bottom Overpass – A bridge, road or railway crossing over another road or railway Pedestrian separation structure – Any structure which separates pedestrians from the roadway Pedway – Pedestrian walkways, includes both skyways and underground walkways Sidewalk – Pedestrian path along the side of a road References [ edit ] ^ a b "Plus 15 network – Calgary's Skywalk" , City of Calgary website , December 19, 2022 ^ a b Offin, Sarah (November 30, 2022), "Should Calgary dismantle its Plus 15 skywalk network?" , Global News ^ a b "Your Guide to Navigating the Minneapolis Skyway System" .

Meet Minneapolis .

Archived (PDF) from the original on May 22, 2022 . Retrieved January 4, 2023 .

^ a b Marshall, Lillie (April 15, 2019).

"Why See the Minneapolis Skyway and Skyline? – Around the World "L" " .

www.aroundtheworldl.com .

Archived from the original on May 11, 2019 . Retrieved January 4, 2023 .

^ Carbon monoxide dispersion analysis in downtown Spokane , ESL Inc.

, Sunnyvale, (1973) ^ Robertson, K. A. (1988-07-01).

"Pedestrian Skywalk Systems: Downtown's Great Hope or Pathways to Ruin?" .

Transportation Quarterly .

42 (3).

ISSN 0278-9434 .

^ Ares (2012-07-02).

"Guest Article: Skywalks in Hong Kong and their Consequences on Urban Communities" .

Places . Retrieved 2016-11-05 .

^ Cui, Jianqiang; Allan, Andrew; Lin, Dong (2015-06-03). "Assessing grade separation pedestrian systems: Planning, design and operation".

Urban Design International .

20 (3): 241– 252.

doi : 10.1057/udi.2015.8 .

ISSN 1357-5317 .

S2CID 107085967 .

^ Goffinet, Mike Schell, Jared (19 October 2020).

"Last portions of Cincinnati's Skywalk coming down" .

fox19.com . Retrieved 2020-10-23 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Montgomery, Michael R.; Bean, Richard (1999-01-01).

"Market Failure, Government Failure, and the Private Supply of Public Goods: The Case of Climate-Controlled Walkway Networks" .

Public Choice .

99 ( 3– 4): 403– 37.

doi : 10.1023/a:1018301628084 .

ISSN 0048-5829 .

S2CID 59471029 .

^ "How a small request kicked off a big debate over skyways and public safety in St. Paul" .

MinnPost . Retrieved 2016-11-05 .

^ Skywalks – Greater Des Moines Convention and Visitors Bureau . Seedesmoines.com. Retrieved on 2011-09-30.

^ Skywalk, Skywalk Fitness Program, Clean & Safe Team Contact . downtownduluth.com. Retrieved on 2016-04-26.

^ "Connected Hotels in Indianapolis" . Visit Indy . Retrieved 2017-10-30 .

^ "SkyWay" .

Saint-Paul.com .

Archived from the original on July 4, 2022 . Retrieved January 4, 2023 .

^ "Up above the milling crowd" .

Bangkok Post .

^ "BMA's skywalk project 'over-priced' " . 2011-03-03.

^ "Proposed Skywalks in Mumbai Metropolitan Region" . Archived from the original on 13 September 2009.

^ Bellman, Eric. (2010-01-19) Packed Streets Have a City of Walkers Looking Skyward for Answers . Online.wsj.com. Retrieved on 2011-09-30.

^ "Information of skywalks" (PDF) . 29 June 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 June 2010.

^ Houghton, Alistair (24 December 2017).

"How we were all meant to use Liverpool's streets in the sky - and why we're not" .

Liverpool Echo . Retrieved 27 May 2024 .

^ "Come fly with me – the brave new world of Liverpool's flyovers" .

National Museums Liverpool . Retrieved 27 May 2024 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Skyways at Wikimedia Commons v t e Infrastructure Bridge Canal Causeway Dam Drainage Footbridge Interchange Levee Overpass Pipeline Road Skyway Storm drain Tunnel See also: Architecture Arena Civil engineering Construction Playground Public Stadium Theater Urban park v t e Rooms and spaces of a house Shared rooms Bonus room Common room Den Dining room Family room Garret Great room Home cinema Keeping room Kitchen dirty kitchen kitchenette Living room Gynaeceum harem Andron man cave Recreation room billiard room Shrine Study Sunroom Private rooms Bathroom toilet Bedroom closet Bedsit Boudoir Cabinet Nursery Spaces Atrium Balcony Breezeway Conversation pit Cubby-hole Deck Elevator dumbwaiter Entryway / Genkan Fireplace hearth Foyer Hall Hallway Inglenook Lanai Loft Loggia Overhang Patio Porch screened sleeping Ramp Secret passage Stairs / Staircase Terrace Veranda Vestibule Technical , utility and storage Attic Basement Carport Cloakroom Closet Crawl space Electrical room Equipment room Furnace room / Boiler room Garage Janitorial closet Larder Laundry room / Utility room / Storage room Mechanical room / floor Pantry Root cellar Semi-basement Storm cellar / Safe room Studio Wardrobe Wine cellar Wiring closet Workshop Great house areas Antechamber Ballroom Kitchen-related butler's pantry buttery saucery scullery spicery still room Conservatory / Orangery Courtyard Drawing room Great chamber Great hall Library Long gallery Lumber room Parlour Sauna Servants' hall Servants' quarters Smoking room Solar State room Swimming pool Turret Undercroft Other Furniture Hidden room House house plan styles types Multi-family residential Secondary suite Duplex Terraced Detached Semi-detached Townhouse Studio apartment Architectural elements Arch Balconet Baluster Belt course Bressummer Ceiling Chimney Colonnade / Portico Column Cornice / Eaves Dome Door Ell Floor Foundation Gable Gate Portal Lighting Molding Ornament Plumbing Quoins Roof shingles Roof lantern Sill plate Style list Skylight Threshold Transom Vault Wall Window Related Backyard Driveway Front yard Garden roof garden Home Home improvement Home repair Shed Tree house Category: Rooms Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Skyway&oldid=1292207965 " Categories : Skyways Covered bridges Bridges Pedestrian infrastructure Rooms Urban studies and planning terminology Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2022 All articles needing additional references All articles with unidentified words Articles with unidentified words from November 2019 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 19:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Skyway 18 languages Add topic

