Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and times Toggle Life and times subsection 1.1 Military exploits 1.1.1 Suppressing the Prince of Ning rebellion 2 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 2.1 Innate knowing 2.2 Integration of Knowledge and Action 2.3 Mind and the world 3 Influence 4 Memorials 5 Translations 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Citations 6.2 Sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Wang Yangming 39 languages العربية Asturianu 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Català Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Кыргызча Latina Malagasy مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Volapük 文言 Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Multilingual Wikisource Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chinese philosopher and general (1472–1529) For the Taiwanese actor, see Sunny Wang .

"Bo'an" redirects here. For the Han Dynasty warlord, see Liu Yu (warlord) . For the ethnic group, see Bonan people . For the language, see Bonan language .

In this Chinese name , the family name is Wang .

Wang Shouren Viceroy of Liangguang In office 1527–1529 Preceded by Yao Mo Succeeded by Zhang Jing Minister of War in the Southern Capital In office 1521–1527 Grand coordinator of Nangan In office 1472–1529 Preceded by Wen Sen Succeeded by Nie Xian Personal details Born ( 1472-10-26 ) 26 October 1472 Yuyao , Zhejiang Died 9 January 1529 (1529-01-09) (aged 56) Nan'an fu , Jiangxi (present-day Ganzhou ) Spouse Lady Zhu Occupation Statesman, general, Neo-Confucian philosopher Philosophical work School Confucianism Notable ideas Yangmingism , Unity of knowledge and action , the streets are full of saints [ simple ] Chinese name Traditional Chinese 王陽明 Simplified Chinese 王阳明 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Wáng Yángmíng Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Wòhng Yèuhngmìhng Jyutping Wong4 Joeng4ming4 Shouren (given name) Chinese 守仁 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Shǒurén Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Sáuyàhn Jyutping Sau2jan4 Bo'an ( courtesy name ) Chinese 伯安 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Bó'ān Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Baakōn Jyutping Baak3on1 Yangmingzi ( art name ) Traditional Chinese 陽明子 Simplified Chinese 阳明子 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Yángmíngzǐ Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Yèuhngmìhngjí Jyutping Joeng4ming4zi2 Wencheng ( posthumous name ) Chinese 文成 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Wénchéng Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Màhnsìhng Jyutping Man4sing4 Earl of Xinjian (nobility title) Chinese 新建伯 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Xīnjiàn Bó Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Sān'gin Baak Jyutping San1gin3 Baak3 Wang Shouren ( Chinese : 王守仁 , 26 October 1472 – 9 January 1529), courtesy name Bo'an ( Chinese : 伯安 ), art name Yangmingzi ( traditional Chinese : 陽明子 ; simplified Chinese : 阳明子 ), usually referred to as Wang Yangming ( traditional Chinese : 王陽明 ; simplified Chinese : 王阳明 ), was a Chinese statesman, general, and Neo-Confucian philosopher during the Ming dynasty .

[ 1 ] After Zhu Xi , he is commonly regarded as the most important Neo-Confucian thinker, [ 2 ] for his interpretations of Confucianism that denied the rationalist dualism of the orthodox philosophy of Zhu Xi. Wang and Lu Xiangshan are regarded as the founders as the Lu–Wang school , or the School of the Mind.

In China, Japan, and Western countries, he is known by his honorific name rather than his private name.

[ 3 ] Life and times [ edit ] Grand Hall, Wang Yangming's former residence Wang was born in Yuyao , Zhejiang Province , to a scholarly family with a tradition of bureaucratic service. His father, Wang Hua, was first ( Zhuangyuan , 狀元) in the Imperial Examination of 1481, and rose to become the vice-minister of the Ministry of Rites , but was later demoted and subsequently expelled from government service for having offended Liu Jin , a eunuch.

Wang earned the juren degree in 1492 and the jinshi degree in 1499. He later served as an executive assistant in various government departments until banishment for offending a eunuch in 1506.

[ 4 ] However, his professional career resumed when he became the Governor of Jiangxi .

[ 5 ] Military exploits [ edit ] Wang became a successful general and was known for the strict discipline he imposed on his troops. In 1517 and 1518, he was dispatched in response to petitions to suppress peasant revolts in Jiangxi , Fujian and Guangdong . Concerned with the destruction that came with war, he petitioned the court to allow amnesty , and successfully destroyed rebel military forces.

Suppressing the Prince of Ning rebellion [ edit ] Main article: Prince of Ning rebellion Tomb of Wang Yangming at Shaoxing In 1519 AD, while he was governor of Jiangxi province and on his way to suppress the revolts in Fujian , Wang was suddenly faced with the Prince of Ning rebellion , led by Zhu Chenhao the fourth Prince of Ning. Given that the prince's base in Nanchang allowed him to sail down the Yangtze River and capture the southern capital of Nanjing , Wang actively prepared for battle to prevent that possibility, while engaging in deception to convince the prince that armies were moving to surround him. The prince, deceived by this, hesitated and gave time for Nanjing to be reinforced. Eventually, forced to engage governmental forces, the Prince of Ning was defeated and captured.

In this campaign, Wang also made one of the earliest references to using the fo-lang-ji in battle, a breech loading culverin cannon imported from the newly arrived Portuguese venturers to China.

[ 5 ] As governor of Jiangxi he also built schools, rehabilitated the rebels, and reconstructed what was lost by the enemy during the revolt. Though he was made an earl, he was ostracized for opposing Zhu Xi .

[ 4 ] Thirty-eight years after his death, he was given the titles Marquis and Completion of Culture. In 1584 he was offered sacrifice in the Confucian Temple , the highest honour for a scholar.

[ 4 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Wang Yangming See also: Yangmingism Wang was the leading figure in the Neo-Confucian School of heart , founded by Lu Jiuyuan (陸九淵, or Lu Xiangshan) of the Southern Song . This school championed an interpretation of Mencius , a Classical Confucian who became the focus of later interpretation, that unified knowledge with action. Their rival school, the School of Principle ( Li ) treated gaining knowledge as a kind of preparation or cultivation that, when completed, could guide action.

Innate knowing [ edit ] Out of Cheng-Zhu's Neo-Confucianism that was mainstream at the time, Wang Yangming developed the idea of innate knowing , arguing that every person knows from birth the difference between good and evil. Wang claimed that such knowledge is intuitive and not rational.  These revolutionizing ideas of Wang Yangming would later inspire prominent Japanese thinkers like Motoori Norinaga , who argued that because of the Shinto deities, Japanese people alone had the intuitive ability to distinguish good and evil without complex rationalization.  His school of thought ( Ōyōmei-gaku in Japanese, Ō stands for the surname "Wang", yōmei stands for "Yangming", gaku stands for "school of learning") also greatly influenced the Japanese samurai ethic.

Integration of Knowledge and Action [ edit ] Main article: Unity of knowledge and action Wang's rejection of the pure investigation of knowledge comes from the then traditional view of Chinese belief that once one gained knowledge, one had a duty to put that knowledge into action. This presupposed two possibilities:
That one can have knowledge without/prior to corresponding action or that one can know what is the proper action, but still fail to act.

Wang rejected both of these which allowed him to develop his philosophy of action. Wang believed that 
only through spontaneous action could one gain knowledge and denied all other ways of gaining it. To him, there was no way to use knowledge after gaining it because he believed that knowledge and action were unified as one. Any knowledge that had been gained then put into action was considered delusion or false.

Mind and the world [ edit ] He held that objects do not exist entirely apart from the mind because the mind shapes them. He believed that it is not the world that shapes the mind, but the mind that gives reason to the world. Therefore, the mind alone is the source of all reason. He understood this to be an inner light, an innate moral goodness and understanding of what is good.

In order to eliminate selfish desires that cloud the mind's understanding of goodness, one can practice his type of meditation often called "tranquil repose" or "sitting still" (靜坐 jingzuo ). This is similar to the practice of Chan ( Zen ) meditation in Buddhism .

Influence [ edit ] Wang Yangming is regarded one of the greatest masters of Confucianism in history along with Confucius , Mencius and Zhu Xi ( 孔孟朱王 ).
He founded " Yaojiang School " ( 姚江學派 ) or "Yangming School of Mind" ( 陽明心學 ), which became one of the dominant Confucian schools in the mid-late Ming period and Qing period China. The typical figures came from this school after Wang were Wang Ji ( 王龍溪 ), Qian Dehong ( 錢德洪 ), Wang Gen , Huang Zongxi , Li Zhuowu and Liu Zongzhou ( 劉宗周 ). Wang Gen formed Taizhou School ( 泰州學派 ), which went left of Wang Yangming's thought. During the late Ming period, Wang Yangming's thought became notably popular and influential in China.
Wang's interpretation of Confucianism has been influential in China into modern times.  The twentieth-century Chinese warlord Yan Xishan attempted to revive Confucianism in Shanxi largely on the model of Wang's philosophy.

[ 6 ] The teachings of Wang Yangming were credited with inspiring many Japanese reformers and revolutionaries during the nineteenth century.  This led to a great increase in interest in his thought in Japan at the end of the Meiji period , when many Chinese activists such as Liang Qichao and Chiang Kai-shek were staying in Japan.  Some Chinese and Korean thinkers believed that Wang Yangming's teachings strongly influenced the development of modern bushido (the "way of the warrior") in Japan, and promoted both ethics in their countries to strengthen the spirit of their respective peoples.

[ 7 ] The Japanese Admiral of the Russo-Japanese War , Tōgō Heihachirō , was influenced by Wang, and made a stamp which read, "One's whole life followed the example of Yangming" ( Japanese : 一生低首拜陽明 ). In Japan, many scholars and politicians (this group of people is known in Japanese as "Yōmeigakusha" (Japanese: 陽明学者 ) came from Wang Yangming's school ( Ōyōmei-gaku ) in history, including Kumazawa Banzan , Saigō Takamori , Takasugi Shinsaku and Nakae Tōju . Toju Nakae is regarded as the founder of Japanese Ōyōmei-gaku .

General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party Xi Jinping urges the party and government officials to learn from Wang's credo "the unity of thought and action".

[ 8 ] Memorials [ edit ] Statue of Wang Yangming at Yangmingshan , Taipei .

Chiang Kai-shek named a national attraction in Taiwan , Yangmingshan , after Wang; and a road in Nanchang is also named Yangming Road after Wang by Chiang-influenced local officials. Additionally, National Yang-Ming University in Taiwan is also named after the philosopher.
People in Guiyang , provincial capital of Guizhou Province, dedicated a statue to Wang Yangming as well as a museum and theme park; a robot version of Wang Yangming is in the city.

[ 9 ] The city government in Wang's hometown, Yuyao , Zhejiang Province, named a middle school after his honorific name.

Translations [ edit ] Henke, Frederick (1916).

The philosophy of Wang Yang-ming . London: Open Court.

. Public domain. Considered a poor translation by Chan.

Ching, Julia (1972).

The Philosophical Letters of Wang Yang-ming . Canberra, Australia: Australian National University Press. Sixty-seven letters and annotations.

Chan, Wing-tsit (1963).

A Source Book in Chinese Philosophy . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Excerpts only.

Chan, Wing-tsit (1963).

Instructions For Practical Living and Other Neo-Confucian Writings by Wang Yang-Ming . Columbia University Press.  Full translation of 傳習録 and 大學問, Wang's two major works.

Ivanhoe, Philip (2009).

Readings from the Lu-Wang school of Neo-Confucianism . Indianapolis: Hackett Pub. Co.

ISBN 978-0872209602 .

Excerpts, but including the first translations of some of Wang's letters.

References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ "Wang Yangming" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 2025-04-25 .

^ "Wang Yangming (Wang Shou-Jen) | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" .

^ Chan, Wing-tsit.

Sourcebook in Chinese Philosophy .

Greenwood Publishing Group , March 1, 2002.

xii . Retrieved on April 1, 2012.

ISBN 978-1-4008-0964-6 .

^ a b c Chan 1963: 654.

^ a b Needham, Volume 5, Part 7, 372.

^ Gillin 60 ^ Benesch, 2009.

^ Tu, Hang (2025).

Sentimental Republic: Chinese Intellectuals and the Maoist Past .

Harvard University Asia Center . p. 256.

ISBN 9780674297579 .

^ Johnson, Ian (2017-10-18).

"Forget Marx and Mao. Chinese City Honors Once-Banned Confucian" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 2017-10-19 .

Sources [ edit ] Chang, Carsun (1962).

Wang Yang-ming: idealist philosopher of sixteenth-century China . New York, NY: St. John's University Press.

Gillin, Donald G. (1967), Warlord: Yen Hsi-shan in Shansi Province 1911-1949 . Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

LCCN 66-14308 Ivanhoe, Philip J. (2002), Ethics in the Confucian Tradition: The Thought of Mengzi and Wang Yangming, rev. 2nd edition, Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing.

Кобзев А.И. Учение Ван Янмина и классическая китайская философия. М., 1983.

Nivison, David S. (1967). "The Problem of 'Knowledge' and 'Action' in Chinese Thought since Wang Yang–ming," in Arthur F. Wright, ed., Studies in Chinese Thought, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 112–45.

Nivison, David S. (1996), "The Philosophy of Wang Yangming," in The Ways of Confucianism, Chicago: Open Court Press, pp. 217–231.

Needham, Joseph (1986).

Science and Civilisation in China: Volume 5, Part 7 . Taipei: Caves Books, Ltd.

Oleg Benesch. "Wang Yangming and Bushidō: Japanese Nativization and its Influences in Modern China." Journal of Chinese Philosophy 36 (3):439-454.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Wang Yangming at Wikimedia Commons Quotations related to Wang Yangming at Wikiquote Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Entry on Wang Yangming Wang Yang Ming in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Works by Wang Yangming at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Wang Yangming at the Internet Archive v t e Chinese philosophy Schools Agriculturalism Buddhism Confucianism Han learning Neo-Confucianism New Confucianism Huang–Lao Legalism Mohism Marxism School of Diplomacy School of Names Naturalism Taoism Daoxue Xuanxue Yangism Mixed School Nine Schools of Thought Hundred Schools of Thought Philosophers Eastern Zhou Bu Shang Chunyu Kun Confucius Deng Xi Duanmu Ci Gaozi Gongsun Long Guan Zhong Han Fei Hui Shi Laozi Li Kui Li Si Lie Yukou Mencius Mozi Shang Yang Shen Buhai Shen Dao Su Qin Sun Tzu Wu Qi Ximen Bao Xu Xing Xunzi Yang Zhu Yuan Xian Zhang Yi Zhuang Zhou Zichan Zisi Zou Yan Qin Han Ban Zhao Dong Zhongshu Dongfang Shuo Dou Wu Huan Tan Jia Yi Jia Kui Jing Fang Kong Anguo Liu An Lu Jia Liu Xiang Ma Rong Wang Chong Wang Fu Xun Yue Yang Xiong Three Kingdoms Jin Northern and Southern Bao Jingyan Fan Zhen Fan Ye Ge Hong Guo Xiang Fu Xuan He Yan Huiyuan Ji Kang Sengzhao Wang Su Wang Bi Xiahou Xuan Xie Daoyun Xun Can Yan Zhitui Zhi Dun Sui Tang Fu Yi Jizang Wang Tong Zhang Zhihe Han Yu Li Ao Liu Yuxi Liu Zongyuan Linji Yixuan Five Dynasties Ten Kingdoms Song Cheng Hao Cheng Yi Fan Zhongyan Hu Hong Lu Jiuyuan Shao Yong Shen Kuo Su Song Wang Anshi Wang Chongyang Wang Chuyi Ye Shi Zhang Zai Zhou Dunyi Zhu Xi Yuan Ming Chen Jiru Huang Zongxi Hong Zicheng Jiao Hong Jiao Yu Lai Zhide Li Zhi Liu Bowen Liu Zongzhou Luo Rufang Qian Dehong Wang Ji Wang Gen Wang Yangming Wu Cheng Xu Ai Zhan Ruoshui Qing Chen Hongmou Chen Menglei Dai Zhen Fang Bao Fang Lanfen Fang Quan Feng Guifen Gong Zizhen Gu Yanwu Hong Liangji Ji Yun Ma Qixi Lin Zexu Liu Yiming Pan Pingge Tan Sitong Tang Zhen Wang Fuzhi Wei Yuan Yan Yuan Yu Yue Yu Zhengxie Zhang Xuecheng Zhuang Cunyu Zeng Guofan 20th century Cai Yuanpei Carsun Chang P. C. Chang Chen Daqi Chen Duxiu Chung-ying Cheng Ch'ien Mu Chu Anping Fang Keli Feng Youlan Gan Yang Gu Su Gu Zhun He Guanghu Hu Qiaomu Hu Shih Hua Gang Ray Huang Jiang Qing Jin Yuelin Kang Youwei Lee Shui-chuen Li Shicen Li Zehou Liang Qichao Liang Shuming Lin Yutang Liu Xiaofeng Lu Xun Mao Zedong Mou Zongsan Qiu Renzong Sun Yat-sen Tang Chun-i Tang Yijie Tsang Lap Chuen Xiong Shili Xu Fuguan Yang Changji Yin Haiguang Yu Dunkang Zhang Dongsun Zhang Shenfu Zhou Guoping Zhou Zuoren Concepts Tao De Fa Jian'ai Jing Jing zuo Li Confucianism Neo-Confucianism Ming yun Qi Qing Ren Three teachings Shen Si Ti Tian Mandate of Heaven Wu wei Filial piety Xin Human nature Self-cultivation Yi Yin and yang Yong Zhengming Ziran Topics Logic Theology Metaphysics Politics Ethics Role ethics State consequentialism Ink wash Shan shui Society Epistemology Metaphilosophy Legitimacy Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii People Trove DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wang_Yangming&oldid=1304618005 " Categories : 1472 births 1529 deaths 15th-century Chinese calligraphers 15th-century Chinese philosophers 16th-century Chinese calligraphers Chinese Confucianists Generals from Zhejiang Idealists Ming dynasty essayists Ming dynasty generals Ming dynasty philosophers 16th-century Chinese philosophers Moral psychologists Neo-Confucian scholars People from Yuyao Philosophers from Zhejiang Politicians from Ningbo Viceroys of Liangguang Writers from Ningbo Xinxue Wang Yangming Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Articles containing simplified Chinese-language text Articles containing Japanese-language text Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 04:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wang Yangming 39 languages Add topic

