Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Sources Toggle Sources subsection 1.1 Neutron radiation from fission 1.2 Cosmogenic neutrons 2 Uses 3 Ionization mechanisms and properties 4 Health hazards and protection 5 Effects on materials 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Neutron radiation 29 languages Беларуская Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ionizing radiation that presents as free neutrons Science with neutrons Foundations Neutron temperature Flux , Radiation , Transport Cross section , Absorption , Activation Neutron scattering Neutron diffraction Small-angle neutron scattering GISANS Reflectometry Inelastic neutron scattering Triple-axis spectrometer Time-of-flight spectrometer Backscattering spectrometer Spin-echo spectrometer Other applications Neutron tomography Activation analysis , Prompt gamma activation analysis Fundamental research with neutrons: Ultracold neutrons , Interferometry Fast neutron therapy Neutron capture therapy Infrastructure Neutron sources : Research reactor , Spallation , Neutron moderator Neutron optics: Reflector , Supermirror Detection Neutron facilities America: HFIR , LANSCE , NIST CNR - SNS Oceania: OPAL Asia: J-PARC , HANARO Europe: BER II , FRM II , ILL , ISIS Neutron and Muon Source , JINR , SINQ Historic: IPNS , HFBR Under construction: ESS v t e Neutron radiation is a form of ionizing radiation that presents as free neutrons . Typical phenomena are nuclear fission or nuclear fusion causing the release of free neutrons, which then react with nuclei of other atoms to form new nuclides —which, in turn, may trigger further neutron radiation.  Free neutrons are unstable, decaying into a proton , an electron , plus an electron antineutrino . Free neutrons have a mean lifetime of 887 seconds (14 minutes, 47 seconds).

[ 1 ] Neutron radiation is distinct from alpha , beta and gamma radiation.

[ 2 ] Sources [ edit ] Main article: Neutron source See also: Category:Neutron sources Neutrons may be emitted from nuclear fusion or nuclear fission , or from other nuclear reactions such as radioactive decay or particle interactions with cosmic rays or within particle accelerators . Large neutron sources are rare, and usually limited to large-sized devices such as nuclear reactors or particle accelerators , including the Spallation Neutron Source .

Neutron radiation was discovered from observing  an alpha particle colliding with a beryllium nucleus , which was transformed into a carbon nucleus while emitting a neutron , Be ( α , n ) C . The combination of an alpha particle emitter and an isotope with a large ( α , n ) nuclear reaction probability is still a common neutron source.

Neutron radiation from fission [ edit ] The neutrons in nuclear reactors are generally categorized as slow (thermal) neutrons or fast neutrons depending on their energy. Thermal neutrons are similar in energy distribution (the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution ) to a gas in thermodynamic equilibrium ; but are easily captured by atomic nuclei and are the primary means by which elements undergo nuclear transmutation .

To achieve an effective fission chain reaction, neutrons produced during fission must be captured by fissionable nuclei, which then split, releasing more neutrons. In most fission reactor designs, the nuclear fuel is not sufficiently refined to absorb enough fast neutrons to carry on the chain reaction, due to the lower cross section for higher-energy neutrons, so a neutron moderator must be introduced to slow the fast neutrons down to thermal velocities to permit sufficient absorption. Common neutron moderators include graphite , ordinary (light) water and heavy water . A few reactors ( fast neutron reactors ) and all nuclear weapons rely on fast neutrons.

Cosmogenic neutrons [ edit ] Main article: Cosmogenic neutron Cosmogenic neutrons are produced from cosmic radiation in the Earth's atmosphere or surface, as well as in particle accelerators. They often possess higher energy levels compared to neutrons found in reactors. Many of these neutrons activate atomic nuclei before reaching the Earth's surface, while a smaller fraction interact with nuclei in the atmospheric air.

[ 3 ] When these neutrons interact with nitrogen-14 atoms, they can transform them into carbon-14 (14C), which is extensively utilized in radiocarbon dating .

[ 4 ] Uses [ edit ] Cold , thermal and hot neutron radiation is most commonly used in scattering and diffraction experiments, to assess the properties and the structure of materials in crystallography , condensed matter physics , biology , solid state chemistry , materials science , geology , mineralogy , and related sciences. Neutron radiation is also used in Boron Neutron Capture Therapy to treat cancerous tumors due to its highly penetrating and damaging nature to cellular structure.  Neutrons can also be used for imaging of industrial parts termed neutron radiography when using film, neutron radioscopy when taking a digital image, such as through image plates, and neutron tomography for three-dimensional images.

Neutron imaging is commonly used in the nuclear industry, [ 5 ] the space and aerospace industry, [ 6 ] as well as the high reliability explosives industry.

Ionization mechanisms and properties [ edit ] Neutron radiation is often called indirectly ionizing radiation . It does not ionize atoms in the same way that charged particles such as protons and electrons do (exciting an electron), because neutrons have no charge. However, neutron interactions are largely ionizing, for example when neutron absorption results in gamma emission and the gamma ray (photon) subsequently removes an electron from an atom, or a nucleus recoiling from a neutron interaction is ionized and causes more traditional subsequent ionization in other atoms.

[ 7 ] Because neutrons are uncharged, they are more penetrating than alpha radiation or beta radiation . In some cases they are more penetrating than gamma radiation, which is impeded in materials of high atomic number . In materials of low atomic number such as hydrogen , a low energy gamma ray may be more penetrating than a high energy neutron.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Health hazards and protection [ edit ] In health physics , neutron radiation is a type of radiation hazard. Another, more severe hazard of neutron radiation, is neutron activation , the ability of neutron radiation to induce radioactivity in most substances it encounters, including bodily tissues.

[ 10 ] This occurs through the capture of neutrons by atomic nuclei, which are transformed to another nuclide , frequently a radionuclide . This process accounts for much of the radioactive material released by the detonation of a nuclear weapon . It is also a problem in nuclear fission and nuclear fusion installations as it gradually renders the equipment radioactive such that eventually it must be replaced and disposed of as low-level radioactive waste .

Neutron radiation protection relies on radiation shielding . Due to the high kinetic energy of neutrons, this radiation is considered the most severe and dangerous radiation to the whole body when it is exposed to external radiation sources. In comparison to conventional ionizing radiation based on photons or charged particles, neutrons are repeatedly bounced and slowed (absorbed) by light nuclei so hydrogen-rich material is more effective at shielding than iron nuclei. The light atoms serve to slow down the neutrons by elastic scattering so they can then be absorbed by nuclear reactions . However, gamma radiation is often produced in such reactions, so additional shielding must be provided to absorb it. Care must be taken to avoid using materials whose nuclei undergo fission or neutron capture that causes radioactive decay of nuclei, producing gamma rays.

Neutrons readily pass through most material, and hence the absorbed dose (measured in grays ) from a given amount of radiation is low, but interact enough to cause biological damage. The most effective shielding materials are water , or hydrocarbons like polyethylene or paraffin wax . Water-extended polyester (WEP) is effective as a shielding wall in harsh environments due to its high hydrogen content and resistance to fire, allowing it to be used in a range of nuclear, health physics, and defense industries.

[ 11 ] Hydrogen-based materials are suitable for shielding as they are proper barriers against radiation.

[ 12 ] Concrete (where a considerable number of water molecules chemically bind to the cement) and gravel provide a cheap solution due to their combined shielding of both gamma rays and neutrons.

Boron is also an excellent neutron absorber (and also undergoes some neutron scattering). Boron decays into carbon or helium and produces virtually no gamma radiation with boron carbide , a shield commonly used where concrete would be cost prohibitive. Commercially, tanks of water or fuel oil, concrete, gravel, and B 4 C are common shields that surround areas of large amounts of neutron flux , e.g., nuclear reactors. Boron-impregnated silica glass, standard borosilicate glass , high- boron steel , paraffin, and Plexiglas have niche uses.

Because neutrons that strike the hydrogen nucleus ( proton , or deuteron ) impart energy to that nucleus, they in turn break from their chemical bonds and travel a short distance before stopping. Such hydrogen nuclei are high linear energy transfer particles, and are in turn stopped by ionization of the material they travel through. Consequently, in living tissue, neutrons have a relatively high relative biological effectiveness , and are roughly ten times more effective at causing biological damage compared to gamma or beta radiation of equivalent energy exposure. These neutrons can either cause cells to change in their functionality or to completely stop replicating, causing damage to the body over time.

[ 13 ] Neutrons are particularly damaging to soft tissues like the cornea of the eye.

Effects on materials [ edit ] High-energy neutrons damage and degrade materials over time; bombardment of materials with neutrons creates collision cascades that can produce point defects and dislocations in the material, the creation of which is the primary driver behind microstructural changes occurring over time in materials exposed to radiation. At high neutron fluences this can lead to embrittlement of metals and other materials, and to neutron-induced swelling in some of them. This poses a problem for nuclear reactor vessels and significantly limits their lifetime (which can be somewhat prolonged by controlled annealing of the vessel, reducing the number of the built-up dislocations). Graphite neutron moderator blocks are especially susceptible to this effect, known as Wigner effect , and must be annealed periodically. The Windscale fire was caused by a mishap during such an annealing operation.

Radiation damage to materials occurs as a result of the interaction of an energetic incident particle (a neutron, or otherwise) with a lattice atom in the material. The collision causes a massive transfer of kinetic energy to the lattice atom, which is displaced from its lattice site, becoming what is known as the primary knock-on atom (PKA). Because the PKA is surrounded by other lattice atoms, its displacement and passage through the lattice results in many subsequent collisions and the creations of additional knock-on atoms, producing what is known as the collision cascade or displacement cascade. The knock-on atoms lose energy with each collision, and terminate as interstitials , effectively creating a series of Frenkel defects in the lattice. Heat is also created as a result of the collisions (from electronic energy loss), as are possibly transmuted atoms . The magnitude of the damage is such that a single 1 MeV neutron creating a PKA in an iron lattice produces approximately 1,100 Frenkel pairs.

[ 14 ] The entire cascade event occurs over a timescale of 1 × 10 −13 seconds, and therefore, can only be "observed" in computer simulations of the event.

[ 15 ] The knock-on atoms terminate in non-equilibrium interstitial lattice positions, many of which annihilate themselves by diffusing back into neighboring vacant lattice sites and restore the ordered lattice. Those that do not or cannot leave vacancies, which causes a local rise in the vacancy concentration far above that of the equilibrium concentration. These vacancies tend to migrate as a result of thermal diffusion towards vacancy sinks (i.e., grain boundaries , dislocations ) but exist for significant amounts of time, during which additional high-energy particles bombard the lattice, creating collision cascades and additional vacancies, which migrate towards sinks. The main effect of irradiation in a lattice is the significant and persistent flux of defects to sinks in what is known as the defect wind . Vacancies can also annihilate by combining with one another to form dislocation loops and later, lattice voids .

[ 14 ] The collision cascade creates many more vacancies and interstitials in the material than equilibrium for a given temperature, and diffusivity in the material is dramatically increased as a result. This leads to an effect called radiation-enhanced diffusion , which leads to microstructural evolution of the material over time. The mechanisms leading to the evolution of the microstructure are many, may vary with temperature, flux, and fluence, and are a subject of extensive study.

[ 16 ] Radiation-induced segregation results from the aforementioned flux of vacancies to sinks, implying a flux of lattice atoms away from sinks; but not necessarily in the same proportion to alloy composition in the case of an alloyed material. These fluxes may therefore lead to depletion of alloying elements in the vicinity of sinks. For the flux of interstitials introduced by the cascade, the effect is reversed: the interstitials diffuse toward sinks resulting in alloy enrichment near the sink.

[ 14 ] Dislocation loops are formed if vacancies form clusters on a lattice plane. If these vacancy concentration expand in three dimensions, a void forms. By definition, voids are under vacuum, but may become gas-filled in the case of alpha-particle radiation (helium) or if the gas is produced as a result of transmutation reactions . The void is then called a bubble, and leads to dimensional instability (neutron-induced swelling) of parts subject to radiation. Swelling presents a major long-term design problem, especially in reactor components made out of stainless steel.

[ 17 ] Alloys with crystallographic isotropy , such as Zircaloys are subject to the creation of dislocation loops, but do not exhibit void formation. Instead, the loops form on particular lattice planes, and can lead to irradiation-induced growth , a phenomenon distinct from swelling, but that can also produce significant dimensional changes in an alloy.

[ 18 ] Irradiation of materials can also induce phase transformations in the material: in the case of a solid solution , the solute enrichment or depletion at sinks radiation-induced segregation can lead to the precipitation of new phases in the material.

[ 19 ] The mechanical effects of these mechanisms include irradiation hardening , embrittlement , creep , and environmentally-assisted cracking . The defect clusters, dislocation loops, voids, bubbles, and precipitates produced as a result of radiation in a material all contribute to the strengthening and embrittlement (loss of ductility ) in the material.

[ 20 ] Embrittlement is of particular concern for the material comprising the reactor pressure vessel, where as a result the energy required to fracture the vessel decreases significantly. It is possible to restore ductility by annealing the defects out, and much of the life-extension of nuclear reactors depends on the ability to safely do so.

Creep is also greatly accelerated in irradiated materials, though not as a result of the enhanced diffusivities, but rather as a result of the interaction between lattice stress and the developing microstructure. Environmentally-assisted cracking or, more specifically, irradiation-assisted stress corrosion cracking (IASCC) is observed especially in alloys subject to neutron radiation and in contact with water,  caused by hydrogen absorption at crack tips resulting from radiolysis of the water, leading to a reduction in the required energy to propagate the crack.

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Neutron emission Neutron flux Neutron radiography References [ edit ] ^ Yue, A. T.; Dewey, M. S.; Gilliam, D. M.; Greene, G. L.; Laptev, A. B.; Nico, J. S.; Snow, W. M.; Wietfeldt, F. E. (27 November 2013). "Improved Determination of the Neutron Lifetime".

Physical Review Letters .

111 (22): 222501.

arXiv : 1309.2623 .

Bibcode : 2013PhRvL.111v2501Y .

doi : 10.1103/PhysRevLett.111.222501 .

PMID 24329445 .

S2CID 17006418 .

^ "What Are The Different Types of Radiation?" .

^ "Cosmogenic Nucleide Principle - CEREGE" .

www.cerege.fr . 2022-10-26 . Retrieved 2024-07-16 .

^ "What is Carbon Dating? | University of Chicago News" .

news.uchicago.edu . Retrieved 2024-09-19 .

^ Craft, Aaron E.; Barton, John P. (2017-01-01).

"Applications of Neutron Radiography for the Nuclear Power Industry" .

Physics Procedia . Neutron Imaging for Applications in Industry and Science Proceedings of the 8th International Topical Meeting on Neutron Radiography (ITMNR-8) Beijing, China, September 4-8, 2016.

88 : 73– 80.

Bibcode : 2017PhPro..88...73C .

doi : 10.1016/j.phpro.2017.06.009 .

ISSN 1875-3892 .

^ "APPLICATION OF NEUTRON RADIOGRAPHY IN AEROSPACE INDUSTRY AND GEOLOGY" (PDF) .

www.ndt.net . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2022-06-03 . Retrieved 2025-03-17 .

^ Humans, IARC Working Group on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to (2000), "Neutrons" , Ionizing Radiation, Part 1: X- and Gamma (γ)-Radiation, and Neutrons , International Agency for Research on Cancer, PMID 10932820 , retrieved 2025-06-18 ^ "Radiation Basics" .

Nuclear Regulatory Commission . March 20, 2020 . Retrieved June 18, 2025 .

^ "Types of Ionizing Radiation" .

Mirion . Retrieved 2025-06-18 .

^ "How Radiation Damages Tissue" .

Michigan State University . Retrieved 2017-12-21 .

^ "Neutron Radiation Shielding" .

www.frontier-cf252.com . Frontier Technology Corporation . Retrieved 2017-12-21 .

^ Carrillo, Héctor René Vega (2006-05-15).

"Neutron Shielding Performance of Water-Extended Polyester" (PDF) .

TA-3 Dosimetry and Instrumentation . Retrieved 2017-12-21 .

^ Specialist, WPI, Environmental Information Services -- Shawn Denny, Information Architect; Mike Pizzuti, Graphic Designer; Chelene Neal, Web Information Specialist; Kate Bessiere, Web Information.

"Advisory Committee On Human Radiation Experiments Final Report" .

ehss.energy.gov . Retrieved 2017-12-21 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b c d Dunand, David. "Materials in Nuclear Power Generation." Materials Science & Engineering 381: Materials for Energy Efficient Technology. Northwestern University, Evanston. 3 Feb. 2015. Lecture ^ A. Struchbery, E. Bezakova "Thermal-Spike Lifetime from Picosecond-Duration Preequilibrium Effects in Hyperfine Magnetic Fields Following Ion Implantation". 3 May. 1999.

^ Thomé, L.; Moll, S.; Debelle, A.; Garrido, F.; Sattonnay, G.; Jagielski, J. (1 June 2018).

"Radiation Effects in Nuclear Ceramics" .

Advances in Materials Science and Engineering .

2012 : 1– 13.

doi : 10.1155/2012/905474 .

^ CAWTHORNE, C.; FULTON, E. J. (1 November 1967). "Voids in Irradiated Stainless Steel".

Nature .

216 (5115): 575– 576.

Bibcode : 1967Natur.216..575C .

doi : 10.1038/216575a0 .

S2CID 4238714 .

^ Adamson, R. "Effects of Neutron Radiation on Microstructure and the Properties of Zircaloy" 1977. 08 Feb. 2015.

^ Hyun Ju Jin, Tae Kyu Kim. "Neutron irradiation performance of Zircaloy-4 under research reactor operating conditions." Annals of Nuclear Energy. 13 Sept. 2014 Web. 08 Feb. 2015.

^ Baroch, CJ (1975).

"Effect of Irradiation at 130, 650, and 775°F on Tensile Properties of Zircaloy-4 at 70, 650, and 775°F" .

Effects of Radiation on Structural Materials . ASTM International. pp. 129–129–14.

doi : 10.1520/STP33683S (inactive 1 July 2025).

ISBN 978-0-8031-0539-3 .

{{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) https://journals.aps.org/prl/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevLett.111.222501 External links [ edit ] EPA definitions of various terms Comparison of Neutron Radiographic and X-Radiographic Images Archived 2014-03-14 at the Wayback Machine Neutron techniques A unique tool for research and development Archived 2011-10-31 at the Wayback Machine v t e Radiation (physics and health) Main articles Non-ionizing radiation Acoustic radiation force Infrared Light Starlight Sunlight Microwave Radio waves Ultraviolet Ionizing radiation Radioactive decay Cluster decay Background radiation Alpha particle Beta particle Gamma ray Cosmic ray Neutron radiation Nuclear fission Nuclear fusion Nuclear reactors Nuclear weapons Particle accelerators Radioactive materials X-ray Earth's energy budget Electromagnetic radiation Synchrotron radiation Thermal radiation Black-body radiation Particle radiation Gravitational radiation Cosmic background radiation Cherenkov radiation Askaryan radiation Bremsstrahlung Unruh radiation Dark radiation Radiation exposure Radiation and health Radiation syndrome acute chronic Health physics Dosimetry Electromagnetic radiation and health Laser safety Lasers and aviation safety Medical radiography Radiation protection Radiation therapy Radiation damage Radioactivity in the life sciences Radioactive contamination Radiobiology Biological dose units and quantities Wireless device radiation and health Wireless electronic devices and health Radiation heat-transfer Linear energy transfer Radiation incidents List of civilian radiation accidents 1996 Costa Rica accident 1987 Goiânia accident 1984 Moroccan accident 1990 Zaragoza accident Related articles Half-life Nuclear physics Radioactive source Radiation hardening See also the categories Radiation effects , Radioactivity , Radiobiology , and Radiation protection v t e Nuclear technology Outline Science Chemistry Engineering Physics Atomic nucleus Fission Fusion Radiation ionizing braking Fuel Tritium Deuterium Helium-3 Fertile material Fissile material Isotope separation Nuclear material Uranium enriched depleted Plutonium Thorium Neutron Activation Capture Poison Cross section Generator Radiation Wigner effect Reflector Temperature Thermal Fast Fusion Power by country Power plant Economics Accidents and incidents Policy Fusion Radioisotope thermoelectric (RTG) MMRTG Propulsion rocket Safety and security Nuclear meltdown Medicine Imaging Autoradiograph RadBall Scintigraphy Single-photon emission (SPECT) Positron-emission tomography (PET) Therapy Fast-neutron Neutron capture therapy of cancer Targeted alpha-particle Proton-beam Tomotherapy Brachytherapy Radiosurgery Radiopharmacology Processing Atomic gardening Electron-beam processing Food irradiation Gemstone irradiation Weapons Topics Arms race Delivery Design Disarmament Ethics Explosion effects History Proliferation Testing high-altitude underground Warfare Yield TNTe Lists States with nuclear weapons Historical stockpiles and tests Tests Tests in the United States WMD treaties Weapon-free zones Weapons Waste Products Actinide Reprocessed uranium Reactor-grade plutonium Minor actinide Activation Fission LLFP Actinide chemistry Disposal Fuel cycle High-level (HLW) Low-level (LLW) Nuclear decommissioning Repository Reprocessing Spent fuel pool cask Transmutation Debate Nuclear power Nuclear weapons Blue Ribbon Commission on America's Nuclear Future Anti-nuclear movement Uranium mining Nuclear power phase-out Nuclear reactors Fission Moderator Light water Aqueous homogeneous Boiling BWR ABWR ESBWR Kerena Natural fission Pressurized AP1000 APR-1400 APR+ APWR ATMEA1 CAP1400 CPR-1000 EPR Hualong One ACPR1000 ACP1000 VVER RITM-200 KLT-40 OK-150/OK-900 OK-650 KN-3 VM IPWR-900 many others Supercritical (SCWR) Heavy water by coolant D 2 O Pressurized CANDU CANDU 6 CANDU 9 EC6 AFCR ACR-1000 CVTR IPHWR IPHWR-220 IPHWR-540 IPHWR-700 PHWR KWU MZFR R3 R4 Marviken H 2 O HWLWR ATR HW BLWR 250 Steam-generating (SGHWR) AHWR Organic WR-1 CO 2 HWGCR EL-4 KKN KS 150 Lucens Graphite by coolant Water H 2 O AM-1 AMB-X EGP-6 RBMK MKER Gas CO 2 Uranium Naturel Graphite Gaz (UNGG) Magnox Advanced gas-cooled (AGR) He GTMHR MHR-T UHTREX VHTR (HTGR) PBR (PBMR) AVR HTR-10 HTR-PM THTR-300 PMR Molten-salt Fluorides Fuji MSR Liquid-fluoride thorium reactor (LFTR) Molten-Salt Reactor Experiment (MSRE) Integral Molten Salt Reactor (IMSR) TMSR-500 TMSR-LF1 None ( fast-neutron ) Breeder (FBR) Integral (IFR) Liquid-metal-cooled (LMFR) OK-550 BM-40A VT-1 Small sealed transportable autonomous (SSTAR) Traveling-wave (TWR) Energy Multiplier Module (EM2) Reduced-moderation (RMWR) Fast Breeder Test Reactor (FBTR) Dual fluid reactor (DFR) Generation IV Sodium (SFR) BN-350 BN-600 BN-800 BN-1200 CFR-600 Phénix Superphénix PFBR FBR-600 CEFR PFR PRISM Lead BREST-300 Helium gas (GFR) Stable Salt Reactor (SSR) Others Organic nuclear reactor OMRE Arbus Piqua Aircraft Reactor Experiment Fusion by confinement Magnetic Field-reversed configuration Levitated dipole Reversed field pinch Spheromak Stellarator Tokamak Inertial Bubble (acoustic) Fusor electrostatic Laser-driven Magnetized-target Z-pinch Other Dense plasma focus Migma Muon-catalyzed Polywell Pyroelectric Nuclear technology portal Category Commons Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐6dmv4
Cached time: 20250812000235
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.510 seconds
Real time usage: 0.639 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2206/1000000
Revision size: 23466/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 207065/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3315/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 94592/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.305/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6629694/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  492.324      1 -total
 36.59%  180.155      1 Template:Reflist
 19.99%   98.415      4 Template:Cite_journal
 17.68%   87.045     14 Template:Navbox
 16.20%   79.750      1 Template:Science_with_neutrons
 15.87%   78.156      1 Template:Sidebar
 13.62%   67.077      1 Template:Nuclear_technology
 13.20%   64.985      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 12.99%   63.951      1 Template:Short_description
  8.59%   42.286      9 Template:Cite_web Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:410923:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812000235 and revision id 1303112353. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Neutron_radiation&oldid=1303112353 " Categories : IARC Group 1 carcinogens Ionizing radiation Neutron Neutron-related techniques Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 errors: periodical ignored CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 04:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Neutron radiation 29 languages Add topic

