Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Versions 2 Later usage 3 References Toggle References subsection 3.1 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Seleucid era 28 languages العربية বাংলা Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Македонски مصرى Nederlands Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Calendar era used during Hellenistic period The Seleucid era ("SE") or Anno Graecorum (literally "year of the Greeks" or "Greek year"), sometimes denoted "AG," was a system of numbering years in use by the Seleucid Empire and other countries among the ancient Hellenistic civilizations , and later by the Parthians . It is sometimes referred to as "the dominion of the Seleucidæ," or the Year of Alexander. The era dates from Seleucus I Nicator 's reconquest of Babylon in 312/11 BC after his exile in Ptolemaic Egypt , [ 1 ] considered by Seleucus and his court to mark the founding of the Seleucid Empire. According to Jewish tradition, it was during the sixth year of Alexander the Great 's reign (lege: possibly Alexander the Great's infant son, Alexander IV of Macedon ) that they began to make use of this counting.

[ 2 ] Versions [ edit ] Two different variations of the Seleucid years existed, one where the year started in spring and another where it starts in autumn: The natives of the empire used the Babylonian calendar , in which the new year falls on 1 Nisanu (3 April in 311 BC), so in this system year 1 of the Seleucid era corresponds roughly to April 311 BC to March 310 BC. This included the inhabitants of Coele-Syria , notably the Jews who call it the Era of Contracts ( Hebrew : מניין שטרות , romanized : minyān shəṭarot ).

The Macedonian court adopted the Babylonian calendar (substituting the Macedonian month names ) but reckoned the new year to be in the autumn (the exact date is unknown). In this system year 1 of the Seleucid era corresponds to the period from autumn 312 BC to summer 311 BC. By the 7th century AD / 10th AG, the west Syrian Christians settled on 1 October-to-30 September.

[ 3 ] Jews, however, reckon the start of each new Seleucid year with the lunar month Tishri .

[ 4 ] These differences in the beginning of the year means that dates differ by one if they fall between spring and autumn.  Notably, the Jewish historical book 1 Maccabees generally uses the Babylonian and Judean year count ( 1 Maccabees 6:20 , 1 Maccabees 7:1 , 9:3, 10:1, etc.).

[ 5 ] However, the book 2 Maccabees exclusively uses the Macedonian version of the calendar, likely because it was written in either Cyprus or Egypt.

[ 6 ] Elias Bickerman gives this example: For instance, the restoration of the temple of Jerusalem by Judas Maccabaeus , approximately 15 December 164 BC, fell in the year 148 of the Seleucid Era according to Jewish (and Babylonian) calculation, but in the year 149 for the court.

[ 7 ] Later usage [ edit ] Anno Graecorum An example from China: the Syriac text at the bottom of the Xi'an Stele mentions that the stele was erected in the "Year of the Greeks 1092" (781 AD), at the imperial capital city of Chang'an (modern-day Xi'an ).

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] The Seleucid era was used as late as the sixth century CE, for instance in the Zabad inscription in Syria , dated the 24th of Gorpiaios , 823 (24 September, 512 AD), [ 11 ] and in the writings of John of Ephesus .

[ 12 ] Syriac chroniclers continued to use it up to Michael the Syrian in the 12th century AD / 15th century AG.

[ 3 ] It has been found on Central Asian tombstones of Christians belonging to the Church of the East well into the 14th century AD.

[ 13 ] The Seleucid era counting, or "era of contracts" ( minyan shəṭarot ), was used by Yemenite Jews in their legal deeds and contracts until modern times, [ 14 ] a practice derived from an ancient Jewish teaching in the Talmud , requiring all Diaspora Jews to uphold its practice.

[ 15 ] For this reason, the Seleucid era counting is mentioned in the Book of Maccabees (I Macc. i. 11) and in the writings of the historian Josephus . The Seleucid era counting fell into disuse among most Jewish communities, following Rabbi David ben Zimra 's cancellation of the practice when he served as Chief Rabbi of Egypt.

[ 16 ] References [ edit ] ^ Denis C. Feeney, Caesar's Calendar, University of California Press , Berkeley 2007, p. 139.

^ Babylonian Talmud (Avodah Zarah 10a), Rabbeinu Hananel's Commentary; RASHI's commentary on Babylonian Talmud (Avodah Zarah 9a); Sefer Hakabbalah of Rabbi Avraham ben David (Ravad); Midrash David on Mishnah Tractate Avot (Ethics of the Fathers, 1:6) ^ a b Andrew Palmer (1993).

The Seventh Century .

Liverpool University Press . pp. xxxiv, xxxvii, lii– lviii.

^ Emil Schürer , Geschichte des jüdischen Volkes im Zeitalter Jesu Christi, vol. 1, Leipzig 1886–1890; 4th edition 1901–1909, pp. 36–46; Mishnah , Rosh HaShanah 1:1 ^ Schürer, Emil (1890).

A History of the Jewish People in the Time of Jesus Christ . T&T Clark. pp.

36 –44.

^ Bar-Kochva, Bezalel (1989).

Judas Maccabaeus: The Jewish Struggle Against the Seleucids .

Cambridge University Press . p. 543.

ISBN 0521323525 .

^ Bickerman, Elias J.

(1943).

"Notes on Seleucid and Parthian Chronology" .

Berytus .

8 : 73– 84.

^ Tang, Li; Winkler, Dietmar W. (2013).

From the Oxus River to the Chinese Shores: Studies on East Syriac Christianity in China and Central Asia . LIT Verlag Münster. p. 131.

ISBN 978-3-643-90329-7 .

^ Holm, Frits Vilhelm (1909).

"Translation of the Nestorian Inscription" .

The Nestorian Monument: An Ancient Record of Christianity in China . The Open Court Publishing Co.

In the year of the Greeks one thousand and ninety-two, the Lord Jazedbuzid, Priest and Vicar-episcopal of Cumdan the royal city, son of the enlightened Mailas, Priest of Balach a city of Turkestan , set up this tablet, whereon is inscribed the Dispensation of our Redeemer, and the preaching of the apostolic missionaries to the King of China. ["The Priest Lingpau", in Chinese] " Adam the Deacon , son of Jazedbuzid, Vicar-episcopal. The Lord Sergius, Priest and Vicar-episcopal. Sabar Jesus, Priest. Gabriel, Priest, Archdeacon, and Ecclesiarch of Cumdan and Sarag.

^ Wilmshurst, David.

A Monument to the Spread of the Syrian Brilliant Teaching in China (PDF) . p. 9.

^ M. A. Kugener, Nouvelle Note Sur L'Inscription Trilingue De Zébed, Rivista degli Studi Orientali (1907), pp. 577-586.

^ Peter Charanis , On the Question of the Hellenization of Sicily and Southern Italy During the Middle Ages, American Historical Review , 52:1 (1946), p. 82.

^ "Syriac Gravestones from Central Asia" . Archived from the original on 2001-04-08 . Retrieved 2012-01-19 .

^ Sar-Shalom, Rahamim (1984).

She'harim La'Luah Ha'ivry (Gates to the Hebrew Calendar) (in Hebrew). Tel-Aviv. p. 164 (Seleucid era counting).

OCLC 854906532 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Babylonian Talmud , Avodah Zarah 10a, which reads: “Said Rav Nahman: 'In the Diaspora, it is not permissible to count [the date in years] except only by the kings of the Grecians'.” ^ Chaim Yosef David Azulai , Shem ha-Gedolim [ Ma'arekhet Gedolim ], ed. Yitzhak Isaac Ben-Yaaqov, (the Letters Daleth ), Vienna 1864, s.v.

מהר"ר דוד ן' זמרא , p. 19 (section 16 - ז) (Hebrew) Bibliography [ edit ] Robert Harry van Gent.

The Babylonian Calendar . Has a date converter based on Parker & Dubberstein (1971).

Kosmin, Paul J.

(2018).

Time and Its Adversaries in the Seleucid Empire .

Harvard University Press .

ISBN 9780674976931 .

Kosmin, Paul J.

(7 May 2019).

"A revolution in time" .

aeon . Retrieved 12 January 2020 .

Once local and irregular, time-keeping became universal and linear in 311 BCE. History would never be the same again.

Strootman, Rolf (2015).

"Seleucid Era" .

Encyclopaedia Iranica . Leiden: Brill . Retrieved 14 May 2021 .

v t e Calendars Systems Lunar Lunisolar Solar In wide use Astronomical Buddhist Chinese Ethiopian Gregorian Hindu Lunar Hijri Solar Hijri ISO Unix time In more limited use Akan Armenian Assamese (Bhāshkarābda) Assyrian Baháʼí Badí‘ Bali Pawukon Saka Bengali Bangladeshi Berber Borana Burmese Chinese Earthly Branches Heavenly Stems Minguo Solar term Germanic heathen Georgian Hebrew Hindu Vikram Samvat Saka Hmong Igbo Iranian Jalali medieval Zoroastrian Irish Gaelic Islamic Fasli Tabular Jain Japanese Javanese Korean Juche Kurdish Lithuanian Maithili Malayalam Mandaean Manipuri (Meitei) Melanau Mizo (Lushai) Mongolian Nepal Nepal Sambat Vikram Samvat Yele Sambat Nanakshahi Nisg̱a'a Odia Punjabi Romanian Shona Somali Sesotho Slavic Slavic Native Faith Macedonian Tamil Thai lunar solar Tibetan Tripuri Tulu Vietnamese Wicca Xhosa Yoruba Zulu Types Runic Mesoamerican Long Count Calendar round Christian variants Coptic Ethiopian and Eritrean Julian Revised Liturgical year Eastern Orthodox Saints Historical Arabian Attic Aztec Tōnalpōhualli Xiuhpōhualli Babylonian Bulgar Byzantine Cappadocian Celtic Cham Culāsakaraj Coligny Egyptian Enoch Florentine French Republican Germanic Greek Hindu Inca Macedonian Maya Haabʼ Tzolkʼin Muisca Pentecontad Pisan Qumran Rapa Nui Roman Rumi Sexagenary Soviet Swedish Turkmen By specialty Holocene anthropological Proleptic Gregorian / Proleptic Julian historiographical Darian Martian Dreamspell New Age Discordian 'Pataphysical Reform proposals Hanke–Henry Permanent International Fixed Pax Positivist Sexagesimal Symmetry454 World Displays and applications Electronic Perpetual Wall Year naming and numbering Terminology Era Epoch Leap year New Year Regnal name Regnal year Year zero Systems Ab urbe condita Anka year Anno Domini / Common Era Anno Lucis Anno Martyrum Anno Mundi Assyrian Before Present Chinese Imperial Chinese Minguo English and British regnal year Hijri year Human (Holocene) Japanese Korean Nirayana system Seleucid Spanish Yugas Satya Treta Dvapara Kali Vietnamese Fictional Discworld ( Discworld ) Greyhawk ( Dungeons & Dragons ) Middle-earth ( The Lord of the Rings ) Stardate ( Star Trek ) List of calendars Category v t e Chronology Key topics Archaeology Astronomy Geology History Big History Paleontology Time Periods Eras Epochs Calendar eras Human Era Ab urbe condita Anno Domini / Common Era Anno Mundi Bosporan era Bostran era Byzantine era Seleucid era Era of Caesar (Iberia) Before Present Hijri Egyptian Sothic cycle Hindu units of time ( Yuga ) Mesoamerican Long Count Short Count Tzolkʼin Haabʼ Regnal year Anka year Canon of Kings English and British regnal year Lists of kings Limmu Era names Chinese Japanese Korean Vietnamese Calendars Pre-Julian / Julian Pre-Julian Roman Original Julian Proleptic Julian Revised Julian Gregorian Gregorian Proleptic Gregorian Old Style and New Style dates Adoption of the Gregorian calendar Dual dating Astronomical Lunisolar ( Hebrew , Hindu ) Solar Lunar ( Islamic ) Astronomical year numbering Others Chinese sexagenary cycle Geologic Calendar Iranian ISO week date Mesoamerican Maya Aztec Winter count New Earth Time Astronomic time Cosmic Calendar Ephemeris Galactic year Metonic cycle Milankovitch cycles Geologic time Concepts Deep time Geological history of Earth Geological time units Standards Global Standard Stratigraphic Age (GSSA) Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP) Methods Chronostratigraphy Geochronology Isotope geochemistry Law of superposition Luminescence dating Samarium–neodymium dating Chronological dating Absolute dating Amino acid racemisation Archaeomagnetic dating Dendrochronology Ice core Incremental dating Lichenometry Paleomagnetism Radiometric dating Lead–lead Potassium–argon Radiocarbon Uranium–lead Tephrochronology Luminescence dating Thermoluminescence dating Relative dating Fluorine absorption Nitrogen dating Obsidian hydration Seriation Stratigraphy Genetic methods Molecular clock Linguistic methods Glottochronology Related topics Chronicle New Chronology Synchronoptic view Timeline Year zero Floruit Terminus post quem ASPRO chronology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Seleucid_era&oldid=1306112514 " Categories : Calendar eras Seleucid Empire Hebrew calendar Persian culture 310s BC establishments 311 BC Seleucus I Nicator Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 Hebrew-language sources (he) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 00:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Seleucid era 28 languages Add topic

