Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 New York City 2 References Toggle References subsection 2.1 Sources 3 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Sidewalk cafe 8 languages Aragonés Español Nederlands Norsk nynorsk Svenska Türkçe 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Café with outdoor tables and service The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( September 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Sidewalk café outside Sofitel Metropole Hotel, Hanoi, Vietnam Paris, 2021 A sidewalk café or pavement café is "a portion of an eating or drinking place, located on a public sidewalk, that provides waiter or waitress service" (as defined by the American Planning Association based upon the New York City planning regulations); the area is used solely for dining.

[ 1 ] Sidewalk cafés may be enclosed or unenclosed, the former being surrounded by a single-story structure and the latter being an area of the sidewalk that contains removable tables, chairs, and railings.

[ 1 ] Sidewalk cafés are common across Europe, forming an important part of street life in countries such as Spain, France and Italy.

[ 2 ] New York City [ edit ] A sidewalk café on the Upper West Side in New York City , 2007 New York City regulations specify the places sidewalk where cafés can exist, their construction, and what parts of a sidewalk they can occupy.

[ 3 ] Proprietors pay a license fee, which is effectively rent paid to the city for the use of the sidewalk.

[ 4 ] From 1988 these regulations were a zoning resolution of the New York City Department of City Planning .

[ 3 ] The 1988 resolution prohibited sidewalk cafés in residential areas and on major thoroughfares, permitting them in malls and (conditionally) "in Historic Districts or in designated Landmark Buildings".

[ 3 ] The stated purposes are to balance the café proprietors' interests against the needs of pedestrians; to conserve the value of land; and to preserve the characters of neighborhoods.

[ 3 ] Until 2003 the process for obtaining a license for a sidewalk café involved so many city agencies and such a long wait time that the law was regularly flouted, with restaurateurs considering it cheaper to just erect sidewalk cafés and pay the fines after the fact.

[ 4 ] New approval processes were adopted in that year, shortening the process to 140 days and making it the sole responsibility of the city's Department of Consumer Affairs.

[ 4 ] Outdoor dining "bubble pods" on Broadway in New York City during the COVID-19 pandemic The COVID-19 pandemic in New York City forced restaurants to close their dining rooms. They received emergency permission to operate al fresco dining areas in streets. By September 2020, 10,600 restaurants had enrolled in the city's outdoor dining program, compared to just 1,023 sidewalk cafés that existed before the pandemic.

[ 5 ] Many restaurants started installing outdoor dining enclosures called bubble pods to promote social distancing.  These hemispherical or igloo shaped structures became quite common during the pandemic.

[ 6 ] They have been criticized for not having a proper ventilation system in place and for safety concerns but some experts believe that if properly ventilated and cleaned between diners these enclosures could be considered safe.

[ 7 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Dolnick & Davidson 1999 , p. 200.

^ Hayward, Tim (6 July 2009).

"Dining out, out" .

The Guardian .

^ a b c d Gumpert & Drucker 2017 , p. 445.

^ a b c Berg 2007 , p. 30.

^ Hu, Winnie; Schweber, Nate (2020-11-09).

"The Setups for Outdoor Winter Dining Are Lavish. But Are They Safe?" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2020-12-04 .

^ "Restaurant dining bubbles raise covid safety concerns" .

The Washington Post .

^ Stone, Will.

"Yurts, Igloos And Pop-Up Domes: How Safe Is 'Outside' Restaurant Dining This Winter?" .

NPR.org . Retrieved 2021-04-11 .

Sources [ edit ] Berg, Bruce F. (2007).

New York City Politics: Governing Gotham . Rutgers University Press.

ISBN 9780813543895 .

Dolnick, Fay; Davidson, Michael, eds. (1999). "sidewalk café".

A Glossary of zoning, development, and planning terms .

American Planning Association .

Gumpert, Gary; Drucker, Susan J. (2017). "Media development and public space: the legislating of social interaction". In Ruben, Brent D. (ed.).

Between Communication and Information . Routledge.

ISBN 9781351294713 .

Further reading [ edit ] Ramati, Raquel.

How to Save Your Own Street , Dolphin Books, 1981 Brown, Carolyn (February 1980). "Sidewalk Cafés".

Planning Advisory Service Memos .

American Planning Association . pp. 80–2 et seq.

v t e Types of coffeehouses Australian cafe Café Book café ( Manga cafe ) Cafe church Café Philosophique Café con piernas Cat café Coffeeshop (Netherlands) Cosplay restaurant ( Maid café Butler café ) Crisis cafe Internet café ( PC bang ) Dabang (Korea) Kafana Kissaten Konditorei Kopi tiam Mamak stall Meikyoku kissa No-pan kissa Ottoman coffeehouse Parisian café Penny university Socrates Cafe Sidewalk cafe Utagoe coffeehouse Viennese coffee house Coffee portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sidewalk_cafe&oldid=1296321773 " Categories : Outdoor structures Types of coffeehouses and cafés Sidewalks Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from September 2019 This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 08:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sidewalk cafe 8 languages Add topic

