Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins of the term 2 As a political descriptor Toggle As a political descriptor subsection 2.1 Use in the 1990s 2.2 Reception and criticism 2.3 Decline 3 Other uses Toggle Other uses subsection 3.1 United Kingdom 3.2 Christian democracy 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Compassionate conservatism 6 languages العربية Asturianu Español Français Nederlands Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American political philosophy This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Compassionate conservatism is an American [ 1 ] [ 2 ] political philosophy that stresses using conservative techniques and concepts in order to improve the general welfare of society. The philosophy supports the implementation of policies designed to help the disadvantaged and alleviate poverty through the free market , envisaging a triangular relationship between government, charities and faith-based organizations.

[ 3 ] The term entered mainstream parlance between 2001 and 2009, during the administration of US President George W. Bush . He used the term often to describe his personal views and embody some parts of his administration's agenda and policy approach.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The term itself is often credited to the American historian and politician Doug Wead , who used it as the title of a speech in 1979. Although its origins lie mostly in accepted economic principles, some applications of it have been criticized as paternalism .

[ 4 ] The term has been used in the United Kingdom by former Prime Minister David Cameron , in New Zealand by former Prime Minister John Key , and in Lithuania by President Gitanas Nausėda .

[ 6 ] The term "compassionate conservatism" has also been applied to Christian democratic political parties.

[ 7 ] However, Christian democrats are far more supportive of government interventionism in the economy.

[ 8 ] Origins of the term [ edit ] Historian and presidential advisor Doug Wead may have been the first person to use the phrase compassionate conservative . In 1977, Wead wrote a book about Kolkata , India , entitled The Compassionate Touch .

[ 9 ] In 1979, he gave a popular speech entitled "The Compassionate Conservative" at the annual Washington Charity Dinner. Tapes of the speech were sold across the country at corporate seminars.

[ 10 ] Wead contended that the policies of Republican conservatives should be motivated by compassion, not protecting the status quo. He declared himself to be "a bleeding heart conservative," meaning that he cared for people and sincerely believed that a free marketplace was better for the poor.

In 1981, in a perhaps-unrelated usage, Vernon Jordan of the National Urban League said of the Reagan administration , [ 11 ] I do not challenge the conservatism of this Administration. I do challenge its failure to exhibit a compassionate conservatism that adapts itself to the realities of a society ridden by class and race distinction.

— Vernon Jordan In 1982, Wead co-authored with Ronald Reagan 's Secretary of the Interior , James G. Watt , the book The Courage of a Conservative and developed his ideas further in chapter five of the book, which was entitled "The Compassionate Conservative." [ 12 ] In 1984, U.S. Representative James R. Jones ( D - OK ) told The New York Times : [ 13 ] I think we should adopt the slogan of compassionate conservatism ...We can be fiscally conservative without losing our commitment to the needy and we must redirect our policy in that direction.

— Rep. James R. Jones Earlier the same year Republican Ray Shamie proclaimed that "I believe in a visionary and compassionate conservatism" [ 14 ] In June 1986, Wead wrote an article for the Christian Herald , describing then-vice-president George H. W. Bush , to whom he served as an aide, as a "compassionate conservative." [ 15 ] According to journalist Jacob Weisberg , George W. Bush , George H. W. Bush's son, first picked up the term "compassionate conservative" from Wead, in 1987.

[ 16 ] In 1992, when Doug Wead ran for U.S. Representative from Arizona , he wrote a campaign book entitled Time for a Change . The first chapter was called "The Compassionate Conservative" and outlined Wead's philosophy that the masses did not care if Republican policies worked if the attitude and purpose behind the policies were uncaring.

[ 17 ] Some insist the doctrine was invented by Marvin Olasky , who went on to memorialize it in his books Renewing American Compassion (1996) and Compassionate Conservatism: What it is, What it Does, and How it Can Transform America (2000), and Myron Magnet of the Manhattan Institute . Olasky has been called the "godfather of compassionate conservatism".

[ 18 ] The phrase was popularized when George W. Bush adopted it as one of his key slogans during his 2000 presidential campaign against Al Gore . Bush also wrote the foreword to Olasky's Compassionate Conservatism . Olasky said others had come up with the term first.

As a political descriptor [ edit ] Use in the 1990s [ edit ] Compassionate conservatism has been defined as the belief that conservatism and compassion complement each other.  A compassionate conservative might see the social problems of the United States , such as health care or immigration , as issues that are better solved through cooperation with private companies, charities, and religious institutions rather than directly through government departments. As former Bush chief speechwriter Michael Gerson put it, "Compassionate conservatism is the theory that the government should encourage the effective provision of social services without providing the service itself." [ 19 ] Magnet and Olasky said 19th century compassionate conservatism was based in part on the Christian doctrine of original sin , which held that "Man is sinful and likely to want something for nothing. … Man's sinful nature leads to indolence." [ 20 ] In the words of Magnet, [ 21 ] Compassionate conservatives [...] offer a new way of thinking about the poor. They know that telling the poor that they are mere passive victims, whether of racism or of vast economic forces, is not only false but also destructive, paralyzing the poor with thoughts of their own helplessness and inadequacy. The poor need the larger society's moral support; they need to hear the message of personal responsibility and self-reliance, the optimistic assurance that if they try—as they must—they will make it. They need to know, too, that they can't blame "the system" for their own wrongdoing.

— Myron Magnet, The Wall Street Journal Compassionate conservative philosophy argues for policies in support of traditional families , welfare reform to promote individual responsibility (cf.

workfare ), active policing, standards-based schools (cf.

No Child Left Behind Act ), and assistance (economic or otherwise) to poor countries around the world.

U.S. president George W. Bush said: [ 22 ] "It is compassionate to actively help our citizens in need. It is conservative to insist on accountability and results." — President George W. Bush Bush began his presidency hoping to make compassionate conservatism his centerpiece. After the September 11, 2001 attacks , he focused less on this theme, but, according to professor and author Ira Chernus , its fundamental ideas became central in his rhetoric about the War on Terrorism .

[ 23 ] Reception and criticism [ edit ] Nicholas Lemann , writing in New Yorker magazine in 2015, wrote that George W. Bush's "description of himself, in the 2000 campaign, as a 'compassionate conservative' was brilliantly vague—liberals heard it as 'I'm not all that conservative,' and conservatives heard it as 'I'm deeply religious.' It was about him as a person, not a program." [ 24 ] In a July 1999 speech to the Democratic Leadership Council , then-President Bill Clinton criticized Bush's "compassionate conservative" self-description, saying: "This 'compassionate conservatism' has a great ring to it, you know? It sounds so good. And I've really worked hard to try to figure out what it means... I made an honest effort, and near as I can tell, here's what it means: It means, 'I like you. I do. And I would like to be for the patients' bill of rights and I'd like to be for closing the gun show loophole , and I'd like not to squander the surplus and, you know, save Social Security and Medicare for the next generation. I'd like to raise the minimum wage . I'd like to do these things. But I just can't, and I feel terrible about it.

' " [ 25 ] Similarly, in December 2005, then-British Prime Minister Tony Blair , speaking in the House of Commons , said: "the only difference between compassionate conservatism and conservatism is that under compassionate conservatism they tell you they're not going to help you but they're really sorry about it." [ 26 ] Some critics of George W. Bush criticized the phrase "compassionate conservatism" as simply sugarcoating, an empty phrase to make traditional conservatism sound more appealing to moderate voters. Liberal commentator Joe Conason , noting Bush's policy of tax cuts, wrote in 2003 that "so far, being a 'compassionate conservative' appears to mean nothing very different from being a hardhearted, stingy, old-fashioned conservative." [ 27 ] External videos Booknotes interview with Olasky on The Tragedy of American Compassion , January 22, 1995 , C-SPAN Others on the left have viewed it as an effort to remove America's social safety net out of the hands of the government and give it to Christian churches.  "Liberals make a big mistake if they dismiss 'compassionate conservatism' as just a hypocritical catch phrase", wrote University of Colorado religion professor Ira Chernus.  "For the right, it is a serious scheme to give tax dollars to churches through so-called ' faith-based initiatives .

' " [ 28 ] Nobel Prize–winning Keynesian economist and columnist Paul Krugman has called it a " dog whistle " to the religious right, referencing Marvin Olasky's The Tragedy of American Compassion, who believed the poor must help themselves and that poverty was the fault not of society but of the poor and of social workers.

[ 29 ] Krugman endorses [ 30 ] Digby's analysis [ 31 ] that right-wing compassionate 'charity' assumes that the giver has the right to investigate and dictate the life of the receiver, even for the smallest charity.

Conversely, the phrase has also been attacked from the right.

John J. DiIulio, Jr.

wrote that Bush's "Duty of Hope" speech, delivered in Indianapolis in May 1999, drew a "negative reaction from his party's right wings. ... Many Republican conservative activists hated the center-hugging 'compassionate conservative.' Others favored it, but only as a rhetorical Trojan Horse . If a 'compassionate conservative' was actually a government-shrinking libertarian in religious drag, then fine.  But, if Bush really meant what he said, Gore -like, about volunteerism not being enough .... or about rejecting as 'destructive' the Reagan-tested idea that government itself is the main problem, then many conservative Republicans would not suffer it." [ 32 ] Herman Cain criticized the idea of "compassionate conservatism" as leading to the Bush administration's increased government spending, saying that it "completely betrayed conservative voters and their decades of grassroots activism", and "alienated the party's conservative base", noting Bush policies such as the Medicare prescription-drug benefit , which increased the size of the Medicare program by around $500 billion.

[ 33 ] In 2006, conservative commentator Jonah Goldberg has written that compassionate conservatism as implemented by George W. Bush differs markedly from the theoretical concept: "As countless writers have noted in National Review over the last five years, most conservatives never really understood what compassionate conservatism was, beyond a convenient marketing slogan to attract swing voters. The reality—as even some members of the Bush team will sheepishly concede—is that there was nothing behind the curtain." [ 34 ] Similarly, conservative commentator Fred Barnes wrote: "Bush has famously defined himself as a compassionate conservative with a positive agenda. Almost by definition, this makes him a big government conservative." [ 35 ] Decline [ edit ] The phrase and the idea of compassionate conservativism declined after the Bush administration left office. In December 2011, Christian commentator Jim Wallis of Sojourners , citing harsh rhetoric toward the poor and immigrants from candidates for the 2012 Republican presidential nomination , wrote that "the compassionate conservative agenda has virtually disappeared from the Republican Party." [ 36 ] In January 2012, commentator Amy Sullivan wrote that "Just three years after George W. Bush left the White House, compassionate conservatives are an endangered species. In the new Tea Party era, they've all but disappeared from Congress, and their philosophy is reviled within the GOP as big-government conservatism." [ 37 ] Sullivan noted that Republican presidential candidates "have jostled to take the hardest line in opposing government-funded programs to help the poor." [ 37 ] The Washington Post columnist Eugene Robinson made similar observations.

[ 38 ] Other uses [ edit ] United Kingdom [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United Kingdom Ideologies Burkean Cameronism Muscular liberalism Civic Compassionate Euroscepticism Green Liberal Classical Thatcherism Neo One-nation Powellism Progressive Toryism High Red Social Ultra Principles Anglo-Saxonism British unionism Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Familialism Imperialism Loyalism Moral absolutism Victorian Nationalism British English Northern Irish Scottish Welsh Ordered liberty Protectionism Royalism Social hierarchy Social market economy Sovereignty State church Tradition History Cavalier Stuart Restoration Tories Jacobitism 1794 Treason Trials Old Whigs Corn Laws Oxford Movement Young England Neo-Jacobite Revival New Right Wets and dries Brexit Intellectuals Bagehot Belloc Biggar Blond Burke Butterfield Carlyle Chesterton Clark Coleridge Conquest Dalrymple Dawson Eliot Elton Ferguson Filmer Galton Gibbon Gray Haldane Hayek Hulme Hume Johnson (Paul) Johnson (Samuel) Kipling Kedourie Laslett Lawrence Ludovici More Newman Oakeshott (Michael) Parvini Ruskin Scott Scruton Southey Stephen Trueman Unwin Waugh Williamson Wordsworth Politicians Anderson Badenoch Baldwin Balfour Braverman Burke Butler Cameron Canning Cazalet Chamberlain Churchill Clarke Disraeli Goldsmith Gove Hannan Hayes Hogg Howard Jenrick Johnson (Boris) Joseph Leigh Liverpool Lowe Macmillan Major May Peel Pitt Powell Rees-Mogg Salisbury Thatcher Whittle Willetts Commentators Amis Benjamin Bowden Burton Clarkson Cohen Forsyth (Frederick) Goodwin Hanbury-Tracy Hitchens Johnson (Paul) Kisin Liddle Lunn Moore Morgan Murray Nelson Oakeshott (Isabel) O'Sullivan Pearce Perry Roberts Smith Starkey Sullivan Turner Watson Welch West Worsthorne Young Literature Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) " Tamworth Manifesto " (1834) On Heroes (1841) Coningsby (1844) Sybil (1845) Latter-Day Pamphlets (1850) Culture and Anarchy (1867–68) Orthodoxy (1908) The Servile State (1912) " Tradition and the Individual Talent " (1919) The Whig Interpretation of History (1931) The Abolition of Man (1943) The Left Was Never Right (1945) " Rivers of Blood " (1968) The Abolition of Britain (1999) Our Culture, What's Left of It (2005) The Rage Against God (2010) The Great Degeneration (2013) How to Be a Conservative (2014) Conservatism (2017) The Strange Death of Europe (2017) Parties Active Alliance EPP: European People's Party UK Christian Party Christian Peoples Alliance Conservative and Unionist Party Common Sense Group Conservative Future (Defunct) Young Conservatives Democratic Unionist Party Heritage Party Reform UK Social Democratic Party (UK, 1990–present) Traditional Unionist Voice UK Independence Party Ulster Unionist Party Workers Party of Britain Defunct For Britain Movement Tories Veterans and People's Party Activists Booth-Smith Bowden Forsyth (James) Goldsmith Hitchens Keen-Minshull Littlewood Marshall Montgomerie Murray Payne Shawcross Stroud Sullivan Worsthorne Organisations 55 Tufton Street Centre for Policy Studies IEA LGB Alliance Migration Watch UK Policy Exchange Bright Blue Blue Collar Conservativism Conservative Democratic Alliance (Defunct) Conservative Philosophy Group Cornerstone Group CSC European Research Group The Freedom Association Henry Jackson Society London Swinton Circle Monday Club (Defunct) NATCON One Nation Conservatives Orange Order Oxford University Conservative Association Right Book Club (Defunct) Revolutionary Conservative Caucus (Defunct) Social Affairs Unit (Defunct) Tory Reform Group Traditional Britain Group Turning Point UK Western Goals Institute (Defunct) Media Anti-Jacobin Review (Defunct) Catholic Herald ConservativeHome The Critic Daily Express Sunday Express Daily Mail The Daily Sceptic The Daily Telegraph Evening Standard GB News Guido Fawkes The Mail on Sunday The Salisbury Review The Spectator The Sun The Sun on Sunday The Sunday Telegraph The Sunday Times Talk The Times UnHerd Related Anglo-Catholicism Antidisestablishmentarianism Blue Labour Cambridge Analytica " Constructive conservatism " List of British conservatives Merry England O'Sullivan's first law Philosophy of Thomas Carlyle Politics of the United Kingdom Liberalism Libertarianism Socialism Public schools in the UK Remigration Conservatism portal United Kingdom portal v t e According to a 2006 report by the British think tank Policy Exchange , "compassionate conservative" was "one of the most prominent themes" of the Conservative Party under David Cameron .

[ 39 ] In speeches and the party's statement of aims and values around 2005 and 2006, Cameron and other senior Conservatives emphasized a "modern, compassionate conservatism" theme.

[ 39 ] Other figures associated with compassionate conservatism in Britain include Tim Montgomerie and Iain Duncan Smith .

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] At the 2011 Conservative Party Conference, the party released a pamphlet titled Modern Compassionate Conservatism , which senior leaders such as Cameron and foreign secretary William Hague claimed had pushed for "compassionate" and "cuddly" policies.

[ 42 ] In 2015, Michael Gove claimed David Cameron was "a modern, compassionate Conservative." [ 43 ] The term "compassionate conservative" was used as a way for the Conservatives to distance themselves from their "Nasty Party" image.

[ 43 ] This is exemplified by some think tanks, such as Bright Blue and the Centre for Social Justice .

Christian democracy [ edit ] Main article: Christian democracy Political commentator Jane Louise Kandur has used the term "compassionate conservatism" to describe Christian democratic political parties, with their support of labour unions and church-established schools and hospitals.

[ 7 ] While Christian democrats uphold social conservatism , they advocate for human rights and social justice , being in support of the welfare state .

[ 7 ] However, unlike the American philosophy, they are far more supportive of government intervention in the economy.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Conservatism portal Centre-right politics Bleeding-heart libertarianism Communitarianism Humanistic capitalism Free-market environmentalism One-nation conservatism Option for the poor Progressive Conservative Party of Canada References [ edit ] ^ Olasky 2000 , pp. xi–xii.

^ Olasky 2000 , p. 1.

^ Watts 2010 , pp. 257–258.

^ a b Dan P. McAdams (October 27, 2010).

George W. Bush and the Redemptive Dream: A Psychological Portrait . Oxford University Press. p. 134.

ISBN 978-0-19-978092-1 .

^ "President George W. Bush on Compassionate Conservatism | Bush Center" .

^ Young, Audrey (May 21, 2015).

"Budget 2015: How it affects you" .

The New Zealand Herald .

Archived from the original on May 18, 2020 . Retrieved September 8, 2018 .

^ a b c Kandur, Jane Louise (October 7, 2016).

"Christian Democrats and Muslim Democrats" .

Daily Sabah . Retrieved July 28, 2017 .

^ a b Heywood 2012 , p. 83.

^ The Compassionate Touch , Doug Wead, Bethany House , 1977.

^ Jacob Weisberg, The Bush Tragedy, Random House, 2008. Page 93.

^ The New York Times , July 23, 1981, p. 17.

^ The Courage of a Conservative , Simon & Schuster , 1985.

^ The New York Times , November 8, 1984.

^ The Christian Science Monitor , September 20, 1984, p. 19.

^ "George Bush: Where Does He Stand?", Doug Wead, Christian Herald , June 1986.

^ Jacob Weisberg , The Bush Tragedy, Random House , 2008. Page 92.

^ Doug Wead, Time for a Change , 1992.

^ Olasky, Martin, Renewing American Compassion , "God promises blessings for obedience, but never an all-expense paid vacation.  Adam's work was not endlessly frustrating... That all changed with man's independent and rebellious grasping for the knowledge of good and evil.  Man must now do tiring work to live." p. 169; "Lazy hands make a man poor." (quoting Proverbs); "If a man does not work, he shall not eat." (quoting Paul, Second Thessalonians).

^ "Opinion, Editorials, Columns, Op-Ed, Letters to the Editor, Commentary - Wall Street Journal - Wsj.com" . Opinionjournal.com. October 3, 2002 . Retrieved February 18, 2015 .

^ Olasky, Renewing American Compassion , 64, 41 ^ [1] Archived December 4, 2003, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Fact Sheet: Compassionate Conservatism" . Georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov . Retrieved February 18, 2015 .

^ " 'Compassionate Conservatism' Goes To War" . Commondreams.org. Archived from the original on November 21, 2006 . Retrieved July 5, 2019 .

^ Nicholas Lemann, The Real Value of Jeb's "Unfortunate Comments" , New Yorker (October 7, 2015).

^ Edwin Chen, Clinton Picks at Bush's 'Compassionate' Label , Los Angeles times (July 15, 1999).

^ "House of Commons Hansard Debates for 14 Dec 2005 (pt 3)" . Publications.parliament.uk. December 14, 2005 . Retrieved February 18, 2015 .

^ "September 15, 2003" . The Nation . Retrieved February 18, 2015 .

^ [2] Archived October 18, 2006, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Compassionate conservatism" .

The New York Times . January 28, 2008 . Retrieved February 18, 2015 .

^ Krugman, Paul (October 12, 2007).

"Busybodies" .

The New York Times . Retrieved February 18, 2015 .

^ Digby (October 12, 2007).

"Post Modern Serfdom" .

Hullabaloo .

^ John J. DiIulio, Jr., Godly Republic: A Centrist Blueprint for America's Faith-Based Future (University of California Press, 2007), pp. 85-86.

^ "Compassionate Conservatism Lost" . Human Events. November 13, 2006. Archived from the original on February 17, 2012 . Retrieved February 18, 2015 .

^ Jonah Goldberg, Living in the Real World , National Review (March 13, 2006).

^ Fred Barnes, Big-Government Conservatism: How George W. Bush squares the fiscally expansive / conservative circle Archived 2015-10-02 at the Wayback Machine , The Wall Street Journal (August 15, 2003).

^ Jim Wallis, The Disappearance of the Compassionate Conservatives Archived 2012-01-31 at the Wayback Machine , Huffington Post (December 8, 2011).

^ a b Amy Sullivan, Column: Is compassionate conservatism dead?

Archived 2016-03-22 at the Wayback Machine , USA Today (January 29, 2012).

^ Eugene Robinson, Where are the compassionate conservatives?

, The Washington Post (September 15, 2011).

^ a b Jesse Norman & Janan Ganesh, Compassionate Conservatism: What It Is, Why We Need It Archived October 19, 2015, at the Wayback Machine , Policy Exchange (2006).

^ Hinsliff, Gaby (13 October 2002).

"Devout whiz-kid seen as Tory saviour" .

The Observer . Retrieved 8 May 2010 .

^ Beckett, Andy (23 October 2012).

"Tim Montgomerie: pushing for a rightwing Tory party – with a heart" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 27 March 2018 .

^ Allegra Stratton, David Cameron: Tory party is 'modern and compassionate' , The Guardian (October 2, 2011).

^ a b Sebastian Payne, Five things we learnt about compassionate conservatism from Michael Gove's speech , Spectator (March 13, 2015).

Bibliography [ edit ] Brooks, Arthur C. (2007).

Who Really Cares: The Surprising Truth About Compassionate Conservatism -- America's Charity Divide--Who Gives, Who Do . United Kingdom: Hachette.

ISBN 978-0-465-00365-5 .

Heywood, Andrew (2012).

Political Ideologies: An Introduction . Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0-230-36994-8 .

Olasky, Marvin (2000).

Compassionate Conservatism: What It Is, What It Does, and How It Can Transform America . Simon and Schuster.

ISBN 0-743-20543-X .

Watts, Duncan (2010).

Dictionary of American Government and Politics . Edinburgh University Press.

ISBN 978-0-748-63502-3 .

External links [ edit ] White House fact sheet "What is compassionate conservatism?" — The Wall Street Journal "Compassionate Conservatives" — Salon.com Theocons.de "Compassionate Conservatives in Europe" — v t e Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Libertarian Moderate Movement Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Progressive Social Traditionalist Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian nationalism Classical liberalism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Gender essentialism Complementarianism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Militarism Moral absolutism Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Protectionism Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Tradition People Presidents Adams (John) Adams (John Quincy) G. H. W. Bush G. W. Bush Cleveland Coolidge Harding Hoover McKinley Nixon Reagan W. H. Taft Trump Washington Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan II Kavanaugh Kennedy O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft Thomas Vermeule Yoo Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Buckley Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eastman Eliot Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hazony Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kendall Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lasch Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet O'Connor Ong Ransom Rieff Santayana Sowell Strauss Viereck Voegelin Washington Weaver Yarvin Other figures Ailes Atwater Beck Breitbart Carlson Cheney Coulter Cruz DeSantis Dilling Elder Falwell Gingrich Giuliani Goldwater Hannity Ingraham Levin Limbaugh Lindbergh Lodge Lovecraft McCain McCarthy McConnell Novak O'Reilly Palin Rand Paul Ron Paul Pence Perot Quayle Romney Rove Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Schlafly Shapiro Stone Robert A. Taft Booker T. Washington Parties American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party of New York State Constitution Party Republican Party Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Movements Alt-right Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Dark Enlightenment Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBT Libertarian Republicans Militia movement Patriot movement Christian Radical Right Reactionary feminism Tea Party movement Trumpism Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Historical factions Bourbon Democrats Dixiecrats Loyalists Old Right Redeemers Southern Agrarians Other organizations 1789 Capital ATR FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Rockbridge Network Tea Party Patriots USCC Literature Democracy in America (1835–1840) Democracy and Leadership (1924) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) Losing Ground (1984) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Bell Curve (1994) A Republic, Not an Empire (1999) Hillbilly Elegy (2017) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) See also American nationalism Bibliography of conservatism in the United States List of American conservatives National conservatism Southern strategy Conservatism portal v t e Conservatism Schools by region International Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Asia China Chiangism Confucianism Neo New Dai Jitao Thought Neoauthoritarianism Iran Khomeinism Monarchist Principlist Israel Fundamentalist Jewish Kahanism Zionism Neo Religious Revisionist Japan Minzoku Neo Nippon Kaigi Shōwa Statism State Shinto South Korea Ilminism New Right Turkey Democratic Erdoğanism Neo-Ottomanism Other Bangladesh Hong Kong India Malaysia Pakistan Ziaism Singapore Taiwan Chiangism Europe France Action Française Bonapartism Gaullism Integral nationalism Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Sarkozysm Ultra-royalism Germany Agrarian Hegelian Historical School Neue Rechte Ordoliberalism Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Revolutionary Young Ritter School Romanticism State Socialism Völkisch Italy Berlusconism Historical Right Italian school of elitism Neo-Bourbonism Sanfedismo Poland Golden Liberty Kaczyzm Monarchist National Democracy Sarmatism Russia Duginism Eurasianism Monarchist Black-hundredism Tsarism Putinism Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Spain Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism National Catholicism Integrism Mellismo Maurism Neocatholicism Noucentisme United Kingdom Cameronism Civic Compassionate Muscular liberalism Jacobitism Neo-Jacobite Revival Neo One-nationism Powellism Thatcherism Toryism High Red Social Other Austria Belgium Rexism Denmark Finland Georgia Monarchist Greece Metaxism Populist Hungary Iceland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Miguelist Integralismo Lusitano Romania Monarchist Serbia Monarchist Sweden Switzerland Ukraine Latin America Argentina Federal Peronism Maurrasismo Menemism Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Brazil Bolsonarism Coronelism Integralism Janismo Monarchist Patrianovism Populism Chile Gremialismo Pinochetism Other Belize Colombia Rojismo Uribism Cuba Guatemala Mexico Cristero Panama Peru Fujimorism Odriismo Uruguay Herrerism Riverism Ruralismo Venezuela Perezjimenismo North America Canada Populism Trumpism Clerico-nationalism Social Toryism Blue Red Pink United States Compassionate Libertarian Fusionism Paleo Tea Party Movement Neo Old Right Paleo Reaganism Social Traditionalist Trumpism Oceania Australia Centre Right National Right New Zealand Philosophy Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Class collaboration Consociationalism Clericalism Collective identity Confessionalism Cultural assimilation Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family values Fundamentalism Gender role Complementarianism Honour Imperialism Loyalty Monarchism Royalist Natural law Natural Order Norms Conventions Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organized religion Orthodoxy Patriotism Nationalism Personalism Philosophical realism Moral realism Private property Protectionism Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Solidarity Sovereignty State religion Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Bainville Barruel Belloc Bonald Buckley Jr.

Burke Burnham Carlyle Chateaubriand Chesterton Coleridge Comte Cortés Dávila Dostoevsky Eliot Evola Fardid Gentz Haller Hitchens Hume Iorga Johnson Jünger Karamzin Kirk Kuehnelt-Leddihn La Mennais Le Bon Le Play Leontiev Lewis Maistre Mansfield Maurras Menéndez More Müller Newman Nisbet Novalis Oakeshott Corrêa de Oliveira Peterson Ranke Renan Rivarol Röpke Santayana Savigny Schlegel Schmitt Scruton Solzhenitsyn Sowell Spann Spengler Stahl Strauss Taine Tocqueville Uvarov Voegelin Politics Organisations European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party Identity and Democracy International Democrat Union International Monarchist League Muslim Brotherhood Tradition, Family, Property Politicians Abe Adams Adenauer Andreotti Berlusconi Bismarck Bolsonaro GW Bush Canning Chiang Churchill Diefenbaker Disraeli Dmowski Dollfuss Erdoğan Franco Fujimori de Gaulle Harper Horthy John Paul II Kaczyński Khamenei Khomeini Kohl Le Pen Lee Macdonald Mannerheim Marcos Maurras Menzies Metaxas Metternich Mobutu Modi Netanyahu Orbán Park Pérez Jiménez Pinochet Pitt Powell Prat de la Riba Putin Reagan Salazar Salisbury Smith Stolypin Suharto Thatcher Trujillo Trump Vajpayee de Valera Zia Zemmour Religion Christian democracy Christian politics Theonomy Christian right Theoconservatism Confucianism Hindutva Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Islamism Islamic economics Theravada Buddhist economics Traditionalist Catholicism Catholic social teaching Distributism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Historical background Ancien régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related Ideologies Agrarianism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Corporatism Localism Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Black conservatism United States Desecularization Postsecularism Conservative feminism Conservative wave Counter-revolutionary Elite theory Ethnopluralism Hispanic and Latino conservatism in the United States LGBTQ conservatism Neo-feudalism Neo-medievalism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Para-fascism Political Evangelicalism in Latin America Political theology Radical right Europe United States Reactionary Neo- Right realism Right-wing politics Authoritarianism New European Small-c conservatives Conservatism portal Politics portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐645954cd9f‐v4zcc
Cached time: 20250815222411
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.877 seconds
Real time usage: 1.061 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6558/1000000
Revision size: 26981/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 283447/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12985/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 116274/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.457/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20290871/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  722.569      1 -total
 21.76%  157.241      1 Template:Reflist
 16.59%  119.903      1 Template:Conservatism_US
 15.39%  111.221      1 Template:Conservatism_footer
 12.19%   88.113      8 Template:Lang
 11.54%   83.389      5 Template:Cite_book
 11.44%   82.687      1 Template:Conservatism_US_footer
 11.36%   82.098      2 Template:Navbox
  8.44%   60.994      1 Template:Short_description
  5.42%   39.188      5 Template:Sfn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:424141:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815222411 and revision id 1293981871. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Compassionate_conservatism&oldid=1293981871 " Categories : 1979 neologisms Centre-right ideologies Compassion Conservatism Conservatism in the United Kingdom Conservatism in the United States David Cameron Political terminology of the United States Political theories Presidency of George W. Bush Progressive conservatism Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with excerpts Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 4 June 2025, at 21:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Compassionate conservatism 6 languages Add topic

