Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Literature Toggle Literature subsection 2.1 Huainanzi 2.2 Chu ci 3 Legend of inventing soy milk 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Liu An 13 languages Català Español Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar 日本語 Slovenčina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Han dynasty Chinese scholar and prince In this Chinese name , the family name is Liu .

Liu An Traditional Chinese 劉安 Simplified Chinese 刘安 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Liú Ān IPA [ljǒʊ án] Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Làuh Ōn Jyutping Lau 4 On 1 IPA [lɐw˩ ɔn˥] Southern Min Hokkien POJ Lâu An Middle Chinese Middle Chinese Ljuw 'An Old Chinese Baxter–Sagart (2014) *mə-ru ʔˤan (or ʔˤar) Liu An King of Huainan Reign 164 BC-122 BC Predecessor Liu He Born 179 BC Died 122 BC (aged 57) Issue Prince Liu Buhai Prince Liu Qian Princess Liu Ling Father Liu Chang, Prince Li of Huainan Mother Lady Yong Occupation Cartographer, monarch, philosopher Liú Ān ( Chinese : 劉安 , c. 179–122 BC) was a Chinese cartographer, monarch, and philosopher. A Han dynasty Chinese prince, ruling the Huainan Kingdom , and an advisor to his nephew, Emperor Wu of Han (武帝). He is best known for editing the (139 BC) Huainanzi compendium of Daoist , Confucianist , and Legalist teachings and is credited for inventing tofu . Early texts represent Liu An in three ways: the "author-editor of a respected philosophical symposium", the "bumbling rebel who took his life to avoid arrest", and the successful Daoist adept who transformed into a xian and "rose into the air to escape prosecution for trumped-up charges of treason and flew to eternal life." [ 1 ] Life [ edit ] He was the grandson of Liu Bang , the founding emperor of the Han dynasty. After his father died, he became the Prince of Huainan , the lands south of the Huai River , at the age of 16.

Liu An had two sons. The younger was Liu Qian (刘迁), who was born by his princess consort and thus became heir to Huainan, while the elder, Liu Buhai (刘不害), was born to a concubine. Liu An favoured Liu Qian over Liu Buhai and never viewed the latter as his son. Liu Qian never regarded Liu Buhai as his elder brother. According to Tui'en Ling (推恩令, Order to Expand Favours ), Liu Buhai could become a marquess if Liu An carved a part of Huainan for him as his fief, but Liu An never did. Liu Jian (刘建), son of Liu Buhai, having realized that both he and his father had little chance to be a marquess, became so resentful that he accused Liu An and Liu Qian of a coup attempt. Finally, in a fate similar to his father, Liu An committed suicide in 122 BC after his plot was revealed.

Literature [ edit ] Noted for his literary ability, Liu An was reputed to be able to compose an elaborate work of prose between waking and finishing breakfast. In addition to composing literary pieces himself, Liu An also frequently invited other scholars as guests to his estate. Eight of these scholars in particular became known as the Eight Immortals of Huainan (淮南八仙).

Huainanzi [ edit ] Together with the Eight Immortals of Huainan and/or other members of his literary circle, Liu An published a treatise in 139 BC. known as the Huainanzi , translated as "Book of the Master of Huainan", or the "Huainan Philosophers". This book is considered one of the cornerstones of Taoist philosophy, along with the works of Laozi and Zhuangzi .  Along with the earlier ShuJing ( Classic of History ) of the 5th century BC ( Warring States era), this book provided further concrete information on geography , including descriptions of the topography of China. His book was also concerned with mathematics and music, making use of the " Pythagorean comma " and listing the first known Chinese 12 tone musical tuning .

Chu ci [ edit ] One of the two major ancient Chinese poetry collections was the Chu ci , also known as The Songs of the South or The Songs of Chu (the other being the Shijing ). The seminal poem of the collection is the " Li Sao ", generally agreed to be by Qu Yuan . Liu An wrote an introduction to the " Li Sao " as well as the first known commentary. There is also reasonable evidence that Liu An was the first editor and anthologist of the original Chu ci collection. The poem Zhao yin shi (Summons for a Recluse) is attributed to Liu An. Also, " Yuan You " ("Far-off Journey") shows many similarities to the work of the literary circle around Liu An.

[ 2 ] Legend of inventing soy milk [ edit ] According to the legend, Liu An developed soy milk for his old, ill mother. She wanted to taste soybeans but couldn't chew, so Liu An ground the soybeans into milk, apparently upon her suggestion.

[ 3 ] No historical evidence supports the legend. In the Ming dynasty reference work Bencao Gangmu , author Li Shizhen describes the development of bean curd (tofu) but does not mention a particular inventor. The attribution of the invention of tofu to Liu An was also made by another Ming dynasty writer, Li Yi (李翊).

[ 4 ] During the Song dynasty in the 10th century, Zhu Xi had already written of the method of Huainan in "Song of Bean Curd" ("豆腐詩").

[ 5 ] It is also mentioned in a book which called bean curd "Lai Ki" in the Han dynasty, and the word appeared in an early Song dynasty writing.

[ 6 ] Other Chinese sources discredit the Liu An invention theory, however, and state that Liu An lived with a lot of vegetarian monks and the method was taught by them. The Chinese Daoists that he recruited used "alchemical" methods to make both soy milk and bean curd, perhaps as a medicine for eternal life. As the only powerful noble at that time, Liu An could order the (relative) mass-production of such items and spread them around, thus making him famous for soy milk and bean curd.

[ 7 ] Still, many place Liu An as the inventor of both bean curd and soy milk.

[ 8 ] A different tradition could be found in 《金華地方風俗志》 and 《中國風俗故事集》, which mention that soy milk and bean curd were made before the Han dynasty. These traditions date soy milk to the warring states period by the Yan general Yue Yi , [ 9 ] These two books are rather recent and the quote in it was only a legend told to bean curd makers orally, without written record.

See also [ edit ] List of geographers List of Chinese people List of Chinese writers List of Chu Ci contents References [ edit ] ^ Wallacker, p. 36.

^ Hawkes, 243 and 191-193 ^ "Soymilk and you tiao, the most popular breakfast in China" . Archived from the original on 2016-08-25 . Retrieved 2016-07-28 .

^ 戒庵老人漫筆「豆腐起於淮南王劉安之術。」 ^ 「種豆豆苗稀，力竭心已腐，早知淮南術，安坐獲泉布。」 "Planting soybeans but the harvest was little, the body is tired and the mind is rotted, if the method of Huainan was known earlier (by me), (I) would be able to get a lot with just relaxing and sitting there." ^ 《行神研究》引 《綺翁憶梅庵雜記》記豆腐業淮南王劉安云：「 相傳農曆九月十五日，為淮南王劉安誕辰，內地豆腐業者均於本日舉行之公祭，祭畢聚餐。」劉安為西漢人，具辯才，善屬文，好讀書鼓琴，天下方術之士多歸之，在其在發明豆腐時，蜀人名曰「黎祈」，故陸游詩有「洗釜煮黎祈」句，惟何時名為豆腐，則不可考。 ^ 《中國行業神》, 李喬 ^ 《中國民間神像》, 宋兆麟 ^ 樂毅因父母年老嚼不動黃豆，樂毅就把黃豆磨成豆漿，把鹽鹵灑進豆漿，結果成了豆腐。又說醫生開了石膏，樂毅把石膏放進豆漿，結果做出的豆腐比放鹽鹵更好。 * Hawkes, David , translator and introduction (2011 [1985]). Qu Yuan et al.

, The Songs of the South: An Ancient Chinese Anthology of Poems by Qu Yuan and Other Poets . London: Penguin Books.

ISBN 978-0-14-044375-2 Needham, Joseph (1986).

Science and Civilization in China: Volume 3 . Taipei: Caves Books, Ltd.

Wallacker, Benjamin E. (1972), "Liu an, Second King of Huai-nan (180?-122 B. C.)," Journal of the American Oriental Society 92.1, pp. 36–51.

External links [ edit ] The Huainan Zi text of Liu An The Dao of the Military: Liu An's Art of War , (Columbia University Press, 2012) Works by An Liu at Project Gutenberg Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Netherlands 2 Norway Latvia Korea Israel Academics CiNii People Trove Other IdRef Yale LUX v t e Han dynasty topics History Chu–Han Contention ( Feast at Swan Goose Gate ) Lü Clan disturbance Rebellion of the Seven States Han dynasty in Inner Asia Han–Xiongnu War War of the Heavenly Horses Han conquest of Gojoseon Four Commanderies Southward expansion ( Han–Minyue War Han conquest of Nanyue Han conquest of Dian First Chinese domination of Vietnam Trung sisters' rebellion Second Chinese domination of Vietnam ) Xin dynasty Red Eyebrows and Lulin Chengjia Disasters of the Partisan Prohibitions Way of the Five Pecks of Rice Yellow Turban Rebellion End of the Han dynasty Battle of Red Cliffs Society and culture Ban Gu Sima Qian Records of the Grand Historian Book of Han Book of the Later Han Records of the Three Kingdoms Flying Horse of Gansu Huainanzi Eight Immortals of Huainan Mawangdui Silk Texts Luxuriant Dew of the Spring and Autumn Annals Yiwu Zhi Old Texts Han poetry Fu Eastern Han Chinese Government and military Ban Chao Ma Yuan Emperor list Family tree Three Lords and Nine Ministers Nine Ministers Three Ducal Ministers Kings Provinces and commanderies Protectorate of the Western Regions ( Chief Official ) Translation of government titles Economy Coinage Ancient Chinese coinage Silk Road Sino-Roman relations Science and technology Cai Lun Cai Yong Ding Huan Du Shi Hua Tuo Liu An Liu Xiang Liu Xin Luoxia Hong Sima Tan Wang Chong Zhang Heng Zhang Zhongjing Texts Balanced Discourse Book of Origins Book on Numbers and Computation Fangyan Essential Prescriptions from the Golden Cabinet The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art Huangdi Neijing Shuowen Jiezi Treatise on Cold Injury and Miscellaneous Disorders Zhoubi Suanjing Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liu_An&oldid=1303385794 " Categories : 170s BC births 122 BC deaths 2nd-century BC geographers 2nd-century BC Chinese philosophers Ancient geographers Chinese cartographers Han dynasty imperial princes Han dynasty philosophers Patrons of literature Tofu Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Articles with Project Gutenberg links This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 17:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Liu An 13 languages Add topic

