Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Taxonomic range 3 Mosaic evolution (in hominin) 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Mosaic evolution 11 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Polski Русский Simple English Suomi Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Evolution of characters at various rates both within and between species For other uses, see Mosaic (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on Evolutionary biology Darwin's finches by John Gould Index Introduction Main Outline Glossary Evidence History Processes and outcomes Population genetics Variation Diversity Mutation Natural selection Adaptation Polymorphism Genetic drift Gene flow Speciation Adaptive radiation Co-operation Coevolution Coextinction Contingency Divergence Convergence Parallel evolution Extinction Natural history Origin of life Common descent History of life Timeline of evolution Human evolution Recent human evolution Phylogeny Biodiversity Biogeography Classification Evolutionary taxonomy Cladistics Transitional fossil Extinction event History of evolutionary theory Overview Renaissance Before Darwin Darwin Origin of Species Before synthesis Modern synthesis Molecular evolution Evo-devo Current research History of speciation History of paleontology ( timeline ) Fields and applications Applications of evolution Biosocial criminology Ecological genetics Evolutionary aesthetics Evolutionary anthropology Evolutionary computation Evolutionary ecology Evolutionary economics Evolutionary epistemology Evolutionary ethics Evolutionary game theory Evolutionary linguistics Evolutionary medicine Evolutionary neuroscience Evolutionary physiology Evolutionary psychology Experimental evolution Invasion genetics Island biogeography Phylogenetics Paleontology Selective breeding Speciation experiments Sociobiology Systematics Universal Darwinism Social implications Eugenics Evolution as fact and theory Dysgenics Social effects Creation–evolution controversy Theistic evolution Objections to evolution Level of support Nature-nurture controversy Evolutionary biology portal Category v t e Mosaic evolution (or modular evolution) is the concept, mainly from palaeontology , that evolutionary change takes place in some body parts or systems without simultaneous changes in other parts.

[ 1 ] Another definition is the "evolution of characters at various rates both within and between species".

[ 2 ] 408 Its place in evolutionary theory comes under long-term trends or macroevolution .

[ 2 ] Background [ edit ] In the neodarwinist theory of evolution , as postulated by Stephen Jay Gould , there is room for differing development, when a life form matures earlier or later, in shape and size. This is due to allomorphism . Organs develop at differing rhythms, as a creature grows and matures. Thus a " heterochronic clock" has three variants: 1) time, as a straight line; 2) general size, as a curved line; 3) shape, as another curved line.

[ 3 ] When a creature is advanced in size, it may develop at a smaller rate. Alternatively, it may maintain its original size or, if delayed, it may result in a larger sized creature. That is insufficient to understand heterochronic mechanism.
Size must be combined with shape, so a creature may retain paedomorphic features if advanced in shape or present recapitulatory appearance when retarded in shape. These names are not very indicative, as past theories of development were very confusing.

[ 3 ] A creature in its ontogeny may combine heterochronic features in six vectors, although Gould considers that there is some binding with growth and sexual maturation.  A creature may, for example, present some neotenic features and retarded development, resulting in new features derived from an original creature only by regulatory genes. Most novel human features (compared to closely related apes) were of this nature, not implying major change in structural genes, as was classically considered.

[ 3 ] Taxonomic range [ edit ] It is not claimed that this pattern is universal, but there is now a wide range of examples from many different taxa, including: Hominid evolution : the early evolution of bipedalism in Australopithecines , and its modification of the pelvic girdle took place well before there was any significant change in the skull, or brain size.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Archaeopteryx . Nearly 150 years ago, Thomas Henry Huxley compared Archaeopteryx with a small theropod dinosaur , Compsognathus . Both fossils came from the Solnhofen Limestone in Bavaria . Huxley showed that the two were very similar, except for the front limbs and feathers of Archaeopteryx . His interest was in the basic affinity of birds and reptiles, which he united as the clade Sauropsida .

[ 6 ] The peculiarity here is that the rest of the skeleton had not changed.

Meadow voles during the last 500,000 years.

[ 7 ] The pterosaur Darwinopterus . The type species, D. modularis was the first known pterosaur to display features of both long-tailed ( rhamphorhynchoid ) and short-tailed ( pterodactyloid ) pterosaurs.

[ 8 ] Evolution of the horse , in which the major changes took place at different times, not all simultaneously.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Mammalian evolution , especially during the Mesozoic provides a clear and well-understood example.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Mosaic evolution (in hominin) [ edit ] Although mosaic evolution is usually seen in terms of animals such as Darwin's finches , it can also be seen in the evolutionary process of hominin . To help further explain the meaning of mosaic evolution in hominin, mosaicism will get broken down into three subgroups. Group 1 includes related species developing independently, of which carry deep variability in their own morphological structure. Examples of this can be seen within comparisons of A. sediba , H. naledi , and H. floresiensis . Group 2 relies on the different environmental impacts on the changes of a species. An example of this is the variability of bipedalism forming independently within all related species of hominin. Lastly, Group 3 involves the presence of behavior such as the human vernacular.

Language is a mosaic composite of various elements working together for one specific attribute, and this is not a single trait an offspring can inherit directly.

[ 14 ] In addition, it has been shown that an increase in social interactions corresponds to the evolution of human intelligence or in other words, an increase in brain size . This is provided and shown by Robin Dunbar 's social brain hypothesis.

[ 15 ] Moreover, this can be used as a level of transition in human evolution; of which also includes dental shapes.

[ 16 ] Brain size has shown intra-specific mosaic variability within its own development, as these differences are a result of environmental limitations. In other words, independent variability of brain structure is seen more when brain regions are unassociated from one another, ultimately, giving rise to perceptible features. When comparing current brain size and capacity between humans and chimpanzees,  the ability to predict the evolutionary change between their ancestors was incredibly insightful. This granted the discovery that "local spatial interactions" were the main effect of the limitations.

[ 17 ] Furthermore, alongside the cranial capacity and structure of the brain, dental shape provides another example of mosaicism.

Using fossil record, dental shape showed mosaic evolution within the canine teeth found in early hominin. Reduction of canine sizes are seen as an authentication mark of human ancestor evolution. However, A. anamensis , discovered in Kenya, was found to have the largest mandibular canine root as part of Australopithecus evolution. This alters the authentication mark because the dimorphism between root and crown reduction has not been assessed. Although canine reduction has probably occurred prior to the evolution of Australopithecus , "changes in canine shape, in both crowns and roots, occurred in a mosaic fashion throughout the A. anamensis–afarensis lineage".

[ 18 ] See also [ edit ] Biology portal Co-adaptation Coevolution Coextinction Convergent evolution Evolutionary developmental biology Parallel evolution References [ edit ] ^ King, R.C.; Stansfield, W.D.; Mulligan, P.K. 2006.

A dictionary of genetics . 7th ed, Oxford University Press. p286 ISBN 0-19-530761-5 ^ a b Carroll R.L. 1997.

Patterns and processes of vertebrate evolution . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-47809-X ^ a b c Gould, S.J.

1977.

Ontogeny and phylogeny . Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

^ Stanley, S.M. 1979.

Macroevolution: pattern and process . Freeman, San Francisco. p154 ISBN 0-7167-1092-7 ^ Jurmain, Robert. et al. 2008.

Introduction to Physical Anthropology . Thompson Wadsworth. p479 ^ Foster, Michael and Lankester, E. Ray (eds )1898–1903.

The scientific memoirs of Thomas Henry Huxley . 4 vols and supplement, Macmillan, London ISBN 1-4326-4011-9 ^ Barnovsky, A.D. 1993. Mosaic evolution at population level in Microtus pennsylvanicus . In Morphological changes in Quaternary mammals of North America . ed R.A. Martin & A.D. Barnovsky. Cambridge University Press. pp24–59 ^ Lü, J.; Unwin, D.M.; Jin, X.; Liu, Y.; Ji, Q. (2010).

"Evidence for modular evolution in a long-tailed pterosaur with a pterodactyloid skull" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society B .

277 (1680): 383– 389.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2009.1603 .

PMC 2842655 .

PMID 19828548 .

^ MacFadden, Bruce J. (2003) [1999].

Fossil horses: systematics, paleobiology, and evolution of the Family Equidae . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-47708-5 . Retrieved 6 June 2010 .

^ Maynard Smith, John 1993.

The theory of evolution . Cambridge University Press. 3rd ed + new Introduction. pp285–290 ISBN 0-521-45128-0 ^ Kermack, D.M.; Kermack, K.A. (1984).

The evolution of mammalian characters . Croom Helm.

ISBN 0-7099-1534-9 .

^ Kemp T.S. 2005.

The origin and evolution of mammals . Oxford University Press, Oxford.

ISBN 0-19-850761-5 ^ Kielan-Jaworowska, Zofia; Richard L. Cifelli and Zhe-Xi Luo 2004.

Mammals from the Age of Dinosaurs: origins, evolution, and structure , Columbia University Press, New York.

ISBN 0-231-11918-6 ^ Parravicini, Andrea; Pievani, Telmo (2019). "Mosaic evolution in hominin phylogeny: meanings, implications, and explanations".

Journal of Anthropological Sciences .

96 (97): 45– 68.

doi : 10.4436/JASS.97001 .

ISSN 1827-4765 .

PMID 31241465 .

^ Dunbar, R.I.M. (2009). "The social brain hypothesis and its implications for social evolution".

Annals of Human Biology .

36 (5): 562– 572.

doi : 10.1080/03014460902960289 .

ISSN 0301-4460 .

PMID 19575315 .

S2CID 21495059 .

^ Foley, Robert A. (2016-07-05).

"Mosaic evolution and the pattern of transitions in the hominin lineage" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

371 (1698): 20150244.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2015.0244 .

ISSN 0962-8436 .

PMC 4920300 .

PMID 27298474 .

^ Gómez-Robles, Aida; Hopkins, William D.; Sherwood, Chet C. (2014).

"Modular structure facilitates mosaic evolution of the brain in chimpanzees and humans" .

Nature Communications .

5 (1): 4469.

Bibcode : 2014NatCo...5.4469G .

doi : 10.1038/ncomms5469 .

ISSN 2041-1723 .

PMC 4144426 .

PMID 25047085 .

^ Manthi, Fredrick K.; Plavcan, J. Michael; Ward, Carol V. (2012-03-01).

"New hominin fossils from Kanapoi, Kenya, and the mosaic evolution of canine teeth in early hominins" .

South African Journal of Science .

108 (3/4): 9 pages.

doi : 10.4102/sajs.v108i3/4.724 .

ISSN 1996-7489 .

v t e Evolutionary biology Introduction Outline Timeline of evolution History of life Index Evolution Abiogenesis Adaptation Adaptive radiation Altruism Cheating Reciprocal Baldwin effect Cladistics Coevolution Mutualism Common descent Convergence Divergence Earliest known life forms Evidence of evolution Evolutionary arms race Evolutionary pressure Exaptation Extinction Event Homology Last universal common ancestor Macroevolution Microevolution Mismatch Non-adaptive radiation Origin of life Panspermia Parallel evolution Signalling theory Handicap principle Speciation Species Species complex Taxonomy Unit of selection Gene-centered view of evolution Population genetics Artificial selection Biodiversity Evolutionarily stable strategy Fisher's principle Fitness Inclusive Gene flow Genetic drift Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mutation Population Natural selection Sexual dimorphism Sexual selection Flowering plants Fungi Mate choice Social selection Trivers–Willard hypothesis Variation Development Canalisation Evolutionary developmental biology Genetic assimilation Inversion Modularity Phenotypic plasticity Of taxa Bacteria Birds origin Brachiopods Molluscs Cephalopods Dinosaurs Fish Fungi Insects butterflies Life Mammals cats canids wolves dogs hyenas dolphins and whales horses Kangaroos primates humans lemurs sea cows Plants pollinator-mediated Reptiles Spiders Tetrapods Viruses Of organs Cell DNA Flagella Eukaryotes symbiogenesis chromosome endomembrane system mitochondria nucleus plastids In animals eye hair auditory ossicle nervous system brain Of processes Aging Death Programmed cell death Avian flight Biological complexity Cooperation Color vision in primates Emotion Empathy Ethics Eusociality Immune system Metabolism Monogamy Morality Mosaic evolution Multicellularity Sexual reproduction Gamete differentiation/sexes Life cycles/nuclear phases Mating types Meiosis Sex-determination Snake venom Tempo and modes Gradualism / Punctuated equilibrium / Saltationism Micromutation / Macromutation Uniformitarianism / Catastrophism Speciation Allopatric Anagenesis Catagenesis Cladogenesis Cospeciation Ecological Hybrid Non-ecological Parapatric Peripatric Reinforcement Sympatric History Renaissance and Enlightenment Transmutation of species David Hume Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion Charles Darwin On the Origin of Species History of paleontology Transitional fossil Blending inheritance Mendelian inheritance The eclipse of Darwinism Neo-Darwinism Modern synthesis History of molecular evolution Extended evolutionary synthesis Philosophy Darwinism Alternatives Catastrophism Lamarckism Orthogenesis Mutationism Saltationism Structuralism Spandrel Theistic Vitalism Teleology in biology Related Biogeography Ecological genetics Evolutionary medicine Group selection Cultural evolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Hologenome theory of evolution Missing heritability problem Molecular evolution Astrobiology Phylogenetics Tree Polymorphism Protocell Systematics Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mosaic_evolution&oldid=1101978814 " Category : Evolutionary biology concepts Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 August 2022, at 19:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mosaic evolution 11 languages Add topic

