Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Student-centered assessment 3 Application to Elementary and Secondary Education 4 Application to higher education 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Student-centered learning 14 languages Afrikaans العربية Bikol Central Български Español Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Македонски 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Shqip Suomi ไทย Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Methods of teaching Student-centered learning , also known as learner-centered education , broadly encompasses methods of teaching that shift the focus of instruction from the teacher to the student . In original usage, student-centered learning aims to develop learner autonomy and independence [ 1 ] by putting responsibility for the learning path in the hands of students by imparting to them skills, and the basis on how to learn a specific subject and schemata required to measure up to the specific performance requirement.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Student-centered instruction focuses on skills and practices that enable lifelong learning and independent problem-solving.

[ 5 ] Student-centered learning theory and practice are based on the constructivist learning theory that emphasizes the learner's critical role in constructing meaning from new information and prior experience.

Student-centered learning puts students' interests first, acknowledging student voice as central to the learning experience.  In a student-centered learning space , students choose what they will learn, how they will pace their learning, [ 6 ] and how they will assess their own learning by playing the role of the facilitator of the classroom.

[ 4 ] This is in contrast to traditional education , also dubbed "teacher-centered learning", which situates the teacher as the primarily "active" role while students take a more "passive", receptive role. In a teacher-centered classroom, teachers choose what the students will learn, how the students will learn, and how the students will be assessed on their learning.  In contrast, student-centered learning requires students to be active, responsible participants in their own learning and with their own pace of learning.

[ 7 ] Usage of the term "student-centered learning" may also simply refer to educational mindsets or instructional methods that recognize individual differences in learners.

[ 8 ] In this sense, student-centered learning emphasizes each student's interests, abilities, and learning styles , placing the teacher as a facilitator of learning for individuals rather than for the class as a whole.

Background [ edit ] Theorists like John Dewey , Jean Piaget and Lev Vygotsky , whose collective work focused on how students learn, have informed the move to student-centered learning. Dewey was an advocate for progressive education, and he believed that learning is a social and experiential process by making learning an active process as children learn by doing. He believed that a classroom environment in which students could learn to think critically and solve real world problems was the best way to prepare learners for the future.

[ 6 ] Carl Rogers 's ideas about the formation of the individual also contributed to student-centered learning. Rogers wrote that "the only learning which significantly influences behavior [and education] is self discovered".

[ 9 ] Maria Montessori was also a forerunner of student-centered learning, where preschool children learn through independent self-directed interaction with previously presented activities.

Self-determination theory focuses on the degree to which an individual's behavior is self-motivated and 'self-determined'. When students are allowed to gauge their learning, learning becomes an incentive, thus more meaningful. Placing students at the center of the classroom allows them to gauge their own self-worth which creates a higher degree of intrinsic motivation.

Student-centered learning means inverting the traditional teacher-centered understanding of the learning process and putting students at the center of the learning process.  In the teacher-centered classroom, teachers are the primary source for knowledge. On the other hand, in student-centered classrooms, active learning is strongly encouraged.  Armstrong (2012) claimed that "traditional education ignores or suppresses learner responsibility".

[ 10 ] A further distinction from a teacher-centered classroom to that of a student-centered classroom is when the teacher acts as a facilitator , as opposed to an instructor. In essence, the teacher's goal in the learning process is to guide students into making new interpretations of the learning material, thereby 'experiencing' content, reaffirming Rogers' notion that "significant learning is acquired through doing".

[ 9 ] Through peer-to-peer interaction, collaborative thinking can lead to an abundance of knowledge. In placing a teacher closer to a peer level, knowledge and learning is enhanced, benefitting the student and classroom overall. According to Lev Vygotsky 's theory of the zone of proximal development (ZPD), students typically learn vicariously through one another.

Scaffolding is important when fostering independent thinking skills. Vygotsky proclaims, "Learning which is oriented toward developmental levels that have already been reached is ineffective from the viewpoint of the child's overall development. It does not aim for a new stage of the developmental process, but rather lags behind this process." [ 11 ] Student-centered assessment [ edit ] One of the most critical differences between student-centered learning and teacher-centered learning is in assessment.

[ 12 ] Student-centered learning typically involves more formative assessment and less summative assessment than teacher-centered learning.

[ 13 ] In student-centered learning, students participate in the evaluation of their learning.

[ 14 ] This means that students are involved in deciding how to demonstrate their learning. Developing assessment that supports learning and motivation is essential to the success of student-centered approaches.

Application to Elementary and Secondary Education [ edit ] In the U.S. the principles of student-centered instruction have been promoted as a way to improve engagement and boost achievement through their inclusion in the Common Core .

[ 15 ] Student-centered instruction has been shown to be related to increased mathematics engagement. Additionally, there is evidence that using student-centered instruction raises mathematics achievement.

[ 16 ] Application to higher education [ edit ] A student-centered class at Shimer College Student-centered learning environments have been shown to be effective in higher education.

[ 17 ] They have been defined specifically within higher education as both a mindset and a culture within a given educational institution and as a learning approach broadly related to, and supported by, constructivist theories of learning . They are characterised by innovative methods of teaching which aim to promote learning in communication with teachers and other learners and which take students seriously as active participants in their own learning and foster transferable skills such as problem-solving, critical thinking, and reflective thinking.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] The revised European Standards and Guidelines for Quality Assurance (ESG) approved by the Ministerial Conference in Yerevan on 15 May 2015 include the following passage on student-centred learning: "Institutions should ensure that the programmes are delivered in a way that encourages students to take an active role in creating the learning process, and [should ensure] that the assessment of students reflects this approach." [ 20 ] A research university in Hong Kong sought to promote student-centered learning across the entire university by employing the following methods: [ 21 ] Analysis of good practice by award-winning teachers, in all faculties, to show how they made use of active forms of student learning.

Subsequent use of the analysis to promote wider use of good practice.

A compulsory teacher training course for new junior teachers, which encouraged student-centered learning.

Projects funded through teaching development grants, of which 16 were concerned with the introduction of active learning experiences.

A program-level quality enhancement initiative that utilized a student survey to identify strengths and potential areas for improvement.

Development of a model of a broadly based teaching and learning environment influencing the development of generic capabilities to provide evidence of the need for an interactive learning environment.

The introduction of program reviews as a quality assurance measure.

The success of this initiative was evaluated by surveying the students.  After two years, the mean ratings indicating the students' perception of the quality of the teaching and learning environment at the university all rose significantly.

[ 22 ] The study is one of many examining the process of implementing student-centered pedagogies in large institutions of higher education.

[ 23 ] See also [ edit ] Schools portal Education portal Constructivism (learning theory) Educational progressivism Experiential education Inquiry-based learning Learning environment Personal learning environment Phenomenon-based learning Problem-based learning Project-based learning Public sphere pedagogy Purpose-centered education SCALE-UP Teaching method Notes [ edit ] ^ Jones, Leo. (2007). The Student-Centered Classroom. Cambridge University Press.

^ Rogers, C. R. (1983). Freedom to Learn for the 80's. New York: Charles E. Merrill Publishing Company, A Bell & Howell Company.

^ Pedersen, S., & Liu, M. (2003). Teachers' beliefs about issues in the implementation of a student-centered learning environment. Educational Technology Research and Development, 51(2), 57-76.

^ a b Hannafin, M. J.; Hannafin, K. M. (2010).

"Cognition and Student-Centered, Web-Based Learning: Issues and Implications for Research and Theory" (PDF) .

Learning and Instruction in the Digital Age . Springer US. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 11, 2021.

^ Young, Lynne E.; Paterson, Barbara L. (2007).

Teaching Nursing: Developing a Student-centered Learning Environment . p. 5.

ISBN 978-0781757720 .

^ a b Crumly, Cari; Dietz, Pamela; d’Angelo, Sarah (November 1, 2014).

Pedagogies for Student-Centered Learning: Online and On-Ground . Augsburg Fortress Publishers.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctt9m0skc.5 .

ISBN 978-1-4514-8953-8 .

JSTOR j.ctt9m0skc .

^ Johnson, Eli (2013).

The Student Centered Classroom: Vol 1: Social Studies and History . p. 19.

ISBN 978-1317919490 .

^ Student-Centered Learning. (2014). Education Reform Glossary.

http://edglossary.org/student-centered-learning/ ^ a b Kraft, R. G. (1994). Bike riding and the art of learning. In L. B. Barnes, C. Roland Christensen, & A. J. Hansen (Eds.), Teaching and the case method. Boston: Harvard Business School Press, Pg. 41 ^ Armstrong 2012 , p. 2.

sfn error: no target: CITEREFArmstrong2012 ( help ) ^ Vygotsky, L.S. (1980).

Mind in Society . p. 89.

ISBN 0674076699 .

^ Crumly, Cari (2014).

Pedagogies for Student-Centered Learning: Online and On-Ground . p. 26.

ISBN 978-1451489538 .

^ Crumly 2014 , p. 26.

^ Jahnke, Isa (2012). "A Way Out of the Information Jungle". In Coakes, Elayne (ed.).

Technological Change and Societal Growth: Analyzing the Future . p. 182.

ISBN 978-1466602014 .

^ "Can Student-Driven Learning Happen Under Common Core?" .

KQED . February 26, 2013 . Retrieved September 16, 2020 .

^ Cornelius-White, Jeffrey (2007). "Learner-centered teacher-student relationships are effective: A meta-analysis".

Review of Educational Research .

77 : 113– 143.

doi : 10.3102/003465430298563 .

^ Wright, Gloria Brown (2011).

"Student-Centered Learning in Higher Education" (PDF) .

International Journal of Teaching and Learning in Higher Education .

23 (3): 93– 94.

ISSN 1812-9129 .

^ Attard, Angele; Iorio, Emma Di; Geven, Koen; Santa, Robert (2014).

Student-Centered Learning SCL Toolkit . Brussels: European Students' Union.

^ Hoidn, Sabine (2017).

Student-Centered Learning Environments in Higher Education Classrooms . New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) ^ ESG, European Higher Education Area (May 15, 2015).

"Standards and Guidelines for Quality Assurance in the European Higher Education Area" (PDF) .

European Higher Education Area . Retrieved April 9, 2023 .

^ Kember 2009 , pp. 10, 12.

^ Kember 2009 , p. 12.

^ Geven, K.; Attard, A. (2012). "Time for Student-Centred Learning?". In Curaj, Adrian; Scott, Peter; Vlasceanu, Laz?r (eds.).

European Higher Education at the Crossroads .

ISBN 978-9400739376 .

References [ edit ] J.S., Armstrong (2012).

"Natural Learning in Higher Education" .

Encyclopedia of the Sciences of Learning . Heidelberg: Springer.

Hoidn, S. (2017).

Student-Centered Learning Environments in Higher Education Classrooms . New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.

Kember, David (2009). "Promoting student-centred forms of learning across an entire university".

Higher Education .

58 (1): 1– 13.

doi : 10.1007/s10734-008-9177-6 .

S2CID 145136281 .

External links [ edit ] Library resources about Student-centered learning Resources in your library Resources in other libraries A paper from the Teaching and Learning Forum 2000 titled: "Student-centred learning: Is it possible?" "Student-Centered Learning Environments: How and Why" "Helping You Talk to the World: Student-Centered Teaching" v t e Education Overview General Glossary Index Outline By perspective Aims and objectives Learning standards Anthropology Assessment Evaluation Course evaluation Psychometrics Standards-based Standardized test Teacher quality Economics Spending Free education Tuition payments Education sciences Evidence-based History Inclusion Leadership Neuroscience Pedagogy Philosophy Policy Politics Psychology Research Rights Sociology Technology Instructional Instructional design By subject Agricultural Art Bilingual Business Chemistry Computer science Death Design Economics Engineering Environmental Euthenics Health Language Legal Mathematics Medical Military Music Nursing Peace Performing arts Philosophy Physical Physics Reading Religious Science Sex Teacher Technology Values Vocational Alternative Adult education Autodidacticism Democratic Education reform Gifted education Homeschooling Religious education Special education Concepts 21st century skills Accreditation Accreditation mill Bloom's taxonomy Board of education Cognitive load Classroom management Class arrangement Compulsory education Critical thinking Curriculum Bias Development Hidden Studies Theory Diploma mill Learning theory Desirable difficulty Spacing effect Testing effect Lesson plan Pedagogical pattern School choice School discipline Teacher look Teacher retention Teaching method Active learning Blended learning Contemplative Demonstration Dialogic learning Experiential Feedback Passive Peer instruction Personalized Phenomenon-based Problem-based Problem solving Project-based Student-centered Socratic Teaching philosophy Wikimedia Books Definitions Images Learning resources News Quotes Texts Stages Early childhood education Primary education Secondary education Tertiary education Preschool → Kindergarten → Primary school → Infant → Junior → Secondary school → Middle school → High school → Higher education Vocational Further ( Continuing ) Undergraduate → Postgraduate Portal Education by region Education in Africa Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Somaliland Dependencies and other territories Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla (Spain) Madeira (Portugal) Mayotte / Réunion (France) Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom) Education in Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal Education in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard Other entities European Union Education in  North America Sovereign states Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Dependencies and other territories Anguilla Aruba Bermuda Bonaire British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Curaçao Greenland Guadeloupe Martinique Montserrat Puerto Rico Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saba Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten Turks and Caicos Islands United States Virgin Islands Education in Oceania Sovereign states Australia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Indonesia Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Associated states of New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Dependencies and other territories American Samoa Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Easter Island French Polynesia Guam Hawaii New Caledonia Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Pitcairn Islands Tokelau Wallis and Futuna Education in South America Sovereign states Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Dependencies and other territories Falkland Islands French Guiana South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Schools portal Category WikiProject Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Student-centered_learning&oldid=1291516269 " Categories : Curricula Philosophy of education Pedagogy Education reform Progressive education Hidden categories: Harv and Sfn no-target errors CS1 errors: periodical ignored Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from March 2021 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from March 2021 This page was last edited on 21 May 2025, at 18:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Student-centered learning 14 languages Add topic

