Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography Toggle Geography subsection 1.1 Other definitions 2 Sovereign states in both hemispheres 3 Countries, dependencies and other territories in the Western Hemisphere but not in the Americas 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Western Hemisphere 78 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Corsu Dansk Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Македонски Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Sakizaya Sardu Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article or section appears to contradict itself on the definition of its subject ; its own sources (Britannica, JM Olson) indicate it is usually defined as spanning from 20W to 160E .

Please see the talk page for more information.

( February 2025 ) This article may be confusing or unclear to readers . In particular, much of the current article is anachronic. This subject needs a more historical perspective ; the notion of Western Hemisphere is tightly linked to the widespread use of double-hemisphere world maps in the 17th to 19th centuries and in this sense very similar in meaning to the New World . Also, the Greenwhich meridian was only standard from 1884 onwards. Essentially all double-hemisphere maps use a partition of hemispheres around what is now the 20th meridian west, with most using that longitude as the prime meridian.

Please help clarify the article . There might be a discussion about this on the talk page .

( January 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Half of Earth west of the Prime Meridian For the metonymous location, see Americas .

Map of the Western Hemisphere The Western Hemisphere is the half of the planet Earth that lies west of the Prime Meridian (which crosses Greenwich , London , United Kingdom ) and east of the 180th meridian .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The other half is called the Eastern Hemisphere . Geopolitically, the term Western Hemisphere is often used as a metonym for the Americas or the " New World ", even though geographically the hemisphere also includes parts of other continents.

[ 12 ] Geography [ edit ] The Western Hemisphere in a photo taken from Deep Space Climate Observatory in June 2022 The Western Hemisphere comprises the Americas , except some of the Aleutian Islands to the southwest of the Alaskan mainland; the westernmost parts of Europe and Africa , both mainland and islands; the extreme eastern tip of the Russian mainland and islands ( North Asia ); many territories in Oceania ; and a large part of Antarctica .

The center of the Western Hemisphere on the surface of the Earth is in the Pacific Ocean , at the intersection of the 90th meridian west and the Equator , among the Galápagos Islands . The nearest land is Genovesa Island at 0°19′N 89°57′W ﻿ / ﻿ 0.317°N 89.950°W ﻿ / 0.317; -89.950 .

The highest mountain in the Western Hemisphere is Aconcagua , in the Andes of Argentina , at 6,960.8 m (22,837 ft).

[ 13 ] The tallest freestanding structure in the Western Hemisphere is the CN Tower , in Toronto , at 553.3 m (1,815 ft). The tallest building in the Western Hemisphere is One World Trade Center , in New York City at 541.3 m (1,776 ft).

Other definitions [ edit ] In an attempt to match the Western Hemisphere more closely with the Americas, some sources use the 20th meridian west and the diametrically opposed 160th meridian east to define the hemisphere.

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] This definition excludes all of the European and African mainlands, but still includes some islands associated with these continents, more of eastern Russia and Oceania, and part of Antarctica. It includes all islands of Alaska, but excludes a small portion of northeast Greenland . There is no hemisphere that includes all of the Americas that also excludes all land outside the Americas, regardless of the meridians or points chosen to define it.

Sovereign states in both hemispheres [ edit ] Below is a list of the sovereign states in both the Western and Eastern hemispheres on the IERS Reference Meridian , in order from north to south: Denmark , due to the entirety of Greenland and the Faroe Islands .

Denmark proper lies entirely within the Eastern Hemisphere.

Norway , due only to Jan Mayen . Mainland Norway, Svalbard and Bouvet Island lie entirely within the Eastern Hemisphere.

United Kingdom , passing through Greenwich , London . Most of the country lies within the Western Hemisphere.

The Netherlands has overseas islands that lie entirely within the Western Hemisphere, while mainland Netherlands lies entirely within the Eastern Hemisphere.

France , passing through Puynormand ( Gironde ). About 1/3 of the country, including cities like Nantes or Bordeaux , as well as the overseas regions of Guadeloupe , Martinique , and French Guiana lie within the Western Hemisphere.

Spain , passing through Castellón de la Plana ( Valencian Community ). Most of Spain, including the capital Madrid , the Canary Islands and the southern half of its Mediterranean territorial waters , lies within the Western Hemisphere. Spanish, Moroccan and Algerian Mediterranean waters are the only part of the Mediterranean Sea located in the Western Hemisphere.

Algeria , passing through Stidia . About 1/4 of the country, including Oran , Algeria's second-largest city, lies within the Western Hemisphere.

Mali , passing through the municipal area of Gao . Most of Mali, including the capital Bamako , lies within the Western Hemisphere.

Burkina Faso , passing through Lalgaye . Most of the country, including the capital Ouagadougou , lies within the Western Hemisphere.

Ghana , passing through Tema . Most of Ghana, including the capital Accra , lies within the Western Hemisphere.

Togo , passing near Tami ( Tône Prefecture in Savanes Region ).

Below is a list of additional sovereign states which are in both the Western and Eastern hemispheres along the 180th meridian , in order from north to south. (France is not listed below due to its inclusion above, though the meridian does pass Wallis and Futuna .) With the exception of the United States (due to Wake Island , Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands ), all of them are located on just one side of the International Date Line , which curves around them.

Russia , passing through Chukotka Autonomous Okrug . Its portion lying east of the 180th meridian is the only part of the country lying in the Western Hemisphere.

United States , passing through the Aleutian Islands ( Alaska ). Except for the portion of Aleutian Islands and waters lying west of the 180th meridian, Guam , the Northern Mariana Islands , and Wake Island , most of the country lies east of the 180th meridian.

Kiribati , passing close to Arorae . The country has both the Equator and the 180th meridian ( antimeridian ) crossing through its territory. It is the only country located in four hemispheres.

Tuvalu , passing close to its capital, Funafuti .

Fiji , passing close to its dependency Rotuma and passing through Taveuni .

Most of New Zealand proper lies within the Eastern Hemisphere; but Chatham Islands and Kermadec Islands , as well as the self-governing states of the Cook Islands and Niue and the dependent territory of Tokelau , lie east of the 180th meridian.

Countries, dependencies and other territories in the Western Hemisphere but not in the Americas [ edit ] The following countries and territories lie outside the Americas yet are entirely, mostly, or partially within the Western Hemisphere: Africa Entirely Cape Verde Gambia Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Liberia Madeira ( Portugal ) Mauritania Morocco Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha ( United Kingdom ) Ascension Island Saint Helena Tristan da Cunha Gough Island Senegal Sierra Leone Western Sahara ( disputed ) Mostly Burkina Faso Ghana Mali Partly Algeria Togo Antarctica Entirely Peter I Island ( Antarctic Treaty parties / Claimed by Norway ) South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands (Administered by the United Kingdom / Claimed by Argentina ) South Orkney Islands ( Antarctic Treaty parties / Claimed by Argentina and the United Kingdom ) South Shetland Islands ( Antarctic Treaty parties / Claimed by Argentina , Chile and the United Kingdom ) Partly Mainland Antarctica ( Antarctic Treaty parties) East Antarctica (partially) Transantarctic Mountains (partially) West Antarctica (entirely) Asia Partly Chukotka Autonomous Okrug ( Russia ) Europe Entirely Bailiwick of Guernsey ( United Kingdom ) Alderney Guernsey Sark Bailiwick of Jersey ( United Kingdom ) Faroe Islands ( Denmark ) Gibraltar ( United Kingdom ) Iceland Isle of Man ( United Kingdom ) Jan Mayen ( Norway ) Portugal Ireland Mostly Spain United Kingdom England (mostly) Northern Ireland (entirely) Scotland (entirely) Wales (entirely) Partly France ( Metropolitan ) Oceania Entirely American Samoa ( United States ) Chatham Islands ( New Zealand ) Clipperton Island ( France ) Cook Islands ( New Zealand ) Easter Island ( Chile ) Salas and Gómez Island French Polynesia ( France ) Tahiti Galápagos Islands ( Ecuador ) Hawaii ( United States ) Howland and Baker Islands ( United States ) Baker Island Howland Island Jarvis Island ( United States ) Johnston Atoll ( United States ) Kermadec Islands ( New Zealand ) Kingman Reef ( United States ) Midway Atoll ( United States ) Niue ( New Zealand ) Palmyra Atoll ( United States ) Pitcairn, Henderson, Ducie and Oeno Islands ( United Kingdom ) Samoa Tokelau ( New Zealand ) Tonga Mostly Kiribati Wallis and Futuna ( France ) Partly Fiji Rotuma Tuvalu See also [ edit ] Eastern Hemisphere Land and water hemispheres Western world References [ edit ] ^ a b Olson, Judy M (1997), "Projecting the hemisphere", in Robinson, Arthur H; Snyder, John P (eds.), Matching the map projection to the need , Bethesda, MD: Cartography and Geographic Information Society, American Congress on Surveying and Mapping, archived from the original on 2016-03-14 , retrieved 2020-03-03 .

- "Western Hemisphere", Merriam-Webster's Geographical Dictionary (3rd ed.), Springfield, Massachusetts: Merriam-Webster, 2001, p. 1294 .

^ Oxford Dictionary of English (2nd ed.), London, UK: Oxford University Press , 2006, p. 2001 - "Western Hemisphere", Merriam Webster's Online Dictionary (based on Collegiate vol., 11th ed.), Springfield, MA: Merriam-Webster, 2006 ^ a b "Western Hemisphere | Definition" .

Britannica .

Archived from the original on 2020-06-08 . Retrieved 2021-11-21 .

^ Bureau of Western Hemisphere Affairs Archived 2020-05-28 at the Wayback Machine , United States Department of State .

^ Western Hemisphere Archived 2020-10-03 at the Wayback Machine , United States Department of the Treasury .

^ Western Hemisphere Archived 2020-05-27 at the Wayback Machine , Office of the United States Trade Representative .

^ Joe Biden: The Western Hemisphere Needs U.S. Leadership Archived 2019-12-25 at the Wayback Machine , Americas Quarterly , 17 December 2018.

^ Western Hemisphere Archived 2020-05-10 at the Wayback Machine , United States Department of Justice .

^ Western Hemisphere Archived 2020-05-06 at the Wayback Machine , United States Department of Agriculture .

^ Western Hemisphere Archived 2020-06-21 at the Wayback Machine , United States Fish and Wildlife Service .

^ Western Hemisphere Archived 2020-04-05 at the Wayback Machine , Fulbright Program .

^ References [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] ^ "Informe científico que estudia el Aconcagua, el Coloso de América mide 6960,8 metros" [Scientific Report on Aconcagua, the Colossus of America measures 6960,8m] (in Spanish).

Universidad Nacional de Cuyo . 2012. Archived from the original on September 8, 2012 . Retrieved September 3, 2012 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Western Hemisphere .

"Western Hemisphere" at Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.

v t e Earth 's primary regions and subregions Worlds Down Under New World Old World Three/Four Worlds First World Second World Third World Fourth World Hemispheres Eastern Land Hemisphere Northern Southern Water Hemisphere Western Landmasses Africa-Eurasia Eurasia Americas Antarctica Australia Zealandia submerged Tectonic plates Continents Africa North Maghreb Sub-Saharan Central East Horn Great Lakes Southern West Antarctica East Antarctica Antarctic Plateau Transantarctic Mountains West Antarctica Antarctic Peninsula Asia East Northeast Southeast Mainland Maritime Central Aral Sea Aralkum Desert Caspian Sea North Siberia Ural Russian Far East Northeast South Indian subcontinent Subregions West Arabian Peninsula Caucasus South Caucasus Levant Dead Sea Levantine corridor Levantine Sea Near East Other regions Himalayan Himalayan states Indian region Inner Asia Greater Central Asia Europe Eastern Balkans Caucasus North Caucasus South Caucasus Southern Russia European Russia Southeastern Northern Baltic British Isles Nordic Northwestern Scandinavia Scandinavian Peninsula Southern Mediterranean Middle East Italy Italian peninsula South-eastern Balkan Peninsula South-western Iberian Peninsula Western Atlantic Low Countries Northwestern Other regions Central Europe By language Celtic Germanic Romance Slavic Macaronesia North America Northern America Greenland Great Lakes Pacific Northwest United States Appalachia Bible Belt Eastern East Coast Northern Southeast Southwest U.S. Census regions Northeastern New England Mid-Atlantic Midwest South Western Mountain Pacific Canada Atlantic Canadian Prairies Central Eastern Northern Western Middle America Aridoamerica Greater Caribbean Caribbean West Indies Central Am.

Mesoamerica Northern Mexico Oceania Australasia Australia Mainland Australia New Guinea Tasmania Zealandia Melanesia Island Melanesia Micronesia Near Oceania Polynesia Remote Oceania South America Amazon Plain Amazon Basin Amazon Rainforest Andean States Brazilian Highlands Caribbean South America The Guianas Southern Cone Patagonia Geopolitical regions Global East Heartland North Northeast Northwest South Southeast Southwest West Asia–Pacific Far East Pacific Asia Sinosphere Greater China Indosphere Greater India Europe, the Middle East and Africa Mediterranean Greater Middle East Middle East and North Africa Middle East Arab world Mashriq Maghreb Greater Iran Iranian plateau Americas Anglo Dutch French Latin America and the Caribbean Latin Ibero Hispanic Portuguese Islands By continent Africa Americas North America Caribbean Central America South America Antarctica Asia Europe by area by population Oceania Australia New Zealand By ocean Arctic Atlantic Baltic Sea Black Sea Caribbean Sea Irish Sea Mediterranean Sea Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Ionian Sea Indian Persian Gulf Pacific East China Sea South China Sea Southern Oceans Antarctic/Southern Antarctic Convergence Arctic Atlantic Indian Pacific Great Barrier Reef Mariana Trench Challenger Deep Ring of Fire World Ocean Other waterbodies Lakes lists Rivers Seas Rim Arctic Atlantic Indo-Mediterranean Indian Ocean Mediterranean Pacific Polar Antarctic Arctic Continents of Earth / List of seas / Physical Earth Authority control databases International VIAF National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Western_Hemisphere&oldid=1302476092 " Categories : Western Hemisphere Hemispheres of Earth Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Self-contradictory articles from February 2025 All self-contradictory articles Wikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2025 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 17:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Western Hemisphere 78 languages Add topic

