Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Glaucon in Book II of the Republic 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References Toggle the table of contents Glaucon 18 languages Català Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית 日本語 ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Română Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Older brother of Plato (born c. 445 BC) For the drug with trade name Glaucon, see Epinephrine .

Not to be confused with Glaucus .

You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Italian .

(August 2023) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the Italian article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Italian Wikipedia article at [[:it:Glaucone (fratello di Platone)]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|it|Glaucone (fratello di Platone)}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Glaucon ( / ˈ ɡ l ɔː k ɒ n / ; Greek : Γλαύκων ; c. 445 BC – 4th century BC), son of Ariston , was an ancient Athenian and Plato 's older brother. He is primarily known as a major conversant with Socrates in the Republic . According to Debra Nails , two major facts about Glaucon's life can be ascertained from a single comment by Socrates in the Republic , [ 1 ] : 368a that Glaucon was old enough to have distinguished himself in a battle at Megara, and that he was the eromenos of the poet and statesman Critias .

[ 2 ] In Book V of the Republic , an exchange between Socrates and Glaucon indicates that Glaucon owned property where he kept and bred sporting dogs and game birds.

[ 1 ] : 459 He is also referenced briefly in the beginnings of two other dialogues of Plato, the Parmenides and Symposium . Glaucon also appears in Xenophon 's Memorabilia , [ 3 ] and is referenced in Aristotle 's Poetics , where Aristotle states: "The true mode of interpretation is the precise opposite of what Glaucon mentions. Critics, he says, jump at certain groundless conclusions; they pass adverse judgement and then proceed to reason on it; and, assuming that the poet has said whatever they happen to think, find fault if a thing is inconsistent with their own fancy." [ 4 ] A later doxographical tradition, recorded by Diogenes Laertius , attributed nine dialogues to Glaucon: Phidylus , Euripides , Amyntichus , Euthias , Lysithides , Aristophanes , Cephalus , Anaxiphemus , and Menexenus , Laërtius, Diogenes .

"Socrates, with predecessors and followers: Glaucon" .

Lives of the Eminent Philosophers . Vol. 1:2. Translated by Hicks, Robert Drew (Two volume ed.). Loeb Classical Library. § 124.

However, no trace of these works remains.

[ 2 ] Biography [ edit ] Glaucon's family lived in the district of Collytus on the outskirts of Athens, which is where Glaucon was born.

[ 5 ] His father, Ariston, and his mother, Perictione, had four children according to Diogenes Laërtius—Glaucon, Adeimantus, Plato, and a daughter, Potone.

[ 6 ] He also had a half-brother named Antiphon according to the Parmenides dialogues. Their family was established, wealthy, and successful.

[ 7 ] Glaucon distinguished himself in a battle at Megara , which may have been a battle in 424 BC , 409 BC, or 405 BC. Due to constant warfare between Athens and Megara, the battle in question may also be a more minor skirmish with an unknown date.

[ 8 ] Glaucon and Plato belonged to Socrates ' circle of wealthy young students. Although little is known about Glaucon's life, some information can be gleaned from his brother's writings and from later Platonic biographers.

Glaucon in Book II of the Republic [ edit ] Much of what is known about Glaucon comes from Plato's works, particularly the Republic, where he is one of Socrates' main interlocutors. As Plato himself points out, Glaucon is a very courageous and bold interlocutor [ 1 ] : 357a2 who does not hesitate to express his doubts about Socrates' refutation of Thrasymachus.

His speech opens with a classification of goods, which will be taken up later by other ancient philosophers, including Aristotle. According to Glaucon, there are goods that we desire for themselves, regardless of their consequences, because they are "harmless pleasures that involve nothing in the future except the joy of experiencing them", [ 1 ] : 357b7 others that we desire for themselves and for their advantages (such as sight and intelligence) and still others that in themselves are less than desirable or cost us effort, but which we are happy to possess for the consequences they have (such as being treated in case of illness or doing gymnastics). This classification is used by Glaucon to introduce his argument, according to which justice, for the majority of people, belongs to the last category of goods, because in itself it should be avoided, but it is necessary to have money and a good reputation.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] At this point, Glaucon manifests his desire to reinforce Thrasymachus ' thesis (justice as the benefit of the strongest), refuted by Socrates in an unsatisfactory way in his opinion, building a genesis of justice that is complementary to it. According to some interpretations, Glaucon chooses to support Thrasymachus's thesis only to spur Socrates to defend justice in a satisfactory way.

[ 12 ] : 74 See also [ edit ] List of speakers in Plato's dialogues Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d Plato (1991) [1968].

The Republic of Plato with note and an interpretive essay by Allan Bloom (PDF) . Translated by Allan Bloom (2 ed.). BasicBooks, HarperCollins. p. 509.

ISBN 0465069347 . Retrieved 13 November 2023 .

^ a b Nails 2002 .

^ Xenophon, Memorabilia , Book III, chapter 6 ^ Aristotle, Poetics , 11.2 ^ Diogenes Laërtius, iii. 3 ^ Diogenes Laërtius, iii. 4 ^ Nails 2002 , p. 39.

^ Kent Moors (1979).

"Plato's Battle of Megara" .

The Southern Journal of Philosophy .

17 (4): 493.

^ Socrates will place justice in the second category of goods, those which are desired for themselves and for their consequences. According to some commentators, the passage is ambiguous, because justice should be desirable only for itself: Bruno Centrone, Notes to Platone, La Repubblica , Laterza, Rome-Bari, 1997, note 6, ' 'Book II .

^ Platone, Repubblica , Roma-Bari, Laterza, 1997 ^ Bruno Centrone, Note a Platone, Repubblica ^ Stefano Bacin (ed.), Ancient ethics and modern ethics. Topics for discussion , il Mulino, Bologna, 2010 References [ edit ] Plato (1991) [1968].

The Republic of Plato with note and an interpretive essay by Allan Bloom (PDF) . Translated by Allan Bloom (2 ed.). BasicBooks, HarperCollins. p. 509.

ISBN 0465069347 . Retrieved 13 November 2023 .

Nails, Debra (15 November 2002).

The People of Plato: A Prosopography of Plato and Other Socratics . Hackett Publishing. pp.

154– 156.

ISBN 978-1-60384-027-9 . Retrieved 16 April 2023 .

This biography of a philosopher from ancient Greece is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Glaucon&oldid=1297162491 " Categories : 5th-century BC Athenians Pupils of Socrates 4th-century BC deaths 440s BC births Family of Plato Ancient Greek philosopher stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Biography articles needing translation from Italian Wikipedia Articles containing Greek-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating the template Lives of the Eminent Philosophers All stub articles This page was last edited on 24 June 2025, at 13:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Glaucon 18 languages Add topic

