Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Naming and etymology 2 Subfields 3 Careers 4 Study 5 Journals 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Herpetology 72 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Кыргызча Кырык мары Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça Tetun ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of amphibians and reptiles For the study of hepatic things (the liver, hepatitis, and so on), see Hepatology .

For the study of herpes, see Herpes simplex research .

"Herp" redirects here. For other uses, see Herp (disambiguation) .

Blue poison dart frog Herpetology (from Ancient Greek ἑρπετόν herpetón , meaning " reptile " or "creeping animal") is a branch of zoology concerned with the study of amphibians (including frogs , salamanders , and caecilians (Gymnophiona)) and reptiles (including snakes , lizards , turtles , crocodilians , and tuataras ).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Birds , which are cladistically included within Reptilia, are traditionally excluded here; the separate scientific study of birds is the subject of ornithology .

[ 3 ] The precise definition of herpetology is the study of ectothermic (cold-blooded) tetrapods . This definition of "herps" (otherwise called "herptiles" or "herpetofauna") excludes fish ; however, it is not uncommon for herpetological and ichthyological scientific societies to collaborate. For instance, groups such as the American Society of Ichthyologists and Herpetologists have co-published journals and hosted conferences to foster the exchange of ideas between the fields.

[ 4 ] Herpetological societies are formed to promote interest in reptiles and amphibians, both captive and wild.

Herpetological studies can offer benefits relevant to other fields by providing research on the role of amphibians and reptiles in global ecology . For example, by monitoring amphibians that are very sensitive to environmental changes, herpetologists record visible warnings that significant climate changes are taking place.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Although they can be deadly, some toxins and venoms produced by reptiles and amphibians are useful in human medicine . Currently, some snake venom has been used to create anti-coagulants that work to treat strokes and heart attacks .

[ 7 ] Naming and etymology [ edit ] The word herpetology is from the Ancient Greek words ἑρπετόν ( herpetón ), meaning "creeping animal", and λόγος ( lógos ), meaning "study".

[ 8 ] "Herp" is a vernacular term for non-avian reptiles and amphibians. It is derived from the archaic term "herpetile", with roots back to Linnaeus's classification of animals, in which he grouped reptiles and amphibians in the same class. There are over 6700 species of amphibians [ 9 ] and over 9000 species of reptiles.

[ 10 ] Despite its modern taxonomic irrelevance, the term has persisted, particularly in the names of herpetology, the scientific study of non-avian reptiles and amphibians, and herpetoculture , the captive care and breeding of reptiles and amphibians.

Subfields [ edit ] The field of herpetology can be divided into areas dealing with particular taxonomic groups such as frogs and other amphibians ( batrachology ), [ 11 ] [ 12 ] snakes (ophiology or ophidiology), lizards (saurology) and turtles (cheloniology, chelonology, or testudinology).

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] More generally, herpetologists work on functional problems in the ecology , evolution , physiology , behavior , taxonomy, or molecular biology of amphibians and reptiles. Amphibians or reptiles can be used as model organisms for specific questions in these fields, such as the role of frogs in the ecology of a wetland . All of these areas are related through their evolutionary history, an example being the evolution of viviparity (including behavior and reproduction ).

[ 15 ] Careers [ edit ] Career options in the field of herpetology include lab research , field studies and surveys, assistance in veterinary and medical procedures, zoological staff, museum staff, and college teaching.

[ 16 ] In modern academic science, it is rare for an individual to solely consider themselves to be a herpetologist. Most individuals focus on a particular field such as ecology, evolution, taxonomy, physiology, or molecular biology, and within that field ask questions pertaining to or best answered by examining reptiles and amphibians. For example, an evolutionary biologist who is also a herpetologist may choose to work on an issue such as the evolution of warning coloration in coral snakes .

[ 17 ] Modern herpetological writers include Mark O'Shea [ 18 ] and Philip Purser. Modern herpetological showmen include Jeff Corwin , Steve Irwin (popularly known as the "Crocodile Hunter"), and Austin Stevens , popularly known as "Austin Snakeman" in the TV series Austin Stevens: Snakemaster .

Herpetology is an established hobby around the world due to the varied biodiversity in many environments. Many amateur herpetologists coin themselves as "herpers".

[ 19 ] Study [ edit ] Most colleges or universities do not offer a major in herpetology at the undergraduate or the graduate level . Instead, persons interested in herpetology select a major in the biological sciences . The knowledge learned about all aspects of the biology of animals is then applied to an individual study of herpetology.

[ 20 ] Journals [ edit ] Herpetology research is published in academic journals including Ichthyology & Herpetology , founded in 1913 [ 21 ] (under the name Copeia in honour of Edward Drinker Cope ); Herpetologica , founded in 1936; [ 22 ] Reptiles and amphibians , founded in 1990; [ 23 ] and Contemporary Herpetology, founded in 1997 and stopped publishing in 2009.

[ 24 ] See also [ edit ] Amphibians portal Reptiles portal Herping List of herpetologists List of herpetology academic journals Reptile Database AmphibiaWeb References [ edit ] ^ "Herpetology - Reptiles, Amphibians, Conservation - Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 2023-11-24 .

^ "Herpetology - Latest research and news - Nature" .

www.nature.com . Retrieved 2023-11-24 .

^ "Ornithology - Bird Identification, Behavior & Conservation - Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 2023-09-06 .

^ "Recent Meetings" .

American Society of Ichthyologists and Herptetologists . Retrieved 2023-09-06 .

^ "Why are amphibian populations declining? - U.S. Geological Survey" .

www.usgs.gov . 31 December 2016 . Retrieved 2023-09-06 .

^ "Amphibians as indicators of environmental health" .

Amphibian Ark . Retrieved 2023-09-27 .

^ "How venoms are shaping medical advances - BBC Earth" .

www.bbcearth.com . Retrieved 2023-09-06 .

^ "herpetology | Etymology of herpetology by etymonline" .

www.etymonline.com . Retrieved 2024-03-05 .

^ "AmphibiaWeb" . AmphibiaWeb . Retrieved 2012-08-13 .

^ "Species Statistics February 2012" . Reptile-database.org . Retrieved 2012-08-13 .

^ D.C. Wareham (2005).

Elsevier's Dictionary of Herpetological and Related Terminology . Elsevier.

ISBN 978-0-08-046017-8 .

^ Francesco M. Angelici (2015).

Problematic Wildlife: A Cross-Disciplinary Approach . Springer. pp.

584– 585.

ISBN 978-3-319-22246-2 .

^ Rhodin, Anders G. J. (2 August 2017).

"Turtles of the World: Annotated Checklist and Atlas of Taxonomy, Synonymy, Distribution, and Conservation Status (8th Ed.)" .

Chelonian Research Foundation and Turtle Conservancy – via Academia.edu .

^ Inger, Robert F. (1992).

"A Bimodal Feeding System in a Stream-Dwelling Larva of Rhacophorus from Borneo" .

Copeia .

1992 (3): 887– 890.

doi : 10.2307/1446167 .

ISSN 0045-8511 .

JSTOR 1446167 .

^ Blackburn, Daniel G. (December 2006). "Squamate Reptiles as Model Organisms for the Evolution of Viviparity".

Herpetological Monographs .

20 (1): 131– 146.

doi : 10.1655/0733-1347(2007)20[131:SRAMOF]2.0.CO;2 .

ISSN 0733-1347 .

S2CID 86044099 .

^ "Herpetologist Job Description [Updated for 2023]" .

www.indeed.com . Retrieved 2023-09-06 .

^ Rojas, Bibiana; Valkonen, Janne; Nokelainen, Ossi (2015-05-04).

"Aposematism" .

Current Biology .

25 (9): R350 – R351 .

Bibcode : 2015CBio...25.R350R .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2015.02.015 .

ISSN 0960-9822 .

PMID 25942542 .

^ "Mark O'Shea - The Official Website" .

www.markoshea.info . Retrieved 2023-09-06 .

^ jlp342 (2020-04-21).

"What the Heck is Herping?" .

cwhl.vet.cornell.edu . Retrieved 2023-09-05 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ "How to Become a Herpetologist - EnvironmentalScience.org" .

www.environmentalscience.org . Retrieved 2023-11-16 .

^ "Ichthyology & Herpetology" .

Ichthyology & Herpetology . Retrieved 2023-09-06 .

^ "Herpetologica on JSTOR" .

www.jstor.org . Retrieved 2023-11-16 .

^ "About the Journal - Reptiles & Amphibians" .

journals.ku.edu . Retrieved 2023-09-06 .

^ "Contemporary Herpetology" .

journals.ku.edu . Retrieved 2023-09-06 .

Further reading [ edit ] Adler, Kraig (1989).

Contributions to the History of Herpetology . Society for the Study of Amphibians and Reptiles (SSAR).

Eatherley, Dan (2015).

Bushmaster: Raymond Ditmars and the Hunt for the World's Largest Viper . New York: Arcade. 320 pp.

ISBN 978-1628725117 .

Goin, Coleman J.

; Goin, Olive B.

; Zug, George R.

(1978).

Introduction to Herpetology, Third Edition . San Francisco: W. H. Freeman and Company. xi + 378 pp.

ISBN 0-7167-0020-4 .

External links [ edit ] Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Snakes of Europe Iranian Herpetological Studies Institute (IHSI) Field Herpetology Guide American Society of Ichthyologists and Herpetologists Herpetological Conservation and Biology Societas Europaea Herpetologica Distribution Maps for European Reptiles and Amphibians Center for North American Herpetology over 500 species of reptiles and amphibians European Field Herping Community New Zealand Herpetology Archived 2007-10-20 at the Wayback Machine Chicago Herpetological Society Biology of the Reptilia is an online copy of the full text of a 22-volume 13,000-page summary of the state of research of reptiles.

HerpMapper is a database of reptile and amphibian sightings Amphibian and Reptile Atlas of Peninsular California , San Diego Natural History Museum A Primer on Reptiles and Amphibians Field Herp Forum v t e Extant amphibian positions by subclass Kingdom Animalia Phylum Chordata Subphylum Craniata Superclass Tetrapoda Lissamphibia Anura (frogs) Urodela (salamanders) Gymnophiona (caecilians) v t e Major extant reptile clades Lepidosauria Rhynchocephalia (tuataras) Squamata (snakes and lizards) Archelosauria Testudines (turtles) Archosauria Aves (birds) Crocodilia (crocodiles, alligators, caimans, and relatives) Outline of reptiles Reptiles portal Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Subphylum: Vertebrata v t e Zoology Outline Branches Anthrozoology Arthropodology ( Arachnology ( Acarology ) Carcinology Entomology ( Coleopterology Lepidopterology Melittology Myrmecology Orthopterology ) Myriapodology ) Biological anthropology Bryozoology Cnidariology Ethnozoology Ethology Helminthology Herpetology ( Batrachology Ophiology Testudinology ) Ichthyology Malacology ( Conchology Teuthology ) Mammalogy ( Cetology Cynology Felinology Hippology Primatology ) Nematology Neuroethology Ornithology Parasitology Paleozoology Planktology Zooarchaeology Animal groups Porifera Ctenophora Placozoa Cnidaria Xenacoelomorpha Ambulacraria Chordata Aschelminthes Arthropoda Platyhelminthes Mollusca Annelida Animal anatomy Animal morphology Histology Tissues Epithelial tissue Muscular tissue Nervous tissue Connective tissues Mineralized tissues Molecular anatomy Anatomy and morphology Mammalian anatomy and morphology Human Dog Elephant Cat Bird anatomy Fish anatomy Shark anatomy Spider anatomy Insect morphology Animal physiology General physiology Respiration Respiratory system Breathing Gas exchange Respiratory pigment Cellular respiration Vascular system Blood Lymph Blood vessels Arteries Veins Capillaries Heart Water vascular system By species Insect physiology Fish physiology Zoologists Karl Ernst von Baer Georges Cuvier Charles Darwin Jean-Henri Fabre William Kirby Carl Linnaeus Konrad Lorenz Thomas Say Jakob von Uexküll Alfred Russel Wallace History Pre-Darwin Post-Darwin Timeline of zoology Category v t e Branches of biology Abiogenesis Aerobiology Agronomy Agrostology Anatomy Anthropogeny Anthropology Astrobiology Bacteriology Biochemistry Biogeography Biogeology Bioinformatics Biological engineering Biomathematics Biomechanics Biophysics Biosemiotics Biostatistics Biotechnology Botany Cell biology Cellular microbiology Chemical biology Chronobiology Cognitive biology Computational biology Conservation biology Cryobiology Cytogenetics Dendrology Developmental biology Ecological genetics Ecology Embryology Epidemiology Epigenetics Evolutionary biology Freshwater biology Generative biology Genetics Genomics Geobiology Gerontology Herpetology Histology Human biology Ichthyology Immunology Lipidology Mammalogy Marine biology Microbiology Molecular biology Mycology Neontology Neuroscience Nutrition Ornithology Osteology Paleontology Parasitology Pathology Pharmacology Photobiology Phycology Phylogenetics Physiology Pomology Primatology Proteomics Protistology Quantum biology Relational biology Reproductive biology Sociobiology Structural biology Synthetic biology Systematics Systems biology Taxonomy Teratology Toxicology Virology Virophysics Welfare biology Xenobiology Zoology See also History of biology Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine Timeline of biology and organic chemistry Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Herpetology&oldid=1302710086 " Categories : Herpetology Subfields of zoology Scoutcraft Hidden categories: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 27 July 2025, at 02:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Herpetology 72 languages Add topic

