Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Formation 1.2 Achievements 1.3 Cooperation with other geopolitical regions 2 Structure 3 Sessions 4 Committees 5 Political groupings 6 Baltic Assembly Prize for Literature, the Arts, and Science 7 Medal of the Baltic Assembly 8 Baltic Innovation Prize of the Baltic Assembly 9 See also 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Baltic Assembly 27 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bosanski Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Italiano Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Nederlands Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Polski Русский Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Multinational regional organisation This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Baltic Assembly" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Baltic Assembly" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2022 ) This article may rely excessively on sources too closely associated with the subject , potentially preventing the article from being verifiable and neutral .

Please help improve it by replacing them with more appropriate citations to reliable, independent sources .

( March 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Baltic Assembly Balti Assamblee ( Estonian ) Baltijas Asambleja ( Latvian ) Baltijos Asamblėja ( Lithuanian ) Flag Logo Member states of the Baltic Assembly (green).

Headquarters Riga Working languages Estonian Latvian Lithuanian Type Intergovernmental organization Membership Estonia Latvia Lithuania Leaders • Secretary General Agnija Antanoviča • Secretary of the Estonian Delegation Merilin Reepalu • Secretary of the Latvian Delegation Ingrīda Sticenko • Secretary of the Lithuanian Delegation Renata Godfrey History • Baltic Assembly established 1 December 1990 • Baltic Assembly regulations approved 8 November 1991 • Baltic Assembly structure and rules agreement 13 June 1994 Website www .baltasam .org The Baltic Assembly ( BA ) is a regional organisation that promotes intergovernmental cooperation between Estonia , Latvia , and Lithuania . It attempts to find a common position in relation to many international issues, including economic, political and cultural issues. The decisions of the assembly are advisory.

The budget of the BA is funded by the three members' governments. The official languages of the Baltic Assembly are Estonian , Latvian , and Lithuanian . The headquarters and secretariat of the organization are located in Riga , Latvia .

History [ edit ] 32nd session of the Baltic Assembly meeting in Riga in November 2013 Formation [ edit ] The organisation was formed after a decision to establish it was made in Vilnius on 1 December 1990. It works under regulations approved on 8 November 1991 in Tallinn .

[ 1 ] On 13 June 1994, the three countries agreed to the structure and rules of the organization.

[ 2 ] Achievements [ edit ] The BA claims the following as its achievements between 1991 and 2003: [ 3 ] Withdrawal of Russian troops from the member States, Formation of the Baltic Council of Ministers as an institution of governmental co-operation, Development of common Baltic economic, educational and information technology policies, Harmonisation of legislation in conformity with requirements of the European Union, Improvement of border-crossing procedures, The establishment of the Baltic Assembly Prizes for Literature, the Arts and Science .

Cooperation with other geopolitical regions [ edit ] In 2017, the Baltic Assembly, the Benelux , and three of the members of the Nordic Council ( Sweden , Denmark and Finland , all EU-member states ) sought intensifying cooperation in the Digital Single Market and discussing social matters, the Economic and Monetary Union of the European Union , the European migrant crisis and defense cooperation. Relations with Russia , Turkey , and the United Kingdom was also on the agenda.

[ 4 ] Structure [ edit ] The BA comprises sixty members. Each of the parliaments of the three States appoints twenty of its members to the Assembly. Each of the national parliaments appoints two of the members to be head and deputy head of the national delegation. The six head delegates and deputy head delegates form the BA's Presidium. The Chairman of the Presidium is the head of the national delegation of the country hosting the next session of the BA. The heads of the other two national delegations are Vice Chairmen of the Presidium. The Presidium controls the BA between sessions. The Chairman acts as the coordinator of the work of the BA, is its representative with other bodies and liaises with the three members’ governments.

Sessions [ edit ] 30th session of the Baltic Assembly meeting in Tallinn in November 2011 31st session of the Baltic Assembly meeting in Vilnius in November 2012 There are ordinary and extraordinary Sessions. The ordinary Session is convened once a year, as a concluding forum of a country's presidency, which proceeds according to a yearly rotation principle in Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania. Before 2003 there were two Sessions a year – in spring and autumn, and countries - participants had half a year presidency.

Any national delegation may propose that an extraordinary session is held. On 8–9 February 1998 in Helsinki , Finland , following to the 2nd Joint Meeting of the Nordic Council and the Baltic Assembly, the first Extraordinary Session of the Baltic Assembly took place. The second Extraordinary Session of the Baltic Assembly was held on 27–29 April 2005 in Pärnu , Estonia , following to the 5th Joint Meeting of the Baltic Assembly and the Nordic Council .

[ 5 ] Committees [ edit ] The following are the standing committees: Budget and Audit Economics, Energy and Innovation Education, Science and Culture Natural Resources and Environment Security and Defence Each member of the Baltic Assembly participates in at least one committee.

Political groupings [ edit ] The 20 members of the BA from each country are chosen so that their political make-up reflects the proportions within their home parliament. The members may then form cross-national party groupings of at least five members from at least two nations.

[ 6 ] Baltic Assembly Prize for Literature, the Arts, and Science [ edit ] Main article: Baltic Assembly Prize for Literature, the Arts and Science An Euler diagram showing the relationships between various multinational European organisations and agreements v t e The idea on establishment of the Baltic Assembly Prize was conceived in 1992. The establishment of the Baltic Prize was inspired by the tradition of the Nordic Council Prizes.

On 31 October 1993 in Tallinn, Resolution on the Establishment of the Baltic Assembly Prizes in Culture, Arts and Science was adopted. Main aim of establishment of the Prizes was to "promote further cooperation among the three nations, provide new opportunities for exchanging cultural values and stimulate better understanding of the history and cultural heritage of the countries".

The aim of the Prize is to support outstanding achievements in literature, the arts and science; demonstrate the common interests of the countries in this region in upholding of their national identity and self-esteem; create an opportunity to learn about the achievements of the neighbouring countries; maintain a continuous interest among the people in Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania about developments in the Baltic States; strengthen cooperation among the Baltic States in the fields of literature, the arts and science; encourage more and more people to become interested in the intellectual values and languages of the Baltic nations; and raise the level of literature, the arts and science in the Baltic States.

Medal of the Baltic Assembly [ edit ] The Medal of the Baltic Assembly The Medal of the Baltic Assembly is an award given by the organization to individuals that have contributed to upholding the unity and cooperation of the Baltic States, outstanding contribution and cooperation in implementing joint cooperation projects, promoting regional cooperation in an enlarged Europe.

[ 7 ] Baltic Innovation Prize of the Baltic Assembly [ edit ] The Baltic Innovation Prize is an annual award given to the most innovative company in the Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. The prize given to demonstrate the mutual interest of the Baltic States to support implementation of achievements in innovation and modern technologies.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Nordic-Baltic Eight Nordic Council Council of the Baltic Sea States Northern Europe Baltic region European Union Baltic Entente New Hanseatic League Baltoscandia Visegrád Group References [ edit ] ^ Baltic Assembly (2021).

"Pre-history" .

baltasam.org . Datateks.

Archived from the original on 4 February 2022 . Retrieved 7 March 2022 .

^ Baltic Assembly (2021).

"International inclusion" .

baltasam.org . Datateks. Archived from the original on 4 February 2022 . Retrieved 7 March 2022 .

^ "Baltic Assembly - History" .

baltasam.org .

^ ERR (22 June 2017).

"Ratas meets with Benelux, Nordic, Baltic leaders in the Hague" .

^ "Baltic Assembly - Session" .

baltasam.org .

^ "Baltic Assembly - National Delegations" .

baltasam.org .

^ "Baltic Assembly - BA Medal" .

www.baltasam.org . Retrieved 6 May 2021 .

^ "Prize for innovative companies in the Baltic States" .

www.baltasam.org . Retrieved 21 December 2021 .

Further reading [ edit ] Hiden, Johan ; Salmon, Patrick (1994) [1991].

The Baltic Nations and Europe (Revised ed.). Harlow, England: Longman.

ISBN 978-0-582-25650-7 .

External links [ edit ] Official website Flag of the Baltic Assembly at Flags of the World Seimas of the Republic of Lithuania Portals : Europe European Union Estonia Latvia Lithuania v t e Baltic states Estonia Latvia Lithuania History Territorial changes Baltic Entente United Baltic Duchy Occupation Timeline Background by the Soviet Union (1940) by Nazi Germany by the Soviet Union (1944) Deportations June deportation (1941) Operation Priboi (1949) State continuity Diplomatic services Under Soviet rule (1944-91) Guerrilla war Sovietization Singing Revolution Baltic Way Geography Largest cities tallest buildings National parks Politics Baltic Assembly Baltic Council of Ministers Military Air Policing Air Surveillance Network Defence College Naval Squadron Economy Baltic Tiger Busiest airports Housing bubble Regions Gross regional product Human Development Index OMX Baltic 10 Sport Baltic Cup Baltic Basketball League Swimming Championships Baltic Chain Tour Records in athletics in swimming Category Commons v t e Eastern Bloc Soviet Union Communism Formation Yalta Conference Soviet occupations Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina Baltic states Hungary Romania 1948 Czechoslovak coup d'état Berlin Blockade Soviet response to the Marshall Plan Tito–Stalin split Soviet-allied states People's Republic of Albania (to 1961) People's Republic of Bulgaria Czechoslovak Socialist Republic German Democratic Republic Hungarian People's Republic Polish People's Republic Socialist Republic of Romania Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia (to 1948) Organizations Cominform COMECON Warsaw Pact World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU) World Federation of Democratic Youth (WFDY) Revolts and opposition Goryani Movement 1949 East German State Railway strike Rebellion of Cazin 1950 1953 Plzeň uprising 1953 East German uprising 1956 Poznań protests 1956 Hungarian Revolution Prague Spring / Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia 1970 Polish protests Croatian Spring June 1976 protests Solidarity / Soviet reaction / Martial law 1981 protests in Kosovo Conditions Emigration and defection ( list of defectors ) Sovietization of the Baltic states Information dissemination Politics Economies Telephone tapping Dissolution Revolutions of 1989 Die Wende Fall of the Berlin Wall End of communism in Hungary Velvet Revolution Romanian revolution Fall of communism in Albania Singing Revolution Collapse of the Soviet Union Dissolution of Czechoslovakia January 1991 events in Lithuania January 1991 events in Latvia Breakup of Yugoslavia Yugoslav Wars Authority control databases International VIAF National United States Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Baltic_Assembly&oldid=1305158563 " Categories : Baltic states Baltic organizations Foreign relations of Lithuania International political organizations Parliamentary assemblies Politics of Estonia Politics of Latvia Bottom-up regional groups within the European Union Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2022 Articles lacking reliable references from March 2022 All articles lacking reliable references Articles needing additional references from March 2022 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing Estonian-language text Articles containing Latvian-language text Articles containing Lithuanian-language text Pages using infobox country or infobox former country with the symbol caption or type parameters This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 11:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Baltic Assembly 27 languages Add topic

