Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Examples 2 References 3 See also 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Persistent identifier 9 languages Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Português Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Long-lasting digital name An introduction to persistent identifiers and FAIR data .

A persistent identifier ( PI or PID ) is a long-lasting reference to a document, file, web page, or other object.

The term "persistent identifier" is usually used in the context of digital objects that are accessible over the Internet. Typically, such an identifier is not only persistent but actionable: [ 1 ] you can plug it into a web browser and be taken to the identified source.

Of course, the issue of persistent identification predates the Internet. Over centuries, writers and scholars developed standards for citation of paper-based documents so that readers could reliably and efficiently find a source that a writer mentioned in a footnote or bibliography. After the Internet started to become an important source of information in the 1990s, the issue of citation standards became important in the online world as well. Studies have shown that within a few years of being cited, a significant percentage of web addresses go "dead", [ 2 ] [ 3 ] a process often called link rot . Using a persistent identifier can slow or stop this process.

An important aspect of persistent identifiers is that "persistence is purely a matter of service".

[ 4 ] That means that persistent identifiers are only persistent to the degree that someone commits to resolving them for users. No identifier can be inherently persistent, however many persistent identifiers are created within institutionally administered systems with the aim to maximise longevity.

However, some regular URLs (i.e. web addresses), maintained by the website owner, are intended to be long-lasting; these are often called permalinks .

Examples [ edit ] People and organisations: Open Researcher and Contributor ID (ORCID) Research Organization Registry (ROR) Publications: Virtual International Authority File (VIAF) International Standard Name Identifier (ISNI) International Standard Book Number (ISBN) Uniform Resource Identifiers : Archival Resource Key (ARK), with 8.2 billion ARKs issued.

Handle System Digital Object Identifier (DOI), with 200 million DOIs issued.

Magnet link [ 5 ] (decentralized, with BitTorrent ) Uniform Resource Names (URNs) Extensible Resource Identifiers (XRIs) Persistent Uniform Resource Locators (PURLs) Software Hash Identifier (SWHID) Wikidata Identifier (e.g QIDs) Combined persistent identifier and archiving functionality is provided by services such as the Internet Archive perma.cc , archive.today , and WebCite such that anyone can archive a web page to prevent link rot of a URL.

[ citation needed ] References [ edit ] ^ John A. Kunze, "Towards Electronic Persistence Using ARK Identifiers", section 3, California Digital Library [1] ^ Sanderson, Robert; Phillips, Mark; Herbert Van de Sompel (2011). "Analyzing the Persistence of Referenced Web Resources with Memento".

arXiv : 1105.3459 [ cs.DL ].

^ Bugeja, Michael (2010).

Vanishing Act: The Erosion of Online Footnotes and Implications for Scholarship in the Digital Age . Litwin Books.

ISBN 978-1936117147 .

^ Kunze, J. (5 April 2013).

"The ARK Identifier Scheme" .

^ "On constructing persistent identifiers with persistent resolution targets" .

IEEE Conference Publication : 1031– 1040. September 2016 . Retrieved 8 April 2018 .

See also [ edit ] Authority control External links [ edit ] Juha Hakala, "Persistent identifiers – an overview." Posted to Technology Watch Report (TWR): Standards in Metadata and Interoperability, 13 Oct 2010.

Hans-Werner Hilse and Jochen Kothe, Implementing persistent identifiers: overview of concepts, guidelines and recommendations.

London / Amsterdam: Consortium of European Research Libraries and European Commission on Preservation and Access, 2006.

ISBN 90-6984-508-3 .

FAIRDATA F1 - F1: (Meta) data are assigned globally unique and persistent identifiers This article relating to library science or information science is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Persistent_identifier&oldid=1292496517 " Categories : Identifiers Library and information science stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 All stub articles This page was last edited on 27 May 2025, at 07:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Persistent identifier 9 languages Add topic

