Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Archetypes in literature Toggle Archetypes in literature subsection 2.1 Function 2.2 Story archetypes 2.3 Literary criticism 3 Jungian archetypes Toggle Jungian archetypes subsection 3.1 Neo-Jungian concepts 4 Other uses of archetypes Toggle Other uses of archetypes subsection 4.1 Dichter's application of archetypes 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Archetype 39 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Kurdî മലയാളം Мокшень Nederlands Norsk bokmål Occitan Português Română Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Українська Vèneto 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept in psychology, literature, philosophy For other uses, see Archetype (disambiguation) .

The concept of an archetype ( / ˈ ɑːr k ɪ t aɪ p / AR -ki-type ) appears in areas relating to behavior , historical psychology , philosophy and literary analysis .

An archetype can be any of the following: a statement, pattern of behavior, prototype , "first" form, or a main model that other statements, patterns of behavior, and objects copy, emulate, or "merge" into. Informal synonyms frequently used for this definition include "standard example", "basic example", and the longer-form "archetypal example"; mathematical archetypes often appear as " canonical examples".

the Jungian psychology concept of an inherited unconscious predisposition, behavioral trait or tendency ("instinct") shared among the members of the species; as any behavioral trait the tendency comes to being by way of patterns of thought, images, affects or pulsions characterized by its qualitative likeness to distinct narrative constructs; unlike personality traits, many of the archetype's fundamental characteristics are shared in common with the collective & are not predominantly defined by the individual's representation of them; and the tendency to utilize archetypal representations is postulated to arise from the evolutionary drive to establish specific cues corresponding with the historical evolutionary environment to better adapt to it. Such evolutionary drives are: survival and thriving in the physical environment, the relating function, acquiring knowledge, etc. It is communicated graphically as archetypal "figures".

a constantly-recurring symbol or motif in literature , painting , or mythology. This definition refers to the recurrence of characters or ideas sharing similar traits throughout various, seemingly unrelated cases in classic storytelling, media, etc. This usage of the term draws from both comparative anthropology and from Jungian archetypal theory .

Archetypes are also very close analogies to instincts , in that, long before any consciousness develops, it is the impersonal and inherited traits of human beings that present and motivate human behavior.

[ 1 ] They also continue to influence feelings and behavior even after some degree of consciousness developed later on.

[ 1 ] Etymology [ edit ] The word archetype , "original pattern from which copies are made," first entered into English usage in the 1540s.

[ 2 ] It derives from the Latin noun archetypum , latinization of the Greek noun ἀρχέτυπον ( archétypon ), whose adjective form is ἀρχέτυπος ( archétypos ), which means "first-molded", [ 3 ] which is a compound of ἀρχή archḗ , "beginning, origin", [ 4 ] and τύπος týpos , which can mean, among other things, "pattern", "model", or "type".

[ 5 ] It, thus, referred to the beginning or origin of the pattern, model or type.

[ 6 ] Archetypes in literature [ edit ] Function [ edit ] Usage of archetypes in specific pieces of writing is a holistic approach , which can help the writing win universal acceptance. This is because readers can relate to and identify with the characters and the situation, both socially and culturally. By deploying common archetypes contextually, a writer aims to impart realism to their work.

[ 7 ] According to many literary critics, archetypes have a standard and recurring depiction in a particular human culture or the whole human race that ultimately lays concrete pillars and can shape the whole structure in a literary work.

[ 8 ] Story archetypes [ edit ] Christopher Booker , author of The Seven Basic Plots: Why We Tell Stories , argues that the following basic archetypes underlie all stories: [ 9 ] Overcoming the Monster Rags to Riches The Quest Voyage and Return Comedy Tragedy Rebirth These themes coincide with the characters of Jung's archetypes.

Literary criticism [ edit ] Main article: Archetypal literary criticism Archetypal literary criticism argues that archetypes determine the form and function of literary works and that a text 's meaning is shaped by cultural and psychological myths. Cultural archetypes are the unknowable basic forms personified or made concrete by recurring images , symbols , or patterns (which may include motifs such as the " quest " or the " heavenly ascent "; recognizable character types such as the " trickster ", " saint ", " martyr " or the " hero "; symbols such as the apple or the snake; and imagery) and that have all been laden with meaning prior to their inclusion in any particular work.

[ citation needed ] The archetypes reveal shared roles universal among societies, such as the role of the mother in her natural relations with all members of the family. These archetypes create a shared imagery which is defined by many stereotypes that have not separated themselves from the traditional, biological, religious, and mythical framework.

[ 10 ] Jungian archetypes [ edit ] Main article: Jungian archetypes For broader coverage of this topic, see Signified and signifier and Schema (Kant) .

The concept of psychological archetypes was advanced by the Swiss psychiatrist Carl Jung , c. 1919. Jung has acknowledged that his conceptualization of archetype is influenced by Plato's Theory of forms , which he described as "the formulated meaning of a primordial image by which it was represented symbolically." [ 11 ] According to Jung, the term archetype is an explanatory paraphrase of the Platonic eidos , also believed to represent the word form .

[ 11 ] He maintained that Platonic archetypes are metaphysical ideas, paradigms, or models, and that real things are held to be only copies of these model ideas.

[ 11 ] However, archetypes are not easily recognizable in Plato's works in the way in which Jung meant them.

[ 12 ] In Jung's psychological framework, archetypes are innate, libidinally collective schemas , universal prototypes for idea- sensory impression images and may be used to interpret observations.

[ 13 ] [ 6 ] A group of memories and interpretations associated with an archetype is a complex (e.g. a mother complex associated with the mother archetype). Jung treated the archetypes as psychological organs, analogous to physical ones in that both are morphological constructs that arose through evolution .

[ 14 ] At the same time, it has also been observed that evolution can itself be considered an archetypal construct.

[ 15 ] Jung states in part one of Man And His Symbols that: My views about the 'archaic remnants', which I call 'archetypes' or 'primordial images,' have been constantly criticized by people who lack sufficient knowledge of the psychology of dreams and of mythology. The term 'archetype' is often misunderstood as meaning certain definite mythological images or motifs, but these are nothing more than conscious representations. Such variable representations cannot be inherited. The archetype is a tendency to form such representations of a motif—representations that can vary a great deal in detail without losing their basic pattern.

While there are a variety of categorizations of archetypes, Jung's configuration is perhaps the most well known and serves as the foundation for many other models. The four major archetypes to emerge from his work, which Jung originally terms primordial images, include the anima/animus, the self, the shadow, and the persona. Additionally, Jung referred to images of the wise old man, the child, the mother, and the maiden.

[ 16 ] He believed that each human mind retains these basic unconscious understandings of the human condition and the collective knowledge of our species in the construct of the collective unconscious .

Neo-Jungian concepts [ edit ] Other authors, such as Carol Pearson and Margaret Mark, have attributed 12 different archetypes to Jung, organized in three overarching categories, based on a fundamental driving force. These include: [ 17 ] Ego types : Innocent Orphan/regular guy or gal Hero Caregiver Soul types : Explorer Rebel Lover Creator Self types : Jester Sage Magician Ruler Other authors, such as Margaret Hartwell and Joshua Chen, go further to give these 12 archetypes families 5 archetypes each.
They are as follows: [ 18 ] Innocent Family : Innocent Child Dreamer Idealist Muse Citizen Family : Citizen Advocate Everyman Networker Servant Hero Family : Hero Athlete Liberator Rescuer Warrior Caregiver family : Caregiver Angel Guardian Healer Samaritan Explorer Family : Explorer Adventurer Pioneer Generalist Seeker Rebel Family : Rebel Activist Gambler Maverick Reformer Lover Family : Lover Companion Hedonist Matchmaker Romantic Creator Family : Creator Artist Entrepreneur Storyteller Visionary Jester Family : Jester Clown Entertainer Provocateur Shapeshifter Sage Family : Sage Detective Mentor Shaman Translator Magician Family : Magician Alchemist Engineer Innovator Scientist Sovereign Family : Sovereign Ambassador Judge Patriarch Ruler Other uses of archetypes [ edit ] There is also the position that the use of archetypes in different ways is possible because every archetype has multiple manifestations, with each one featuring different attributes.

[ 19 ] For instance, there is the position that the function of the archetype must be approached according to the context of biological sciences and is accomplished through the concept of the ultimate function.

[ 20 ] This pertains to the organism's response to those pressures in terms of biological trait.

[ 20 ] Dichter's application of archetypes [ edit ] Later in the 1900s, a Viennese psychologist named Dr.

Ernest Dichter took these psychological constructs and applied them to marketing. Dichter moved to New York around 1939  and sent every ad agency on Madison Avenue a letter boasting of his new discovery. He found that applying these universal themes to products promoted easier discovery and stronger loyalty for brands.

[ 21 ] See also [ edit ] Allegory of the Cave Archetypal pedagogy Archive for Research in Archetypal Symbolism Character (arts) Cliché Dmuta in Mandaeism Mental model Monomyth Ostensive definition Perennial philosophy Personification Prototype Role reversal Simulacrum Stereotype System archetypes Theory of Forms Type (biology) Wounded healer References [ edit ] ^ a b Holzinger, Andreas; Ziefle, Martina; Hitz, Martin; Debevc, Matjaz (2013-06-26).

Human Factors in Computing and Informatics: First International Conference, SouthCHI 2013, Maribor, Slovenia, July 1-3, 2013, Proceedings . Heidelberg: Springer. p. 18.

ISBN 9783642390616 .

^ Douglas Harper.

"Online Etymology Dictionary - Archetype" .

^ ἀρχέτυπος , Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon , on Perseus ^ ἀρχή , Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon , on Perseus ^ τύπος , Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon , on Perseus ^ a b Celikel, Mehmet; Taniyan, Baysar (2015).

English Studies: New Perspectives . Newcastle upon Tyne, UK: Cambridge Scholars Publishing. p. 13.

ISBN 978-1443877275 .

^ "Online Literary Device - Archetype Function" . 2013-08-19.

^ Garry, Jane (2017-07-05).

Archetypes and Motifs in Folklore and Literature: A Handbook: A Handbook . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-351-57615-4 .

^ Christopher., Booker (2004).

The seven basic plots : why we tell stories . London: Continuum.

ISBN 978-0826452092 .

OCLC 57131450 .

^ Sbaihat, Ahlam. 2012. "La imagen de la madre en el refranero español y jordano. Estudio de Paremiología comparada." España: Sociedad Española de Estudios Literarios de Cultura Popular , Oceanide 5.

^ a b c Knox, Jean (2003).

Archetype, Attachment, Analysis: Jungian Psychology and the Emergent Mind . New York: Brunner-Routledge. p. 35.

ISBN 978-1583911280 .

^ Nagy, Marilyn (1991).

Philosophical Issues in the Psychology of C. G. Jung: Portraits, Policies, Programs, and Practices . Albany, NY: State University of New York Press. p. 157.

ISBN 978-0791404515 .

^ Hogenson, George B. (2004). "Archetypes: emergence and the psyche's deep structure". In Cambray, Joseph; Carter, Linda (eds.).

Analytical Psychology: Contemporary Perspectives in Jungian Analysis . Advancing Theory in Therapy. Routledge. p. 33.

ISBN 978-1-58391-999-6 .

'The archetypes are sources of energy [...] collective ideas [...] records of reactions to subjective sense-images' (Jung[).] ^ Boeree, C. George.

"Carl Jung" .

Archived from the original on 6 February 2006 . Retrieved 2006-03-09 .

^ Brown, R. S. 2013. " Beyond the Evolutionary Paradigm in Consciousness Studies ." Journal of Transpersonal Psychology 45(2):159–71.

^ Hull, R. F.C, ed. (2014), "Archetypes of the Collective Unconscious", Collected Works of C.G. Jung, Volume 9 (Part 1): Archetypes and the Collective Unconscious , Princeton University Press, pp.

3– 41, doi : 10.1515/9781400850969.3 , ISBN 9781400850969 ^ "Archetypes – 12 Jungian types of human" .

mainform.net . Retrieved 2019-05-10 .

[ dead link ] ^ Mumfrey, W. H. (2009).

Archetypes in Branding : a Toolkit for Creatives and Strategists . Adams Media Corporation.

ISBN 978-1-4403-0788-1 .

OCLC 1088338691 .

^ Odajnyk, V. Walter (2012).

Archetype and Character: Power, Eros, Spirit, and Matter Personality Types . New York: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 51.

ISBN 9781349349241 .

^ a b Holtkamp, Mark B. (2012-07-10).

Biology Of The Archetype . BookBaby.

ISBN 9780615665337 .

^ "Retail therapy. How Ernest Dichter, an acolyte of Sigmund Freud, revolutionised marketing" .

The Economist . December 17, 2011 . Retrieved 2012-01-01 .

In 1939 he wrote to six big American companies, introducing himself as 'a young psychologist ...

External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of archetype at Wiktionary v t e Appropriation in the arts By field Music Bootleg recording Chopped and screwed Contrafact list Contrafactum Cover version DJ mix Interpolation Medley Music mashup Music plagiarism Musical quotation Nightcore Parody music Pasticcio Plunderphonics Potpourri Quodlibet Remix Riddim Sampling Sound collage Standard Tribute act Trope Variation Vaporwave Literature / theatre Assemblage Cut-up technique Flarf poetry Found poetry Jukebox musical Trope Verbatim theatre Visual arts Collage Combine painting Photographic mosaic Readymades of Marcel Duchamp Swipe By source material Mona Lisa Michelangelo's David Michelangelo's Pietà Statue of Liberty Cinema / television / video Abridged series Anime music video Collage film Found footage Literal music video Parody film Re-cut trailer Remake Shot-for-shot Supercut TV format Vidding Video mashup YouTube Poop Other arts In-joke Internet meme Joke theft Parody advertisement Revivalism (architecture) Video game modding General concepts Intertextual figures Allusion Calque Parody Pastiche Plagiarism Quotation Translation Adaptation Film Literary Theatre Other concepts After (art) Assemblage (art) Bricolage Citation Détournement Found object Homage Imitation in art Mashup Reprise Satire Source criticism in the arts Related artistic concepts Aesthetic interpretation Anti-art Archetypal literary criticism Artistic inspiration " The Death of the Author " Divine inspiration Afflatus Genius (literature) Muses Fan labor Fan fiction Genre Genre studies Originality Simulacrum Western canon Standard blocks and forms Archetype Formula fiction Genre fiction Jazz standard Plot device Stock character Story structure Epoch-marking works L.H.O.O.Q.

(1919) " Pierre Menard, Author of the Quixote " (1939) Reality Hunger: A Manifesto (2010) Theorization Dada De Copia Rerum Diegesis Dionysian imitatio Mimesis Nachahmung Palimpsests: Literature in the Second Degree The Pictures Generation Pop art Postmodernism Russian formalism Related non- artistic concepts Academic dishonesty Appropriation in sociology Articulation in sociology Cultural appropriation History of printing Information society Intellectual property Copyright infringement Derivative work Fair use Meme Open source Participatory culture Pirate politics Recontextualisation Remix culture v t e Stock characters List Archetype By ethics and morality Heroes Classic hero Action hero Christ figure Chosen One Everyman Folk hero Knight-errant Legacy hero Mythological king Paladin Superhero Youngest son Antihero Byronic hero Man alone Tragic hero Other Cyberhero Super soldier Space marine Rogues Lovable rogue Gentleman detective Jack Trickster Tricky slave Zanni (servants, clowns: Harlequin , Brighella , Scapino , Pulcinella and Pierrot ) Outlaw Bad boy Gentleman thief Pirate Air pirate Space pirate Other Good cop/bad cop Rake Villains Antivillains False hero The mole Double agent Evil twin Terrorist Social Darwinist Dark lord Mad scientist Supervillain Monsters Bug-eyed monster Evil clown Killer robot Killer toy Monster girl Skeleton Slime Swamp monster Vampires Zombie Nazi zombies Zombie animal Other Alazon Archenemy Folk devil Igor Masked villain Miser Vecchio (wealthy old men, Pantalone and Il Dottore ) Il Capitano (self styled captain, braggart) By sex and gender Feminine Love interest Bishōjo Blonde stereotype Farmer's daughter Girl next door Hooker with a heart of gold Ingénue Loosu ponnu Magical girlfriend Catgirl Monster girl Manic Pixie Dream Girl Vixen Hag Cat lady Crone Fairy godmother La Ruffiana Loathly lady Hawksian woman Dragon Lady Femme fatale Tsundere Woman warrior Jungle girl Magical girl Virago Strong female character Queen bee Princesse lointaine Southern belle Valley girl Yamato nadeshiko LGBT Class S Laotong Lady-in-waiting Columbina Mammy stereotype Geek girl Gamer girl Damsel in distress Final girl Princess and dragon Masculine Harlequin Pierrot Scaramouche Father figure Wise old man Elderly martial arts master Young American mappillai Himbo Ivan the Fool Jack Jock Little Johnny Nice guy Nice Jewish boy Superfluous man Prince Charming Bishōnen Knight-errant Primitive Feral child Noble savage Caveman Mountain man LGBT Seme and uke Otokonoko Bad boy Pachuco Black knight Others Adolescent clique Barbarian Clown Dragonslayer Donor Fool Identity formation Imaginary friend Innamorati ("The Lovers") Little green men Magical Negro Mole people Pop icon Redshirt Shoulder angel Sidekick Straight man Tokenism Town drunk Tragic mulatto Truck-kun Village idiot White savior Authority control databases : National Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐87fb5
Cached time: 20250814220136
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.681 seconds
Real time usage: 0.867 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3351/1000000
Revision size: 17605/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 185368/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10281/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 84543/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.442/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16040310/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  728.800      1 -total
 27.12%  197.649      1 Template:Reflist
 18.23%  132.887     11 Template:Lang
 17.81%  129.790     10 Template:Cite_book
 17.73%  129.217     11 Template:Navbox
 13.43%   97.896      1 Template:Appropriation_in_the_Arts
  9.85%   71.764      1 Template:Short_description
  5.60%   40.833      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.17%   37.650      2 Template:Columns-list
  4.81%   35.031      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:53917:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220136 and revision id 1304790536. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Archetype&oldid=1304790536 " Categories : Archetypes Archetypal psychology Cultural anthropology Literary concepts Narratology Social psychology Tropes Hidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from June 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2020 Articles containing Japanese-language text This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 05:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Archetype 39 languages Add topic

