Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Objective 2 Origin 3 Charter 4 Other programs 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Universities Space Research Association 4 languages العربية Deutsch Français Polski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Independent, nonprofit research corporation to advance space science and technology Universities Space Research Association Abbreviation USRA Formation March 12, 1969 ; 56 years ago ( 1969-03-12 ) Founder James E. Webb et al.

Founded at Washington, D.C.

Legal status Nonprofit organization Purpose "To advance the space- and aeronautics-related sciences" [ 1 ] Headquarters 425 3rd Street SW Suite 950 Washington DC 20024 Location United States Region Multinational Fields Aeronautics Space research Official language English President Elsayed Talaat Chair of the board of trustees Gen.

Lester L. Lyles (ret.) Subsidiaries Lunar and Planetary Institute Affiliations NASA Website www .usra .edu The Universities Space Research Association ( USRA ) was incorporated on March 12, 1969, in Washington, D.C.

as a private, nonprofit corporation under the auspices of the National Academy of Sciences (NAS). 
Institutional membership in the association currently stands at 121 universities. All member institutions have graduate programs in space sciences or technology.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Objective [ edit ] USRA provides a mechanism through which universities can cooperate effectively with one another, with the government, and with other organizations to further space science and technology, and to promote education in these areas. Its mission is carried out through the institutes, centers, divisions, and programs, by more than 200 administrative and scientific personnel. A unique feature of USRA's management is its system of standing panels of technical experts, drawn from the research community, to provide oversight for USRA's institutes, centers, divisions and programs.

Origin [ edit ] USRA was founded in 1969, at NASA's request, under the auspices of the National Academy of Sciences.  Just prior to the Apollo 11 Moon landing, and the return of the lunar samples, NASA sought a new partner organization to engage and organize the research community. James Webb, NASA Administrator, wrote to President Frederick Seitz, proposing a university association, chartered to advance space science and technology.  The result: the formation of USRA.
Webb envisioned this new association as not only working with NASA in lunar science, but also in other scientific disciplines and technology areas, in which NASA would become engaged, as its space exploration role unfolded.

As the civilian space program grew to encompass missions in heliophysics, planetary science, astrophysics, Earth sciences, microgravity science, and other disciplines, as well as technology development, USRA worked alongside NASA. All the efforts under taken by USRA from its founding to the present day fulfil its nonprofit purpose and also realize Webb's vision of close partnership and engagement of universities.

USRA's first task: operation of the Lunar Science Institute and engaging the scientific community in the analysis of lunar samples that would be returned to Earth during the Apollo missions.  Now called the Lunar and Planetary Institute, the LPI cultivated strong collaboration between NASA and the international research community to help organize a new research discipline: lunar and planetary science.  The LPI helped lead research that resulted in a new understanding about the origin of the Moon.  Today, the LPI, located in USRA's facility near NASA's Johnson Space Center, continues the important job of organizing community activities to support NASA's exploration of the Solar System , with a specialized scientific and administrative staff.

Charter [ edit ] On March 1, 1968, President Lyndon Johnson announced the creation of the Lunar Science Institute (LSI), and USRA was chartered the following year as the parent organization of LSI. The initial headquarters of USRA was at the University of Virginia , where Professor A. R. Kuhlthau served as the first president of the association.

In 1976, Dr.

Alexander J. Dessler became the second USRA president. Dessler moved the headquarters of the association to Rice University , where he served as chairman of the Department of Space Physics and Astronomy.

In 1978 USRA headquarters moved to Columbia, Maryland .

In 2022 USRA headquarters moved to Washington DC .

Other programs [ edit ] USRA initially concentrated on the management of Lunar Science Institute (later renamed the Lunar and Planetary Institute ) but, armed with its broad charter, the consortium began to explore other ways to serve the university space research community as early as 1970. Today, USRA researchers are involved with university, government and industry scientists and engineers in a broad array of space and aeronautics related fields, including astronomy and astrophysics , Earth sciences , microgravity , life sciences , space technology , computer science , and advanced concepts.

Most USRA research activities include related educational components.

The presidents of USRA have been: A. Robert Kuhlthau (1969–1976) Alexander J. Dessler (1976–1981) Paul J. Coleman Jr.

(1981–2000) David C. Black (2000–2006) Frederick A. Tarantino (2006–2014) Donald A. Kniffen (2014) Jeffrey A. Isaacson (2014–2024) Elsayed R. Talaat (2025-Present) Current Institutes and Programs Lunar and Planetary Institute (LPI) Earth from Space Institute (EfSI) Science and Technology Institute (STI) Partnership for Heliophysics and Space Environment Research (PHaSER) Research Institute for Advanced Computer Science (RIACS) Subcontractor for Glenn Engineering and Research Support (GEARS) NSF Engines (SPARC Ohio) Center for Space and Nuclear Research (CSNR) University Consortium Research Opportunity AFRL Scholars Program Small Business Subsidiaries E Street Technologies (ESTech) ] Previous Institutes and Programs Arecibo Observatory Center for Advanced Space Studies (CASS) Center for Program/Project Management Research (CPMR) Cooperative Program in Space Science (CPSS) Division of Space Life Sciences (DSLS) Education Programs Office at CASS Earth Sciences Applications Research Program (ESARP) Earth System Science Education for the 21st Century (ESSE 21) Earth System Science Program (ESSP) in Huntsville Goddard Earth Science Technology and Research (GESTAR) NASA Institute for Advanced Concepts (NIAC) program NASA Internship Program NASA Post Doctoral Program (NPP) NASA Summer Faculty Research Opportunities (NSFRO) National Center for Earth and Space Science Education (NCESSE) National Center for Space Exploration Research on Fluids and Combustion (NCSER) Navy Astronomy Programs (NRL and USNO) Revolutionary Aerospace Systems Concepts - Academic Linkage (RASC-AL) Program Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA) Technology Development and Aerospace Environments  (TDAE) USRA Astronomy Program in Huntsville Visiting Researcher Exchange and Outreach (VREO) Program References [ edit ] ^ "Purpose & Mission" .

USRA.edu . Universities Space Research Association. Archived from the original on June 20, 2018 . Retrieved June 19, 2018 .

^ "The History of USRA" . USRA. Archived from the original on October 24, 2006 . Retrieved October 31, 2006 .

^ "All Member Universities" . USRA. Archived from the original on June 25, 2018 . Retrieved December 20, 2012 .

External links [ edit ] Official website Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Universities_Space_Research_Association&oldid=1304692172 " Categories : Engineering university associations and consortia Space agencies Space organizations United States National Academy of Sciences Organizations established in 1969 1969 establishments in Washington, D.C.

Non-profit organizations based in Maryland Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from April 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from April 2025 This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 15:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Universities Space Research Association 4 languages Add topic

