Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 IUPAC 2 Metallicity-based 3 Common and historical 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Names for sets of chemical elements 52 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Asturianu বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית Kiswahili Lombard Magyar മലയാളം Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Plattdüütsch Português Română Русский සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska தமிழ் Taqbaylit ไทย Українська West-Vlams 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Group of chemical elements This article needs editing to comply with Wikipedia's Manual of Style .

Please help improve the content .

( February 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on the Periodic table Periodic table forms 18-column 32-column Alternative and extended forms Periodic table history D. Mendeleev 1871 table 1869 predictions Discovery of elements Naming and etymology for people for places controversies ( in East Asia ) Systematic element names Sets of elements By periodic table structure Groups (1–18) 1 ( alkali metals ) 2 (alkaline earth metals) 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 (pnictogens) 16 (chalcogens) 17 (halogens) 18 (noble gases) Periods (1–7, ...) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8+ Blocks (s, p, d, f, ...) Atomic orbitals Aufbau principle By metallic classification Metals alkali alkaline earth transition post-transition lanthanide actinide Metalloids dividing metals and nonmetals Nonmetals nonmetal halogen noble gas By other characteristics Coinage metals Platinum-group metals Precious metals Refractory metals Heavy metals Light metals Native metals Noble metals Main-group elements Rare-earth elements Transuranium elements Major , minor and trans- actinides Elements List of chemical elements by abundance ( in human body ) by atomic properties by isotope stability by symbol Properties of elements Relative atomic mass Crystal structure Electron affinity configuration Electronegativity ( Allen , Pauling ) Goldschmidt classification Nutrition Valence Data pages for elements Abundance Atomic radius Boiling point Critical point Density Elasticity Electrical resistivity Electron affinity / configuration Electronegativity Hardness Heat capacity / of fusion / of vaporization Ionization energy Melting point Oxidation state Speed of sound Thermal conductivity / expansion coefficient Vapor pressure Category Chemistry Portal v t e There are currently 118 known chemical elements with a wide range of physical and chemical properties. Amongst this diversity, scientists have found it useful to apply names for various sets of elements that have similar properties, to varying degrees. Many of these sets are formally recognized by the standards body IUPAC .

[ 1 ] IUPAC [ edit ] The following collective names are recommended or noted by IUPAC: Alkali metals The metals of group 1: Li, Na, K, Rb, Cs, Fr Alkaline earth metals The metals of group 2: Be, Mg, Ca, Sr, Ba, Ra Transition elements * Elements in groups 3 to 11 or 3 to 12 (the latter making up the d-block) Pnictogens The elements of group 15: N, P, As, Sb, Bi † Chalcogens The elements of group 16: O, S, Se, Te, Po † Halogens The elements of group 17: F, Cl, Br, I, At † Noble gases The elements of group 18: He, Ne, Ar, Kr, Xe, Rn † Lanthanoids ‡ Elements 57–71: La, Ce, Pr, Nd, Pm, Sm, Eu, Gd, Tb, Dy, Ho, Er, Tm, Yb, Lu Actinoids ‡ Elements 89–103: Ac, Th, Pa, U, Np, Pu, Am, Cm, Bk, Cf, Es, Fm, Md, No, Lr Rare-earth metals Sc, Y, plus the lanthanides Inner transition elements f-block elements Main group elements Elements in groups 1–2 or 13–18, excluding hydrogen * Transition elements are sometimes referred to as transition metals † Although the heavier elements of groups 15 (Mc), 16 (Lv), 17 (Ts) and 18 (Og) have been notionally assigned to the indicated groups their chemical properties have not yet been experimentally confirmed.

‡ Lanthanoids and actinoids are sometimes referred to as lanthanides and actinides respectively Metallicity-based [ edit ] Another common classification is by degree of metallic or nonmetallic behaviour and characteristics. Elements in the vicinity of where the metals and nonmetals meet are sometime classified as metalloids or an equivalent term. These two to three classes are commonly marked by differing background colors in the periodic table.

Common and historical [ edit ] Many other names for sets of elements are in common use; others have been used throughout history. These sets usually do not aim to cover the whole periodic table (as for example period does), and often overlap or have boundaries that differ between authors. Some examples: Metals and nonmetals Metalloids – Variously-defined group of elements with properties intermediate between metals and nonmetals.

In alphabetic order: Coinage metals – Various metals used to mint coins, primarily the group 11 elements Cu, Ag, and Au.

Earth metal – Old historic term, usually referred to the metals of groups 3 and 13, although sometimes others such as beryllium and chromium are included as well.

Heavy metals – Variously-defined group of metals, on the base of their density, atomic number, or toxicity.

Heavy atom – term used in computational chemistry to refer to any element other than hydrogen and helium.

Minor actinides – Actinides found in significant quantities in nuclear fuel, other than U and Pu: Np, Am, Cm.

Native metals – Metals that occur pure in nature, including the noble metals and others such as Sn and Pb.

Noble metals – Variously-defined group of metals that are generally resistant to corrosion. Usually includes Ag, Au, and the platinum-group metals .

Non-ferrous metals - Metals or alloys that do not contain iron in appreciable amounts.

Platinum group – Ru, Rh, Pd, Os, Ir, Pt.

Post-transition metals – The metals coming after the transition metals. Many other names have been used for this set, and its borders are not agreed on.

Precious metals – Variously-defined group of non-radioactive metals of high economical value.

Superactinides – Hypothetical series of elements 121 to 157, which includes a predicted "g-block" of the periodic table.

Transactinide elements – Elements after the actinides (atomic number greater than 103).

Transplutonium elements – Elements with atomic number greater than 94.

Transuranium elements – Elements with atomic number greater than 92.

Valve metal - a metal which, in an electrolytic cell, passes current in only one direction.

References [ edit ] ^ International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (2005).

Nomenclature of Inorganic Chemistry (IUPAC Recommendations 2005). Cambridge (UK): RSC – IUPAC .

ISBN 0-85404-438-8 .

Electronic version.

Retrieved 10 June 2012.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Sets of chemical elements at Wikimedia Commons v t e Periodic table Periodic table forms Alternatives Extended periodic table Sets of elements By periodic table structure Groups 1 ( Hydrogen and alkali metals ) 2 (Alkaline earth metals) 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 (Triels) 14 (Tetrels) 15 (Pnictogens) 16 (Chalcogens) 17 (Halogens) 18 (Noble gases) Periods 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8+ Aufbau Fricke Pyykkö Blocks Aufbau principle By metallicity Metals Lanthanides Actinides Transition metals Post-transition metals Metalloids Lists of metalloids by source Dividing line Nonmetals Noble gases Other sets Platinum-group metals (PGM) Rare-earth elements Refractory metals Precious metals Coinage metals Noble metals Heavy metals Native metals Transuranium elements Superheavy elements Major actinides Minor actinides Elements Lists By: Abundance ( in humans ) Atomic properties Nuclear stability Symbol Properties Aqueous chemistry Crystal structure Electron configuration Electronegativity Goldschmidt classification Term symbol Data pages Abundance Atomic radius Boiling point Critical point Density Elasticity Electrical resistivity Electron affinity Electron configuration Electronegativity Hardness Heat capacity Heat of fusion Heat of vaporization Ionization energy Melting point Oxidation state Speed of sound Thermal conductivity Thermal expansion coefficient Vapor pressure History Element discoveries Dmitri Mendeleev 1871 table 1869 predictions Naming etymology controversies for places for people in East Asian languages See also IUPAC nomenclature systematic element name Trivial name Dmitri Mendeleev Category WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Names_for_sets_of_chemical_elements&oldid=1190516904 " Categories : Sets of chemical elements Chemical nomenclature Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles with style issues from February 2020 All articles with style issues Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 December 2023, at 09:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Names for sets of chemical elements 52 languages Add topic

