Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Colleges hosting balls 3 Ball crashing 4 Alternatives 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle External links subsection 7.1 Cambridge May Balls & June Events 7.2 Other May Balls Toggle the table of contents May Ball in Cambridge 2 languages Italiano Română Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from May Ball ) Formal dance at Cambridge University The bridge over the River Cam at Clare College during its 2005 May Ball.

A May Ball is a ball at the end of the academic year that takes place at any of the colleges of the University of Cambridge . They are elaborate and lavish formal affairs, requiring black tie or sometimes white tie , with ticket prices ranging from around £100 to as much as £640 for a pair of dining tickets at Trinity .

[ 1 ] May Ball budgets (excluding VAT) can exceed £200,000; a report by the student newspaper Varsity in 2016 found that the budget for the 2015 Trinity ball was £286,000.

[ 2 ] The balls are held in the colleges, starting around from 6-9 p.m. and lasting until well after dawn. "Survivors photographs" are taken of those who last until morning. Other colleges frequently hold winter balls, such as the popular Selwyn Snowball, who recently had acts such Tinchy Stryder and Mumford and Sons headlining.

History [ edit ] The morning after a May Ball in 1906, including Siegfried Sassoon and his brother Hamo The tradition of May Balls in Cambridge started in the 1830s with the first official one being the First and Third Trinity Boat Club May Ball in 1866.

[ 3 ] It is thought they developed from the celebrations surrounding successes in the May Bumps - a set of rowing races which used to take place before the university tripos examinations in May each year.

[ 4 ] The balls and the other celebrations which make up May Week (such as June Events and garden parties ) moved from May to June in 1882, and still take place in June, after examinations, but the name has been retained.

[ 5 ] By the 1890s, King's and Clare were holding regular balls.

St John's first annual ball began in 1888, from which an exclusive '1888 Club' ticket can be obtained by members of the College in honour of the first ball.

[ 6 ] The first St Catharine's Ball dates from 1929.

[ 5 ] As the 20th century progressed the formula of the balls varied very little until the 1960s, when students began to question both the cost and perceived stuffiness. Around this time, some colleges began to augment the traditional dance orchestras with rock bands, and by the end of the 1970s the focus of the majority had shifted towards booking rock acts.

[ 5 ] As the all-male colleges began to allow female students, the ubiquitous double tickets began to be bought by pairs of students rather than inviting a date from outside of the university, causing a corresponding reduction in ticket sales; in 1991 Sidney Sussex and Downing merged balls, and in 1992 Pembroke cancelled its ball. When in 1993 there were a reported 16,000 tickets available to an undergraduate population of 10,000, Selwyn , Emmanuel , Girton and Peterhouse were all forced to cancel their balls, though Trinity and Magdalene sold out as usual.

[ 5 ] The solution was for most of the smaller balls to hold events every other year, and by the 2000s only Trinity, St John's , Clare, and Jesus were still holding annual May Balls.

They fell out of popularity with the students in the 1990s, [ 7 ] but this trend has since reversed and tickets now sell out in record time. Local businesses also now seek to get involved and the local punting companies put on special night-time tours to allow people to watch the John's and Trinity College firework displays on the Backs from the River Cam - the river usually becomes gridlocked for these evenings during May Week.

Colleges hosting balls [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( March 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Many Cambridge colleges originally held the balls in May, sometimes in the week preceding year-end exams. Today, they take place in May Week , which usually starts on the second Thursday of June following the end of exams, and which includes Suicide Sunday . The balls operate a strict dress code . Magdalene insists on white tie , which is recommended but not required at Trinity and Peterhouse, while all the others have a minimum of only black tie . Most balls are themed, though Magdalene, Peterhouse, and Trinity's are notable for their lack of a theme. St John's Ball is best known to have a secret theme only revealed on the night of the event, previous themes have included Mythicas and Through the Lens.

[ 8 ] Guests queue to enter First and Third Trinity Boat Club May Ball Queens' College held its 100th May Ball in 2013 Jesus College May Ball 2012 A 'survivors photo' taken around 6am at Jesus College May Ball in 2007.

The First and Third Trinity Boat Club May Ball (named after the boat club , but now run by Trinity College ), held on the first Monday of May Week, and the St John's May Ball, held on the first Tuesday.

Magdalene and Peterhouse hold exclusive white tie balls, with Peterhouse beginning this tradition in 1892. Other desirable May balls are held annually by Clare , which has some of the most beautiful gardens, Jesus , whose ball is popular amongst first year students, and Queens' , whose balls are well known for finding soon-to-be-famous up and coming acts (see Performances below).

Homerton hosts the first ball of May Week, and is also one of the least expensive black tie balls, but still provides an extravagant start to May Week.

St Edmund's hosts the final ball of May Week and is known for attracting finalists and postgraduates.

Christ's is known for securing high-profile acts. Trinity, Clare and St John's are situated directly on the River Cam , along the Backs , as are Queens' , Magdalene and Trinity Hall . As a result, when several balls are held on the same evening, the river is lit up in different colours from the lights and the fireworks, creating a memorable backdrop to the evening's festivities. The latest break from tradition comes from Darwin , who are hosting the first ever plant-based May Ball.

Annual balls are held by Clare, Darwin , Hughes Hall , Homerton , Jesus , St Edmund's , Robinson , Trinity , St John's and Wolfson ; while Magdalene , Pembroke , Emmanuel , Corpus Christi , Christ's , Downing , Girton , Gonville and Caius , Newnham , Queens' , Sidney Sussex , Selwyn , and St Catharine's hold May Balls every two years.

Most balls have fundamental similarities: all will offer guests a variety of food, entertainment, and a selection of alcoholic drinks. The quality and diversity of all of these vary markedly between different balls. While all claim to offer luxury (and many deliver), some have distinctive hallmarks: Peterhouse is famed for its ferris wheel , Magdalene for its dining, Trinity for its exceptional fireworks and flame display, Clare for its entertainment lineup and St John's for its party atmosphere. Often the balls have overarching themes, sometimes they are fancy dress.

Ball entertainment is a closely guarded secret, not least because of the fear that other committees will 'free ride' by booking an act already booked at another ball and thus have to pay a reduced fee because the band is in Cambridge already, whilst simultaneously devaluing the 'get' by the initial contractor. This was seen in 2010 when Two Door Cinema Club performed at four separate balls. Partly for this reason, ball line-ups are not usually announced until the night of the ball, although they tend to leak out fairly early.

Ball crashing [ edit ] Colleges with larger May balls pay considerable attention to security and the prevention of ball crashing .

[ 9 ] With tickets priced at over £150 and in short supply, students often try to gain unauthorized access, climbing high walls, arriving dressed as gorillas pretending to be part of the evening's entertainment, and posing as journalists. Typically, college porters are joined by both student and professional security staff and, at larger balls, police [ citation needed ] to identify and apprehend the crashers. Some colleges have painted walls with anti-burglar paint , which stains the crashers' clothes with luminous green paint, making it somewhat difficult to blend in. More courageous crashers can be seen swimming down the river Cam holding their clothes in a plastic bag above the water in an attempt to enter colleges from the banks.

[ citation needed ] As part of the security arrangements, students living in parts of the college and not attending the May Ball are often required either to vacate their rooms or remain in them without leaving overnight, in spite of the inevitable loud music.

[ citation needed ] Alternatives [ edit ] Guests watching a fireshow at King's June Event, 2006 Several colleges host a variation on these balls, a June Event . These are cheaper (£60-90), tend to be focused on live music, and frequently have less formal dress codes. Some colleges alternate June events and May balls from year to year.

Trinity Hall , Newnham and Wolfson hold June events. In 2018 Wolfson held a May Ball instead. In 2023, Darwin College was the first college at Cambridge to host a vegan ball.

[ 10 ] King's holds an annual event known as the "King's Affair" — like the June events it is cheaper and has a reputation for "Beats not Bollinger"; guests are invited to wear any costume they choose. With several different music stages focusing mainly on new DJs, the atmosphere is perhaps more akin to some festivals. The college used to hold a traditional May Ball, but this was banned by the local police after The Stranglers played in the 1970s and caused a crush.

[ 11 ] In order to spread the fun throughout the year, a number of colleges have broken with tradition to hold balls at different times, normally either in the winter at the end of Michaelmas term , i.e. the beginning of December, or in spring at the end of Lent term .

Selwyn is the only college to hold a yearly winter ball, known as the Snowball; in 2008 Selwyn also held a May Ball to celebrate its 125th Birthday and did so again in 2015 and 2017.

Cambridge University Law Society also holds a well-regarded yearly winter ball.

Fitzwilliam holds winter balls every two years, the most recent being November 2018. Of the spring balls, that of Girton is held biennially at the end of Lent term in March, whereas Churchill continues to produce an annual ball in the middle of Lent term every February.

Klaxons playing at Queens' May Ball in 2007 Jesus College May Ball 2012 See also [ edit ] Commemoration ball - similar summer balls at the University of Oxford References [ edit ] ^ "Which May Ball" . Which May Ball . Retrieved 8 June 2016 .

^ "Revealed: May Ball and June Event budgets show striking disparities" . Varsity. 16 June 2016 . Retrieved 17 June 2016 .

^ "St. Catharine's College May Ball, 1929" (PDF) .

St Catharine's College, Cambridge . Retrieved 15 July 2012 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Trinity May Ball - A brief history" . First and Third Trinity Boat Club May Ball. Archived from the original on 5 September 2013 . Retrieved 15 July 2012 .

^ a b c d "We had a Ball" - William Ham Bevan. Cambridge Alumni Magazine, Issue 72 (Easter 2014) ^ "St. John's College May Ball" . Retrieved 17 August 2024 .

^ Macdonald, Marianne (13 June 1993).

"May Balls lose their shine: A glamorous Oxbridge tradition is suddenly in decline. Marianne MacDonald goes in search of the reasons - UK - News" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on 12 May 2022 . Retrieved 29 May 2014 .

^ "St. John's May Ball" . Retrieved 17 August 2024 .

^ Hall, Melanie (24 June 2013).

"Gang of non-students gatecrashed Oxbridge balls" . Telegraph . Retrieved 29 May 2014 .

^ Olsson, Laurence Sleator, Erik.

"Cambridge college takes vegan menu to the ball" .

The Times .

ISSN 0140-0460 . Retrieved 11 April 2023 .

{{ cite news }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "May Week: balls, boats and bubbly" .

Archive of the Month: July 2011 . King's College Cambridge . Retrieved 1 February 2018 .

External links [ edit ] Listings with details of 2009 Balls / June Events Listings with details of 2024 Balls / June Events Listings with details of 2025 Balls / June Events Cambridge May Balls & June Events [ edit ] Christ's May Ball Churchill May Ball Clare May Ball Clare Hall June Event Clare Hall May Ball Corpus Christi May Ball Darwin May Ball Downing May Ball Emmanuel May Ball Archived 23 February 2006 at the Wayback Machine Fitzwilliam Winter Ball Girton Spring Ball Gonville and Caius May Ball Homerton May Ball Hughes Hall May Ball Jesus May Ball The King's Affair Magdalene May Ball Newnham June Event Pembroke May Ball Peterhouse May Ball Queens' May Ball Robinson May Ball St Catharine's May Ball St Edmund's May Ball St John's May Ball Selwyn Snowball Sidney Sussex May Ball Trinity May Ball ( article ) Trinity Hall June Event Wolfson June Event Wolfson May Ball Cambridge Union Society June Fling Other May Balls [ edit ] Trinity College, Dublin May Ball v t e Parties and festivals Sorted by occasions, purposes or attributes Types Wedding -related Bachelor party Bachelorette party Bridal shower Engagement party Wedding reception Eid al-Adha Eid al-Fitr Banquets Eid cuisine State banquet Ball Debutante ball Hunt ball Symposium House parties Family reunion Cocktail party Housewarming party Sleepover LAN party Rent party Public parties Festivals Holidays Spring break Mischief Night New Year's Eve Arts festival Film awards seasons Religious festival Christmas Carnival Feasts Fools Food festival Beer Wine Harvest festival Social season Garden Tulip Winter Light Solstice Heortology Fairs World's fair State fair County fair Trade fair Picnic Block party Subway party Tailgate party Anniversary Jubilee Ceremony Children's party Baby shower Class reunion Costume party Masquerade party Drag party Toga party Naked party Crayfish party Cuddle party Dance party Prom Homecoming Foam party Hurricane party Kitty party Pamper party Parade Marching Pizza party Quiet party Ritual Stop light party Tea party Clothing Western dress codes Formal White tie Morning dress Semi-formal Black tie Black lounge suit Informal Suit Casual Wedding dress Contemporary Bridal crown Dress Evening gown Ball gown Debutante Opera gloves Cocktail dress Garters Casual Equipment Balloon Balloon modelling Confetti Cotton candy Deely bobber Float Glow stick Groucho glasses Party hat New Year's glasses Party bus Party horn Party popper Serpentine streamer Society portal Media Category v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=May_Ball_in_Cambridge&oldid=1283554127 " Categories : Balls in the United Kingdom Terminology of the University of Cambridge May Culture of the University of Cambridge Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2014 Use British English from October 2014 Articles needing additional references from March 2024 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2011 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2024 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 2 April 2025, at 06:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents May Ball in Cambridge 2 languages Add topic

