Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical Toggle Historical subsection 1.1 Benin Kingdom 1.2 Medieval Europe 2 Modern Toggle Modern subsection 2.1 Australia 2.1.1 New South Wales 2.2 Austria 2.3 Belgium 2.4 Canada 2.5 Chile 2.6 France 2.7 Germany 2.8 Hong Kong 2.9 India 2.10 Italy 2.11 Netherlands 2.12 New Zealand 2.13 Philippines 2.14 Singapore 2.15 Switzerland 2.16 United Kingdom 2.17 United States 3 Awards 4 See also 5 Citations 6 General and cited references 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Commemorative plaque 35 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia עברית Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Historical marker Plaque in tribute to Claude Bernard at Collège de France in Paris A Benin Bronze plaque An example of a lightbox used as a commemorative plaque This sign in Dickson, Australian Capital Territory commemorates the establishment of Canberra's first aerodrome and its first fatality in the 1920s.

A plaque commemorating the victims of a mass execution during the Axis occupation of Greece in Fregkaina, Greece A commemorative plaque , or simply plaque , or in other places referred to as a historical marker , historic marker , or historic plaque , is a plate of metal, ceramic, stone, wood, or other material, bearing text or an image in relief , or both, to commemorate one or more persons, an event, a former use of the place, or some other thing.  Most  such plaques are attached to a wall, stone, or other vertical surface.

Many modern plaques and markers are used to associate the location where the plaque or marker is installed with the person, event, or item commemorated as a place worthy of visit.

[ 1 ] A monumental plaque or tablet commemorating a deceased person or persons, can be a simple form of church monument .  Most modern plaques affixed in this way are commemorative of something, but not all.  There are also purely religious plaques, and some signify ownership or affiliation of some sort.  A plaquette is a small plaque, but in English, unlike many European languages, the term is not typically used for outdoor plaques fixed to walls.

Historical [ edit ] Benin Kingdom [ edit ] Main article: Benin Bronzes The Benin Empire , which flourished in present-day Nigeria between the thirteenth and nineteenth centuries, had an exceedingly rich sculptural tradition. One of the kingdom's chief sites of cultural production was the elaborate ceremonial court of the Oba (divine king) at the palace in Benin. Among the wide range of artistic forms produced at the court were rectangular brass or bronze plaques. At least a portion of these plaques, which were mainly created from the thirteenth through sixteenth centuries, commemorate significant persons and events associated with the Oba's court, [ 2 ] [ 3 ] including important battles during Benin's sixteenth century expansionary period.

[ 4 ] Medieval Europe [ edit ] Main article: Monumental brass Brass or bronze memorial plaques were produced throughout medieval Europe from at least the early thirteenth through the sixteenth centuries as a form of sepulchral memorial generally inset into the walls of churches or surfaces of tombs. Surviving in great numbers, they were manufactured from sheet brass or latten , very occasionally coloured with enamels, and tend to depict highly conventional figures with brief inscriptions.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Modern [ edit ] Sir Henry Cole helped set up the first historical marker scheme in 1866.

Historical markers are put on display by the owners of sites listed by national agencies concerned with historic preservation such as the National Trust for Historic Preservation and the National Register of Historic Places [ 7 ] (in the United States), the National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty [ 8 ] (in the United Kingdom), An Taisce [ 9 ] (in Ireland), National Historical Commission of the Philippines (in the Philippines), and the National Trusts of other countries.

Other historical markers are created by local municipalities , non-profit organizations , companies , or individuals. In addition to geographically defined regions, individual organizations, such as E Clampus Vitus or the American Society of Mechanical Engineers , can choose to maintain a national set of historical markers that fit a certain theme.

[ 10 ] The Royal Society of Arts established the first scheme in the world for historical commemoration on plaques in 1866.

[ 11 ] The scheme was established under the influence of the British politician William Ewart and the civil servant Henry Cole .

[ 12 ] The first plaque was unveiled in 1867 to commemorate Lord Byron at his birthplace, 24 Holles Street, Cavendish Square . The earliest historical marker to survive, commemorates Napoleon III in King Street, St James's , and was also put up in 1867.

[ 13 ] The original plaque colour was blue, but this was changed by the manufacturer Minton, Hollins & Co to chocolate brown to save money.

[ 14 ] In 1901, the scheme was first taken over by the local government authority - the London County Council .

[ 15 ] Australia [ edit ] Commemorative plaque at Halley Park in Victoria, Australia Several states have a program overseeing the installation of blue plaques similar to those in the UK, including South Australia , [ 16 ] Victoria , [ 17 ] and New South Wales .

[ 18 ] There are also many other types of commemorative plaques.

New South Wales [ edit ] In April 2022 the New South Wales Heritage Minister announced 17 Blue Plaques to celebrate NSW heritage by recognising noteworthy people and events from the state's history. Inspired by the famous London Blue Plaques program run by English Heritage which originally started in 1866, and similar programs around the world, these plaques were selected from over 750 nominations received in November 2021 from community members, organisations, and local councils. People and places recognised by the first batch of plaques to be erected include Bessie Robinson of Canowindra and Duke Kahanamoku and Camden Red Cross.

[ 19 ] In November 2023 it was announced that a further 14 people, places and events would be commemorated in the second round of blue plaques sponsored by the Government of New South Wales, chosen from 117 public nominations: Kathleen Butler , godmother of Sydney Harbour Bridge ; Emma Jane Callaghan , an Aboriginal midwife and activist; Susan Katherina Schardt ; journalist Dorothy Drain ; writer Charmian Clift ; Beryl Mary McLaughlin , one of the first three women to graduate in architecture from the University of Sydney; Grace Emily Munro , Sir William Dobell , Ioannis (Jack) and Antonios (Tony) Notaras; Syms Covington ; Ken Thomas of Thomas Nationwide Transport , Bondi Surf Bathers' Life Saving Club and the first release of myxomatosis .

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] To mark the 60th anniversary of the 1965 Freedom Ride in which a group of students toured country towns to highlight discrimination against Aboriginal Australians , in February 2025 the Government of New South Wales unveiled a blue plaque commemorating in Walgett , the first of several to be installed in key locations along the route.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Austria [ edit ] Bundesdenkmalamt Belgium [ edit ] Institut du Patrimoine wallon Canada [ edit ] National Historic Sites of Canada Index: National Historic Sites of Canada Chile [ edit ] National Monuments of Chile France [ edit ] Monument historique Plaque commémorative [ fr ] Germany [ edit ] Löwenberger Land (Germany) Berlin memorial plaque Deutsche Stiftung Denkmalschutz Kulturdenkmal (National Heritage Sites) Hong Kong [ edit ] Declared monuments of Hong Kong List of Grade I historic buildings in Hong Kong List of Grade II historic buildings in Hong Kong List of Grade III historic buildings in Hong Kong India [ edit ] Pune Aitihasik Vastu Smriti Italy [ edit ] Fondo per l'Ambiente Italiano (National Trust of Italy) Netherlands [ edit ] Rijksmonument Gable stone New Zealand [ edit ] New Zealand Historic Places Trust Philippines [ edit ] Unveiling of a historical marker.

Main articles: Historical markers of the Philippines , List of Quincentennial historical markers in the Philippines , and List of Philippine Nationhood Trail historical markers Historical markers ( Filipino : panandang pangkasaysayan ; Spanish : marcador histórico ) are cast-iron plaques installed all over the Philippines that commemorate people, places, personalities, structures, and events. They are installed by the National Historical Commission of the Philippines . This practice started in 1933, with NHCP's predecessor, the Philippine Historical Research and Markers Committee, which initially only marked antiquities in Manila .

[ 24 ] The initial markers were placed in 1934.

Markers have their texts primarily in Filipino , while there are also markers in the English language, especially for markers that were installed during the American colonial era . Markers in regional languages such as Cebuano , Ilocano , and Kapampangan , are also available and issued by the NHCP. Markers are found all over the country, and there have been markers installed outside the country. The plaques themselves are permanent signs installed in publicly visible locations on buildings, monuments, or in special locations. There are more than 1,690 markers to date.  Most markers are located within Luzon , especially in Metro Manila (with more than 500), which has prompted the NHCP to install more markers in Visayas and Mindanao , for their greater inclusion in the national historical narrative.

[ 25 ] Issues and controversies have also been the concern of several individual markers, from the commemoration of former Philippine President Ferdinand Marcos to the reaction of the Japanese embassy to the comfort women statue and marker . There have also been some markers replaced by new ones because of rectified information, theft, or loss due to war or disasters. Many American-era markers have been destroyed or were lost as casualties of World War II.

Local municipalities and cities can also install markers of figures and events of local significance. Though they may have the permission of the NHCP, these markers are barred from using the seal of the Republic of the Philippines .

[ 26 ] From March to October 2021, quincentennial historical markers were unveiled by the NHCP and the National Quincentennial Committee as part of the 2021 Quincentennial Commemorations in the Philippines (QCP). As part of the 125th anniversary of the Philippine declaration of independence celebrations, the agency then started unveiling Philippine Nationhood Trail historical markers since 2023.

Historical markers of the Philippines Singapore [ edit ] National Monuments of Singapore Switzerland [ edit ] Kulturgüterschutz — or: Protection des biens culturels ; Cultural heritage protection in Switzerland ; or Protezione dei beni culturali United Kingdom [ edit ] Greater London Council blue plaque at Alexandra Palace commemorating the launch of BBC Television there in 1936 Blue plaques are the principal type of historical markers found throughout England and are the closest thing there is to a historical marker system in the UK. An example is the blue plaque scheme run by English Heritage in London , although these were originally erected in a variety of shapes and colors. This has been running for over 140 years and is thought to be the oldest system of its kind in the world. Plaques are attached to buildings to commemorate their association with important occupants or events.

[ 27 ] The National Trust (which is a non-profit charity organization unlike English Heritage and English Heritage properties) has its own similar markers as well.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] The Dead Comics' Society installs blue plaques to commemorate the former residences of well-known comedians, including those of Sid James and John Le Mesurier .

However, not all historical markers in the United Kingdom are blue, and many are not ceramic. A range of other commemorative plaque schemes, which are typically run by local councils and charitable bodies, exists throughout the United Kingdom. These tend to use their own criteria for determining the eligibility to put up a plaque. There are commemorative plaque schemes in Bath , Edinburgh , Brighton , Liverpool , Loughton , and elsewhere—some of which differ from the familiar blue plaque. A scheme in Manchester uses color-coded plaques to commemorate figures, with each of the colors corresponding to the person's occupation. The Purple Plaques /Placiau Porffor scheme in Wales uses purple to commemorate significant women.

[ 30 ] In 2003, the London Borough of Southwark started a plaque scheme which included living people in the awards. Even in London, the Westminster City Council runs a green plaque scheme which is run alongside that of the blue plaque scheme administered by English Heritage. Other schemes are run by civic societies, district or town councils, or local history groups, and often operate with different criteria.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] Main article: Memorial Plaque (medallion) After the First World War , the families of British and British Empire (now Commonwealth) service men and women killed during the conflict were presented with bronze Memorial Plaques . The plaques, of about 125 millimetres (4.9 in) in diameter, were designed by the eminent sculptor and medallist , Edward Carter Preston .

United States [ edit ] In the United States , various state governments have commemorative plaque schemes usually using the name historical markers. The National Trust for Historic Preservation or the U.S. government, through the National Register of Historic Places, can bestow historical status.

State programmes, such as the California Register of Historical Resources , allow designated sites to place their own markers.

[ 31 ] The criteria and circumstances through which a party administers the distribution of historical markers varies. For example, the "Preservation Worcester" program in Worcester, Massachusetts , allows a person to register their house or other structure of least fifty years of age if the building is well preserved, with retention of its original character and importance to the architectural, cultural or historical nature of the local neighborhood . One then pays a fee ($185 to $225) to receive the historical marker itself.

[ 32 ] These historical markers indicate the location of Francis Parkman House , a National Historic Landmark on Beacon Hill in Boston, Massachusetts .

In the same state, the Boston neighborhood Charlestown has its own local association to administer historical markers.

[ 33 ] Other historical markers in and around Boston are administered by agencies such as The Bostonian Society [ 34 ] or are associated with sites such as those along the Freedom Trail , the Black Heritage Trail , and the Emerald Necklace .

[ 35 ] Typical mid-20th century official New York State Historical Marker for a minor battlefield, free standing on a suburban street Other examples of mostly locally generated historical markers in the United States include: Plaque outside the Alaska Governor's Mansion made by the Alaska Centennial Commission's historical markers program, [ 36 ] Historical markers of State Historic Marker Council in Florida, [ 37 ] Markers placed by various agencies in Georgia (of which one source mentions 3,292 different historical markers [ 1 ] ) In Indiana, it is illegal to create a historical marker in the "state format" without first getting official approval from that state's historical bureau, [ 38 ] Historical markers in Kansas erected by the Kansas Historical Society and the Kansas Department of Transportation , [ 39 ] Roadside Historic Marker Program in Maryland administered by the Maryland Historical Trust, [ 40 ] State Historic Marker Program of New York (begun in 1926 to commemorate the Sequicentennial of the American Revolution ), [ 41 ] Historic markers placed as recently as 2008 in Sussex County, New Jersey , [ 42 ] New Mexico historical markers printed in white letters on a brown background by the New Mexico Department of Transportation , [ 43 ] historical markers of North Carolina (the Historical Publications Section of the state Office of Archives and History publishes a Guide to North Carolina Highway Historical Markers ), [ 44 ] More than 1200 historical markers of Ohio (all of which are now made in a Marietta, Ohio , workshop), [ 45 ] Over 550 official state markers in Wisconsin.

[ 46 ] See also: Historical markers posted at U.S. state and/or municipal levels (examples): Georgia Historic Markers Indiana State Historic Markers — of statewide historical significance, by state New Hampshire State Historic Markers — of statewide historical significance, by state Nevada Historic Markers — of statewide historical significance, by state New York State Historic Markers — of statewide historical significance, by state North Carolina Highway Historical Marker Program , part of the North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources Pennsylvania State Historic Markers — of statewide historical significance, by state Texas Historic Markers Awards [ edit ] Plaques or, more often, plaquettes, are also given as awards instead of trophies or ribbons . Such plaques usually bear text describing the reason for the award and, often, the date of the award.

See also [ edit ] Blue plaque Hartog Plate Historical Marker Database Historical markers of the Philippines List of blue plaques National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty – England, Wales, and Northern Ireland National Trust for Scotland Parting stone Statutory List of Buildings of Special Architectural or Historic Interest Stolperstein Citations [ edit ] ^ a b "Historic Markers Across Georgia" . Latitude 34 North. Archived from the original on 24 December 2013 . Retrieved 31 October 2008 .

^ Ezra, Kate (1992).

Royal Art of Benin: The Perls Collection in the Metropolitan Museum of Art . New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art.

ISBN 0810964147 .

^ "Benin plaque: the oba with Europeans" . The British Museum . Retrieved 27 June 2015 .

^ Plankensteiner, Barbara (22 December 2007).

"Benin—Kings and Rituals: Court Arts from Nigeria" .

African Arts .

40 (4). University of California: 74– 87.

doi : 10.1162/afar.2007.40.4.74 .

ISSN 0001-9933 .

S2CID 57571805 . Retrieved 27 June 2015 .

^ Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Brasses, Monumental" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 4 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

^ Badham, Sally; Norris, Malcolm (1999).

Early Incised Slabs and Brasses . London: Society of Antiquaries.

^ "National Register of Historic Places" .

National Park Service . Archived from the original on 9 July 2008 . Retrieved 31 October 2008 .

^ "The National Trust" . Retrieved 31 October 2008 .

^ " An Taisce " .

National Trust for Ireland . Retrieved 31 October 2008 .

^ "Making their markers" .

The News & Observer . Archived from the original on 10 February 2009 . Retrieved 31 October 2008 .

^ "Blue Plaques" . English Heritage . Retrieved 16 June 2011 .

^ Hansard vol 172 17 July 1863 quoted in 'The commemoration of historians under the blue plaque scheme in London' by author
Howard Spencer ^ "History of the Blue Plaques Scheme" . English Heritage . Retrieved 16 June 2011 .

^ "About blue plaques" . Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea. Archived from the original on 3 October 2023 . Retrieved 16 June 2011 .

^ "The Blue Plaque Design" . English Heritage . Retrieved 16 June 2011 .

^ "Heritage plaques" .

City of Adelaide . 9 April 2019 . Retrieved 23 February 2025 .

^ "Order a blue plaque" .

Heritage Council Victoria . Retrieved 23 February 2025 .

^ "Blue Plaques" .

Blue Plaques . 9 September 2022 . Retrieved 23 February 2025 .

^ "Blue Plaques NSW" .

Heritage NSW . Retrieved 12 May 2022 .

^ "New round of Blue Plaques recognises the stories of NSW" .

Blue Plaques . 20 November 2023 . Retrieved 22 November 2023 .

^ Power, Julie (19 November 2023).

"The 'clever girl' who helped build the Harbour Bridge" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . Retrieved 22 November 2023 .

^ "NSW Government marks 60 years since the Freedom Ride" .

NSW Government . 17 February 2025 . Retrieved 23 February 2025 .

^ "1965 Freedom Ride plaque trail" .

Blue Plaques . 19 February 2025 . Retrieved 23 February 2025 .

^ Historical Markers Placed by the Philippine Historical Committee . Manila: Bureau of Printing. 1958.

^ "2011-2012.pdf" .

Google Docs . Retrieved 2 February 2018 .

^ "GUIDELINES_IDENTIF CLASSIF AND RECOG OF HIST SITES & STRUCTS IN THE PHIL.pdf" .

Google Docs . Retrieved 2 February 2018 .

^ "History of the Blue Plaques Scheme" . Retrieved 30 July 2012 .

^ a b Markeroni.com [ usurped ] , Information about historical markers and historical plaques, and historic preservation in England, British Isles.

^ a b "English Heritage" . English Heritage. 26 October 2011 . Retrieved 30 November 2011 .

^ "Purple plaque stories" .

Purple plaques . Retrieved 2 July 2021 .

^ Chung, Yun Shun Susie. "Collections of Historical Markers and Signage and Public Programming Online at Public History Institutions Such as Museums and Archives." Collections: A Journal for Museum and Archives Professionals 13, no. 3-4 (2017): 243+.

^ "Preservationworcester.org" . Preservationworcester.org. Archived from the original on 6 November 2011 . Retrieved 30 November 2011 .

^ "Charlestownpreservation.org" . Charlestownpreservation.org. Archived from the original on 5 October 2011 . Retrieved 30 November 2011 .

^ 2007 Catalogue For Philanthropy ^ "Boston National Historic Park" . Nps.gov. 17 November 2011 . Retrieved 30 November 2011 .

^ "Alaska Historic Markers" . Waymarking.com. 31 January 2011 . Retrieved 30 November 2011 .

^ "Florida Heritage & Preservation" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 August 2006.

^ "Historical Marker FAQs" . In.gov. 16 June 2009. Archived from the original on 15 February 2009 . Retrieved 30 November 2011 .

^ "Kansas Historical Markers" . Kshs.org . Retrieved 30 November 2011 .

^ "Maryland Historical Trust" .

mht.maryland.gov .

^ "New York State Museum" . Nysm.nysed.gov. 1 December 1998. Archived from the original on 5 September 2015 . Retrieved 30 November 2011 .

^ "Sussex County News and Information" . Sussex.nj.us. 14 May 2008. Archived from the original on 27 September 2011 . Retrieved 30 November 2011 .

^ New Mexico Department of Transportation [ dead link ] ^ News Observer Archived 10 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine (26 July 2006) ^ "Manufacturing Ohio's Historic Markers" . Touring-ohio.com. Archived from the original on 2 October 2011 . Retrieved 30 November 2011 .

^ "Wisconsin Historical Society" . Wisconsinhistory.org. Archived from the original on 1 December 2017 . Retrieved 30 November 2011 .

General and cited references [ edit ] English Heritage, Blue Plaques: A Guide to the Scheme , 2002 James Loewen, Lies Across America: What Our Historic Sites Get Wrong , 1999.

Nick Rennison, The London Blue Plaque Guide , 2003 Derek Sumeray, Discovering London Plaques , 1999 Derek Sumeray, Track the Plaque , 2003 External links [ edit ] Media related to Commemorative plaques at Wikimedia Commons v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐hz9sv
Cached time: 20250814222254
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.954 seconds
Real time usage: 1.242 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8302/1000000
Revision size: 32086/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 376077/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9748/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 48/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 165579/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.499/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16380366/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  971.320      1 -total
 37.68%  366.031      1 Template:Reflist
 26.13%  253.825      1 Template:Historiography
 25.84%  250.977      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 22.79%  221.397     16 Template:Navbox
 22.49%  218.431     33 Template:Cite_web
 12.26%  119.080     37 Template:Ill
  9.77%   94.876      1 Template:Langx
  7.56%   73.413      1 Template:Short_description
  5.14%   49.957      2 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2412774:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814222254 and revision id 1294394428. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Commemorative_plaque&oldid=1294394428 " Categories : Award items Cultural heritage Cultural history Cultural history of the United States Monuments and memorials Historical markers Signage Types of monuments and memorials Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from May 2016 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2015 Articles containing Spanish-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 June 2025, at 13:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Commemorative plaque 35 languages Add topic

