Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Impacts of stormwater Toggle Impacts of stormwater subsection 1.1 Stormwater pollution 1.2 Stormwater runoff as a source of pollution 2 Stormwater treatment Toggle Stormwater treatment subsection 2.1 Passive treatment systems 2.2 Urban flooding 2.3 Stormwater creation of sinkhole collapses 3 Stormwater management Toggle Stormwater management subsection 3.1 Technical aspects 3.2 Institutional and policy aspects 4 Integrated water management 5 Regulations Toggle Regulations subsection 5.1 United States 5.1.1 Federal requirements 5.1.2 State and local requirements 5.1.3 Nonpoint source pollution management 6 Public education campaigns 7 History 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Stormwater 8 languages Afrikaans العربية বাংলা Eesti فارسی Français Igbo සිංහල Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Water that originates during precipitation events and snow/ice melt Urban runoff entering a storm drain Infrastructure Grand Coulee Dam Assets and facilities Airports Bridges Broadband Canals Coastal management Critical infrastructure Dams Electricity Energy Hazardous waste Hospitals Irrigation Levees Lighthouses Parks Pipeline Ports Mass transit Public housing State schools Public spaces Rail Roads Sewage treatment Sewerage Sluices Snow removal Solid waste Telecommunications Trails Utilities Water supply Weirs Concepts Asset management Appropriation Lindahl tax Build–operate–transfer Design–bid–build Design–build Earmark European green infrastructure Fixed cost Engineering contracts Externality Government debt Green infrastructure Life-cycle assessment Maintenance Monopoly Property tax Public–private partnership Public capital Public finance Public good Public sector Renovation Replacement (upgrade) Spillover Supply chain Tax Issues and ideas Air traffic control Brownfield Carbon footprint Containerization Congestion pricing Environmental tax Ethanol fuel Fuel tax Groundwater High-speed rail Hybrid vehicles Land-use planning Mobile data terminal Pork barrel Rapid bus transit Recycling Renewables Reverse osmosis Smart grid Smart growth Stormwater Urban sprawl Traffic congestion Transit-oriented development Fuel efficiency Waste-to-energy Weatherization Wireless technology Fields of study Architecture Chemical engineering Civil Electrical Mechanical engineering Public economics Public policy Urban planning Examples Akashi Kaikyo Bridge Trans-Alaska pipeline Autobahn Bicycle parking station Brazilian energy independence Brooklyn Bridge Channel Tunnel Chicago wastewater China's high-speed rail Curtiba rapid bus transit Cycling infrastructure ( history , safety ) Danish wind-power British offshore wind-power Nuclear power in France Solar power in Germany Hoover Dam Hong Kong Int'l Airport Intercity Express Interstate highways Jamnagar Refinery Kansai Int'l Airport Levee Offshore wind port Panama Canal Port of Shanghai San Francisco–Oakland Bay Bridge Three Gorges Dam Shinkansen Spanish high-speed rail French TGV rail Spanish autovias and autopistas Transcontinental Railroad Power transmission in the USA Wind farm Category Engineering portal v t e Stormwater , also written storm water , is water that originates from precipitation ( storm ), including heavy rain and meltwater from hail and snow . Stormwater can soak into the soil ( infiltrate ) and become groundwater , be stored on depressed land surface in ponds and puddles , evaporate back into the atmosphere, or contribute to surface runoff .  Most runoff is conveyed directly as surface water to nearby streams , rivers or other large water bodies ( wetlands , lakes and oceans ) without treatment.

In natural landscapes, such as forests, soil absorbs much of the stormwater. Plants also reduce stormwater by improving infiltration, intercepting precipitation as it falls, and by taking up water through their roots. In developed environments, such as cities , unmanaged stormwater can create two major issues: one related to the volume and timing of runoff ( flooding ) and the other related to potential contaminants the water is carrying ( water pollution ). In addition to the pollutants carried in stormwater runoff, urban runoff is being recognized as a cause of pollution in its own right.

Stormwater is also an important resource as human population and demand for water grow, particularly in arid and drought-prone climates.

Stormwater harvesting techniques and purification could potentially make some urban environments self-sustaining in terms of water.

Stormwater carrying street bound pollutants to a storm drain for coastal discharge.

Impacts of stormwater [ edit ] Stormwater pollution [ edit ] Further information: Urban runoff With less vegetation and more impervious surfaces ( parking lots , roads , buildings , compacted soil ), developed areas allow less rain to infiltrate into the ground, and more runoff is generated than in undeveloped conditions. Additionally, passages such as ditches and storm sewers quickly transport runoff away from commercial and residential areas into nearby water bodies. This greatly increases the volume of water in waterways and the discharge of those waterways, leading to erosion and flooding. Because the water is flushed out of the watershed during the storm event, little infiltrates the soil, replenishes groundwater , or supplies stream baseflow in dry weather.

[ 1 ] A first flush is the initial runoff of a rainstorm. During this phase, polluted water entering storm drains in areas with high proportions of impervious surfaces is typically more concentrated compared to the remainder of the storm. Consequently, these high concentrations of urban runoff result in high levels of pollutants discharged from storm sewers to surface waters .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] : 216 Daily human activities result in deposition of pollutants on roads, lawns, roofs, farm fields, and other land surfaces. Such pollutants include trash, sediment, nutrients, bacteria, pesticides, metals, and petroleum byproducts.

[ 4 ] When it rains or there is irrigation , water runs off and ultimately makes its way to a river, lake, or ocean. While there is some attenuation of these pollutants before entering receiving waters, polluted runoff results in large enough quantities of pollutants to impair receiving waters.

[ 5 ] Urban runoff being discharged to coastal waters Stormwater runoff as a source of pollution [ edit ] In addition to the pollutants carried in stormwater runoff , urban runoff is being recognized as a cause of pollution in its own right. In natural catchments ( watersheds ) surface runoff entering waterways is a relatively rare event, occurring only a few times each year and generally after larger storms. Before land development occurs in a particular area, most rainfall soaks into the ground and contributes to groundwater recharge, or is recycled into the atmosphere by vegetation through evapotranspiration .

Modern drainage systems, which collect runoff from impervious surfaces (e.g., roofs and roads), ensure that water is efficiently moved to waterways through pipe networks, meaning that even small storms result in increased waterway flows.

In addition to delivering higher pollutants from the urban catchment, increased stormwater flow can lead to stream erosion , encourage weed invasion, and alter natural flow regimes. Native species often rely on such flow regimes for spawning, juvenile development, and migration. Stormwater runoff from roadways has been observed to contain many metals including zinc , cadmium , copper , nickel , lead , chromium , manganese , iron , vanadium , cobalt , and aluminum  and other constituents.

[ 6 ] In some areas, especially along the U.S. coast, polluted runoff from roads and highways may be the largest source of water pollution . For example, about 75 percent of the toxic chemicals getting to Seattle , Washington's Puget Sound are carried by stormwater that runs off paved roads and driveways, rooftops, yards, and other developed land.

[ 7 ] Relationship between impervious surfaces and surface runoff Industrial stormwater is runoff from precipitation that lands on industrial sites (e.g. manufacturing facilities, mines, airports). This runoff is often polluted by materials that are handled or stored on the sites, and the facilities are subject to regulations to control the discharges.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Stormwater treatment [ edit ] Stormwater management facilities (SWMF) are generally designed using Stokes' law to allow rudimentary treatment through the settling particulate matter larger than 40 micron in size and to impound water to reduce downstream flooding.

[ citation needed ] However, regulation on the effluent from SWMFs is becoming more stringent. The effect of phosphorus , either dissolved from (fertilizers) or bound to sediment particles from construction or agriculture runoff, causes algae and toxic cyanobacteria (aka Blue-green algae ) blooms in receiving lakes.

Cyanotoxin is of particular concern as many drinking water treatment plants can not effectively remove this health hazard.

[ citation needed ] In a recent [ when?

] municipal stormwater treatment study, an advanced sedimentation technology was used passively in large diameter stormwater mains upstream of SWMFs to remove an average of 90% of total suspended solids (TSS) and phosphorus during a near 50 year rain event turning a management facility into a passive treatment facility.

[ 10 ] Gel flocculants in a passive mining treatment system Passive treatment systems [ edit ] Chemical treatment of stormwater to remove pollutants can be accomplished without large scale infrastructure improvements. Passive treatment technologies use the energy of water flowing by gravity through ditches, canals, culverts, pipes or other constructed conveyances to enable treatment. Self-dosing products, such as gel flocculants, are placed in the flowing water where sediment particles, colloids and flow energy combine to release the required dosage, thereby creating heavy flocs which can then be easily filtered or settled.

[ 11 ] Natural woven fibers like jute are often used in ditch bottoms to act as filtration media. Silt retention mats can also be placed in situ to capture floccules. Sedimentation in a forebay is often utilized as a deposition area to clarify the water and concentrate the material. Mining, heavy construction and other industries have used passive systems for more than twenty years. These types of systems are low carbon as no external power source is needed, they require little skill to operate, minimal maintenance and are effective at reducing TSS, some heavy metals and phosphorus.

[ citation needed ] Urban flooding [ edit ] Main article: Urban flooding Retention basin for management of stormwater Stormwater is a major cause of urban flooding, which is the inundation of land or property in a built-up environment caused by stormwater overwhelming the capacity of drainage systems , such as storm sewers . Although triggered by single events such as flash flooding or snow melt , urban flooding is a condition, characterized by its repetitive, costly and systemic impacts on communities. In areas susceptible to urban flooding, backwater valves and other infrastructure may be installed to mitigate losses.

Where properties are built with basements , urban flooding is the primary cause of basement and sewer backups. Although the number of casualties from urban flooding is usually limited, the economic, social and environmental consequences can be considerable: in addition to direct damage to property and infrastructure (highways, utilities and services), chronically wet houses are linked to an increase in respiratory problems and other illnesses.

[ 12 ] Sewer backups are often caused by defects in the sanitary sewer system, which takes on some storm water as a result of infiltration and inflow (groundwater entering sanitary sewers, and water entering sanitary sewers from inappropriate connections).

Volunteers clearing gutters in Ilorin, Nigeria Stormwater creation of sinkhole collapses [ edit ] An example of urban stormwater creating a sinkhole collapse is the February 25, 2002 Dishman Lane collapse in Bowling Green, Kentucky where a sinkhole suddenly dropped the road under four traveling vehicles. The nine-month repair of the Dishman Lane collapse cost a million dollars but there remains the potential for future problems.

[ 13 ] In undisturbed areas with natural subsurface ( karst ) drainage, soil and rock fragments choke karst openings, thereby being a self-limitation to the growth of openings.

[ 14 ] : 189–190, 196 The undisturbed karst drainage system becomes balanced with the climate so it can drain the water produced by most storms. However, problems occur when the landscape is altered by urban development.

[ 15 ] : 28 In urban areas with natural subsurface karst drainage there are no surface streams for the increased stormwater from impervious surfaces such as roofs, parking lots, and streets to receive drainage. Instead, the stormwater enters the subsurface drainage system by moving down through the ground. When the subsurface water flow becomes great enough to transport soil and rock fragments, the karst openings grow rapidly.

[ 14 ] : 190 Where karst openings are roofed by supportive ( competent ) limestone, there frequently is no surface warning that an opening has grown so large it will suddenly collapse catastrophically.

[ 14 ] : 198 It is recommended that land-use planning agencies avoid karst areas when considering new development projects.

[ 15 ] : 37–38 Ultimately taxpayers end up paying the costs for poor land use decisions.

Stormwater management [ edit ] Stormwater filtration system for urban runoff Rain barrel reducing runoff from a building downspout Managing the quantity and quality of stormwater is termed, "Stormwater Management." [ 16 ] The term Best Management Practice (BMP) or stormwater control measure (SCM) is often used to refer to both structural or engineered control devices and systems (e.g.

retention ponds ) to treat or store polluted stormwater, as well as operational or procedural practices (e.g. street sweeping).

[ 17 ] Stormwater management includes both technical and institutional aspects.

[ 18 ] Technical aspects [ edit ] A sump in Islip, NY built to collect rainwater and prevent flooding This section is in list format but may read better as prose .

You can help by converting this section , if appropriate.

Editing help is available.

( March 2023 ) control of flooding and erosion; control of hazardous materials to prevent release of pollutants into the environment (source control); planning and construction of stormwater systems like retention basins , buried vaults with various kinds of media filters , and vortex separators to remove coarse solids [ 19 ] before they pollute surface waters or groundwater resources; acquisition and protection of natural waterways or rehabilitation; building nature-based solutions such as ponds, swales , constructed wetlands or green infrastructure solutions to work with existing or "hard" drainage structures, such as pipes and concrete channels (constructed wetlands built for stormwater treatment can also serve as habitat for plants, amphibians and fish) Institutional and policy aspects [ edit ] This section is in list format but may read better as prose .

You can help by converting this section , if appropriate.

Editing help is available.

( March 2023 ) development of funding approaches to stormwater programs potentially including stormwater user fees and the creation of a stormwater utility; development of long-term asset management programs to repair and replace aging infrastructure; revision of current stormwater regulations to address comprehensive stormwater needs; enhancement and enforcement of existing ordinances to make sure property owners consider the effects of stormwater before, during and after development of their land; education of a community about how its actions affect water quality , and about what it can do to improve water quality.

Integrated water management [ edit ] Rain garden designed to treat stormwater from adjacent parking lot.

Integrated water management (IWM) of stormwater has the potential to address many of the issues affecting the health of waterways and water supply challenges facing the modern urban city.  IWM is often associated with green infrastructure when considered in the design process.  Professionals in their respective fields, such as urban planners , architects , landscape architects , interior designers , and engineers , often consider integrated water management as a foundation of the design process.

Also known as low impact development (LID) [ 20 ] in the United States , or Water Sensitive Urban Design (WSUD) [ 21 ] in Australia , IWM has the potential to improve runoff quality, reduce the risk and impact of flooding and deliver an additional water resource to augment potable supply.

The development of the modern city often results in increased demands for water supply due to population growth, while at the same time altered runoff predicted by climate change has the potential to increase the volume of stormwater that can contribute to drainage and flooding problems.  IWM offers several techniques, including stormwater harvest (to reduce the amount of water that can cause flooding), infiltration (to restore the natural recharge of groundwater), biofiltration or bioretention (e.g., rain gardens), to store and treat runoff and release it at a controlled rate to reduce impact on streams and wetland treatments (to store and control runoff rates and provide habitat in urban areas).

There are many ways of achieving LID. The most popular is to incorporate land-based solutions to reduce stormwater runoff through the use of retention ponds, bioswales , infiltration trenches, sustainable pavements (such as permeable paving ), and others noted above.  LID can also be achieved by utilizing engineered, manufactured products to achieve similar, or potentially better, results as land-based systems (underground storage tanks, stormwater treatment systems, biofilters , etc.).  The proper LID solution is one that balances the desired results (controlling runoff and pollution) with the associated costs (loss of usable land for land-based systems versus capital cost of manufactured solution). Green (vegetated) roofs are also another low-cost solution.

IWM as a movement can be regarded as being in its infancy and brings together elements of drainage science, ecology and a realization that traditional drainage solutions transfer problems further downstream to the detriment of the environment and water resources.

Regulations [ edit ] United States [ edit ] Main article: United States regulation of point source water pollution Federal requirements [ edit ] Map of municipal separate storm sewer systems In the United States , the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is charged with regulating stormwater pursuant to the Clean Water Act (CWA).

[ 22 ] The goal of the CWA is to restore all " Waters of the United States " to their "fishable" and "swimmable" conditions. Point source discharges, which originate mostly from municipal wastewater ( sewage ) and industrial wastewater discharges, have been regulated since enactment of the CWA in 1972. Pollutant loadings from these sources are tightly controlled through the issuance of National Pollution Discharge Elimination System ( NPDES ) permits. However, despite these controls, thousands of water bodies in the U.S. remain classified as "impaired," meaning that they contain pollutants at levels higher than is considered safe by EPA for the intended beneficial uses of the water. Much of this impairment is due to polluted runoff, generally in urbanized watersheds (in other US watersheds, agricultural pollution is a major source).

[ 23 ] : 15 To address the nationwide problem of stormwater pollution, Congress broadened the CWA definition of "point source" in 1987 to include industrial stormwater discharges and Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems ("MS4"). These facilities are required to obtain NPDES permits.

[ 24 ] In 2017, about 855 large municipal systems (serving populations of 100,000 or more), and 6,695 small systems are regulated by the permit system.

[ 25 ] State and local requirements [ edit ] A silt fence , a type of sediment control , installed on a construction site EPA has authorized 47 states to issue NPDES permits.

[ 26 ] In addition to implementing the NPDES requirements, many states and local governments have enacted their own stormwater management laws and ordinances, and some have published stormwater treatment design manuals.

[ 16 ] [ 27 ] Some of these state and local requirements have expanded coverage beyond the federal requirements. For example, the State of Maryland requires erosion and sediment controls on construction sites of 5,000 sq ft (460 m 2 ) or more.

[ 28 ] It is not uncommon for state agencies to revise their requirements and impose them upon counties and cities; daily fines ranging as high as $25,000 can be imposed for failure to modify their local stormwater permitting for construction sites, for instance.

Nonpoint source pollution management [ edit ] Further information: Agricultural wastewater treatment and Erosion control Agricultural runoff (except for concentrated animal feeding operations, or " CAFO ") is classified as nonpoint source pollution under the CWA. It is not included in the CWA definition of "point source" and therefore not subject to NPDES permit requirements. The 1987 CWA amendments established a non-regulatory program at EPA for nonpoint source pollution management consisting of research and demonstration projects.

[ 29 ] Related programs, such as the Environmental Quality Incentives Program are conducted by the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) in the U.S.

Department of Agriculture .

[ 30 ] EPA public education graphic Public education campaigns [ edit ] Education is a key component of stormwater management. A number of agencies, organizations, and now climate tech companies have launched campaigns to teach the public about stormwater pollution, and how they can contribute to solving it. Thousands of local governments in the U.S. have developed education programs as required by their NPDES stormwater permits.

[ 25 ] Climate and property tech companies are also now focused on property education when it comes to stormwater damage and resiliency.

[ citation needed ] . Other public education campaigns highlight the importance of green infrastructure in slowing down and treating stormwater runoff.

DuPage County, Illinois launched its "Love Blue, Live Green" outreach campaign on social media sites to educate the public on green infrastructure and some other best management practices for stormwater runoff. The county distributed articles, websites, pictures, videos and other media through this campaign.

[ 31 ] History [ edit ] Stormwater infrastructure is an expensive long-term investment that is difficult to replace when the underlying circumstances change. As a result, the system will perform worse or malfunction more frequently over time. This is precisely what is occurring in the region surrounding Europe and the Baltic Sea, where the quickening pace of climate change is stressing the systems, the advancement of urbanization, and stricter regulations. Rethinking stormwater management techniques and investing in infrastructure are essential to adapting to these rapidly changing circumstances.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Stormwater runoff has been an issue since humans began living in concentrated villages or urban settings.  During the Bronze Age , housing took a more concentrated form, and impervious surfaces emerged as a factor in the design of early human settlements . Some of the early incorporation of stormwater engineering is evidenced in Ancient Greece .

[ 34 ] A specific example of an early stormwater runoff system design is found in the archaeological recovery at Minoan Phaistos on Crete .

[ 35 ] See also [ edit ] Water portal Aquifer storage and recovery HydroCAD Stormwater modeling software Nationwide Urban Runoff Program (U.S. research program) Rainwater harvesting Reclaimed water Resin-bound paving Sanitary sewer overflow Settling basin Stochastic Empirical Loading and Dilution Model Storm Water Management Model Stream restoration Sustainable drainage system Tree box filter Water conservation Water pinch analysis Water-sensitive urban design References [ edit ] ^ Schueler, Thomas R.

"The Importance of Imperviousness." Archived 2014-03-27 at the Wayback Machine Reprinted in The Practice of Watershed Protection.

2000. Center for Watershed Protection, Ellicott City, MD.

^ Metcalf, Leonard; Eddy, Harrison P. (1916).

American Sewerage Practice: Disposal of Sewage . Vol. III. New York: McGraw-Hill. p. 154.

^ Maestre, Alex; Pitt, Robert; Center for Watershed Protection (2005).

The National Stormwater Quality Database, Version 1.1: A Compilation and Analysis of NPDES Stormwater Monitoring Information (PDF) (Report). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-03-03 . Retrieved 2013-08-27 .

^ "Runoff: Surface and Overland Water Runoff" .

Water Science School . Reston, VA: U.S. Geological Survey (USGS). 2018-06-06.

^ Results of the Nationwide Urban Runoff Program: Volume 1 – Final Report (Report). EPA. 1983. Publication 5927A.

^ Sansalone and Buchberger, 1997; Westerlund and Viklander, 2006) [ full citation needed ] ^ Washington State Department of Ecology.

"Control of Toxic Chemicals in Puget Sound, Phase 2: Development of Simple Numerical Models" Archived 2017-03-02 at the Wayback Machine , 2008 ^ Müller, Alexandra; Österlund, Heléne; Marsalek, Jiri; Viklander, Maria (2020-03-20).

"The pollution conveyed by urban runoff: A review of sources" .

Science of the Total Environment .

709 . Elsevier: 136125.

Bibcode : 2020ScTEn.70936125M .

doi : 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.136125 .

PMID 31905584 .

^ "Stormwater Discharges from Industrial Activities" .

National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System . EPA. 2025-02-05.

^ "Erosion Control and Advanced Sedimentation Pilot Project" (PDF) .

[ incomplete short citation ] ^ "Gel Flocculants." https://www.clearflowgroup.com/gel-flocculants Archived 2024-06-04 at the Wayback Machine ^ Indoor Air Quality (IAQ) Scientific Findings Resource Bank (IAQ-SFRB), "Health Risks or Dampness or Mold in Houses" "Indoor Air Quality Scientific Findings Resource Bank : Indoor Dampness, Biological Contaminants and Health : Health Risk of Dampness or Mold in Houses" . Archived from the original on 2013-10-04 . Retrieved 2013-09-17 .

^ Kambesis, P., R. Brucker, T. Waltham, F. Bell, and M. Culshaw. "Collapse sinkhole at Dishman Lane, Kentucky." Sinkholes and Subsidence: Karst and Cavernous Rocks in Engineering and Construction. Springer, Berlin (2005): 277-282.

^ a b c Palmer, Arthur N. (January 1990).

"Groundwater processes in karst terranes" .

Ground Water Geomorphology : 177– 209.

doi : 10.1130/SPE252-p177 .

^ a b Veni, George.

Living with Karst . American Geological Institute, 2001.

^ a b Washington State Department of Ecology (2005). Olympia, WA.

"Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington." Archived 2012-04-02 at the Wayback Machine Publication No. 05-10-029.

^ National Research Council (United States). Committee on Reducing Stormwater Discharge Contributions to Water Pollution (2009).

"5. Stormwater Management Approaches" .

Urban Stormwater Management in the United States . Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.

ISBN 978-0-309-12540-6 .

^ Debo, Tom; Reese, Andrew (2003). "Chapter 2. Stormwater Management Programs".

Municipal Stormwater Management . Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.

ISBN 1-56670-584-3 .

^ Burton, G. Allen Jr.; Pitt, Robert E. (2001).

"Chapter 2. Receiving Water Uses, Impairments, and Sources of Stormwater Pollutants" .

Stormwater Effects Handbook: A Toolbox for Watershed Managers, Scientists, and Engineers . New York: CRC/Lewis Publishers.

ISBN 978-0-87371-924-7 . Archived from the original on 2009-05-19 . Retrieved 2021-07-24 .

^ Prince George's County, Maryland. Department of Environmental Resources (January 2000).

Low-Impact Development Design Strategies, An Integrated Design Approach (Report). EPA. EPA 841-B-00-003.

^ "Water Sensitive Urban Design - Melbourne Water" . Wsud.melbournewater.com.au . Retrieved 2011-12-05 .

^ United States. Federal Water Pollution Control Amendments of 1972 ("Clean Water Act").

Pub. L.

92–500 , October 18, 1972.

^ National Water Quality Inventory: Report to Congress; 2004 Reporting Cycle (Report). EPA. January 2009. EPA 841-R-08-001.

^ United States. Water Quality Act of 1987, Pub. L.

100–4 , February 4, 1987. Added CWA section 402(p), 33 U.S.C.

§ 1342(p) .

^ a b "Stormwater Discharges from Municipal Sources" . EPA. 2025-06-06.

^ "NPDES State Program Authority" .

National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System . EPA. 2025-02-24.

^ Maryland Stormwater Design Manual (Report). Baltimore, MD: Maryland Department of the Environment. 2009. Archived from the original on 2016-02-07.

^ State of Maryland.

Code of Maryland Regulations (COMAR).

Activities for Which Approved Erosion and Sediment Control Plans are Required.

Sec. 26.17.01.05.

^ United States. Clean Water Act sec. 319, 33 U.S.C.

§ 1329 .

^ "Environmental Quality Incentives Program" . Washington, D.C.: U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service . Retrieved 2025-07-07 .

^ "Education and Outreach" . Wheaton, IL: DuPage County Stormwater Management. Archived from the original on 2013-12-27 . Retrieved 2013-12-27 .

^ "Overview of the (Smart) Stormwater Management around the Baltic Sea" .

Water (journal) .

15 (8). MDPI: 1623. 2023.

Bibcode : 2023Water..15.1623S .

doi : 10.3390/w15081623 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is by Ivar Annus, Nils Kändler, Tobias Karlsson, Antonius Van Maris, Antti Kaseva, Nika Kotoviča, and Gunaratna Kuttuva Rajarao available under the CC BY 4.0 license.

^ Le, J. T., Gonzalez, J. P., Carson, R. T., Ambrose, R. F., & Levin, L. A. (2023). Integrating non-targeted ecosystem services into assessment of natural stormwater treatment systems.

Water, 15 (8), 1460.

https://doi.org/10.3390/w15081460 ^ Trimble, Stanley W. (2007).

Encyclopedia of Water Science . Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.

ISBN 978-0-8493-9627-4 .

^ C. Michael Hogan, "Phaistos Fieldnotes." The Modern Antiquarian (2007).

External links [ edit ] EPA Stormwater Permit Program International Stormwater Best Management Practices (BMP) Database About stormwater and hydrology (YouTube) - USGS v t e Stormwater management structures Treatment / Containment Biofilter Constructed wetland Detention basin Green roof Media filter Oil-grit separator Retention basin Stormwater detention vault Stormwater harvesting Flow control Continuous monitoring and adaptive control Flood control channel Flow control structure Hydrodynamic separator Storm drain Infiltration Bioretention Bioswale Dry well Infiltration basin Percolation trench Permeable paving Semicircular bund v t e Marine pollution Algal bloom Anoxic event Anoxic waters Aquatic toxicology Cultural eutrophication Cyanotoxin Dead zone Environmental impact of shipping Eutrophication Fish diseases and parasites Fish kill Friendly Floatees Garbage patch Great Pacific Indian Ocean North Atlantic South Pacific GASB Hypoxia Invasive species Marine debris Mercury in fish Microbead Nonpoint source pollution Nutrient pollution Ocean acidification Ocean deoxygenation Oil spill Particle Plastic bags Plastic pellet pollution Point source pollution Shutdown of thermohaline circulation Silver nanoparticles Stormwater Surface runoff Upwelling Urban runoff Water pollution v t e Sewerage Types Combined sewer Decentralized wastewater system Drain-waste-vent system Effluent sewer Force main Gravity sewer Outfall Pressure sewer Sanitary sewer Simplified sewerage Storm drain Vacuum sewer Construction materials Asbestos cement pipe Brickwork Cast iron pipe Concrete pipe Culvert Interceptor ditch Plastic pipe Reinforced concrete Steel pipe Vitrified clay pipe Related equipment Chopper pump Combined sewer overflow Grease trap Grinder pump Maceration Lift station Sanitary manhole Sewage pumping Sewer gas destructor lamp Stormwater detention vault Submersible pump Sump pump Trap Problems Biogenic sulfide corrosion Blocked Sewer Fatberg First flush Infiltration/Inflow Sanitary sewer overflow Sewer fly Sewer gas Sewer rat Liquids transported Blackwater (waste) Greywater Industrial wastewater Sewage Stormwater Background History of water supply and sanitation v t e Rivers , streams and springs Rivers ( lists ) Alluvial river Braided river Blackwater river Channel Channel pattern Channel types Confluence Distributary Drainage basin Mountain river Subterranean river River bifurcation River ecosystem River source Tributary Streams Arroyo Beck Bourne Burn Chalk stream Coulee Current Stream bed Stream channel Streamflow Stream gradient Stream pool Perennial stream Winterbourne Springs ( list ) Estavelle/Inversac Geyser Holy well Hot spring list list in the US Karst spring list Mineral spring Ponor Rhythmic spring Spring horizon Sedimentary processes and erosion Abrasion Anabranch Aggradation Armor Bed load Bed material load Granular flow Debris flow Deposition Dissolved load Downcutting Erosion Headward erosion Knickpoint Palaeochannel Progradation Retrogradation Saltation Secondary flow Sediment transport Suspended load Wash load Water gap Fluvial landforms Ait Alluvial fan Antecedent drainage stream Avulsion Bank Bar Bayou Billabong Canyon Chine Cut bank Estuary Floating island Fluvial terrace Gill Gulch Gully Glen Meander scar Mouth bar Oxbow lake Riffle-pool sequence Point bar Ravine Rill River island Rock-cut basin Sedimentary basin Sedimentary structures Strath Thalweg River valley Wadi Fluvial flow Helicoidal flow International scale of river difficulty Log jam Meander Plunge pool Rapids Riffle Shoal Stream capture Waterfall list of waterfalls Whitewater Surface runoff Agricultural wastewater First flush Urban runoff Floods and stormwater 100-year flood Crevasse splay Flash flood Flood Urban flooding Non-water flood Flood barrier Flood control Flood forecasting Flood-meadow Floodplain Flood pulse concept Flooded grasslands and savannas Inundation Storm Water Management Model Return period Point source pollution Effluent Industrial wastewater Sewage River measurement and modelling Baer's law Baseflow Bradshaw model Discharge (hydrology) Drainage density Exner equation Groundwater model Hack's law Hjulström curve Hydrograph Hydrological model Hydrological transport model Infiltration (hydrology) Main stem Playfair's law Relief ratio River Continuum Concept Rouse number Runoff curve number Runoff model (reservoir) Stream gauge Universal Soil Loss Equation WAFLEX Wetted perimeter Volumetric flow rate River engineering Aqueduct Balancing lake Canal Check dam Dam Drop structure Daylighting Detention basin Erosion control Fish ladder Floodplain restoration Flume Infiltration basin Leat Levee River morphology Retention basin Revetment Riparian-zone restoration Stream restoration Weir River sports Canyoning Fly fishing Rafting River surfing Riverboarding Stone skipping Triathlon Whitewater canoeing Whitewater kayaking Whitewater slalom Related Aquifer Aquatic toxicology Body of water Hydraulic civilization Limnology Riparian zone River valley civilization River cruise Sacred waters Surface water Wild river Rivers by length Rivers by discharge rate Drainage basins Whitewater rivers Flash floods River name etymologies Countries without rivers v t e Natural resources Air Pollution / quality Ambient standards (US) Index Indoor Law Clean Air Act (US) Ozone depletion Emissions Airshed Trading Deforestation (REDD) Energy Bio Law Resources Fossil fuels ( gas , peak coal , peak gas , peak oil ) Geothermal Hydro Nuclear Solar sunlight shade Wind Land Agricultural arable peak farmland Degradation Field Landscape cityscape seascape soundscape viewshed Law property Management habitat conservation Minerals gemstone industrial ore metal mining law sand peak copper phosphorus rights Soil conservation fertility health resilience Use planning reserve Life Biodiversity Bioprospecting biopiracy Biosphere Bushfood Bushmeat Fisheries climate change law management Forests genetic resources law management non-timber products Game law Marine conservation Meadow Pasture Plants FAO Plant Treaty food genetic resources gene banks herbal medicines UPOV Convention wood Rangeland Seed bank Wildlife conservation management Water Types / location Aquifer storage and recovery Drinking Fresh Groundwater pollution recharge remediation Hydrosphere Ice bergs glacial polar Irrigation huerta Marine Rain harvesting Stormwater Surface water Sewage reclaimed water Watershed Aspects Desalination Floods Law Leaching Sanitation improved Scarcity Security Supply Efficiency Conflict Conservation Peak water Pollution Privatization Quality Right Resources improved policy Related Commons enclosure global land tragedy of Economics ecological land Ecosystem services Exploitation overexploitation Earth Overshoot Day Management adaptive Natural capital accounting good Natural heritage Nature reserve remnant natural area Systems ecology Urban ecology Wilderness Resource Common-pool Conflict (perpetuation) Curse Depletion Extraction Nationalism Renewable / Non-renewable Politics Oil war Petroleum politics Petrostate Petro-Islam Resource war Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐848f445bb8‐qgzk5
Cached time: 20250814153427
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.773 seconds
Real time usage: 0.954 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5970/1000000
Revision size: 34549/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 213276/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5915/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 145398/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.413/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9228718/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  720.366      1 -total
 35.93%  258.854      1 Template:Reflist
 15.23%  109.738      1 Template:Public_Infrastructure
 13.99%  100.744      5 Template:Cite_book
 10.73%   77.263      8 Template:Navbox
  8.71%   62.730      7 Template:Fix
  8.64%   62.209      1 Template:Short_description
  7.56%   54.444      4 Template:Citation_needed
  7.22%   52.033      7 Template:Rp
  6.46%   46.530      7 Template:R/superscript Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:192021:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814153427 and revision id 1303397613. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Stormwater&oldid=1303397613 " Categories : Environmental soil science Stormwater management Drainage Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from January 2021 Articles with incomplete citations from March 2025 Articles with imported Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 text Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from March 2025 Articles needing cleanup from March 2023 All pages needing cleanup Articles with sections that need to be turned into prose from March 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 19:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Stormwater 8 languages Add topic

