Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview Toggle Overview subsection 1.1 Negative views 1.2 Reassessment 2 Economic policies 3 See also 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Citations 4.2 Sources Toggle the table of contents Historical reputation of Warren G. Harding Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Reputation of the 29th US president This article is part of a series about Warren G. Harding Personal Early life Harding Home Harding Railroad Car Tomb Political rise Lieutenant Governorship 1910 race for governor 1914 Senate race 29th President of the United States Presidency timeline Transition Inauguration Cabinet Judiciary Supreme Court candidates Executive actions Foreign Washington Naval Conference Depression of 1920–1921 Teapot Dome scandal Great Railroad Strike of 1922 Voyage of Understanding Presidential campaigns 1920 convention election Legacy Cultural depictions Historical reputation Library Memorials v t e Warren G. Harding died as one of the most popular presidents in history, but the subsequent exposure of the scandals eroded his popular regard, as did revelations of several extramarital affairs. In historical rankings during the decades after his term in office, Harding was often rated among the worst. However, in recent decades, many historians have begun to fundamentally reassess the conventional views of Harding's historical record in office.

Overview [ edit ] Upon his death, Harding was deeply mourned—not only in the United States, but around the world. He was called a man of peace in many European newspapers. American journalists praised him lavishly, with some describing him as having given his life for his country. His associates were stunned by his demise.

Harry Daugherty wrote, "I can hardly write about it or allow myself to think about it yet." [ 1 ] Charles Evans Hughes stated, "I cannot realize that our beloved Chief is no longer with us." [ 2 ] Negative views [ edit ] Hagiographic accounts of Harding's life quickly followed his death, such as Joe Mitchell Chapple's Life and Times of Warren G. Harding, Our After-War President (1924).

[ 3 ] By then, however, the scandals were breaking, and the Harding administration soon became a byword for corruption in the view of the public. Works written in the late 1920s helped shape Harding's historical reputation: William Allen White 's Masks in a Pageant (1928) mocked and dismissed Harding, as did Samuel Hopkins Adams ' fictionalized account of the Harding administration, Revelry (1926).

[ 4 ] These books depicted Harding's time in office as one of great presidential weakness.

[ 5 ] The publication of Nan Britton 's bestselling book, which disclosed that they had had an affair, also lowered the late president in public esteem. President Calvin Coolidge , wishing to distance himself from his predecessor, refused to dedicate the Harding Tomb.

Herbert Hoover , Coolidge's successor, was similarly reluctant, but with Coolidge in attendance, presided over the dedication in 1931. By that time, with the Great Depression in full swing, Hoover was nearly as discredited as Harding.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Adams continued to shape the negative view of Harding with several nonfiction works in the 1930s, culminating with The Incredible Era—The Life and Times of Warren G. Harding (1939) in which he called his subject "an amiable, well-meaning third-rate Mr. Babbitt , with the equipment of a small-town semi-educated journalist ... It could not work. It did not work." [ 8 ] John Dean views the works of White and Adams "remarkably unbalanced and unfair accounts, exaggerating the negative, assigning responsibility to Harding for all wrongs, and denying him credit for anything done right. Today there is considerable evidence refuting their portrayals of Harding. Yet the myth has persisted." [ 9 ] Warren and Florence Harding , c.

1922. Florence Harding was highly protective of her husband's legacy.

The opening of Harding's papers for research in 1964 sparked a small spate of biographies, of which the most controversial was Franics Russell 's The Shadow of Blooming Grove (1968), which concluded that the rumors of black ancestry (the "shadow" of the title) deeply affected Harding in his formative years, causing both Harding's conservatism and his desire to get along with everyone. Coffey faults Russell's methods, and deems the biography "largely critical, though not entirely unsympathetic." [ 10 ] Historian Robert K. Murray 's The Harding Era (1969) took a more positive view of the president, and put him in the context of his times.

Eugene P. Trani and David L. Wilson faulted Murray for "a tendency to go overboard" in trying to connect Harding with the successful policies of his cabinet officers, and for asserting, without sufficient evidence, that a new, more assertive Harding had emerged by 1923.

[ 11 ] Later decades saw revisionist books published on Harding.

Robert Ferrell 's The Strange Deaths of President Harding (1996), according to Coffey, "spends almost the entire work challenging every story about Harding and concludes that almost everything that is read and taught about his subject is wrong." [ 12 ] In 2004, Dean, noted for his involvement in another presidential scandal, Watergate , wrote the Harding volume in "The American Presidents" series of short biographies, edited by Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.

Coffey considered that book the most revisionist to date, and faults Dean for glossing over some unfavorable episodes in Harding's life, like his silence during the 1914 United States Senate election in Ohio when his opponent, Timothy S. Hogan , was being attacked for his faith.

[ 13 ] External videos Booknotes interview with Robert Ferrell on The Strange Deaths of President Harding , January 12, 1997 , C-SPAN Booknotes interview with John Dean on Warren G. Harding , March 14, 2004 , C-SPAN Trani faults Harding's own lack of depth and decisiveness as bringing about his tarnished legacy.

[ 14 ] Harding has traditionally been ranked as one of the worst American presidents .

[ 15 ] In a 1948 poll conducted by Harvard University , historian Arthur M. Schlesinger Sr.

conducted a survey of scholars' opinions of the presidents, ranking Harding last among the 29 presidents considered.

[ 16 ] He has also been last in many other polls since then.

[ citation needed ] Ferrell attributes Harding's negative ratings to scholars who read little that is substantive, and who focus more on sensational accounts of Harding.

[ 15 ] Coffey believes "the academic lack of interest in Harding has cost him his reputation, as scholars still rank Harding as nearly dead last among presidents." [ 10 ] Reassessment [ edit ] In historical rankings of the presidents during the decades after his term in office, Harding was often rated among the worst. However, in recent decades, some authors and historians have begun to fundamentally reassess the conventional views of Harding's historical record in office.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] In The Spoils of War (2016), Bruce Bueno de Mesquita and Alastair Smith place Harding first in a combined ranking of fewest wartime deaths and highest annual per capita income growth during each president's time in office.

[ 19 ] Murray argued in his book The Harding Era that Harding deserves more credit than historians have given: "He was certainly the equal of a Franklin Pierce , an Andrew Johnson , a Benjamin Harrison , or even a Calvin Coolidge. In concrete accomplishments, his administration was superior to a sizable portion of those in the nation's history." [ 20 ] Murray notes some general points regarding Harding's poor standing which illustrate the relatively obscure and weak basis for negative critiques of Harding in general. Namely, the conventional views often entail omission of an actual critique or analysis of President's Harding's actions, and often consist of a relatively limited and arbitrary focus on the nature of Harding's appointees, to the omission and detriment of a broader analysis of larger historical facts. Murray states: In the American system, there is no such thing as an innocent bystander in the White House. If Harding can rightly claim the achievements of a Hughes in State or a Hoover in Commerce, he must also shoulder responsibility for a Daugherty in Justice and a Fall in Interior. Especially must he bear the onus of his lack of punitive action against such men as Forbes and Smith. By his inaction, he forfeited whatever chance he had to maintain the integrity of his position and salvage a favorable image for himself and his administration. As it was, the subsequent popular and scholarly negative verdict was inevitable, if not wholly deserved.

[ 20 ] Various historians have defended Harding, with many arguing that he was merely below average rather than a total failure.

[ 21 ] Murray wrote that, "in establishing the political philosophy and program for an entire decade, [Harding's] 882 days in office were more significant than all but a few similar short periods in the nation's existence." [ 21 ] Authors Marcus Raskin and Robert Spero, in 2007, also believed that Harding was underrated, and admired Harding's quest for world peace after World War I and his successful naval disarmament among strongly armed nations, including France , Britain , and Japan .

[ 22 ] In his book The Leaders We Deserved (and a Few We Didn't): Rethinking the Presidential Rating Game (2010), presidential historian Alvin S. Felzenberg , ranking presidents on several criteria, ranked Harding 26th out of 40 presidents considered.

[ 23 ] In some cases, it is the very ubiquity and conventionality of the criticisms of Harding that has impelled some historians to take a closer look and seek a more objective reassessment. For example, one historian wrote a detailed study subtitled "You've always heard Harding was the worst President. Sex in the White House. Bribes on Capitol Hill. Was he really that bad?", [ 24 ] which states, in part: For years I shared this general [negative] opinion of Harding. But then I started to study him. Actually I began with his wife, Florence, working on what has just become a published biography of her. Naturally it became clear to me that I couldn't know Florence Harding without becoming well acquainted with Warren. I was initially struck by the way Americans reacted to his death. He was the object of national grief and reverence, and in his gentleness, geniality, and warmth he was even considered Lincoln's equal. As I read about him, it began to dawn on me that possibly these tributes were not entirely undeserved … As I delved further into the Harding archives, I kept finding evidence of a more positive side to his administration.

[ 24 ] Another study titled "Reputation Overrides Record: How Warren G. Harding Mistakenly Became the 'Worst' President of the United States" questions whether political biases might be partly responsible for the widespread conventional negative views on Harding. The article shows that modern historians, whether liberal or conservative, have similarly negative views of Harding; it argues that Harding's reputation was "destroyed" by progressive authors in the 1920s-30s, "leaving us a great disparity between scholarly judgment and objective measures of
presidential success".

[ 25 ] Similarly, the 2015 Washington Post article, "If we weren't so obsessed with Warren G. Harding's sex life, we'd realize he was a pretty good president", [ 26 ] stated, in part: Our obsession, past and present, with Harding's sex life has obscured the truth: This man was a good president. Among his more important accomplishments was stabilizing the country and the world after the catastrophic war in Europe, a true Armageddon that left most "civilized" nations in economic, political and social chaos. The United States alone was capable of steadying the world. Harding started by lifting our country out of a sharp postwar depression and then placed the federal government on a budget for the first time — establishing the Office of the Budget (the forerunner of the modern OMB). He addressed severe racial tensions that the war stirred up, in part because of the great migration of African Americans to the North to work in war industries. Harding traveled to Birmingham, Ala., in his first year in office to deliver a courageous civil rights speech. 'Democracy is a lie,' he said, without political equality for black citizens. He also supported a federal anti-lynching law. ... Over time Harding freed hundreds of political prisoners, repairing the severe wounds wrought by the Espionage and Sedition acts of 1917 and 1918. Free speech was the victor.

[ 26 ] Economic policies [ edit ] Harding's detailed attention to federal budgeting, including his creation of the Bureau of the Budget , and lowering of federal spending, have increased the basis for various positive reassessments in recent decades. A 2022 article titled Warren Harding: The US President Who Reduced Federal Spending by Nearly 50% in Just Two Years.

[ 27 ] stated: Today, we're going to celebrate the fiscal achievements of Warren Harding. Most notably, as illustrated by this chart based on OMB data, he presided over a period of remarkable spending discipline. Harding also launched very big—and very effective—reductions in tax rates. And his agenda of less government and lower tax rates helped bring about a quick end to a massive economic downturn (unlike the big-government policies of Hoover and Roosevelt, which deepened and lengthened the Great Depression).

[ 27 ] A 2021 article in the National Review titled How the Media Destroyed the Reputation of a Great President [ 28 ] stated: One hundred years ago this month, one of our greatest presidents took office. In a moment of national crisis, Warren G. Harding restored the economic health of the United States. Harding was also, for a man of his time, atypically enlightened about the perniciousness of racism, and, contrary to legend, honest. America in 1921 was in a state of crisis... Harding and Congress cut federal spending nearly in half, from 6.5 percent of GDP to 3.5 percent. The top tax rate came down from 73 percent to 25, and the tax base broadened. Unemployment came down to an estimated 2 to 4 percent... Harding was a smashing success in a historically important role as the anti-Wilson: He restored a classically liberal, rights-focused, limited government, and deserves immense credit for the economic boom that kicked off in his first year and continued throughout the rest of the 1920s....

[ 28 ] An article by Jim Powell in 2009 titled Not‐So‐Great Depression: Which U.S. president ranks as America's greatest depression fighter?

[ 29 ] stated: America's greatest depression fighter was Warren Gamaliel Harding. An Ohio senator when he was elected president in 1920, he followed the much praised Woodrow Wilson— who had brought America into World War I, built up huge federal bureaucracies, imprisoned dissenters, and incurred $25 billion of debt... One of Harding's campaign slogans was "less government in business," and it served him well. Harding embraced the advice of Treasury Secretary Andrew Mellon and called for tax cuts in his first message to Congress on April 12, 1921. The highest taxes, on corporate revenues and "excess" profits, were to be cut. Personal income taxes were to be left as is, with a top rate of 8 percent of incomes above $4,000.

[ 29 ] Economist David Kuehn has questioned the claims of Powell and other Austrian School economists on Harding, noting many of the measures taken by him had already started under President Wilson.

[ 30 ] See also [ edit ] Historical rankings of presidents of the United States Presidency of Warren G. Harding References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Murray 1969 , pp. 456–457.

^ Murray 1969 , p. 457.

^ Trani & Wilson 1977 , p. 208.

^ Coffey 2014 , p. 80.

^ Ferrell 1998 , 2970.

^ Russell 1962 , pp. 632–633, 639–640.

^ Payne 2014 , pp. 125, 127.

^ Trani & Wilson 1977 , p. 209.

^ Dean 2004 , p. 163.

^ a b Coffey 2014 , p. 86.

^ Trani & Wilson 1977 , p. 211.

^ Coffey 2014 , pp. 88–89.

^ Coffey 2014 , p. 89.

^ Trani, Eugene P.

(October 4, 2016).

"Warren G. Harding: Impact and Legacy" .

Miller Center . Retrieved December 26, 2017 .

^ a b Ferrell 1998 , 3474–3485.

^ Schlesinger, Arthur M.

(November 1, 1948). "Historians Rate the U.S. Presidents".

Life . pp.

65– 66, 68, 73– 74.

^ Robenalt, James D.

(August 13, 2015).

"If we weren't so obsessed with Warren G. Harding's sex life, we'd realize he was a pretty good president" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved August 13, 2015 .

^ Pecquet, Gary M.; Thies, Clifford F. (Summer 2016).

"Reputation Overrides Record: How Warren G. Harding Mistakenly Became the 'Worst' President of the United States" (PDF) .

The Independent Review .

21 .

Independent Institute : 29– 45.

ISSN 1086-1653 .

^ Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce; Smith, Alastair (2016).

The Spoils of War . PublicAffairs. p. 255.

^ a b Murray 1969 , p. 536.

^ a b Trani & Wilson 1977 , p. 190.

^ Raskin & Spero (2007) , p. 242.

^ Felzenberg (2010) , p. 378 ^ a b The Most Scandalous President: You've always heard Harding was the worst President. Sex in the White House. Bribes on Capitol Hill. Was he really that bad?

, by Carl Sferrazza Anthony, July/August 1998, American Heritage.

^ Pecquet, Gary M.; Thies, Clifford F. (2016).

"Reputation Overrides Record: How Warren G. Harding Mistakenly Became the "Worst" President of the United States" (PDF) .

The Independent Review .

21 (1): 29– 45.

JSTOR 43999675 .

^ a b Robenalt, James D. (August 13, 2015).

"If we weren't so obsessed with Warren G. Harding's sex life, we'd realize he was a pretty good president. There was more to the man than his mistresses" .

The Washington Post .

^ a b Warren Harding: The US President Who Reduced Federal Spending by Nearly 50% in Just Two Years.

, by Daniel Mitchell, Saturday, March 12, 2022 FEE Website.

^ a b How the Media Destroyed the Reputation of a Great President by Kyle Smith, March 27, 2021.

^ a b Not‐So‐Great Depression: Which U.S. president ranks as America's greatest depression fighter?' , by Jim Powell, January 2009 in National Review, posted on the Cato Institute website.

^ Kuehn, Daniel (September 2011). "A critique of Powell, Woods, and Murphy on the 1920–1921 depression".

Review of Austrian Economics .

24 (3): 273– 291.

doi : 10.1007/s11138-010-0131-3 .

S2CID 145586147 .

Sources [ edit ] Coffey, Justin P. (2014), "Harding Biographies", in Sibley, Katherine A. S. (ed.), A Companion to Warren G. Harding, Calvin Coolidge, and Herbert Hoover , Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., pp.

79– 93, ISBN 978-1-4443-5003-6 Dean, John W.

(2004).

Warren Harding: The 29th President, 1921–1923 . The American Presidents Series. Henry Holt and Co.

ISBN 978-0-8050-6956-3 .

Felzenberg, Alvin S.

(2010).

The Leaders We Deserved (and a Few We Didn't): Rethinking the Presidential Rating Game . New York: Basic Books.

ISBN 978-0-7867-2163-4 .

[ permanent dead link ] Ferrell, Robert H.

(1992).

Ill-Advised: Presidential Health & Public Trust . Columbia, MO: University of Missouri Press.

ISBN 978-0826208644 .

Ferrell, Robert H.

(1998).

The Strange Deaths of Warren G. Harding . University of Missouri Press.

ISBN 978-0-8262-1202-3 .

Murray, Robert K. (1969).

The Harding Era 1921–1923: Warren G. Harding and his Administration . University of Minnesota Press.

ISBN 0-8166-0541-6 .

Payne, Phillip G. (2014), "The Harding Presidency: Scandals, Legacy, and Memory", in Sibley, Katherine A. S. (ed.), A Companion to Warren G. Harding, Calvin Coolidge, and Herbert Hoover , Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., pp.

79– 93, ISBN 978-1-4443-5003-6 Raskin, Marcus; Spero, Robert (2007).

The Four Freedoms under Siege: The Clear and Present Danger from Our National Security State . University of Nebraska Press.

ISBN 978-0275989118 .

Russell, Francis (1962).

The Shadow of Blooming Grove-Warren G. Harding In His Times . Easton Press.

ISBN 978-0-07-054338-6 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Trani, Eugene P.

; Wilson, David L. (1977).

The Presidency of Warren G. Harding . American Presidency. The Regents Press of Kansas.

ISBN 978-0-7006-0152-3 .

v t e Warren G. Harding 29th President of the United States (1921–1923) 28th Lieutenant Governor of Ohio (1904–1906) Life Harding Home Harding Tomb The Marion Star Electoral history of Warren G. Harding 1914 United States Senate election in Ohio 1920 United States presidential election Front porch campaign transition 1920 Republican National Convention Presidency ( timeline ) Inauguration of Warren G. Harding Washington Naval Conference Recession of 1920–1921 Halibut Treaty Agricultural Appropriation Act of 1923 Budget and Accounting Act Bureau of the Budget General Accounting Office Cable Act Capper–Volstead Act Dyer Anti-Lynching Bill Emergency Quota Act Emergency Tariff of 1921 Federal Aid Highway Act of 1921 Future Trading Act Fordney–McCumber Tariff Grain Futures Act Great Railroad Strike of 1922 Knox–Porter Resolution Revenue Act of 1921 Sheppard–Towner Act Veterans Administration Willis Graham Act Executive actions Federal judges appointed Supreme Court candidates Harding Railroad Car Voyage of Understanding Teapot Dome scandal Public image The President's Daughter Cultural depictions of Warren G. Harding List of memorials to Warren G. Harding Warren G. Harding Presidential Center Historical reputation of Warren G. Harding Family Florence Harding (wife) Elizabeth Ann Blaesing (daughter) George Tryon Harding (father) Carolyn Harding Votaw (sister) Nan Britton (mistress) Laddie Boy (pet dog) Related The Superb railway car The President tree ← Woodrow Wilson Calvin Coolidge → Category v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Historical_reputation_of_Warren_G._Harding&oldid=1290953297 " Categories : Warren G. Harding Historical reputations of presidents of the United States Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from August 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2023 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 errors: ISBN date This page was last edited on 18 May 2025, at 04:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Historical reputation of Warren G. Harding Add languages Add topic

