Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Aetiology 2 Clinical signs 3 Diagnosis 4 Treatment 5 Prognosis 6 Epidemiology 7 Genetics 8 References Toggle the table of contents Equine recurrent uveitis 6 languages Deutsch Eesti עברית Nederlands Polski Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Eye disease of horses This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Equine recurrent uveitis" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) "Moon blindness" on an Icelandic horse Advanced stage of disease Advanced stage of disease ERU on an Icelandic horse Equine recurrent uveitis ( ERU ) – also known as moon blindness , recurrent iridocyclitis , or periodic ophthalmia [ 1 ] – is an acute, nongranulomatous inflammation of the uveal tract of the eye , occurring commonly in horses of all breeds, worldwide. The causative factor is not known, but several pathogeneses have been suggested. It is the most common cause of blindness in horses. In some breeds, a genetic factor may be involved.

Aetiology [ edit ] Several aetiologies are suggested, and any combination of these may be present in any given case.

[ 2 ] Vitamin deficiency ( A , B or C ) Viral infection Bacterial infection Leptospira Streptococcus Brucella Parasitic infection Strongyle Onchocerca cervicalis Autoimmune disease The disease has been suggested to be primarily autoimmune in nature, being a delayed hypersensitivity reaction to any of the above agents.

Clinical signs [ edit ] In the acute stage of the disease, a catarrhal conjunctivitis is present, with signs of ocular pain, usually blepharospasm , increased lacrimation , and photophobia .

Miosis is also usually present. After a few days, this will progress to a keratitis and iridocyclitis . Other ocular problems may also occur, including conjunctival and corneal oedema , and aqueous flare .

After an acute flare-up, no clinical signs of disease may be seen for a prolonged period, which can vary from a few hours to a few years. With frequent acute incidents, though, additional clinical signs may be seen, including anterior and posterior synechiae , poor pupillary responses, cataracts , and a cloudy appearance to the vitreous humour .

Diagnosis [ edit ] The cornerstone of diagnosis is an accurate history, and a good clinical examination of the eye, to eliminate traumatic uveitis. Ultrasonography is a useful tool, as it can detect a thickened iris , but only in the hands of an expert.

Treatment [ edit ] During an acute flare-up, therapy is targeted at reducing the inflammation present, and dilating the pupil.

Mydriasis is important, as pupillary constriction is the primary reason for pain. Anti-inflammatory therapy is usually given both systemically, often in the form of flunixin meglumine , and topically, as prednisolone acetate . The mydriatic of choice is atropine . In the periods between acute attacks, no therapy has been shown to be beneficial.

Prognosis [ edit ] Horses that suffer from this disease can never be considered cured, although they can be managed by careful use of the therapy described above, and fast detection of new flare-ups. If the disease is not properly treated, it will eventually lead to blindness .

Epidemiology [ edit ] ERU occurs in horses worldwide, but is more common in North America than in Europe, Australia or South Africa.

[ 3 ] Males and females are equally affected.

[ 3 ] Genetics [ edit ] The Appaloosa has a higher risk of developing ERU than other breeds; this predisposition has a genetic basis. Appaloosas which develop ERU are more likely than other breeds to have ERU in both eyes, and more likely to become blind in one or both eyes.

[ 1 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Gilger, BC; Hollingsworth, SR (2016). "Chapter 8: Diseases of the uvea, uveitis and recurrent uveitis". In Gilger, BC (ed.).

Equine Ophthalmology (3rd ed.). John Wiley & Sons. pp.

380– 415.

ISBN 9781119047742 .

^ "Equine Recurrent Uveitis" . Archived from the original on 2011-07-10 . Retrieved 2010-11-28 .

^ a b Maggs, D; Miller, P; Ofri, R, eds. (2013). "Chapter 11: Uvea: Equine recurrent uveitis".

Slatter's fundamentals of veterinary ophthalmology (5th ed.). St. Louis, Mo.: Elsevier. pp.

235– 240.

ISBN 9780323241960 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Equine_recurrent_uveitis&oldid=1300839412 " Category : Horse diseases Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2025 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 17:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Equine recurrent uveitis 6 languages Add topic

