Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 User-generated geographic content 3 Discussion about the definition 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Neogeography 9 languages العربية বাংলা Català Deutsch Español Français Italiano Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Amateur-focused geography Part of a series on Geography Portal Outline History of geography Graeco-Roman Chinese Islamic Age of Discovery History of cartography Historical geography Environmental determinism Regional geography Quantitative revolution Critical geography Human geography Fields Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Physical geography Fields Biogeography Ecology Phytogeography Zoogeography Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Earth science Geology Geomorphology Glaciology Hydrology / Hydrography Landscape ecology Limnology Pedology Quaternary science Technical geography Fields Geodesign Geodesy Geoinformatics Geographic information science Geomatics Statistical geography Spatial analysis Integrated geography Fields Environmental social science Environmental studies Landscape architecture Landscape ecology Methods Quantitative Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Geochronology Geographic information system Distributed GIS Internet GIS Web GIS Geologic modelling Geomathematics Geostatistics Geovisualization Global Positioning System Hydrography Map algebra Participant observation Photogrammetry Remote Sensing Statistical survey Surveying Land change modeling Qualitative Ethnography Geopoetics Interview (research) Survey (human research) Philosophy of geography Behavioral Critical Feminist Marxist Non-representational theory Modernism Structuralism Semiotics Postmodernism Post-structuralism Deconstruction Societies Index Geographers v t e Neogeography (literally "new geography") is the use of geographical techniques and tools for personal and community activities or by a non-expert group of users.

[ 1 ] Application domains of neogeography are typically not formal or analytical.

[ 2 ] From the point of view of human geography, neogeography could be also defined as the use of new specific information society tools, especially the Internet, to the aims and purposes of geography as an academic discipline; in all branches of geographical thought and incorporating contributions from outside of geography performed by non-specialist users in this discipline through the use of specific geographic ICT tools. This new definition, complementing previous ones, restores to academic geography the leading role proponents claim it should play when considering a renewal of the discipline with the rigor and right granted by its centuries-existence, but also includes the interesting social phenomenon of citizen participation in the geographical knowledge from its dual role: as undoubted possibility of enrichment for geography and as social phenomenon with geographic interest.

[ citation needed ] History [ edit ] The term neogeography has been used since at least 1922.  In the early 1950s in the U.S. it was a term used in the sociology of production & work.  The French philosopher François Dagognet used it in the title of his 1977 book Une Epistemologie de l'espace concret: Neo-geographie .  The word was first used in relation to the study of online communities in the 1990s by Kenneth Dowling, the Librarian of the City and County of San Francisco .

[ 3 ] Immediate precursor terms in the industry press were: "the geospatial Web" and "the geoaware Web" (both 2005); "Where 2.0" (2005); "a dissident cartographic aesthetic" and "mapping and counter-mapping" (2006).

[ 3 ] These terms arose with the concept of Web 2.0 , around the increased public appeal of mapping and geospatial technologies that occurred with the release of such tools as "slippy maps" such as Google Maps , Google Earth , and also with the decreased cost of geolocated mobile devices such as GPS units.  Subsequently, the use of geospatial technologies began to see increased integration with non-geographically focused applications.

The term neogeography was first defined in its contemporary sense by Randall Szott in 2006.  He argued for a broad scope, to include artists, psychogeography , and more. The technically oriented aspects of the field, far more tightly defined than in Scott's definition, were outlined by Andrew Turner in his Introduction to Neogeography (O'Reilly, 2006). The contemporary use of the term, and the field in general, owes much of its inspiration to the locative media movement that sought to expand the use of location-based technologies to encompass personal expression and society.

[ 3 ] Traditional Geographic Information Systems historically have developed tools and techniques targeted towards formal applications that require precision and accuracy. By contrast, neogeography tends to apply to the areas of approachable, colloquial applications. The two realms can have overlap as the same problems are presented to different sets of users: experts and non-experts.

[ citation needed ] User-generated geographic content [ edit ] Neogeography has also been connected [ 4 ] with the increase in user-generated geographic content, closely related to Volunteered Geographic Information .

[ 5 ] This can be an active collection of data such as OpenStreetMap or passive collection of user-data such as Flickr tags for folksonomic toponyms. While involving non-trained volunteers in the data creation process, research proves users perceive volunteered geographic information as highly valuable and trustworthy.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Discussion about the definition [ edit ] There is currently much debate about the scope and application of neogeography in the web mapping, geography, and GIS fields. Some of this discussion considers neogeography to be the ease of use of geographic tools and interfaces while other points focus on the domains of application.

Neogeography is not limited to a specific technology and is not strictly web-based, so is not synonymous with web mapping though it is commonly conceived as such.

A number of geographers and geoinformatics scientists (such as Mike Goodchild [ 9 ] ) have expressed strong reservations about the term "neogeography". They say that geography is an established scientific discipline; uses such as mashups and tags in Google Earth are not scientific works, but are better described as Volunteered Geographic Information .

There are also a great many artists and inter-disciplinary practitioners involved in an engagement with new forms of mapping and locative art.

[ 10 ] It is thus far wider than simply web mapping .

See also [ edit ] Cartography Collaborative Mapping Geography Markup Language GeoRSS Geoweb Google Earth GPS eXchange Format Keyhole Markup Language Locative media OpenStreetMap Participatory 3D Modelling (P3DM) Participatory GIS Soundmap Spatial citizenship Technical geography Volunteered geographic information Web mapping References [ edit ] ^ Flanagin, A. J.; Metzger, M. J. (2008). "The credibility of volunteered geographic information".

GeoJournal .

72 ( 3– 4): 137– 148.

doi : 10.1007/s10708-008-9188-y .

S2CID 15975229 .

^ Turner, Andrew (2006).

Introduction to Neogeography . Short Cuts.

O'Reilly Media . p. 2.

ISBN 978-0-596-52995-6 .

^ a b c "A short enquiry into the origins and uses of the term “neogeography”", D'log ^ Haklay, Muki; Singleton, Alex; Parker, Chris (2008). "Web mapping 2.0: The neogeography of the GeoWeb".

Geography Compass .

2 (6): 2011– 2039.

doi : 10.1111/j.1749-8198.2008.00167.x .

^ "Neogeography and the Palimpsests of Place: Web 2.0 and the Construction of a Virtual Earth ", M. Graham (2010). Journal of Economic And Social Geography (TESG) ^ Parker, Christopher J.; May, Andrew; Mitchell, Val (2014-07-03).

"User-centred design of neogeography: the impact of volunteered geographic information on users' perceptions of online map 'mashups' " .

Ergonomics .

57 (7): 987– 997.

doi : 10.1080/00140139.2014.909950 .

ISSN 0014-0139 .

PMID 24827070 .

S2CID 13458260 .

^ May, Andrew; Parker, Christopher J.; Taylor, Neil; Ross, Tracy (December 2014).

"Evaluating a concept design of a crowd-sourced 'mashup' providing ease-of-access information for people with limited mobility" .

Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies .

49 : 103– 113.

doi : 10.1016/j.trc.2014.10.007 .

^ Parker, Christopher J.; May, Andrew; Mitchell, Val (August 2012).

"Understanding Design with VGI using an Information Relevance Framework: Understanding VGI" .

Transactions in GIS .

16 (4): 545– 560.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9671.2012.01302.x .

S2CID 20100267 .

^ Goodchild, Michael (2009). "NeoGeography and the nature of geographic expertise".

Journal of location based services .

3 (2): 82– 96.

doi : 10.1080/17489720902950374 .

^ "Search results - neogeography" Links to related articles v t e Sub-fields of and approaches to human geography Sub-fields Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Approaches Critical Culture theory Feminist Marxist Modernism Structuralism Semiotics Non-representational theory Postmodernism Post-structuralism Deconstruction Scientific method Time Universalism Category v t e Geography topics Glossary History Philosophy Geographers Index Outline Branches Human Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Physical Biogeography Ecology Phytogeography Zoogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Earth science Atmospheric science / Meteorology Environmental science Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Geobiology Geophysics / Geodesy Earth system science Geomorphology / Geology Glaciology Hydrology / Limnology Soil science ( Pedology / Edaphology ) Quaternary science Technical Geodesign Geodesy Geoinformatics Geographic information science Geomatics Statistical geography Spatial analysis Integrated Environmental social science Environmental studies Landscape architecture Landscape ecology Time geography Techniques and tools Quantitative Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Geochronology Geographic information system Distributed GIS Internet GIS Web GIS Geologic modelling Geomathematics Geostatistics Geovisualization Global Positioning System Hydrography Map algebra Participant observation Photogrammetry Remote sensing Statistical survey Surveying Land change modeling Qualitative Ethnography Geopoetics Interview (research) Survey (human research) Institutions, organizations, and societies Geography organizations Geographic data and information organizations Geographical societies Geoscience societies Education Geo-literacy Geographers on Film International Geography Olympiad National Council for Geographic Education Spatial citizenship Publication Geography books Geography journals Geographic magazines Category Portal Commons WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Neogeography&oldid=1255988641 " Categories : Neogeography Geographical technology Collaborative mapping Cultural geography Psychogeography Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2008 This page was last edited on 7 November 2024, at 17:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Neogeography 9 languages Add topic

