Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Establishment 1.2 Selective grammar 1.3 Recent history 2 Overview Toggle Overview subsection 2.1 Curriculum 2.2 Academic attainment 2.3 School uniform 3 Notable former pupils Toggle Notable former pupils subsection 3.1 Early scholars 3.2 20th century scholars 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents The King's School, Grantham 2 languages Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 52°54′56″N 0°38′27″W ﻿ / ﻿ 52.9156°N 0.6409°W ﻿ / 52.9156; -0.6409 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British grammar school The King's School, Grantham School badge The King's School, Grantham.

Location Brook Street Grantham, Lincolnshire , NG31 6RP England Coordinates 52°54′56″N 0°38′27″W ﻿ / ﻿ 52.9156°N 0.6409°W ﻿ / 52.9156; -0.6409 Information Type 11–18 boys Grammar school ; Academy Motto Honi soit qui mal y pense (Shame on anyone who thinks evil of it) Established 1329 ; 696 years ago ( 1329 ) Department for Education URN 137166 Tables Ofsted Reports Headmaster Simon Pickett Staff 90 Gender Boys Age 11 to 18 Enrolment 1000 Houses Burleigh (Blue), Curteis (Red), Foxe (Yellow), More (White), Newton (Green), School (Black).

Colour(s) Publication The Granthamian Website www .kings .lincs .sch .uk The King's School is an 11–18 boys grammar school with academy status , in the market town of Grantham, Lincolnshire , England. The school's history can be traced to 1329, and was re-endowed by Richard Foxe in 1528. Located on Brook Street, the school's site has expanded over the course of its history, with some school buildings dating back to 1497.

Today, King's remains an all-boys grammar school, with just over 1,000 pupils. King's and another Grantham grammar school, Kesteven and Grantham Girls' School , share teaching resources for sixth form study in certain subjects; since 2006–2007, timetables for this study have been co-ordinated between both schools.

History [ edit ] Establishment [ edit ] The King's School has an unbroken history on the same site since its re-endowment in 1528 by Richard Foxe , although its history can be traced back to 1329.

Sir Nikolaus Pevsner in his Buildings of England , dates the original School building to 1497. Foxe was born and raised locally. He entered into the service of Henry Tudor , while Henry was in exile in Brittany . When Henry took the throne of England as Henry VII, Foxe became his secretary, and later founded Corpus Christi College, Oxford (1517) and Taunton Grammar School (1522). In the 16th century the School became known as the Free Grammar School of King Edward VI . Scholars numbered perhaps a few dozen at foundation, and there were still fewer than one hundred until the 20th century.

[ citation needed ] Isaac Newton was a King's School scholar between 1655 and 1660. As was customary in his time, he carved his signature on the wall of what is now the school library, although the signature has never been confirmed as authentic; visitors from around the world come to view this indication of Newton's education. A replica of the signature is on display in Grantham Museum.

Selective grammar [ edit ] The school became a selective state grammar school under the implementation of the Education Act 1944 . By 1970, Kesteven County Council announced plans to turn its grammar schools into co-educational comprehensives for ages of 11–16 and leave Grantham College as the town's only sixth form. Other parts of Kesteven became comprehensive but responsibility for education passed to Lincolnshire County Council under the Local Government Act 1972 , and King's remained a grammar school.

The novelist and eccentric Frederick Rolfe ('Baron Corvo') was briefly a teacher at the school.

[ 1 ] Recent history [ edit ] In 1988 an illustrated history of the School was published by a former King's School teacher: The King's School Grantham – 660 years of a Grammar School .

[ 2 ] On 1 August 2011 The King's School ended its long relationship with the local elected authorities and the town of Grantham, by converting to a selective academy. It remains a selective boys' school and has kept its name and logo.

Overview [ edit ] Curriculum [ edit ] The original King's School building.

The school provides subjects that are traditional in range, providing curriculum subjects with breadth, depth and challenge at each Key Stage throughout the school.

[ 3 ] Boys attending the school are provided with opportunities to partake in extra-curriculum and academic experiences such as in sports, music, art, drama, chess, the Duke of Edinburgh award scheme and languages. Additionally, the school offers a range of lunchtime and after school clubs to enhance boys' learning experiences such as the Combined Cadet Force (CCF). Boys may also wish to partake in a programme of visits and trips overseas with the school.

[ 4 ] Form tutors support the progress and wellbeing of boys throughout the school year, together with subject staff and Heads of Year staff at the school. Subjects offered by the school include Art, Business, Computing, Drama, English, French, History, Music, Physical Education (PE), Politics, Religious Education (RE), Biology, Chemistry, Design and Technology, Economics, Financial Studies, Geography, Mathematics, Physics, Psychology, Science and PSHE Curriculum.

[ 5 ] Academic attainment [ edit ] King's boys generally take ten to eleven General Certificate of Secondary Education (GCSE) examinations in Year Eleven (aged 15–16), and they have a choice of three or four A-levels in the sixth form. An Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) inspection in May 2008 graded The King's School as "outstanding". The majority of students go on to higher education following the completion of their A-levels at the end of Year Thirteen (aged 17–18), and it is common for several boys to gain Oxbridge offers.

School uniform [ edit ] An agreed school uniform is in place at The King's School, as determined by the schools School Uniform policy. The school expects all boys attending the school to be "clean, neat and tidy in their appearance", with an expectation to be wearing full school uniform during their commute to and from the school, as well as when representing the school at occasions outwith the school building and grounds.

[ 6 ] Boys are expected to have their shirts tucked in to their school trousers, with clean and "well groomed" hair, having no "extremes of length, style or colour", the school expects boys to have "natural coloured" hair".

The current agreed school uniform for boys attending The King's School is as follows: [ 7 ] Black blazer with school badge Formal, white school shirt Black or dark grey, long school trousers School tie Dark grey or black socks Black school shoes (not suede material, boots and trainers are forbidden) Grey school pullover jumper with maroon stripe, or; Plain grey v-neck pullover jumper Notable former pupils [ edit ] See also: Category:People educated at The King's School, Grantham Early scholars [ edit ] Newton's signature in the original King's School building William Cecil (statesman) (1530s) Henry More (philosopher) (c. 1620s) Isaac Newton (scientist) (1655–1659) Colley Cibber (playwright and poetaster ) (1682–1687) 20th century scholars [ edit ] Captain Albert Ball VC DSO MC (World War I Flying Ace) Air Vice Marshal Gary Waterfall CBE (Senior RAF Officer, Chief of Staff (Operations) Permanent Joint Headquarters) Jason Lai (Orchestral Conductor and TV presenter) Andy Bond , Former Asda COO [ 8 ] Andy Clarke , Former Asda CEO [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Brian Thompson (1938–2011), footballer and concert promoter Ben Everitt (1978–), MP for Milton Keynes North.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] List of the oldest schools in the United Kingdom References [ edit ] ^ "Teaching Staff at Grantham Grammar School 1329 to 2005" . The King's School . Retrieved 24 November 2023 .

^ Branson, S.J. (1988).

A History Of The King's School Grantham . Alan Sutton.

ISBN 0-9513861-0-7 .

^ "Curriculum" . The King's School . Retrieved 24 November 2023 .

^ "Curriculum" . The King's School . Retrieved 24 November 2023 .

^ "Curriculum" . The King's School . Retrieved 24 November 2023 .

^ "School Uniform" . The King's School . Retrieved 24 November 2023 .

^ "School Uniform" . The King's School . Retrieved 24 November 2023 .

^ a b "Global retail giant's top bosses share Grantham connection" Grantham Journal 26 June 2008; retrieved 2 July 2009 ^ "The Business On... Andy Clarke, Chief executive, Asda" The Independent 24 June 2010; retrieved 12 May 2011 ^ https://www.beneveritt.com/ [ bare URL ] External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to The King's School, Grantham .

The King's School, Grantham The King's School Old Boys' Society v t e Schools in Lincolnshire Primary Bourne Abbey CE Academy Ellison Boulters Academy Huntingtower Academy The Priory Witham Academy Staniland Academy Secondary Banovallum School Barnes Wallis Academy Bourne Academy Branston Community Academy Caistor Yarborough Academy Charles Read Academy Cowley Academy De Aston School The Deepings School The Gainsborough Academy Giles Academy Haven High Academy John Spendluffe Technology College King Edward VI Academy Lincoln Castle Academy Lincoln Christ's Hospital School Lincoln UTC Louth Academy North Kesteven Academy The Priory Academy LSST The Priory City of Lincoln Academy The Priory Pembroke Academy The Priory Ruskin Academy The Priory Witham Academy St George's Academy St Peter and St Paul's RC Academy Sir Robert Pattinson Academy Sir William Robertson Academy Skegness Academy Somercotes Academy Spalding Academy Stamford Welland Academy Thomas Middlecott Academy University Academy Holbeach University Academy Long Sutton Walton Academy West Grantham CE Secondary Academy William Farr School William Lovell CE Academy Grammar Boston Grammar School Boston High School Bourne Grammar School Caistor Grammar School Carre's Grammar School Kesteven and Grantham Girls' School Kesteven and Sleaford High School King Edward VI Grammar School The King's School Queen Elizabeth's Grammar School, Alford Queen Elizabeth's Grammar School, Horncastle Queen Elizabeth's High School Skegness Grammar School Spalding Grammar School Spalding High School Independent Grantham Preparatory School Kirkstone House School Lincoln Minster School St Hugh's School Stamford High School Stamford School Witham Hall Defunct The Aveland High School Central Technology and Sports College Cordeaux Academy Coteland's School Ruskington Excell International School Gleed Boys' School Gleed Girls' Technology College Kitwood Boys School The Lafford High School Lincoln Grammar School Regents Academy South Park High School Tattershall College See also Schools in Lincolnshire Schools in North East Lincolnshire Schools in North Lincolnshire Educational establishments in South Kesteven v t e Educational establishments in South Kesteven LEA Lincolnshire Grammar schools Bourne Grammar School Kesteven and Grantham Girls' School The King's School, Grantham Other secondary schools Bourne Academy The Deepings School Charles Read High School Stamford Welland Academy Walton Academy Independent schools Grantham Preparatory School Kirkstone House School Stamford School Stamford High School Witham Hall Further educational colleges Grantham College New College Stamford Primary schools Bourne Abbey Church of England Academy Huntingtower Academy See also Schools in Lincolnshire Schools in North East Lincolnshire Schools in North Lincolnshire Educational establishments in South Kesteven Authority control databases ISNI Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_King%27s_School,_Grantham&oldid=1304952799 " Categories : Educational institutions established in the 1520s Grammar schools in Lincolnshire 1528 establishments in England Boys' schools in Lincolnshire Schools in Grantham Academies in Lincolnshire Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas All articles with bare URLs for citations Articles with bare URLs for citations from August 2024 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2022 Use British English from July 2014 Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2021 Commons category link is on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 04:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The King's School, Grantham 2 languages Add topic

