Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Causes 2 Types of plastic debris Toggle Types of plastic debris subsection 2.1 Microdebris 2.1.1 Amounts, locations, tracking, and correlations of the microdebris 2.2 Macrodebris 3 Plastic production Toggle Plastic production subsection 3.1 Decomposition of plastics 3.2 Persistent organic pollutants 3.3 Commercial pollutants 4 Major plastic waste generator and polluter countries Toggle Major plastic waste generator and polluter countries subsection 4.1 Plastic waste generation 4.2 Plastic pollution 4.3 Mismanaged plastic waste polluters 4.4 Total plastic waste polluters 5 Effects Toggle Effects subsection 5.1 Effects on the environment 5.1.1 Plastic pollution as a cause of climate change 5.2 Effects of plastic on land 5.2.1 Effect on flooding 5.2.2 In tap water 5.2.3 In terrestrial ecosystems 5.3 Effects of plastic on oceans and seabirds 5.4 Effects on freshwater ecosystems 5.4.1 Impacts on freshwater biodiversity 5.4.1.1 Invertebrates 5.4.1.2 Vertebrates 5.5 Effects on humans 5.5.1 Clinical significance 5.5.1.1 Thyroid hormone axis 5.5.1.2 Sex hormones 5.5.1.3 Carotid arteries 5.5.1.4 Breast milk 5.6 Disease 6 Reduction efforts Toggle Reduction efforts subsection 6.1 Biodegradable and degradable plastics 6.2 Incineration 6.3 Policy 6.3.1 Voluntary reduction efforts failing 6.3.1.1 Legally binding plastics treaty 6.3.2 Waste import bans 6.3.3 Circular economy policies 6.4 Collection, recycling and reduction 6.4.1 Ocean cleanup 6.4.2 Great Bubble Barrier 6.5 Mapping and tracking 6.6 By country/region 6.6.1 Albania 6.6.2 Australia 6.6.3 Canada 6.6.4 China 6.6.5 European Union 6.6.6 France 6.6.7 India 6.6.8 Indonesia 6.6.9 Israel 6.6.10 Kenya 6.6.11 New Zealand 6.6.12 Nigeria 6.6.13 Spain 6.6.14 Taiwan 6.6.15 United Kingdom 6.6.16 United States 6.6.17 Vanuatu 7 Obstruction by major plastic producers Toggle Obstruction by major plastic producers subsection 7.1 Deception of the public about recycling 8 Action for creating awareness Toggle Action for creating awareness subsection 8.1 World Environment Day 8.2 Other actions 9 See also 10 Notes 11 References Toggle References subsection 11.1 Sources 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Plastic pollution 51 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা भोजपुरी Bikol Central Català Čeština Cymraeg Dagbanli Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Jawa Latina Lingua Franca Nova മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Português Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski తెలుగు Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Walon 吴语 粵語 中文 Ghanaian Pidgin Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Accumulation of plastic in natural ecosystems Plastic pollution Plastic pollution affects seas, beaches, rivers and land (clockwise from top left): Olive ridley sea turtle entangled in a ghost net in the Maldives Plastic pollution of Sharm el-Naga beach, near Safaga , Egypt Piles of plastic waste on the government-authorized "garbage island" of Thilafushi , Maldives A tributary of the Wouri River in Douala, Cameroon , completely clogged with plastic.

Part of a series on Pollution Air pollution from a factory Air Acid rain Air quality index Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Exhaust gas Haze Household air pollution Global dimming Global distillation Indoor air quality Non-exhaust emissions Ozone depletion Particulates Persistent organic pollutant Smog Soot Volatile organic compound Biological Biological hazard Genetic Illegal logging Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information Electromagnetic Light Ecological Overillumination Radio spectrum Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Health effects from noise Marine mammals and sonar Noise barrier Noise control Soundproofing Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Depleted uranium Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural Land degradation Bioremediation Defecation Electrical resistance heating Illegal mining Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Industrial waste Litter Mining Municipal solid waste Nanomaterials Plastic Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Space Space debris Visual Air travel Advertising clutter Overhead power lines Traffic signs Urban blight Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare Agent Orange Nuclear holocaust Nuclear fallout Nuclear famine Nuclear winter Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biosolids Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine Monitoring Nonpoint source Nutrient Ocean acidification Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Freshwater salinization Septic tanks Sewage Shipping Sludge Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Wastewater Topics History Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Misc Area source Brain health and pollution Debris Dust Garbology Legacy Thermal pollution Midden Point source Waste Toxic Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM2.5 Treaties Most polluted rivers Categories By country Environment portal Ecology portal v t e Plastic pollution is the accumulation of plastic objects and particles (e.g. plastic bottles, bags and microbeads ) in the Earth's environment that adversely affects humans, wildlife and their habitat.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Plastics that act as pollutants are categorized by size into micro-, meso-, or macro debris.

[ 3 ] Plastics are inexpensive and durable, making them very adaptable for different uses; as a result, manufacturers choose to use plastic over other materials.

[ 4 ] However, the chemical structure of most plastics renders them resistant to many natural processes of degradation and as a result they are slow to degrade.

[ 5 ] Together, these two factors allow large volumes of plastic to enter the environment as mismanaged waste which persists in the ecosystem and travels throughout food webs .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Plastic pollution can afflict land , waterways and oceans . It is estimated that 1.1 to 8.8 million tonnes of plastic waste enters the ocean from coastal communities each year.

[ 8 ] It is estimated that there is a stock of 86 million tons of plastic marine debris in the worldwide ocean as of the end of 2013, with an assumption that 1.4% of global plastics produced from 1950 to 2013 has entered the ocean and has accumulated there.

[ 9 ] Global plastic production has surged from 1.5 million tons in the 1950s to 335 million tons in 2016, resulting in environmental concerns. A significant issue arises from the inefficient treatment of 79% of plastic products, leading to their release into landfills or natural environments.

[ 10 ] Some researchers suggest that by 2050 there could be more plastic than fish in the oceans by weight.

[ 11 ] Living organisms, particularly marine animals , can be harmed either by mechanical effects such as entanglement in plastic objects, problems related to ingestion of plastic waste, or through exposure to chemicals within plastics that interfere with their physiology . Degraded plastic waste can directly affect humans through direct consumption (i.e. in tap water), indirect consumption (by eating plants and animals), and disruption of various hormonal mechanisms.

[ 12 ] As of 2019, 368 million tonnes of plastic is produced each year; 51% in Asia, where China is the world's largest producer.

[ 13 ] From the 1950s up to 2018, an estimated 6.3 billion tonnes of plastic has been produced worldwide, of which an estimated 9% has been recycled and another 12% has been incinerated .

[ 14 ] This large amount of plastic waste enters the environment and causes problems throughout the ecosystem; for example, studies suggest that the bodies of 90% of seabirds contain plastic debris.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] In some areas there have been significant efforts to reduce the prominence of free range plastic pollution, through reducing plastic consumption, litter cleanup, and promoting plastic recycling .

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] As of 2020, the global mass of produced plastic exceeds the biomass of all land and marine animals combined.

[ 19 ] A May 2019 amendment to the Basel Convention regulates the exportation/importation of plastic waste, largely intended to prevent the shipping of plastic waste from developed countries to developing countries . Nearly all countries have joined this agreement.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] On 2 March 2022, in Nairobi, 175 countries pledged to create a legally binding agreement by the end of the year 2024 with a goal to end plastic pollution.

[ 24 ] The amount of plastic waste produced increased during the COVID-19 pandemic due to increased demand for protective equipment and packaging materials.

[ 25 ] Higher amounts of plastic ended up in the ocean, especially plastic from medical waste and masks.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Several news reports point to a plastic industry trying to take advantage of the health concerns and desire for disposable masks and packaging to increase production of single use plastic.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] Causes See also: Timeline of plastic development The pathway by which plastics enters the world's oceans There are differing estimates of how much plastic waste has been produced in the last century. By one estimate, one billion tons of plastic waste have been discarded since the 1950s.

[ 32 ] Others estimate a cumulative human production of 8.3 billion tons of plastic, of which 6.3 billion tons is waste, with only 9% getting recycled.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] It is estimated that this waste is made up of 81% polymer resin , 13% polymer fibres and 32% polymer additives . In 2018 more than 343 million tonnes of plastic waste were generated, 90% of which was composed of post-consumer plastic waste (industrial, agricultural, commercial and municipal plastic waste). The rest was pre-consumer waste from resin production and manufacturing of plastic products (e.g. materials rejected due to unsuitable colour, hardness, or processing characteristics).

[ 35 ] A large proportion of post-consumer plastic waste consists of plastic packaging . In the United States plastic packaging has been estimated to make up 5% of MSW. This packaging includes plastic bottles, pots, tubs and trays, plastic films shopping bags, rubbish bags, bubble wrap, and plastic or stretch wrap and plastic foams e.g. expanded polystyrene (EPS). Plastic waste is generated in sectors including agriculture (e.g. irrigation pipes, greenhouse covers, fencing, pellets, mulch; construction (e.g. pipes, paints, flooring and roofing, insulants and sealants); transport (e.g. abraded tyres, road surfaces and road markings); electronic and electric equipment (e-waste); and pharmaceuticals and healthcare. The total amounts of plastic waste generated by these sectors is uncertain.

[ 35 ] Several studies have attempted to quantify plastic leakage into the environment at both national and global levels which have highlight the difficulty of determining the sources and amounts of all plastic leakage. One global study has estimated that between 60 and 99 million tonnes of mismanaged plastic waste were produced in 2015. Borrelle et al. 2020 has estimated that 19–23 million tonnes of plastic waste entered aquatic ecosystems in 2016. while the Pew Charitable Trusts and SYSTEMIQ (2020) have estimated that 9–14 million tonnes of plastic waste ended up in the oceans the same year.

Despite global efforts to reduce the generation of plastic waste, losses to the environment are predicted to increase. Modelling indicates that, without major interventions, between 23 and 37 million tonnes per year of plastic waste could enter the oceans by 2040 and between 155 and 265 million tonnes per year could be discharged into the environment by 2060. Under a business as usual scenario, such increases would likely be attributable to a continuing rise in production of plastic products, driven by consumer demand, accompanied by insufficient improvements in waste management. As the plastic waste released into the environment already has a significant impact on ecosystems, an increase of this magnitude could have dramatic consequences.

[ 35 ] The trade in plastic waste has been identified as "a main culprit" of marine litter.

[ a ] Countries importing the waste plastics often lack the capacity to process all the material. As a result, the United Nations has imposed a ban on waste plastic trade unless it meets certain criteria.

[ b ] Types of plastic debris Beach cleanup in Ghana There are three major forms of plastic that contribute to plastic pollution: micro -, macro-, and mega-plastics. Mega- and micro plastics have accumulated in highest densities in the Northern Hemisphere, concentrated around urban centers and water fronts. Plastic can be found off the coast of some islands because of currents carrying the debris. Both mega- and macro-plastics are found in packaging, footwear, and other domestic items that have been washed off of ships or discarded in landfills . Fishing-related items are more likely to be found around remote islands.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] These may also be referred to as micro-, meso-, and macro debris.

Plastic bottle stuck on edge of river Plastic debris is categorized as either primary or secondary. Primary plastics are in their original form when collected. Examples of these would be bottle caps, cigarette butts, and microbeads.

[ 39 ] Secondary plastics, on the other hand, account for smaller plastics that have resulted from the degradation of primary plastics.

[ 40 ] Microdebris Microplastics in the surface ocean 1950–2000 and projections beyond, in million metric tonnes Main article: Microplastics Microdebris are plastic pieces between 2 mm and 5 mm in size.

[ 38 ] Plastic debris that starts off as meso- or macrodebris can become microdebris through degradation and collisions that break it down into smaller pieces.

[ 3 ] Microdebris is more commonly referred to as nurdles .

[ 3 ] Nurdles are recycled to make new plastic items, but they easily end up released into the environment during production because of their small size. They often end up in ocean waters through rivers and streams.

[ 3 ] Microdebris that come from cleaning and cosmetic products are also referred to as scrubbers. Because microdebris and scrubbers are so small in size, filter-feeding organisms often consume them.

[ 3 ] Nurdles enter the ocean by means of spills during transportation or from land based sources. The Ocean Conservancy reported that China, Indonesia, Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam dump more plastic in the sea than all other countries combined.

[ 41 ] It is estimated that 10% of the plastics in the ocean are nurdles, making them one of the most common types of plastic pollution, along with plastic bags and food containers.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] These micro-plastics can accumulate in the oceans and allow for the accumulation of Persistent Bio-accumulating Toxins such as bisphenol A , polystyrene , DDT, and PCB's which are hydrophobic in nature and can cause adverse health affects.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] Amounts, locations, tracking, and correlations of the microdebris A 2004 study by Richard Thompson from the University of Plymouth , UK, found a great amount of microdebris on beaches and in waters in Europe, the Americas, Australia, Africa, and Antarctica.

[ 5 ] Thompson and his associates found that plastic pellets from both domestic and industrial sources were being broken down into much smaller plastic pieces, some having a diameter smaller than human hair.

[ 5 ] If not ingested, this microdebris floats instead of being absorbed into the marine environment. Thompson predicts there may be 300,000 plastic items per square kilometre of sea surface and 100,000 plastic particles per square kilometre of seabed .

[ 5 ] International Pellet Watch collected samples of polythene pellets from 30 beaches in 17 countries which were analysed for organic micro-pollutants. It was found that pellets found on beaches in the US, Vietnam and southern Africa contained compounds from pesticides suggesting a high use of pesticides in the areas.

[ 46 ] In 2020 scientists created what may be the first scientific estimate of how much microplastic currently resides in Earth's seafloor, after investigating six areas of around 3 km (1.9 mi) depth about 300 km (190 mi) off the Australian coast. They found the highly variable microplastic counts to be proportionate to plastic on the surface and the angle of the seafloor slope. By averaging the microplastic mass per cm 3 , they estimated that Earth's seafloor contains about 14 million tons of microplastic – about double the amount they estimated based on data from earlier studies – despite calling both estimates "conservative" as coastal areas are known to contain much more microplastic. These estimates are about one to two times the amount of plastic thought – per Jambeck et al., 2015 – to currently enter the oceans annually.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] [ 49 ] Macrodebris Plastic bags are an example of macrodebris.

Macroplastics at the surface ocean 1950–2000 and projections beyond, in million metric tonnes Plastic debris is categorized as macrodebris when it is larger than 20 mm. These include items such as plastic grocery bags.

[ 3 ] Macrodebris are often found in ocean waters, and can have a serious impact on the native organisms. Fishing nets have been prime pollutants. Even after they have been abandoned, they continue to trap marine organisms and other plastic debris. Eventually, these abandoned nets become too difficult to remove from the water because they become too heavy, having grown in weight up to 6 tonnes.

[ 3 ] Plastic production 9.2 billion tonnes of plastic are estimated to have been made between 1950 and 2017. More than half this plastic has been produced since 2004. Of all the plastic discarded so far, 14% has been incinerated and less than 10% has been recycled.

[ 35 ] Decomposition of plastics Average estimated decomposition times of typical marine debris items. Plastic items are shown in blue.

Main article: Polymer degradation Plastics themselves contribute to approximately 10% of discarded waste. Many kinds of plastics exist depending on their precursors and the method for their polymerization . Depending on their chemical composition, plastics and resins have varying properties related to contaminant absorption and adsorption .

Polymer degradation takes much longer as a result of saline environments and the cooling effect of the sea. These factors contribute to the persistence of plastic debris in certain environments.

[ 38 ] Recent studies have shown that plastics in the ocean decompose faster than was once thought, due to exposure to sun, rain, and other environmental conditions, resulting in the release of toxic chemicals such as bisphenol A . However, due to the increased volume of plastics in the ocean, decomposition has slowed down.

[ 50 ] The Ocean Conservancy has predicted the decomposition rates of several plastic products. It is estimated that a foam plastic cup will take 50 years, a plastic beverage holder will take 400 years, a disposable nappy will take 450 years, and fishing line will take 600 years to degrade.

[ 5 ] Persistent organic pollutants It was estimated that global production of plastics is approximately 250 Mt per year. Their abundance has been found to transport persistent organic pollutants , also known as POPs. These pollutants have been linked to an increased distribution of algae associated with red tides .

[ 38 ] Commercial pollutants See also: Category:Plastics companies by country Single-serve sachets are a major contributor to plastic pollution, especially in developing countries In 2019, the group Break Free From Plastic organized over 70,000 volunteers in 51 countries to collect and identify plastic waste. These volunteers collected over "59,000 plastic bags, 53,000 sachets and 29,000 plastic bottles," as reported by The Guardian . Nearly half of the items were identifiable by consumer brands. The most common brands were Coca-Cola , Nestlé , and Pepsico .

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] According to the global campaign coordinator for the project Emma Priestland in 2020, the only way to solve the problem is stopping production of single use plastic and using reusable products instead.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] Coca-Cola answered that "more than 20% of our portfolio comes in refillable or fountain packaging", they are decreasing the amount of plastic in secondary packaging.

[ 55 ] Nestlé responded that 87% of their packaging and 66% of their plastic packaging can be reused or recycled and by 2025 they want to make it 100%. By that year they want to reduce the consumption of virgin plastic by one third.

[ 56 ] Pepsico responded that they want to decrease "virgin plastic in our beverage business by 35% by 2025" and also expanding reuse and refill practices what should prevent 67 billion single use bottles by 2025.

[ 56 ] A study from 2024, using the Break Free From Plastic dataset, found that of the aforementioned 50% of the waste that was identifiable by brand, 11% was attributable to Coca-Cola, 5% to Pepsico, 3% to Nestle, 3% to Danone , and 2% to Altria , totaling 24% of the total branded count. 56 companies accounted for over 50% of the branded items.

[ 57 ] According to The Plastic Waste Makers index, 55% of plastic waste worldwide is created by 20 companies.

[ 58 ] Major plastic waste generator and polluter countries Share of plastic waste that is inadequately managed Per capita mismanaged plastic waste (in kilograms per person per day) Plastic waste generation The United States is the world leader in generating plastic waste, producing an annual 42 million metric tons of plastic waste.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] Per capita generation of plastic waste in the United States is higher than in any other country, with the average American producing 130.09 kilograms of plastic waste per year. Other high-income countries, such as those of the EU-28 (annual per capita generation 58.56 kg), also have a high per capita plastic waste generation rate. Some high-income countries, such as Japan (annual per capital generation 38.44 kg), produce far less plastic waste per capita.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] Plastic pollution The United States National Academy of Sciences estimated in 2022 that the worldwide entry of plastic into the ocean was 8 million metric tons of plastic per year.

[ 63 ] A 2021 study by The Ocean Cleanup estimated that rivers convey between 0.8 and 2.7 million metric tons of plastic into the ocean, and ranked these river's countries.  The top ten were, from the most to the least: Philippines, India, Malaysia, China, Indonesia, Myanmar, Brazil, Vietnam, Bangladesh, and Thailand.

[ 64 ] Mismanaged plastic waste polluters Top 12 mismanaged plastic waste polluters China (27.7%) Indonesia (10.1%) Philippines (5.90%) Vietnam (5.80%) Sri Lanka (5.00%) Thailand (3.20%) Egypt (3.00%) Malaysia (2.90%) Nigeria (2.70%) Bangladesh (2.50%) South Africa (2.00%) India (1.90%) Rest of the world (27.3%) In 2018 approximately 513 million tonnes of plastics wind up in the oceans every year out of which the 83,1% is from the following 20 countries: China is the most mismanaged plastic waste polluter leaving in the sea the 27.7% of the world total, second Indonesia with the 10.1%, third Philippines with 5.9%, fourth Vietnam with 5.8%, fifth Sri Lanka 5.0%, sixth Thailand with 3.2%, seventh Egypt with 3.0%, eighth Malaysia with 2.9%, ninth Nigeria with 2.7%, tenth Bangladesh with 2.5%, eleventh South Africa with 2.0%, twelfth India with 1.9%, thirteenth Algeria with 1.6%, fourteenth Turkey with 1.5%, fifteenth Pakistan with 1.5%, sixteenth Brazil with 1.5%, seventeenth Myanmar with 1.4%, eighteenth Morocco with 1.0%, nineteenth North Korea with 1.0%, twentieth United States with 0.9%. The rest of world's countries combined wind up the 16.9% of the mismanaged plastic waste in the oceans, according to a study published by Science in 2015.

[ 8 ] [ 65 ] [ 66 ] All the European Union countries combined would rank eighteenth on the list.

[ 8 ] [ 65 ] In 2020, a study revised the potential 2016 U.S. contribution to mismanaged plastic; [ 20 ] It estimated that U.S.-generated plastic might place the U.S. behind Indonesia and India in oceanic pollution, or it might place the U.S. behind Indonesia, India, Thailand, China, Brazil, Philippines, Egypt, Japan, Russia, and Vietnam.  In 2022, it was estimated all OECD countries (North America, Chile, Colombia, Europe, Israel, Japan, S. Korea) may contribute 5% of oceanic plastic pollution, with the rest of the world polluting 95%.

[ 67 ] Since 2016 China ceased importing plastics for recycling and since 2019 international treaties signed by 187 countries restricted the export of plastics for recycling.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] A 2019 study calculated the mismanaged plastic waste, in millions of metric tonnes (Mt) per year: 52 Mt – Asia 17 Mt – Africa 7.9 Mt – Latin America & Caribbean 3.3 Mt – Europe 0.3 Mt – US & Canada 0.1 Mt – Oceania (Australia, New Zealand, etc.) [ 70 ] Total plastic waste polluters Around 275 million tonnes of plastic waste is generated each year around the world; between 4.8 million and 12.7 million tonnes is dumped into the sea.

[ 6 ] About 60% of the plastic waste in the ocean comes from the top five countries: China, Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand and Vietnam.

[ 71 ] The table below list the top 20 plastic waste polluting countries in 2010 according to a study published by Science , Jambeck et al (2015).

[ 8 ] [ 65 ] Top plastic polluters as of 2010 [update] Position Country Plastic pollution (in 1000 tonnes per year) 1 China 8820 2 Indonesia 3220 3 Philippines 1880 4 Vietnam 1830 5 Sri Lanka 1590 6 Thailand 1030 7 Egypt 970 8 Malaysia 940 9 Nigeria 850 10 Bangladesh 790 11 South Africa 630 12 India 600 13 Algeria 520 14 Turkey 490 15 Pakistan 480 16 Brazil 470 17 Myanmar 460 18 Morocco 310 19 North Korea 300 20 United States 280 All the European Union countries combined would rank eighteenth on the list.

[ 8 ] [ 65 ] In a study published by Environmental Science & Technology , Schmidt et al (2017) calculated that ten rivers: two in Africa (the Nile and the Niger ) and eight in Asia (the Ganges , Indus , Yellow , Yangtze , Hai He , Pearl , Mekong and Amur ) "transport 88–95% of the global plastics load into the sea." [ 72 ] [ 73 ] [ 74 ] [ 75 ] The Caribbean Islands are the biggest plastic polluters per capita in the world.

Trinidad and Tobago produces 1.5 kilograms of waste per capita per day, is the biggest plastic polluter per capita in the world. At least 0.19 kg per person per day of Trinidad and Tobago's plastic debris end up in the ocean, or for example Saint Lucia which generates more than four times the amount of plastic waste per capita as China and is responsible for 1.2 times more improperly disposed plastic waste per capita than China. Of the top thirty global polluters per capita, ten are from the Caribbean region. These are Trinidad and Tobago, Antigua and Barbuda , Saint Kitts and Nevis , Guyana , Barbados , Saint Lucia , Bahamas , Grenada , Anguilla and Aruba , according to a set of studies summarized by Forbes (2019).

[ 76 ] Effects Effects on the environment The distribution of plastic debris is highly variable as a result of certain factors such as wind and ocean currents, coastline geography, urban areas, and trade routes. Human population in certain areas also plays a large role in this. Plastics are more likely to be found in enclosed regions such as the Caribbean. It serves as a means of distribution of organisms to remote coasts that are not their native environments. This could potentially increase the variability and dispersal of organisms in specific areas that are less biologically diverse. Plastics can also be used as vectors for chemical contaminants such as persistent organic pollutants and heavy metals .

[ 38 ] Atlantic Ocean marine plastic on a beach in Tenerife A man and woman dragging a bag of plastic waste collected from the beach in Ghana Plastic pollution has also greatly negatively affected our environment. "The pollution is significant and widespread, with plastic debris found on even the most remote coastal areas and in every marine habitat".

[ 77 ] This information tells us about how much of a consequential change plastic pollution has made on the ocean and even the coasts.

In January 2022 a group of scientists defined a planetary boundary for "novel entities" (pollution, including plastic pollution) and found it has already been exceeded. According to co-author Patricia Villarubia-Gómez from the Stockholm Resilience Centre, "There has been a 50-fold increase in the production of chemicals since 1950. This is projected to triple again by 2050". There are at least 350,000 artificial chemicals in the world. They have mostly "negative effects on planetary health ". Plastic alone contain more than 10,000 chemicals and create large problems. The researchers are calling for limit on chemical production and shift to circular economy , meaning to products that can be reused and recycled.

[ 78 ] The problem of ocean plastic debris is ubiquitous. It is estimated that 1.5–4% of global plastics production ends up in the oceans every year, mainly as a result of poor waste management infrastructure and practices combined with irresponsible attitudes to the use and disposal of plastics. The weathering of plastic debris causes its fragmentation into particles that even small marine invertebrates may ingest hence contaminating the food chain. Their small size renders them untraceable to their source and extremely difficult to remove from open ocean environments.

[ 79 ] In the marine environment, plastic pollution causes "Entanglement, toxicological effects via ingestion of plastics, suffocation, starvation, dispersal, and rafting of organisms, provision of new habitats, and introduction of invasive species are significant ecological effects with growing threats to biodiversity and trophic relationships. Degradation (changes in the ecosystem state) and modifications of marine systems are associated with loss of ecosystem services and values. Consequently, this emerging contaminant affects the socio-economic aspects through negative impacts on tourism, fishery, shipping, and human health".

[ 80 ] Plastic pollution as a cause of climate change See also: Ethylene § Greenhouse_gas_emissions , and Plastic § Greenhouse_gas_emissions According to the "Plastic and Climate" report, in 2019 production and incineration of plastic contributed greenhouse gases in the equivalent of 850 million tonnes of carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) to the atmosphere. In trend, annual emissions from these sources would grow to 1.34 billion tonnes by 2030. By 2050 plastic could emit 56 billion tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions, as much as 14 percent of the earth's remaining carbon budget .

[ 81 ] [ obsolete source ] Those are emission from production, transportation, incineration, but there are also releases of methane and effects on phytoplankton .

[ 82 ] The emissions of methane from plastic decomposition and impact on phytoplankton, were still not known well when the report was released. According to one estimate, plastic floating in the ocean can emit annually 76 Mt methane equal to 2,129 Mt CO2e, based on the 100 years global warming potential of methane.  But these numbers are very preliminary. From one side, it can be an overestimate as it is based on the emissions of LDPE in powder form, the most emission intensive type of plastic in this case and in tropical water where intense radiation increases decomposition. But from the other side it can be an underestimate, as it is not including the decomposition of plastic on land which is probably more emission intensive, the effects on phytoplankton which can be significant, the emissions from submerged plastic. Therefore, the authors prefer to not include them in the official estimate, but to write them in the full report, as a base for further discussion noting the high importance of the problem.

[ 83 ] [ needs update ] The United Nations Environment Programme used 2 different studies to estimate the impact of plastic on climate: according to the first, by the year 2040 the annual emissions from plastic will reach 2.1 GtCO2 and will consume 19% of the 1.5 degrees carbon budget , while the second estimated the emissions in the year 2015 as 1.7 GtCO2 and predicted that by the year 2050 they will reach 6.5 GtCO2, consuming 15% of the carbon budget.

[ 84 ] The OECD estimated the emissions from plastic as 1.8 GtCO2 (3.7% of total emissions) in 2019 which will rise to 4.3 GtCO2 (4.5% of total emissions) in 2060, without measures to reduce them.

[ 85 ] In a 2024 Bloomberg article, the ever-increasing consumption of plastics was highlighted as a critical environmental issue. Global use is projected to reach 1.1 billion metric tons by 2050, up from just 2 million in the 1950s. The plastic industry's greenhouse gas emissions are substantial, having emitted 1.8 billion metric tons in 2019, with the potential to exceed 2.5 billion metric tons by 2050 if no changes are made.

[ citation needed ] With global recycling rates for plastic packaging at a mere 20%, most discarded plastics end up incinerated or in landfills, where they emit methane as they decompose .

[ citation needed ] The international community [ clarification needed ] is divided on how to address the plastic issue. Proposals range from national pledges to mandatory production controls, with the latter being supported by entities like the European Union .

[ need quotation to verify ] However, the recycling solution is under scrutiny due to low success rates. As a result, there's a growing movement towards reducing plastic production and implementing bans on single-use plastics. States like Maine and Oregon are taking legislative action with extended producer responsibility laws to ensure that manufacturers are accountable for the lifecycle environmental impact of their products.

[ 86 ] Effects of plastic on land Plastic pollution on land poses a threat to the plants and animals – including humans who are based on the land.

[ 87 ] Estimates of the amount of plastic concentration on land are between four and twenty three times that of the ocean. The amount of plastic poised on the land is greater and more concentrated than that in the water.

[ 88 ] Mismanaged plastic waste ranges from 60 percent in East Asia and Pacific to one percent in North America.

[ 89 ] It is estimated that between 1 million and 1.7 million tonnes of mismanaged plastic is transported to the ocean each year.

[ 90 ] In 2021 a report conducted by the Food and Agriculture Organization stated that plastic is often used in agriculture. There is more plastic in the soil than  in the oceans. The presence of plastic in the environment hurt ecosystems and human health and pose a threat to food safety.

[ 91 ] Chlorinated plastic can release harmful chemicals into the surrounding soil, which can then seep into groundwater or other surrounding water sources and also the ecosystem of the world.

[ 92 ] This can cause serious harm to the species that drink the water. A 2025 study confirmed that agricultural soil contain up to 23 times more plastic particles in comparison to the ocean. The particles can  be absorbed by the crops through the roots and be eaten by humans. This create different health hazards, especially as the chemicals replacing BPA in the plastic can be more dangerouse than BPA itself.

[ 93 ] Effect on flooding Volunteers clearing gutters in Ilorin , Nigeria during a volunteer sanitation day. Even when there is adequate infrastructure for sanitation , plastic pollution can prevent drainage and impede sewage flow.

Plastic waste can clog storm drains , and such clogging can increase flood damage, particularly in urban areas.

[ 94 ] A buildup of plastic garbage at trash cans raises the water level upstream and may enhance the risk of urban flooding.

[ 95 ] For example, in Bangkok flood risk increases substantially because of plastic waste clogging the already overburdened sewer system.

[ 96 ] In tap water A 2017 study found that 83% of tap water samples taken around the world contained plastic pollutants.

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] This was the first study to focus on global drinking water pollution with plastics, [ 99 ] and showed that with a contamination rate of 94%, tap water in the United States was the most polluted, followed by Lebanon and India . European countries such as the United Kingdom , Germany and France had the lowest contamination rate, though still as high as 72%.

[ 97 ] This means that people may be ingesting between 3,000 and 4,000 microparticles of plastic from tap water per year.

[ 99 ] The analysis found particles of more than 2.5 microns in size, which is 2500 times bigger than a nanometer . It is currently unclear if this contamination is affecting human health, but if the water is also found to contain nano-particle pollutants, there could be adverse impacts on human well-being, according to scientists associated with the study.

[ 100 ] However, plastic tap water pollution remains under-studied, as are the links of how pollution transfers between humans, air, water, and soil.

[ 101 ] In terrestrial ecosystems Mismanaged plastic waste leads to plastic directly or indirectly entering terrestrial ecosystems.

[ 102 ] There has been a significant increase of microplastic pollution due to the poor handling and disposal of plastic materials.

[ 103 ] In particular, plastic pollution in the form of microplastics now can be found extensively in soil. It enters the soil by settling on the surface and eventually making its way into subsoils.

[ 104 ] These microplastics find their way into plants and animals.

[ 105 ] Effluent and sludge of wastewater contain large amounts of plastics. Wastewater treatment plants do not have a treatment process to remove microplastics which results in plastics being transferred into water and soil when effluent and sludge are applied to land for agricultural purposes.

[ 105 ] Several researchers have found plastic microfibers that are released when fleece and other polyester textiles are cleaned in washing machines.

[ 106 ] These fibers can be transferred through effluent to land which pollutes soil environments.

[ 104 ] The increase in plastic and microplastic pollution in soils can cause adverse impacts on plants and microorganisms in the soil, which can in turn affect soil fertility. Microplastics affect soil ecosystems that are important for plant growth. Plants are important for the environment and ecosystems so the plastics are damaging to plants and organisms living in these ecosystems.

[ 103 ] Microplastics alter soil biophysical properties which affect the quality of the soil. This affects soil biological activity, biodiversity and plant health. Microplastics in the soil alter a plant's growth. It decreases seedling germination, affects the number of leaves, stem diameter and chlorophyll content in these plants.

[ 103 ] Microplastics in the soil are a risk not only to soil biodiversity but also food safety and human health. Soil biodiversity is important for plant growth in agricultural industries. Agricultural activities such as plastic mulching and application of municipal wastes contribute to the microplastic pollution in the soil. Human-modified soils are commonly used to improve crop productivity but the effects are more damaging than helpful.

[ 103 ] Plastics also release toxic chemicals into the environment and cause physical, chemical harm and biological damage to organisms. Ingestion of plastic does not only lead to death in animals through intestinal blockage but it can also travel up the food chain which affects humans.

[ 102 ] Effects of plastic on oceans and seabirds The unaltered stomach contents of a dead albatross chick photographed on Midway Atoll National Wildlife Refuge in the Pacific in September 2009 include plastic marine debris fed to the chick by its parents Main article: Plastic soup Marine life is one of the most important when one is affected by plastic pollution. Plastic pollution puts animals' lives in danger and is in constant fear of extinction. Marine wildlife such as seabirds, whales, fish and turtles mistake plastic waste for prey; most then die of starvation as their stomachs become filled with plastic. They also suffer from lacerations, infections, reduced ability to swim, and internal injuries.

[ 107 ] This evidence tells us how damaged marine wildlife is being affected by plastic pollution, they bring up how many animals mistake plastic for prey and eat it without knowing. "Globally, 100,000 marine mammals die every year as a result of plastic pollution. This includes whales, dolphins, porpoises, seals and sea lions".

[ 108 ] This evidence tells us the statistics of how many marine mammals really are negatively affected enough to die from plastic pollution.

Effects on freshwater ecosystems Research into freshwater plastic pollution has been largely ignored over marine ecosystems, comprising only 13% of published papers on the topic.

[ 109 ] Plastics make their way into bodies of freshwater, underground aquifers, and moving freshwaters through runoff and erosion of mismanaged plastic waste (MMPW). In some areas, the direct waste disposal into rivers is a remaining factor of historical practices, and has only been somewhat limited by modern legislation.

[ 110 ] Rivers are the primary transport of plastics into marine ecosystems, sourcing potentially 80% of the plastic pollution in the oceans.

[ 111 ] [ 112 ] Research on the top ten river catchments ranked by annual amount of MMPW showed that some rivers contribute as high as 88–95% of ocean-bound plastics, the highest being the Yangtze River into the East China Sea.

[ 113 ] Asian rivers contribute 86% of plastic waste found in the ocean annually, largely influenced by the high density coastal populations all throughout the continent as well as relatively intense bouts of seasonal rainfall.

[ 114 ] Just 5% to 10% come from rivers across Europe and North America. However, Our World in Data estimates that possibly up to 5% of ocean plastics stem from rich countries exporting their waste, which could make the rich country total share up to 10%. Japan, Hongkong and other OECD countries are included in that number. For example, the U.S. exported 5% of its plastic waste in 2010.

[ 115 ] Around 5 million tonnes (or 2%) of plastic waste was traded globally in 2020. That fell by two-thirds from 2010 to 2020. Moreover, most of that 2% ends up into richer countries, therefore, not likely into oceans. China's share of imports fell to 1% in 2018, due to its bans in 2017. Most plastic is traded within regions, not between regions. Europe both exported and imported more plastic than other regions.

[ 115 ] Impacts on freshwater biodiversity Invertebrates A study analyzing ingestion of plastics across a variety of previously published experiments showed that out of the 206 species covered, the majority of papers documented ingestion in fish.

[ 110 ] This does not quite mean that fish ingest plastic more than other organisms, but instead highlights the underrepresentation of plastic effects in equally important organisms, like aquatic plants, amphibians and invertebrates. Despite this disparity, controlled experiments analyzing microplastic impact on aquatic plants like the algae Chlorella spp and common duckweed Lemna minor have yielded significant results. Between microplastics of polypropylene (PP) and polyvinyl chloride (PVC), PVC demonstrated greater toxicity to Chlorella pyrenoidosa , overall negatively impacting their photosynthetic ability. This effect on photosynthesis is likely due to the 60% reduction of algal chlorophyll a associated with high PVC concentrations found in the same study.

[ 116 ] When analyzing the effect of polyethylene microbeads (origin: cosmetic exfoliants) on the aquatic macrophyte L. minor , no effect on photosynthetic pigments and productivity was found, but root growth and root cell viability decreased.

[ 117 ] These results are concerning as plants and algae are integral to nutrient and gas cycling within an aquatic system, and have the capacity to create significant changes in water composition due to their sheer density. Crustaceans have also been analyzed for their response to plastic presence. There is proof that freshwater crustaceans, specifically European crabs and crayfish, suffer entanglement in polyamide ghost nets used in lake fishing.

[ 118 ] When exposed to plastic nanoparticles of polystyrene, Daphnia galeata (common water flea) experienced reduced survival within 48 hours as well as reproductive issues. Over a span of 5 days, the amount of pregnant Daphnia decreased by nearly 50%, and less than 20% of exposed embryos survived without any immediate repercussions.

[ 119 ] Other arthropods, like juvenile stages of insects are susceptible to similar plastic exposure as some spend part of their adolescence fully submerged in a freshwater resource. This similarity in lifestyle to other aquatic invertebrates indicates that insects may experience similar side effects of plastic exposure.

Vertebrates An American robin dead after becoming tangled in discarded fishing line Plastic exposure in amphibians has mostly been studied in adolescent life stages, when the test subjects are still dependent on an aquatic environment where it can be easier to manipulate variables experimentally. Studies on a common South American freshwater frog, Physalaemus cuvieri indicated that plastics may have the potential to induce mutagenic and cytotoxic morphological changes.

[ 120 ] Much more research needs to be done on amphibian response to plastic pollution, especially since amphibians can serve as initial indicator species of environmental decline.

[ 121 ] Freshwater mammals and birds have long been known to have negative interactions with plastic pollution, often resulting in entanglement or suffocation/choking after ingesting. While inflammation within the gastrointestinal tract in both groups has been noted, unfortunately there is little to no data on the toxicological effects of plastic pollutants in these organisms.

[ 110 ] Fish have been studied the most regarding plastic pollution in freshwater organisms, with the majority of studies indicating evidence of plastic ingestion in wild-caught samples and lab specimens.

[ 110 ] There have been some attempts to look at lethality of plastics in a common freshwater model species, Danio rerio , aka zebrafish. Increased mucus production and inflammation response in the D. rerio GI tract was noted, but additionally, researchers noted a distinct shift in the microbial communities within the zebrafish intestinal microbiome.

[ 122 ] This finding is significant, as research within the last few decades has increasingly revealed how much power intestinal microbiomes have regarding their host's nutrient absorption and endocrine systems.

[ 123 ] Because of this, plastics may have a far more drastic effect on individual organism health than is currently known so far, thus warranting the need for further research as soon as possible. Many of these findings also have been found in a laboratory setting, so more effort needs to be channeled into measuring plastic abundance and toxicology in wild populations.

Effects on humans The site where the refuse is being recycled in Ghana Compounds that are used in manufacturing pollute the environment by releasing chemicals into the air and water. Some compounds that are used in plastics, such as phthalates, bisphenol A (BPA), polybrominated diphenyl ether (PBDE), are under close statute and might be very harmful. Even though these compounds are unsafe, they have been used in the manufacturing of food packaging , medical devices, flooring materials, bottles, perfumes, cosmetics and much more. Inhalation of microplastics (MPs) have been shown to be one of the major contributors to MP uptake in humans. MPs in the form of dust particles are circulated constantly through ventilation and air conditioning systems indoors.

[ 124 ] The large dosage of these compounds are hazardous to humans, destroying the endocrine system. BPA imitates the female's hormone called estrogen. PBD destroys and causes damage to thyroid hormones, which are vital hormone glands that play a major role in the metabolism, growth and development of the human body. MPs can also have a detrimental effect on male reproductive success. MPs such as BPA can interfere with steroid biosynthesis in the male endocrine system and with early stages of spermatogenesis .

[ 125 ] MPs in men can also create oxidative stress and DNA damage in spermatozoa, causing reduced sperm viability.

[ 125 ] Although the level of exposure to these chemicals varies depending on age and geography, most humans experience simultaneous exposure to many of these chemicals. Average levels of daily exposure are below the levels deemed to be unsafe, but more research needs to be done on the effects of low dose exposure on humans. A lot is unknown on how severely humans are physically affected by these chemicals. Some of the chemicals used in plastic production can cause dermatitis upon contact with human skin. In many plastics, these toxic chemicals are only used in trace amounts, but significant testing is often required to ensure that the toxic elements are contained within the plastic by inert material or polymer. Children and women during their reproduction age are at most at risk and more prone to damaging their immune as well as their reproductive system from these hormone-disrupting chemicals. Pregnancy and nursing products such as baby bottles, pacifiers, and plastic feeding utensils place infants and children at a very high risk of exposure.

[ 124 ] Human health has also been negatively impacted by plastic pollution. "Almost a third of groundwater sites in the US contain BPA. BPA is harmful at very low concentrations as it interferes with our hormone and reproductive systems.

[ 126 ] This quote tells us how much of a percentage of our water is contaminated and should not be drunk on a daily basis. "At every stage of its lifecycle, plastic poses distinct risks to human health, arising from both exposure to plastic particles themselves and associated chemicals".

[ 127 ] This quote is an intro to numerous points of why plastic is damaging to us, such as the carbon that is released when it is being made and transported which is also related to how plastic pollution harms our environment.

A 2022 study published in Environment International found microplastic in the blood of 80% of people tested in the study, and such microplastic has the potential to become embedded in human organs.

[ 128 ] Clinical significance Due to the pervasiveness of plastic products, most of the human population is constantly exposed to the chemical components of plastics. In the United States, 95% of adults have had detectable levels of BPA in their urine. Exposure to chemicals such as BPA have been correlated with disruptions in fertility, reproduction, sexual maturation, and other health effects.

[ 129 ] Specific phthalates have also resulted in similar biological effects.

Thyroid hormone axis Bisphenol A affects gene expression related to the thyroid hormone axis, which affects biological functions such as metabolism and development. BPA can decrease thyroid hormone receptor (TR) activity by increasing TR transcriptional corepressor activity. This then decreases the level of thyroid hormone binding proteins that bind to triiodothyronine. By affecting the thyroid hormone axis, BPA exposure can lead to hypothyroidism .

[ 16 ] Sex hormones BPA can disrupt normal, physiological levels of sex hormones . It does this by binding to globulins that normally bind to sex hormones such as androgens and estrogens , leading to the disruption of the balance between the two. BPA can also affect the metabolism or the catabolism of sex hormones. It often acts as an antiandrogen or as an estrogen, which can cause disruptions in gonadal development and sperm production.

[ 16 ] Carotid arteries A recent research found that approximately 58% of patients who underwent vascular surgery for clogged blood vessels were patients with invisible plastic nano particles in their carotid arteries , blocking the blood supply to the brain and neck. The researchers also found that the blood vessels of those with plastic were inflamed, thus putting them at risk of heart attacks , strokes , and death.
Another research found that amounts of polyethylene were found in the plaque tissues of 150 people who underwent carotid endarterectomy .

[ 130 ] [ 131 ] Breast milk A study in 2022 showed that plastic particles were identified in the breast milk of 77% of the sample of healthy mothers. The researchers were concerned with plastic particles jeopardizing the infants’ health during lactation. The Mothers’ consumption of food and drink in plastic packaging and the use of plastic-containing personal hygiene products was recorded. The results showed absence of microplastics, thus scientists considered the omnipresence of microplastics in the environment and the inevitability of them entering the body.

[ 132 ] Disease In 2023, plasticosis , a new disease caused solely by plastics, was discovered in seabirds.
The birds identified as having the disease have scarred digestive tracts from ingesting plastic waste.

[ 133 ] "When birds ingest small pieces of plastic, they found, it inflames the digestive tract. Over time, the persistent inflammation causes tissues to become scarred and disfigured, affecting digestion, growth and survival." [ 134 ] Reduction efforts Household items made of various types of plastic.

Waste generation, measured in kilograms per person per day Efforts to reduce the use of plastics, to promote plastic recycling and to reduce mismanaged plastic waste or plastic pollution have occurred or are ongoing. The first scientific review in the professional academic literature about global plastic pollution in general found that the rational response to the "global threat" would be "reductions in consumption of virgin plastic materials, along with internationally coordinated strategies for waste management " – such as banning export of plastic waste unless it leads to better recycling – and describes the state of knowledge about "poorly reversible" impacts which are one of the rationales for its reduction.

[ 135 ] [ 136 ] Some supermarkets charge their customers for plastic bags, and in some places more efficient reusable or biodegradable materials are being used in place of plastics. Some communities and businesses have put a ban on some commonly used plastic items, such as bottled water and plastic bags.

[ 137 ] Some non-governmental organizations have launched voluntary plastic reduction schemes like certificates that can be adapted by restaurants to be recognized as eco-friendly among customers.

[ 138 ] In January 2019 a "Global Alliance to End Plastic Waste " was created by companies in the plastics industry. The alliance aims to clean the environment from existing waste and increase recycling, but it does not mention reduction in plastic production as one of its targets.

[ 139 ] Moreover, subsequent reporting has suggested the group is a greenwashing initiative.

[ 140 ] [ 141 ] [ 142 ] On 2 March 2022 in Nairobi, representatives of 175 countries pledged to create a legally binding agreement to end plastic pollution. The agreement should address the full lifecycle of plastic and propose alternatives including reusability . An Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee (INC) that should conceive the agreement by the end of the year 2024 was created. The agreement should facilitate the transition to a circular economy, which will reduce GHG emissions by 25%. Inger Andersen, executive director of UNEP called the decision "a triumph by planet earth over single-use plastics".

[ 24 ] [ 143 ] Around 100 countries implemented single use plastic bags bans or taxes, which successfully reduced pollution and had public support. Many implemented measures to reduce the use of "single use cutlery, straws, balloon sticks, and coffee buds".

[ 144 ] In the lead up to the Assembly, global public opinion on a plastic treaty was surveyed, analysed and reported by The Plastic Free Foundation in partnership with Ipsos and WWF-International. The report identified that nearly 90% of survey participants – over 20,000 adults across 28 countries – believed that having a global plastics treaty will help to effectively address the plastic pollution crisis.

[ 2 ] Biodegradable and degradable plastics Further information: Sustainable packaging § Alternatives to plastics The use of biodegradable plastics has many advantages and disadvantages . Biodegradables are biopolymers that degrade in industrial composters . Biodegradables do not degrade as efficiently in domestic composters, and during this slower process, methane gas may be emitted.

[ 145 ] There are also other types of degradable materials that are not considered to be biopolymers , because they are oil-based, similar to other conventional plastics. These plastics are made to be more degradable through the use of different additives, which help them degrade when exposed to UV rays or other physical stressors.

[ 145 ] yet, biodegradation-promoting additives for polymers have been shown not to significantly increase biodegradation.

[ 146 ] Although biodegradable and degradable plastics have helped reduce plastic pollution, there are some drawbacks. One issue concerning both types of plastics is that they do not break down very efficiently in natural environments. There, degradable plastics that are oil-based may break down into smaller fractions, at which point they do not degrade further.

[ 145 ] A parliamentary committee in the United Kingdom also found that compostable and biodegradable plastics could add to marine pollution because there is a lack of infrastructure to deal with these new types of plastic, as well as a lack of understanding about them on the part of consumers.

[ 147 ] For example, these plastics need to be sent to industrial composting facilities to degrade properly, but no adequate system exists to make sure waste reaches these facilities.

[ 147 ] The committee thus recommended to reduce the amount of plastic used rather than introducing new types of it to the market.

[ 147 ] See also: Category:Organisms breaking down plastic Also worth noting is the evolution of new enzymes allowing microorganisms living in polluted locations to digest normal, hard-to-degrade plastic.

[ 7 ] A 2021 study looking for homologs of 95 known plastic-degrading enzymes spanning 17 plastic types found a further 30,000 possible enzymes. Despite their apparent ubiquity, there is no current evidence that these novel enzymes are breaking down any meaningful amount of plastic to reduce pollution.

[ 148 ] Incineration Up to 60% of used plastic medical equipment is incinerated rather than deposited in a landfill as a precautionary measure to lessen the transmission of disease. This has allowed for a large decrease in the amount of plastic waste that stems from medical equipment.

[ 129 ] At a large scale, plastics, paper, and other materials provides waste-to-energy plants with useful fuel. About 12% of total produced plastic has been incinerated.

[ 149 ] Many studies have been done concerning the gaseous emissions that result from the incineration process.

[ 150 ] Incinerated plastics release a number of toxins in the burning process, including dioxins , furans , mercury , and polychlorinated biphenyls .

[ 150 ] When burned outside of facilities designed to collect or process the toxins, this can have significant health effects and create significant air pollution.

[ 150 ] Policy Further information: § Collection, recycling and reduction Share of inadequately managed plastic waste (2010) Projected share of inadequately managed plastic waste (2025) Agencies such as the US Environmental Protection Agency and US Food and Drug Administration often do not assess the safety of new chemicals until after a negative side effect is shown. Once they suspect a chemical may be toxic, it is studied to determine the human reference dose, which is determined to be the lowest observable adverse effect level. During these studies, a high dose is tested to see if it causes any adverse health effects, and if it does not, lower doses are considered to be safe as well. This does not take into account the fact that with some chemicals found in plastics, such as BPA , lower doses can have a discernible effect.

[ 151 ] Even with this often complex evaluation process, policies have been put into place in order to help alleviate plastic pollution and its effects. Government regulations have been implemented that ban some chemicals from being used in specific plastic products.

In Canada, the United States, and the European Union, BPA has been banned from being incorporated in the production of baby bottles and children's cups, due to health concerns and the higher vulnerability of younger children to the effects of BPA.

[ 129 ] Taxes have been established in order to discourage specific ways of managing plastic waste. The landfill tax , for example, creates an incentive to choose to recycle plastics rather than contain them in landfills, by making the latter more expensive.

[ 145 ] There has also been a standardization of the types of plastics that can be considered compostable.

[ 145 ] The European Norm EN 13432, which was set by the European Committee for Standardization (CEN), lists the standards that plastics must meet, in terms of compostability and biodegradability , in order to officially be labeled as compostable.

[ 145 ] [ 152 ] Given the significant threat that oceans face, the European Investment Bank Group aims to increase its funding and advisory assistance for ocean cleanup. For example, the Clean Oceans Initiative (COI) was established in 2018. The European Investment Bank, the German Development Bank, and the French Development Agency (AFD) agreed to invest a total of €2 billion under the COI from October 2018 to October 2023 in initiatives aimed at reducing pollution discharge into the oceans, with a special focus on plastics.

[ 153 ] [ 154 ] [ 155 ] The Clean Ocean Initiative plans to give €4 billion in funding towards decreasing plastic waste at sea by the end of 2025. Improved wastewater treatment in Sri Lanka , Egypt , and South Africa are some examples, as is solid waste management in Togo and Senegal .

[ 156 ] [ 157 ] [ 158 ] [ 159 ] Voluntary reduction efforts failing Major plastic producers continue to lobby governments to refrain from imposing restrictions on plastic production and to advocate for voluntary corporate targets to reduce new plastic output. However, the world's top 10 plastic producers, including The Coca-Cola Company, Nestle SA and PepsiCo have been failing to meet even their own minimum targets for virgin plastic use.

[ 160 ] The export of plastic waste from rich countries to poorer countries has been well documented.
Differences between countries in environmental policy and costs relating to taxes, disposal, and transport, are important determinants on legal and illegal international traffic in hazardous and non hazardous waste and scrap products, including plastics.

[ 161 ] [ 162 ] There have been several international covenants which address marine plastic pollution, such as the Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter 1972 , the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973 and the Honolulu Strategy, there is nothing around plastics which infiltrate the ocean from the land.

[ 163 ] [ 164 ] In 2019, the Basel Convention was amended to include plastic waste.

[ 165 ] 187 countries agreed to limit the export of plastic waste following rules from the Basel Convention .  The Convention prohibits Parties from trading with non-Parties (e.g. United States) unless the countries have a pre-determined agreement that meets Basel criteria.

[ 166 ] During January 2021, the first month that the agreement was in effect, trade data showed that overall scrap exports from the U.S. actually increased.

[ 167 ] Legally binding plastics treaty Some academics and NGOs believe that a legally binding international treaty to deal with plastic pollution is necessary. They think this because plastic pollution is an international problem, moving between maritime borders, and also because they believe there needs to be a cap on plastic production.

[ 168 ] [ 169 ] [ 170 ] Lobbyists were hoping that UNEA-5 would lead to a plastics treaty, but the session ended without a legally binding agreement.

[ 171 ] [ 172 ] In 2022, countries agreed to devise a global plastic pollution treaty by 2024.

[ 173 ] [ 174 ] Waste import bans Since around 2017, China, [ 175 ] Turkey, [ 176 ] Malaysia, [ 177 ] Cambodia, [ 178 ] and Thailand [ 179 ] have banned certain waste imports. It has been suggested that such bans may increase automation [ 180 ] and recycling, decreasing negative impacts on the environment.

[ 181 ] According to an analysis of global trade data by the nonprofit Basel Action Network, violations of the Basel Convention , active since 1 January 2021, have been rampant during 2021. The U.S., Canada, and the European Union have sent hundreds of millions of tons of plastic to countries with insufficient waste management infrastructure, where much of it is landfilled, burned, or littered into the environment.

[ 182 ] Circular economy policies Laws related to recyclability, waste management, domestic materials recovery facilities, product composition, biodegradability and prevention of import/export of specific wastes may support prevention of plastic pollution.

[ citation needed ] A study considers producer/manufacturer responsibility "a practical approach toward addressing the issue of plastic pollution", suggesting that "Existing and adopted policies, legislations, regulations, and initiatives at global, regional, and national level play a vital role".

[ 80 ] Standardization of products, especially of packaging [ 183 ] [ 184 ] [ additional citation(s) needed ] which are, as of 2022, often composed of different materials (each and across products) that are hard or currently impossible to either separate or recycle together in general or in an automated way [ 185 ] [ 186 ] could support recyclability and recycling.

For instance, there are systems that can theoretically distinguish between and sort 12 types of plastics such as PET using hyperspectral imaging and algorithms developed via machine learning [ 187 ] [ 188 ] while only an estimated 9% of the estimated 6.3 billion tonnes of plastic waste from the 1950s up to 2018 has been recycled (12% has been incinerated and the rest reportedly being "dumped in landfills or the natural environment").

[ 14 ] Collection, recycling and reduction Main article: Plastic recycling The two common forms of waste collection include curbside collection and the use of drop-off recycling centers. About 87 percent of the population in the United States (273 million people) have access to curbside and drop-off recycling centers. In curbside collection, which is available to about 63 percent of the United States population (193 million people), people place designated plastics in a special bin to be picked up by a public or private hauling company.

[ 189 ] Most curbside programs collect more than one type of plastic resin, usually both PETE and HDPE .

[ 190 ] At drop-off recycling centers, which are available to 68 percent of the United States population (213 million people), people take their recyclables to a centrally located facility.

[ 189 ] Once collected, the plastics are delivered to a materials recovery facility (MRF) or handler for sorting into single-resin streams to increase product value. The sorted plastics are then baled to reduce shipping costs to reclaimers.

[ 190 ] There are varying rates of recycling per type of plastic, and in 2017, the overall plastic recycling rate was approximately 8.4% in the United States. Approximately 2.7 million tonnes (3.0 million short tons) of plastics were recycled in the U.S. in 2017, while 24.3 million tonnes (26.8 million short tons) plastic were dumped in landfills the same year. Some plastics are recycled more than others; in 2017 about 31.2 percent of HDPE bottles and 29.1 percent of PET bottles and jars were recycled.

[ 191 ] Reusable packaging refers to packaging that is manufactured of durable materials and is specifically designed for multiple trips and extended life. There are zero-waste stores and refill shops [ 192 ] [ 193 ] for selected products as well as conventional supermarkets that enable refilling of selected plastics-packaged products or voluntarily sell products with no or more sustainable packaging .

[ 194 ] On 21 May 2019, a new service model called "Loop" to collect packaging from consumers and reuse it, began to function in the New York region, US, supported by multiple larger companies. Consumers drop packages in special shipping totes and then a pick up collect, clean, refill and return them.

[ 195 ] It has begun with several thousand households and aims to not only stop single use plastic, but to stop single use generally by recycling consumer product containers of various materials.

[ 196 ] Another effective strategy, that could be supported by policies, is eliminating the need for plastic bottles such as by using refillable e.g. steel bottles, [ 197 ] and water carbonators , [ 198 ] [ additional citation(s) needed ] which may also prevent potential negative impacts on human health due to microplastics release.

[ 199 ] [ 200 ] [ 201 ] Reducing plastic waste could support recycling and is often taken together with recycling: the "3R" refer to Reduce, Reuse and Recycle.

[ 80 ] [ 202 ] [ 203 ] [ 204 ] Ocean cleanup The organization " The Ocean Cleanup " is trying to collect plastic waste from the oceans by nets. There are concerns from harm to some forms of sea organisms, especially neuston .

[ 205 ] Great Bubble Barrier In the Netherlands, plastic litter from some rivers is collected by a bubble barrier, to prevent plastics from floating into the sea. This so-called 'Great Bubble Barrier' catches plastics bigger than 1 mm.

[ 206 ] [ 27 ] The bubble barrier is implemented in the River IJssel (2017) and in Amsterdam (2019) [ 207 ] [ 208 ] and will be implemented in Katwijk at the end of the river Rhine .

[ 209 ] [ 210 ] Mapping and tracking See also: § Major plastic polluter countries Our World In Data provides graphics about some analyses, including maps, to show sources of plastic pollution [ 211 ] [ 212 ] – including that of oceans in specific.

[ 213 ] Identifying largest sources of ocean plastics in high fidelity may help to discern causes, to measure progress and to develop effective countermeasures.

A large fraction of ocean plastics may come from – also non-imported (see above ) – plastic waste of coastal cities [ 211 ] as well as from rivers (with top 1000 rivers estimated by one 2021 study to account for 80% of global annual emissions).

[ 214 ] These two sources may be interlinked.

[ 215 ] The Yangtze river into the East China Sea is identified by some studies that use sampling evidence as the highest plastic-emitting (sampled) river, [ 113 ] [ 216 ] in contrast to the beforementioned 2021 study that ranks it at place 64.

[ 214 ] Management interventions at the local level at coastal areas were found to be crucial to the global success of reducing plastic pollution.

[ 217 ] There is one global, interactive machine learning- and satellite monitoring -based, map of plastic waste sites which could help identify who and where mismanages plastic waste, dumping it into oceans.

[ 218 ] [ 219 ] By country/region See also: Phase-out of lightweight plastic bags Albania In July 2018, Albania became the first country in Europe to ban lightweight plastic bags.

[ 220 ] [ 221 ] [ 222 ] Albania's environment minister Blendi Klosi said that businesses importing, producing or trading plastic bags less than 35 microns in thickness risk facing fines between 1 million to 1.5 million lek (€7,900 to €11,800).

[ 221 ] Australia See also: Phase-out of lightweight plastic bags in Australia It has been estimated that each year, Australia produces around 2.5m tonnes of plastic waste annually, of which about 84% ends up as landfill , and around 130,000 tonnes of plastic waste leaks into the environment.

[ 223 ] Six of the eight states and territories had by December 2021 committed to banning a range of plastics. The federal government 's National Packaging Targets created the goal of phasing out the worst of single-use plastics by 2025, [ 224 ] and under the National Plastics Plan 2021 , [ 225 ] it has committed "to phase out loose fill and moulded polystyrene packaging by July 2022, and various other products by December 2022.

[ 224 ] An Australian single-use plastic reduction initiative, Plastic Free July , that began in 2011 in Perth, Western Australia has gained a significant global outreach.  As of 2022, it had a record 140 million participants making conscious changes and reducing their waste by 2.6 million tonnes in 2022.

[ 15 ] In 2022, in recognition of its contributions to promoting single-use plastic pollution solutions, Plastic Free July was one of two finalists in the annual UN Sustainable Development Action Awards.

[ 18 ] Recent research highlights that Australia's current plastic waste policies, which focus heavily on recycling, are failing—only 14% of plastic waste is recovered, and overall consumption is projected to more than double by 2050. Its recommended to pus towards policies that reduce plastic production and consumption, such as implementing a plastics tax and extended producer responsibility schemes, to effectively address the growing plastic waste crisis.

[ 226 ] Canada In the year 2022 Canada announced a ban on producing and importing single use plastic from December 2022. The sale of those items will be banned from December 2023 and the export from 2025. The prime minister of Canada Justin Trudeau pledged to ban single use plastic in 2019.

[ 227 ] China China is the biggest consumer of single-use plastics.

[ 228 ] In 2020 China published a plan to cut 30% of plastic waste in five years. As part of this plan, single use plastic bags and straws will be banned.

[ 229 ] [ 230 ] European Union In 2015 the European Union adopted a directive requiring a reduction in the consumption of single use plastic bags per person to 90 by 2019 and to 40 by 2025.

[ 231 ] In April 2019, the EU adopted a further directive banning almost all types of single use plastic, except bottles, from the beginning of the year 2021.

[ 232 ] [ 233 ] On 3 July 2021, the EU Single-Use Plastics Directive (SUPD, EU 2019/904) went into effect within EU member states . The directive aims to reduce plastic pollution from single-use disposable plastics. It focuses on the 10 most commonly found disposable plastics at beaches, which make up 43% of marine litter (fishing gear another 27%). According to the directive, there is a ban on plastic cotton buds and balloon sticks, plastic plates, cutlery, stirrers and straws, Styrofoam drinks and food packaging (e.g. disposable cups and one-person meals), products made of oxo-degradable plastic, which degrade into microplastics , while cigarette filters, drinking cups, wet wipes, sanitary towels and tampons receive a label indicating the product contains plastic, that it belongs in the trash, and that litter has negative effects on the environment.

[ 234 ] [ 235 ] Article 8 of the directive also supports the use of extended producer responsibility schemes relating to plastic waste.

[ 236 ] In December 2022 the EU took the first steps for banning the export of plastic waste to other countries.

[ 237 ] Agreement between the European Parliament and the European Council on a revision to the Waste Shipment Regulation, which will cover this matter, was reached on 17 November 2023.

[ 238 ] France In 2021 France banned "free plastic bottles, plastic confetti, and single-use plastic bags", in 2022 restrictions were made on plastic packaging and toys and in the first of January 2023 many types of single use plastic were banned from restaurants that have more than 20 places. Some were concerned the measures will not be implemented well due to the current energy crisis.

[ 239 ] India Say no to polythene.

Sign.

Nako, Himachal Pradesh , India.

The government of India decided to ban single use plastics and take a number of measures to recycle and reuse plastic from 2 October 2019.

[ 240 ] The Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation , Government of India, has requested various governmental departments to avoid the use of plastic bottles to provide drinking water during governmental meetings, etc., and to instead make arrangements for providing drinking water that do not generate plastic waste.

[ 241 ] The state of Sikkim has restricted the usage of plastic water bottles (in government functions and meetings) and styrofoam products.

[ 242 ] The state of Bihar has banned the usage of plastic water bottles in governmental meetings.

[ 243 ] The 2015 National Games of India , organised in Thiruvananthapuram , was associated with green protocols.

[ 244 ] This was initiated by Suchitwa Mission that aimed for " zero-waste " venues. To make the event "disposable-free", there was ban on the usage of disposable water bottles.

[ 245 ] The event witnessed the usage of reusable tableware and stainless steel tumblers.

[ 246 ] Athletes were provided with refillable steel flasks.

[ 247 ] It is estimated that these green practices stopped the generation of 120 tonnes of disposable waste.

[ 248 ] The City of Bangalore in 2016 banned the plastic for all purpose other than for few special cases like milk delivery etc.

[ 249 ] The state of Maharashtra , India effected the Maharashtra Plastic and Thermocol Products ban 23 June 2018, subjecting plastic users to fines and potential imprisonment for repeat offenders.

[ 250 ] [ 251 ] In the year 2022 India has begun to implement a country wide ban on different sorts of plastic. This is necessary also for achieving the climate targets of the country as in plastic production are used more than 8,000 additives, part of them are thousands times more powerful greenhouse gases than CO 2 .

[ 252 ] Indonesia In Bali , one of the many islands of Indonesia, two sisters, Melati and Isabel Wijsen, made efforts to ban plastic bags in 2019.

[ 253 ] [ 254 ] As of January 2022 [update] their organization Bye Bye Plastic Bags had spread to over 50 locations around the world.

[ 255 ] Israel In Israel, two cities: Eilat and Herzliya , decided to ban the usage of single use plastic bags and cutlery on the beaches.

[ 256 ] In 2020 Tel Aviv joined them, banning also the sale of single use plastic on the beaches.

[ 257 ] Kenya In August 2017, Kenya has one of the world's harshest plastic bag bans. Fines of $38,000 or up to four years in jail to anyone that was caught producing, selling, or using a plastic bag.

[ 258 ] New Zealand New Zealand announced a ban on many types of hard-to-recycle single use plastic by 2025.

[ 259 ] Nigeria In 2019, The House of Representatives of Nigeria banned the production, import and usage of plastic bags in the country.

[ 260 ] Spain Spain banned several types of single use plastic at the beginning of the year 2023.

[ 261 ] Taiwan In February 2018, Taiwan restricted the use of single-use plastic cups, straws, utensils and bags; the ban will also include an extra charge for plastic bags and updates their recycling regulations and aiming by 2030 it would be completely enforced.

[ 258 ] United Kingdom In January 2019, the Iceland supermarket chain , which specializes in frozen foods, pledged to "eliminate or drastically reduce all plastic packaging for its store-brand products by 2023." [ 262 ] As of 2020, 104 communities achieved the title of "Plastic free community" in United Kingdom; 500 want to achieve it.

[ 263 ] After two schoolgirls Ella and Caitlin launched a petition about it, Burger King and McDonald's in the United Kingdom and Ireland pledged to stop sending plastic toys with their meals. McDonald's pledged to do it from the year 2021. McDonald's also pledged to use a paper wrap for it meals and books that will be sent with the meals. The transmission will begin already in March 2020.

[ 264 ] From October 2023 many types of single use plastic will be banned in England including cutlery and plates.

Scotland and Wales have already implemented such bans.

[ 265 ] The new rules entered into force on the first of October, but many are unaware and not prepared for it.

[ 266 ] United States In the beginning of 2024, 12 states and at least 500 municipalities had some kind of plastic bag ban. Three state bans and two city bans alone reduced the amount of plastic bags used in one year approximately by 6 billion.

[ 267 ] In 2009, Washington University in St. Louis became the first university in the United States to ban the sale of plastic, single-use water bottles.

[ 268 ] In 2009, the District of Columbia required all businesses that sell food or alcohol to charge an additional 5 cents for each carryout plastic or paper bag.

[ 269 ] In 2011 and 2013, Kauai , Maui and Hawaii prohibit non-biodegradable plastic bags at checkout as well as paper bags containing less than 40 percent recycled material. In 2015, Honolulu was the last major county approving the ban.

[ 269 ] In 2015, California prohibited large stores from providing plastic bags, and if so a charge of $0.10 per bag and has to meet certain criteria.

[ 269 ] In 2016, Illinois adopted the legislation and established "Recycle Thin Film Friday" in effort toe reclaim used thin-film plastic bags and encourage reusable bags.

[ 269 ] In 2019, the state New York banned single use plastic bags and introduced a 5-cent fee for using single use paper bags. The ban will enter into force in 2020. This will not only reduce plastic bag usage in New York state (23 billion every year until now), but also eliminate 12 million barrels of oil used to make plastic bags used by the state each year.

[ 270 ] [ 271 ] The state of Maine ban Styrofoam (polystyrene) containers in May 2019.

[ 272 ] In 2019 the Giant Eagle retailer became the first big US retailer that committed to completely phase out plastic by 2025. The first step – stop using single use plastic bags – will begun to be implemented already on January 15, 2020.

[ 273 ] In 2019, Delaware , Maine , Oregon and Vermont enacted on legislation. Vermont also restricted single-use straws and polystyrene containers.

[ 269 ] In 2019, Connecticut imposed a $0.10 charge on single-use plastic bags at point of sale, and is going to ban them on 1 July 2021.

[ 269 ] Vanuatu On 30 July 2017, Vanuatu 's Independence Day, made an announcement of stepping towards the beginning of not using plastic bags and bottles. This made it one of the first Pacific nations to do so and will start banning the importation of single-use plastic bottles and bags.

[ 258 ] Obstruction by major plastic producers Surgical mask among dry grass in Brastad during the COVID-19 pandemic The ten corporations that produce the most plastic on the planet, The Coca-Cola Company , Colgate-Palmolive , Danone , Mars, Incorporated , Mondelēz International , Nestlé , PepsiCo , Perfetti Van Melle , Procter & Gamble , and Unilever , formed a well-financed network that has sabotaged for decades government and community efforts to address the plastic pollution crisis, according to a detailed investigative report by the Changing Markets Foundation. The investigation documents how these companies delay and derail legislation so that they can continue to inundate consumers with disposable plastic packaging. These large plastic producers have exploited public fears of the COVID-19 pandemic to work toward delaying and reversing existing regulation of plastic disposal. Big ten plastic producers have advanced voluntary commitments for plastic waste disposal as a stratagem to deter governments from imposing additional regulations.

[ 274 ] PepsiCo faced legal action on 15 November 2023, as the New York attorney general filed a lawsuit. The allegations asserted that the food and beverage giant jeopardized the environment and disseminated deceptive information about its dedication to reducing single-use plastic in packaging. Moreover, a substantial portion of the plastic pollution along the Buffalo River was linked to products manufactured by the company.

[ 275 ] Deception of the public about recycling As early as the early 1970s, petrochemical industry leaders understood that the vast majority of plastic they produced would never be recycled. For example, an April 1973 report written by industry scientists for industry executive states that sorting the hundreds of different kinds plastic is "infeasible" and cost-prohibitive. By the late 1980s, industry leaders also knew that the public must be kept feeling good about purchasing plastic products if their industry was to continue to prosper, and needed to quell proposed legislation to regulate the plastic being sold. So the industry launched a $50 million/year corporate propaganda campaign targeting the American public with the message that plastic can be, and is being, recycled, and lobbied American municipalities to launch expensive plastic waste collection programs, and lobbied U.S. states to require the labeling of plastic products and containers with recycling symbols. They were confident, however, that the recycling initiatives would not end up recovering and reusing plastic in amounts anywhere near sufficient to hurt their profits in selling new "virgin" plastic products because they understood that the recycling efforts that they were promoting were likely to fail. Industry leaders more recently have planned 100% recycling of the plastic they produce by 2040, calling for more efficient collection, sorting and processing.

[ 276 ] [ 277 ] Action for creating awareness World Environment Day Every year, 5 June is observed as World Environment Day to raise awareness and increase government action on the pressing issue. In 2018, India was host to the 43rd World Environment Day and the theme was "Beat Plastic Pollution", with a focus on single-use or disposable plastic. The Ministry of Environment, Forest, and Climate Change of India invited people to take care of their social responsibility and urged them to take up green good deeds in everyday life. Several states presented plans to ban plastic or drastically reduce their use.

[ 278 ] Other actions On 11 April 2013 in order to create awareness, artist Maria Cristina Finucci founded The Garbage Patch State at UNESCO [ 279 ] headquarters in Paris , France, in front of Director General Irina Bokova . This was the first of a series of events under the patronage of UNESCO and of the Italian Ministry of the Environment.

[ 280 ] Mexico City implemented a ban on single-use plastics, starting with plastic bags in 2020 and expanding to items like utensils, straws, and to-go trays in 2021.

[ 281 ] In 2020, China disclosed a three-part proposal to reduce plastic pollution. The plan includes a nationwide prohibition on single-use plastics, introduced as the country's plastic waste had risen to an anticipated 45 million tons in 2025, partly as a result of a surge in e-commerce packaging.

[ 281 ] See also Burning Eddy pumping – The role of mesoscale eddies in trapping and transporting plastic in the ocean Fiber optic drone Great Pacific Garbage Patch – an area with concentrations of pelagic plastics, chemical sludge, and other debris Plastic-eating organisms Marine plastic pollution Microplastic remediation Plasticulture Refill (scheme) Reverse vending machine Rubber pollution Nuclear waste Technofossil Notes ^ "Campaigners have identified the global trade in plastic waste as a main culprit in marine litter, because the industrialised world has for years been shipping much of its plastic "recyclables" to developing countries, which often lack the capacity to process all the material." [ 36 ] ^ "The new UN rules will effectively prevent the US and EU from exporting any mixed plastic waste, as well plastics that are contaminated or unrecyclable – a move that will slash the global plastic waste trade when it comes into effect in January 2021." [ 36 ] References ^ "Plastic pollution" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 1 August 2013 .

^ a b Laura Parker (June 2018).

"We Depend on Plastic. Now We're Drowning in It" .

NationalGeographic.com . Archived from the original on 16 May 2018 . Retrieved 25 June 2018 .

^ a b c d e f g Hammer, J; Kraak, MH; Parsons, JR (2012). "Plastics in the Marine Environment: The Dark Side of a Modern Gift".

Reviews of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology . Vol. 220. pp.

1– 44.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-4614-3414-6_1 .

ISBN 978-1461434139 .

PMID 22610295 .

S2CID 5842747 .

^ Hester, Ronald E.; Harrison, R. M. (editors) (2011).

Marine Pollution and Human Health . Royal Society of Chemistry. pp. 84–85.

ISBN 184973240X ^ a b c d e Le Guern, Claire (March 2018).

"When The Mermaids Cry: The Great Plastic Tide" .

Coastal Care .

^ a b Worm, Boris; Lotze, Heike K.; Jubinville, Isabelle; Wilcox, Chris; Jambeck, Jenna (17 October 2017).

"Plastic as a Persistent Marine Pollutant" .

Annual Review of Environment and Resources .

42 (1): 1– 26.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-environ-102016-060700 .

ISSN 1543-5938 .

^ a b Ong, Sandy (24 August 2023).

"The living things that feast on plastic" .

Knowable Magazine .

doi : 10.1146/knowable-082423-1 .

^ a b c d e Jambeck, Jenna R.; Geyer, Roland; Wilcox, Chris; Siegler, Theodore R.; Perryman, Miriam; Andrady, Anthony; Narayan, Ramani; Law, Kara Lavender (13 February 2015).

"Plastic waste inputs from land into the ocean" .

Science .

347 (6223): 768– 771.

Bibcode : 2015Sci...347..768J .

doi : 10.1126/science.1260352 .

PMID 25678662 .

S2CID 206562155 .

^ Jang, Y. C., Lee, J., Hong, S., Choi, H. W., Shim, W. J., & Hong, S. Y. 2015. "Estimating the global inflow and stock of plastic marine debris using material flow analysis: a preliminary approach".

Journal of the Korean Society for Marine Environment and Energy , 18(4), 263–273.

[1] ^ Li, Penghui; Wang, Xiaodan; Su, Min; Zou, Xiaoyan; Duan, Linlin; Zhang, Hongwu (1 October 2021).

"Characteristics of Plastic Pollution in the Environment: A Review" .

Bulletin of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology .

107 (4): 577– 584.

Bibcode : 2021BuECT.107..577L .

doi : 10.1007/s00128-020-02820-1 .

ISSN 1432-0800 .

PMID 32166334 .

S2CID 212681362 .

^ Sutter, John D. (12 December 2016).

"How to stop the sixth mass extinction" .

CNN . Retrieved 18 September 2017 .

^ Ziani, K; Ioniță-Mîndrican, CB; Mititelu, M; Neacșu, SM; Negrei, C; Moroșan, E; Drăgănescu, D; Preda, OT (25 January 2023).

"Microplastics: A Real Global Threat for Environment and Food Safety: A State of the Art Review" .

Nutrients .

15 (3): 617.

doi : 10.3390/nu15030617 .

PMC 9920460 .

PMID 36771324 .

^ "Plastics – the Facts 2020" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 September 2021 . Retrieved 6 October 2021 .

^ a b "The known unknowns of plastic pollution" .

The Economist . 3 March 2018 . Retrieved 17 June 2018 .

^ a b Nomadic, Global (29 February 2016).

"Turning rubbish into money – environmental innovation leads the way" .

^ a b c Mathieu-Denoncourt, Justine; Wallace, Sarah J.; de Solla, Shane R.; Langlois, Valerie S. (November 2014).

"Plasticizer endocrine disruption: Highlighting developmental and reproductive effects in mammals and non-mammalian aquatic species" .

General and Comparative Endocrinology .

219 : 74– 88.

doi : 10.1016/j.ygcen.2014.11.003 .

PMID 25448254 .

^ Walker, Tony R.; Xanthos, Dirk (2018). "A call for Canada to move toward zero plastic waste by reducing and recycling single-use plastics".

Resources, Conservation and Recycling .

133 : 99– 100.

Bibcode : 2018RCR...133...99W .

doi : 10.1016/j.resconrec.2018.02.014 .

S2CID 117378637 .

^ a b "Picking up litter: Pointless exercise or powerful tool in the battle to beat plastic pollution?" .

unenvironment.org . 18 May 2018 . Retrieved 19 July 2019 .

^ Laville, Sandra (9 December 2020).

"Human-made materials now outweigh Earth's entire biomass – study" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 9 December 2020 .

^ a b National Geographic, 30 Oct. 2020, "U.S. Generates More Plastic Trash than Any Other Nation, Report Finds: The Plastic Pollution Crisis Has Been Widely Blamed on a Handful of Asian Countries, But New Research Shows Just How Much the U.S. Contributes" ^ UN Environment Programme, 12 May 2019 "Governments Agree Landmark Decisions to Protect People and Planet from Hazardous Chemicals and Waste, Including Plastic Waste" ^ The Guardian, 10 May 2019, "Nearly All Countries Agree to Stem Flow of Plastic Waste into Poor Nations: US Reportedly Opposed Deal, which Follows Concerns that Villages in Indonesia, Thailand and Malaysia Had ‘Turned into Dumpsites’" ^ Phys.org, 10 May 2019 "180 Nations Agree UN Deal to Regulate Export of Plastic Waste" ^ a b "Historic day in the campaign to beat plastic pollution: Nations commit to develop a legally binding agreement" .

UN Environment Programme (UNEP) . 2 March 2022 . Retrieved 11 March 2022 .

^ Shams, Mehnaz; Alam, Iftaykhairul; Mahbub, Md Shahriar (October 2021).

"Plastic pollution during COVID-19: Plastic waste directives and its long-term impact on the environment" .

Environmental Advances .

5 : 100119.

Bibcode : 2021EnvAd...500119S .

doi : 10.1016/j.envadv.2021.100119 .

ISSN 2666-7657 .

PMC 8464355 .

PMID 34604829 .

^ Ana, Silva (2021).

"Increased Plastic Pollution Due to Covid-19 Pandemic: Challenges and Recommendations" .

Chemical Engineering Journal .

405 : 126683.

Bibcode : 2021ChEnJ.40526683P .

doi : 10.1016/j.cej.2020.126683 .

PMC 7430241 .

PMID 32834764 .

^ a b Limb, Lottie (22 September 2021).

"The Great Bubble Barrier: How bubbles are keeping plastic out of the sea" .

euronews.com . Euronews.green . Retrieved 26 November 2021 .

^ "Plastics industry adapts to business during COVID-19" .

Plastics News . 13 March 2020 . Retrieved 18 December 2021 .

^ "Plastic in the time of a pandemic: protector or polluter?" .

World Economic Forum . 6 May 2020 . Retrieved 18 December 2021 .

^ Monella, Lillo Montalto (12 May 2020).

"Will plastic pollution get worse after the COVID-19 pandemic?" .

euronews . Retrieved 18 December 2021 .

^ Westervelt, Amy (14 January 2020).

"Big Oil Bets Big on Plastic" .

Drilled News . Archived from the original on 18 December 2021 . Retrieved 18 December 2021 .

^ Weisman A (2007).

The world without us . New York: Thomas Dunne Books/St. Martin's Press.

ISBN 978-1443400084 .

^ "What Percentage of Plastic is Recycled Globally?" .

UCSB Bren School of Environmental Science & Management . 18 December 2018 . Retrieved 23 January 2024 .

^ Geyer R, Jambeck JR, Law KL (July 2017).

"Production, use, and fate of all plastics ever made" .

Science Advances .

3 (7): e1700782.

Bibcode : 2017SciA....3E0782G .

doi : 10.1126/sciadv.1700782 .

PMC 5517107 .

PMID 28776036 .

^ a b c d e Environment, U.N. (21 October 2021).

"Drowning in Plastics – Marine Litter and Plastic Waste Vital Graphics" .

UNEP – UN Environment Programme . Retrieved 21 March 2022 .

^ a b Clive Cookson 2019 .

^ Walker, T.R.; Reid, K.; Arnould, J.P.Y.; Croxall, J.P. (1997). "Marine debris surveys at Bird Island, South Georgia 1990–1995".

Marine Pollution Bulletin .

34 (1): 61– 65.

Bibcode : 1997MarPB..34...61W .

doi : 10.1016/S0025-326X(96)00053-7 .

^ a b c d e Barnes, D. K. A.; Galgani, F.; Thompson, R. C.; Barlaz, M. (14 June 2009).

"Accumulation and fragmentation of plastic debris in global environments" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

364 (1526): 1985– 1998.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2008.0205 .

PMC 2873009 .

PMID 19528051 .

^ Pettipas, Shauna; Bernier, Meagan; Walker, Tony R. (2016). "A Canadian policy framework to mitigate plastic marine pollution".

Marine Policy .

68 : 117– 122.

Bibcode : 2016MarPo..68..117P .

doi : 10.1016/j.marpol.2016.02.025 .

^ Driedger, Alexander G.J.; Dürr, Hans H.; Mitchell, Kristen; Van Cappellen, Philippe (March 2015).

"Plastic debris in the Laurentian Great Lakes: A review" (PDF) .

Journal of Great Lakes Research .

41 (1): 9– 19.

Bibcode : 2015JGLR...41....9D .

doi : 10.1016/j.jglr.2014.12.020 .

^ Hannah Leung (21 April 2018).

"Five Asian Countries Dump More Plastic into Oceans Than Anyone Else Combined: How You Can Help" .

Forbes . Retrieved 23 June 2019 .

China, Indonesia, Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam are dumping more plastic into oceans than the rest of the world combined, according to a 2017 report by Ocean Conservancy ^ Knight 2012, p. 11.

^ Knight 2012, p. 13.

^ Knight 2012, p. 12.

^ "Small, Smaller, Microscopic!" .

The Great Nurdle Hunt . Archived from the original on 1 December 2017 . Retrieved 30 November 2017 .

^ Otaga, Y. (2009).

"International Pellet Watch: Global monitoring of persistent organic pollutants (POPs) in coastal waters. 1. Initial phase data on PCBs, DDTs, and HCHs" (PDF) .

Marine Pollution Bulletin .

58 (10): 1437– 1446.

Bibcode : 2009MarPB..58.1437O .

doi : 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2009.06.014 .

PMID 19635625 .

^ May, Tiffany (7 October 2020).

"Hidden Beneath the Ocean's Surface, Nearly 16 Million Tons of Microplastic" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 30 November 2020 .

^ "14 million tonnes of microplastics on sea floor: Australian study" .

phys.org . Retrieved 9 November 2020 .

^ Barrett, Justine; Chase, Zanna ; Zhang, Jing; Holl, Mark M. Banaszak; Willis, Kathryn; Williams, Alan; Hardesty, Britta D.; Wilcox, Chris (2020).

"Microplastic Pollution in Deep-Sea Sediments From the Great Australian Bight" .

Frontiers in Marine Science .

7 .

Bibcode : 2020FrMaS...776170B .

doi : 10.3389/fmars.2020.576170 .

ISSN 2296-7745 .

S2CID 222125532 .

Available under CC BY 4.0 .

^ Chemical Society, American.

"Plastics in Oceans Decompose, Release Hazardous Chemicals, Surprising New Study Says" .

Science Daily . Retrieved 15 March 2015 .

^ Chalabi, Mona (9 November 2019).

"Coca-Cola is world's biggest plastics polluter – again" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 18 November 2019 .

^ "Global Brand Audit Report 2019" .

Break Free From Plastic . 18 October 2019 . Retrieved 18 November 2019 .

^ Priestland, Emma (5 November 2020).

"Quick to commit but slow to change, Corporations are making little progress upscaling towards a circular economy for plastics" .

Break Free From Plastic . Retrieved 1 April 2022 .

^ "Coca-Cola, PepsiCo, Nestlé Are Worst Plastic Polluters of 2020, Have Made 'Zero Progress,' New Report Finds" .

EcoWatch . 11 December 2020 . Retrieved 1 April 2022 .

^ "Coca-Cola Shares Sustainability Progress" .

The Coca-Cola Company . Retrieved 1 April 2022 .

^ a b McVeigh, Karen (7 December 2020).

"Coca-Cola, Pepsi and Nestlé named top plastic polluters for third year in a row" . The Guardian . Retrieved 20 December 2020 .

^ Cowger, Win; Willis, Kathryn A.; Bullock, Sybil; Conlon, Katie; Emmanuel, Jorge; Erdle, Lisa M.; Eriksen, Marcus; Farrelly, Trisia A.; Hardesty, Britta Denise; Kerge, Kristiina; Li, Natalie; Li, Yedan; Liebman, Adam; Tangri, Neil; Thiel, Martin (26 April 2024).

"Global producer responsibility for plastic pollution" .

Science Advances .

10 (17): eadj8275.

Bibcode : 2024SciA...10J8275C .

doi : 10.1126/sciadv.adj8275 .

ISSN 2375-2548 .

PMC 11042729 .

PMID 38657069 .

^ Laville, Sandra (18 May 2021).

"Twenty firms produce 55% of world's plastic waste, report reveals" .

The Guardian .

^ The Guardian, 1 Dec. 2021 "‘Deluge of Plastic Waste’: US Is World’s Biggest Plastic Polluter; At 42m Metric Tons of Plastic Waste a Year, The US Generates More Waste than All EU Countries Combined" ^ 2021 Consensus Study Report of the Committee of Experts of the United States National Academies of Engineering, Sciences and Medicine "Reckoning with the U.S. Role in Global Ocean Plastic Waste" ^ Statista, Ian Tiseo, 14 Apr. 2021 "Per capita plastic waste generation in select countries worldwide in 2016(in kilograms a year)" ^ Science, 30 Oct. 2020 "The United States’ Contribution of Plastic Waste to Land and Ocean" ^ National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (2022). "Summary".

Reckoning with the U.S. Role in Global Ocean Plastic Waste . Washington: The National Academies Press. p. 1.

ISBN 978-0-309-45885-6 . Retrieved 20 June 2022 .

An estimated 8 million metric tons (MMT) of plastic waste enter the world's ocean each year ^ Meijer, Lourens J. J.; Van Emmerik, Tim; Van Der Ent, Ruud; Schmidt, Christian; Lebreton, Laurent (2021).

"More than 1000 rivers account for 80% of global riverine plastic emissions into the ocean" .

Science Advances .

7 (18).

Bibcode : 2021SciA....7.5803M .

doi : 10.1126/sciadv.aaz5803 .

PMC 8087412 .

PMID 33931460 .

^ a b c d "Top 20 Countries Ranked by Mass of Mismanaged Plastic Waste" .

Earth Day .org . 4 June 2018.

^ Kushboo Sheth (18 September 2019).

"Countries Putting The Most Plastic Waste Into The Oceans" .

worldatlas.com .

^ Hannah Ritchie (11 October 2022).

"Ocean plastics: How much do rich countries contribute by shipping their waste overseas?" .

Our World in Data . Retrieved 12 October 2022 .

Most of the plastic that enters the oceans from land comes from rivers in Asia. More than 80% of it [...] a few percent – possibly up to 5% – of the world's ocean plastics could come from rich countries exporting their waste overseas ^ Law, Kara Lavender; Starr, Natalie; Siegler, Theodore R.; Jambeck, Jenna R.; Mallos, Nicholas J.; Leonard, George H. (2020).

"The United States' contribution of plastic waste to land and ocean" .

Science Advances .

6 (44).

Bibcode : 2020SciA....6..288L .

doi : 10.1126/sciadv.abd0288 .

PMC 7608798 .

PMID 33127684 .

^ EcoWatch, 18 Mar. 2021 "U.S. Continues to Ship Illegal Plastic Waste to Developing Countries" ^ Lebreton, Laurent; Andrady, Anthony (2019).

"Future scenarios of global plastic waste generation and disposal" .

Palgrave Communications .

5 (1).

Nature .

doi : 10.1057/s41599-018-0212-7 .

ISSN 2055-1045 . Lebreton2019.

the Asian continent was in 2015 the leading generating region of plastic waste with 82 Mt, followed by Europe (31 Mt) and Northern America (29 Mt). Latin America (including the Caribbean) and Africa each produced 19 Mt of plastic waste while Oceania generated about 0.9 Mt.

^ "Plastic Oceans" .

futureagenda.org . London.

^ Cheryl Santa Maria (8 November 2017).

"STUDY: 95% of plastic in the sea comes from 10 rivers" .

The Weather Network .

^ Duncan Hooper; Rafael Cereceda (20 April 2018).

"What plastic objects cause the most waste in the sea?" .

Euronews .

^ Christian Schmidt; Tobias Krauth; Stephan Wagner (11 October 2017).

"Export of Plastic Debris by Rivers into the Sea" (PDF) .

Environmental Science & Technology .

51 (21): 12246– 12253.

Bibcode : 2017EnST...5112246S .

doi : 10.1021/acs.est.7b02368 .

PMID 29019247 .

The 10 top-ranked rivers transport 88–95% of the global load into the sea ^ Harald Franzen (30 November 2017).

"Almost all plastic in the ocean comes from just 10 rivers" .

Deutsche Welle . Retrieved 18 December 2018 .

It turns out that about 90 percent of all the plastic that reaches the world's oceans gets flushed through just 10 rivers: The Yangtze, the Indus, Yellow River, Hai River, the Nile, the Ganges, Pearl River, Amur River, the Niger, and the Mekong (in that order).

^ Daphne Ewing-Chow (20 September 2019).

"Caribbean Islands Are The Biggest Plastic Polluters Per Capita In The World" .

Forbes .

^ Hardesty, Britta Denise (2017).

"Plastic Pollution Challenges in Marine and Coastal Environments: From Local to Global Governance" .

Restoration Ecology .

25 (1): 123– 128.

Bibcode : 2017ResEc..25..123V .

doi : 10.1111/rec.12388 .

S2CID 55423492 .

^ "Safe planetary boundary for pollutants, including plastics, exceeded, say researchers" .

Stockholm Resilience Centre . 18 January 2022 . Retrieved 28 January 2022 .

^ De Matteis, Alessandro; Turkmen Ceylan, Fethiye Burcu; Daoud, Mona; Kahuthu, Anne (2022).

"A systemic approach to tackling ocean plastic debris" .

Environment Systems and Decisions .

42 (1): 136– 145.

Bibcode : 2022EnvSD..42..136D .

doi : 10.1007/s10669-021-09832-0 .

ISSN 2194-5403 .

S2CID 238208588 .

^ a b c Thushari, G. G. N.; Senevirathna, J. D. M. (1 August 2020).

"Plastic pollution in the marine environment" .

Heliyon .

6 (8): e04709.

Bibcode : 2020Heliy...604709T .

doi : 10.1016/j.heliyon.2020.e04709 .

ISSN 2405-8440 .

PMC 7475234 .

PMID 32923712 .

^ "Sweeping New Report on Global Environmental Impact of Plastics Reveals Severe Damage to Climate" .

Center for International Environmental Law (CIEL) . Retrieved 16 May 2019 .

^ Plastic & Climate: The Hidden Costs of a Plastic Planet (PDF) . May 2019 . Retrieved 28 May 2019 .

^ Plastic & Climate The Hidden Costs of a Plastic Planet (PDF) . Center for International Environmental Law (CIEL), Environmental Integrity Project (EIP), FracTracker Alliance, Global Alliance for Incinerator Alternatives (GAIA), 5Gyres, Break free from plastic. 2019. pp.

69– 77 . Retrieved 7 February 2024 .

^ FROM POLLUTION TO SOLUTION A GLOBAL ASSESSMENT OF MARINE LITTER AND PLASTIC POLLUTION (PDF) . United Nations. 2021. p. 83 . Retrieved 7 February 2024 .

^ Climate change and plastics pollution (PDF) . OECD. May 2023. p. 6 . Retrieved 7 February 2024 .

^ Dottle, Rachael (30 December 2022).

"The Climate Impact of Our Insatiable Plastic Addiction" .

Bloomberg.com . Retrieved 8 April 2024 .

^ "An underestimated threat: Land-based pollution with microplastics" .

sciencedaily.com . 5 February 2018 . Retrieved 19 July 2019 .

^ "Plastic planet: How tiny plastic particles are polluting our soil" .

unenvironment.org . 3 April 2019 . Retrieved 19 July 2019 .

^ Kibria, Md. Golam; Masuk, Nahid Imtiaz; Safayet, Rafat; Nguyen, Huy Quoc; Mourshed, Monjur (20 January 2023).

"Plastic Waste: Challenges and Opportunities to Mitigate Pollution and Effective Management" .

International Journal of Environmental Research .

17 (1): 20.

Bibcode : 2023IJEnR..17...20K .

doi : 10.1007/s41742-023-00507-z .

ISSN 2008-2304 .

PMC 9857911 .

PMID 36711426 .

^ Ritchie, Hannah; Roser, Max (28 December 2023).

"How much plastic waste ends up in the ocean?" .

Our World in Data . Retrieved 30 April 2024 .

^ Carrington, Damian (7 December 2021).

" 'Disastrous' plastic use in farming threatens food safety – UN" . The Guardian . Retrieved 8 December 2021 .

^ Aggarwal,Poonam; (et al.) Interactive Environmental Education Book VIII . Pitambar Publishing. p. 86.

ISBN 8120913736 ^ Bennett, Paige (27 May 2025).

"Agricultural Soil Can Contain Microplastics at 23x Higher Concentrations Than What Oceans Hold, Study Says" . Ecowatch . Retrieved 29 May 2025 .

^ "Development solutions: Building a better ocean" .

European Investment Bank . Retrieved 19 August 2020 .

^ Honingh, Dorien; van Emmerik, Tim; Uijttewaal, Wim; Kardhana, Hadi; Hoes, Olivier; van de Giesen, Nick (2020).

"Urban River Water Level Increase Through Plastic Waste Accumulation at a Rack Structure" .

Frontiers in Earth Science .

8 : 28.

Bibcode : 2020FrEaS...8...28H .

doi : 10.3389/feart.2020.00028 .

ISSN 2296-6463 .

^ "Plastic bags clogging Bangkok's sewers complicate efforts to fight floods" .

The Straits Times . 6 September 2016 . Retrieved 17 November 2020 .

^ a b "Invisibles" .

orbmedia.org . Archived from the original on 6 September 2017 . Retrieved 15 September 2017 .

^ "Synthetic Polymer Contamination in Global Drinking Water" .

orbmedia.org . Retrieved 19 September 2017 .

^ a b "Your tap water may contain plastic, researchers warn (Update)" . Retrieved 15 September 2017 .

^ Carrington, Damian (5 September 2017).

"Plastic fibres found in tap water around the world, study reveals" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 15 September 2017 .

^ Lui, Kevin.

"Plastic Fibers Are Found in '83% of the World's Tap Water' " .

Time . Retrieved 15 September 2017 .

^ a b Li, P., Wang, X., Su, M., Zou, X., Duan, L., & Zhang, H. (2020). Characteristics of plastic pollution in the environment: A Review. Bulletin of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology, 107(4), 577–584.

https://doi.org/10.1007/s00128-020-02820-1 ^ a b c d Mbachu, O., Jenkins, G., Kaparaju, P., & Pratt, C. (2021). The rise of artificial soil carbon inputs: Reviewing microplastic pollution effects in the soil environment. Science of the Total Environment, 780, 146569.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.146569 ^ a b Chae, Y., & An, Y.-J. (2018). Current research trends on plastic pollution and ecological impacts on the soil ecosystem: A Review. Environmental Pollution, 240, 387–395.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2018.05.008 ^ a b Wei, F., Xu, C., Chen, C., Wang, Y., Lan, Y., Long, L., Xu, M., Wu, J., Shen, F., Zhang, Y., Xiao, Y., & Yang, G. (2022). Distribution of microplastics in the sludge of wastewater treatment plants in Chengdu, China. Chemosphere, 287, 132357.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2021.132357 ^ Yang, J., Li, L., Li, R., Xu, L., Shen, Y., Li, S., Tu, C., Wu, L., Christie, P., & Luo, Y. (2021). Microplastics in an agricultural soil following repeated application of three types of sewage sludge: A field study. Environmental Pollution, 289, 117943.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2021.117943 ^ "Marine Plastic Pollution" .

IUCN . 17 November 2021 . Retrieved 14 December 2021 .

^ "Plastic in Our Oceans Is Killing Marine Mammals" .

WWF . 1 July 2021. Archived from the original on 17 December 2021 . Retrieved 14 December 2021 .

^ Blettler, Martín C.M.; Abrial, Elie; Khan, Farhan R.; Sivri, Nuket; Espinola, Luis A. (2018).

"Freshwater plastic pollution: Recognizing research biases and identifying knowledge gaps" .

Water Research .

143 : 416– 424.

Bibcode : 2018WatRe.143..416B .

doi : 10.1016/j.watres.2018.06.015 .

hdl : 11336/88691 .

PMID 29986250 .

S2CID 51617474 .

^ a b c d Azevedo-Santos, Valter M.; Brito, Marcelo F. G.; Manoel, Pedro S.; Perroca, Júlia F.; Rodrigues-Filho, Jorge Luiz; Paschoal, Lucas R. P.; Gonçalves, Geslaine R. L.; Wolf, Milena R.; Blettler, Martín C. M.; Andrade, Marcelo C.; Nobile, André B. (2021).

"Plastic pollution: A focus on freshwater biodiversity" .

Ambio .

50 (7): 1313– 1324.

Bibcode : 2021Ambio..50.1313A .

doi : 10.1007/s13280-020-01496-5 .

ISSN 0044-7447 .

PMC 8116388 .

PMID 33543362 .

^ Winton, Debbie J.; Anderson, Lucy G.; Rocliffe, Stephen; Loiselle, Steven (2020).

"Macroplastic pollution in freshwater environments: Focusing public and policy action" .

Science of the Total Environment .

704 : 135242.

Bibcode : 2020ScTEn.70435242W .

doi : 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.135242 .

hdl : 11365/1128793 .

PMID 31812404 .

S2CID 208955699 .

^ Ritchie, Hannah; Roser, Max (1 May 2021).

"Where does the plastic in our oceans come from?" .

Our World in Data . Retrieved 30 April 2024 .

^ a b Schmidt, Christian; Krauth, Tobias; Wagner, Stephan (7 November 2017).

"Export of Plastic Debris by Rivers into the Sea" .

Environmental Science & Technology .

51 (21): 12246– 12253.

Bibcode : 2017EnST...5112246S .

doi : 10.1021/acs.est.7b02368 .

ISSN 0013-936X .

PMID 29019247 .

^ Lebreton, Laurent C. M.; van der Zwet, Joost; Damsteeg, Jan-Willem; Slat, Boyan; Andrady, Anthony; Reisser, Julia (2017).

"River plastic emissions to the world's oceans" .

Nature Communications .

8 (1): 15611.

Bibcode : 2017NatCo...815611L .

doi : 10.1038/ncomms15611 .

ISSN 2041-1723 .

PMC 5467230 .

PMID 28589961 .

^ a b Ritchie, Hannah (2022).

"Ocean plastics: How much do rich countries contribute by shipping their waste overseas?" . OurWorldinData.

^ Wu, Yanmei; Guo, Peiyong; Zhang, Xiaoyan; Zhang, Yuxuan; Xie, Shuting; Deng, Jun (2019).

"Effect of microplastics exposure on the photosynthesis system of freshwater algae" .

Journal of Hazardous Materials .

374 : 219– 227.

Bibcode : 2019JHzM..374..219W .

doi : 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2019.04.039 .

PMID 31005054 .

S2CID 125204296 .

^ Kalčíková, Gabriela; Žgajnar Gotvajn, Andreja; Kladnik, Aleš; Jemec, Anita (2017).

"Impact of polyethylene microbeads on the floating freshwater plant duckweed Lemna minor" .

Environmental Pollution .

230 : 1108– 1115.

Bibcode : 2017EPoll.230.1108K .

doi : 10.1016/j.envpol.2017.07.050 .

PMID 28783918 .

^ Spirkovski, Z.; Ilik-Boeva, D.; Ritterbusch, D.; Peveling, R.; Pietrock, M. (2019).

"Ghost net removal in ancient Lake Ohrid: A pilot study" .

Fisheries Research .

211 : 46– 50.

Bibcode : 2019FishR.211...46S .

doi : 10.1016/j.fishres.2018.10.023 .

ISSN 0165-7836 .

S2CID 92803175 .

^ Cui, Rongxue; Kim, Shin Woong; An, Youn-Joo (21 September 2017).

"Polystyrene nanoplastics inhibit reproduction and induce abnormal embryonic development in the freshwater crustacean Daphnia galeata" .

Scientific Reports .

7 (1): 12095.

Bibcode : 2017NatSR...712095C .

doi : 10.1038/s41598-017-12299-2 .

ISSN 2045-2322 .

PMC 5608696 .

PMID 28935955 .

^ Araújo, Amanda Pereira da Costa; Malafaia, Guilherme (2020).

"Can short exposure to polyethylene microplastics change tadpoles' behavior? A study conducted with neotropical tadpole species belonging to order anura (Physalaemus cuvieri)" .

Journal of Hazardous Materials .

391 : 122214.

Bibcode : 2020JHzM..39122214A .

doi : 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.122214 .

ISSN 0304-3894 .

PMID 32044637 .

S2CID 211079532 .

^ Niemi, Gerald J.; McDonald, Michael E. (15 December 2004).

"Application of Ecological Indicators" .

Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics .

35 (1): 89– 111.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.ecolsys.35.112202.130132 .

ISSN 1543-592X .

^ Jin, Yuanxiang; Xia, Jizhou; Pan, Zihong; Yang, Jiajing; Wang, Wenchao; Fu, Zhengwei (2018).

"Polystyrene microplastics induce microbiota dysbiosis and inflammation in the gut of adult zebrafish" .

Environmental Pollution .

235 : 322– 329.

Bibcode : 2018EPoll.235..322J .

doi : 10.1016/j.envpol.2017.12.088 .

ISSN 0269-7491 .

PMID 29304465 .

^ Rastelli, Marialetizia; Cani, Patrice D; Knauf, Claude (13 May 2019).

"The Gut Microbiome Influences Host Endocrine Functions" .

Endocrine Reviews .

40 (5): 1271– 1284.

doi : 10.1210/er.2018-00280 .

hdl : 2078.1/237266 .

ISSN 0163-769X .

PMID 31081896 .

S2CID 153306607 .

^ a b Kannan, Kurunthachalam; Vimalkumar, Krishnamoorthi (18 August 2021).

"A Review of Human Exposure to Microplastics and Insights Into Microplastics as Obesogens" .

Frontiers in Endocrinology .

12 : 724989.

doi : 10.3389/fendo.2021.724989 .

ISSN 1664-2392 .

PMC 8416353 .

PMID 34484127 .

^ a b D'Angelo, Stefania; Meccariello, Rosaria (1 March 2021).

"Microplastics: A Threat for Male Fertility" .

International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health .

18 (5): 2392.

doi : 10.3390/ijerph18052392 .

ISSN 1660-4601 .

PMC 7967748 .

PMID 33804513 .

^ "Report: Plastic Threatens Human Health at a Global Scale" .

Plastic Pollution Coalition . 20 February 2019 . Retrieved 14 December 2021 .

^ "Ocean Plastics Pollution" .

Center for Biological Diversity . Archived from the original on 25 August 2012 . Retrieved 17 May 2019 .

^ Carrington, Damian (24 March 2022).

"Microplastics found in human blood for first time" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 28 March 2022 .

^ a b c North, Emily J.; Halden, Rolf U. (1 January 2013).

"Plastics and environmental health: the road ahead" .

Reviews on Environmental Health .

28 (1): 1– 8.

Bibcode : 2013RvEH...28....1N .

doi : 10.1515/reveh-2012-0030 .

PMC 3791860 .

PMID 23337043 .

^ "Nanoplastics linked to heart attack, stroke and early death, study finds" .

CNN Health . 7 March 2024.

^ "Can plastic pollution damage our heart health? Study shows microplastics raises heart attack risk" .

Euronews . 8 March 2024.

^ "Microplastics found in human breast milk for the first time" .

The Guardian . 7 October 2022.

^ "New disease caused by plastics discovered in seabirds" .

The Guardian . 3 March 2023 . Retrieved 4 March 2023 .

^ "New disease caused solely by plastics discovered in seabirds" . Natural History Museum. 3 March 2023 . Retrieved 4 March 2023 .

^ "Is global plastic pollution nearing an irreversible tipping point?" .

phys.org . Retrieved 13 August 2021 .

^ MacLeod, Matthew; Arp, Hans Peter H.; Tekman, Mine B.; Jahnke, Annika (2 July 2021).

"The global threat from plastic pollution" .

Science .

373 (6550): 61– 65.

Bibcode : 2021Sci...373...61M .

doi : 10.1126/science.abg5433 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 34210878 .

S2CID 235699724 .

^ Malkin, Bonnie (8 July 2009).

"Australian town bans bottled water" .

The Daily Telegraph .

Archived from the original on 12 January 2022 . Retrieved 1 August 2013 .

^ "Pledging for a plastic-free dining culture | Daily FT" .

www.ft.lk . Retrieved 22 August 2020 .

^ Staff, Waste360 (16 January 2019).

"New Global Alliance to End Plastic Waste Has Launched" .

Waste360 . Retrieved 18 January 2019 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Inside Big Plastic's Faltering $1.5 Billion Global Cleanup Effort" .

Bloomberg.com . Retrieved 22 February 2023 .

^ "Alliance to End Plastic Waste: Barely Credible" (PDF) .

planet-tracker.org/ . August 2022.

^ " 'It's a pipe dream': Green groups blast plastic makers' recycling push" .

www.msn.com .

^ "End plastic pollution: Towards an international legally binding instrument*" (PDF) .

United Nations Environmental Programm . Retrieved 13 March 2022 .

^ " 'Really encouraging': Plastic bag bans work, say campaigners. Where is Europe lagging behind?" . Euronews. 5 April 2023 . Retrieved 7 February 2024 .

^ a b c d e f Thompson, R. C.; Moore, C. J.; vom Saal, F. S.; Swan, S. H. (14 June 2009).

"Plastics, the environment and human health: current consensus and future trends" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

364 (1526): 2153– 2166.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2009.0053 .

PMC 2873021 .

PMID 19528062 .

^ Selke, Susan; Auras, Rafael; Nguyen, Tuan Anh; Castro Aguirre, Edgar; Cheruvathur, Rijosh; Liu, Yan (2015). "Evaluation of Biodegradation-Promoting Additives for Plastics".

Environmental Science & Technology .

49 (6): 3769– 3777.

Bibcode : 2015EnST...49.3769S .

doi : 10.1021/es504258u .

PMID 25723056 .

^ a b c "Plastic alternatives may worsen marine pollution, MPs warn" .

The Guardian . 12 September 2019 . Retrieved 12 September 2019 .

^ "Bugs across globe are evolving to eat plastic, study finds" .

The Guardian . 14 December 2021.

^ "Our planet is drowning in plastic pollution. This World Environment Day, it's time for a change" .

www.unep.org . Retrieved 27 March 2021 .

^ a b c Verma, Rinku; Vinoda, K.S.; Papireddy, M.; Gowda, A.N.S. (1 January 2016).

"Toxic Pollutants from Plastic Waste – A Review" .

Procedia Environmental Sciences .

35 : 701– 708.

Bibcode : 2016PrEnS..35..701V .

doi : 10.1016/j.proenv.2016.07.069 .

ISSN 1878-0296 .

^ Groff, Tricia (2010). "Bisphenol A: invisible pollution".

Current Opinion in Pediatrics .

22 (4): 524– 529.

doi : 10.1097/MOP.0b013e32833b03f8 .

PMID 20489636 .

S2CID 19343256 .

^ "EN 13432" .

Green Plastics .

^ Bank, European Investment (2020).

The EIB Group Climate Bank Roadmap 2021–2025 . European Investment Bank.

ISBN 978-9286149085 .

^ Bank, European Investment (14 October 2020).

The Clean Oceans Initiative . European Investment Bank.

^ Bank, European Investment (9 October 2020).

The EIB and the Clean Oceans Initiative . European Investment Bank.

^ "Financing nature and biodiversity" .

European Investment Bank . Retrieved 27 January 2023 .

^ "The Clean Oceans Initiative doubles its commitment to provide €4 billion by 2025 to protect the Oceans and welcomes EBRD as new member | KfW" .

www.kfw.de . Retrieved 27 January 2023 .

^ Anyiego, Beldine (15 August 2022).

"AFRICA: The Clean Oceans initiative will fund twice as many projects as expected?" .

COPIP . Retrieved 27 January 2023 .

^ Shrestha, Priyanka (14 February 2022).

"Clean Oceans Initiative doubles commitment to €4bn by 2025" .

Energy Live News . Retrieved 27 January 2023 .

^ BNN Bloomberg, 17 Sept. 2020, "Voluntary Efforts Curb the World’s Plastic Problem Aren’t Working" ^ Benson, Emily; Mortensen, Sarah (7 October 2021).

"The Basel Convention: From Hazardous Waste to Plastic Pollution" .

^ Kellenberg, Derek (1 October 2015).

"The Economics of the International Trade of Waste" .

Annual Review of Resource Economics .

7 (1): 109– 125.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-resource-100913-012639 .

ISSN 1941-1340 .

S2CID 155009941 .

^ Farrelly, Trisia ; Green, Laura (11 May 2020).

"The Global Plastic Pollution Crisis: how should New Zealand respond?" .

Policy Quarterly .

16 (2).

doi : 10.26686/pq.v16i2.6484 .

ISSN 2324-1101 .

^ "The Honolulu Strategy" .

UNEP - UN Environment Programme . 31 August 2017.

^ "Basel Convention Plastic Waste Amendments" .

Secretariat of the Basel Convention .

^ "New International Requirements for the Export and Import of Plastic Recyclables and Waste" .

EPA . 10 July 2023.

^ Tabuchi, Hiroko ; Corkery, Michael (12 March 2021).

"Countries Tried to Curb Trade in Plastic Waste. The U.S. Is Shipping More" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 17 March 2021 .

^ Farrelly, Trisia (18 March 2019).

"We need a legally binding treaty to make plastic pollution history" .

The Conversation . Retrieved 14 April 2021 .

^ "A legally binding agreement on plastic pollution – FAQs – EIA" .

eia-international.org . Archived from the original on 3 May 2021 . Retrieved 14 April 2021 .

^ "NGOs and Businesses Call for UN Treaty on Plastic Pollution" .

World Wildlife Fund . Retrieved 14 April 2021 .

^ "Global treaty to tackle plastic pollution gains steam without US and UK" .

The Guardian . 16 November 2020 . Retrieved 14 April 2021 .

^ "Outcomes of the Online Session: UNEA-5" .

Environment Assembly . Retrieved 14 April 2021 .

^ Geddie, John; Brock, Joe (2 March 2022).

" 'Biggest green deal since Paris': UN agrees plastic treaty roadmap" .

Reuters .

^ "UN body weighs a global treaty to fight plastic pollution" .

ABC News . Retrieved 3 July 2022 .

^ Brooks, Amy L.; Wang, Shunli; Jambeck, Jenna R. (June 2018).

"The Chinese import ban and its impact on global plastic waste trade" .

Science Advances .

4 (6): eaat0131.

Bibcode : 2018SciA....4..131B .

doi : 10.1126/sciadv.aat0131 .

PMC 6010324 .

PMID 29938223 .

^ "Turkey to ban plastic waste imports" .

The Guardian . 19 May 2021 . Retrieved 26 January 2022 .

^ Lee, Yen Nee (25 January 2019).

"Malaysia, following in China's footsteps, bans imports of plastic waste" .

CNBC . Retrieved 26 January 2022 .

^ "Cambodia probes Chinese firm over illegal waste imports" .

Reuters . 19 July 2019 . Retrieved 26 January 2022 .

^ "Thailand to ban imports of high-tech trash, plastic waste" .

Reuters . 16 August 2018 . Retrieved 26 January 2022 .

^ Green, Adam (1 July 2020).

"Recyclers turn to AI robots after waste import bans" .

Financial Times . Retrieved 26 January 2022 .

^ " 'Waste colonialism': world grapples with west's unwanted plastic" .

The Guardian . 31 December 2021 . Retrieved 26 January 2022 .

^ "Rich countries are illegally exporting plastic trash to poor countries, data suggests" .

Grist . 15 April 2022 . Retrieved 3 July 2022 .

^ Qureshi, Muhammad Saad; Oasmaa, Anja; Pihkola, Hanna; Deviatkin, Ivan; Tenhunen, Anna; Mannila, Juha; Minkkinen, Hannu; Pohjakallio, Maija; Laine-Ylijoki, Jutta (1 November 2020). "Pyrolysis of plastic waste: Opportunities and challenges".

Journal of Analytical and Applied Pyrolysis .

152 : 104804.

Bibcode : 2020JAAP..15204804Q .

doi : 10.1016/j.jaap.2020.104804 .

ISSN 0165-2370 .

S2CID 200068035 .

^ Zorpas, Antonis A. (1 April 2016). "Sustainable waste management through end-of-waste criteria development".

Environmental Science and Pollution Research .

23 (8): 7376– 7389.

Bibcode : 2016ESPR...23.7376Z .

doi : 10.1007/s11356-015-5990-5 .

ISSN 1614-7499 .

PMID 26690583 .

S2CID 36643191 .

^ Ulrich, Viola (6 November 2019).

"Plastikmüll und Recycling: Acht Mythen und Irrtümer" .

DIE WELT (in German) . Retrieved 26 January 2022 .

^ Enck, Judith; Dell, Jan (30 May 2022).

"Plastic Recycling Doesn't Work and Will Never Work" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 3 July 2022 .

^ "Breakthrough in separating plastic waste: Machines can now distinguish 12 different types of plastic" .

Aarhus University . Retrieved 19 January 2022 .

^ Henriksen, Martin L.; Karlsen, Celine B.; Klarskov, Pernille; Hinge, Mogens (1 January 2022).

"Plastic classification via in-line hyperspectral camera analysis and unsupervised machine learning" .

Vibrational Spectroscopy .

118 : 103329.

Bibcode : 2022VibSp.11803329H .

doi : 10.1016/j.vibspec.2021.103329 .

ISSN 0924-2031 .

S2CID 244913832 .

^ a b "AF&PA Releases Community Recycling Survey Results" . Archived from the original on 2 June 2012 . Retrieved 3 February 2013 .

^ a b "Life cycle of a plastic product" .

Americanchemistry.com . Archived from the original on 17 March 2010 . Retrieved 3 September 2012 .

^ "Facts and Figures about Materials, Waste and Recycling" . United States Environmental Protection Agency. 2017 . Retrieved 12 January 2020 .

^ "Waste reduction: 'Refill just one bottle and cut plastic use' " .

BBC News . 15 January 2022 . Retrieved 21 February 2022 .

^ Hildahl, Grace.

"Opinion | Stop buying the bottle and embrace the environmentally friendly benefits of refill stations" .

The Daily Iowan . Retrieved 21 February 2022 .

^ "This UK supermarket is going refillable to help the planet – and save shoppers money" .

World Economic Forum . Retrieved 21 February 2022 .

^ Lorraine Chow J, Lorraine (25 January 2019).

"World's Biggest Brands Join Ambitious New Packaging Model" . Ecowatch . Retrieved 27 January 2019 .

^ HIRSH, SOPHIE (21 May 2019).

" 'Loop' Launches in the U.S., Bringing Customers the Products They Love in a Milkman Model" .

Greenmatters . Retrieved 27 May 2019 .

^ "8 simple ways to reduce your plastic use" .

NBC News . 18 March 2019 . Retrieved 21 February 2022 .

^ "Can you really have a plastic-free kitchen?" .

BBC Food . Retrieved 21 February 2022 .

^ Li, Dunzhu; Shi, Yunhong; Yang, Luming; Xiao, Liwen; Kehoe, Daniel K.; Gun'ko, Yurii K.; Boland, John J.; Wang, Jing Jing (November 2020).

"Microplastic release from the degradation of polypropylene feeding bottles during infant formula preparation" .

Nature Food .

1 (11): 746– 754.

doi : 10.1038/s43016-020-00171-y .

hdl : 2262/94127 .

ISSN 2662-1355 .

PMID 37128027 .

S2CID 228978799 . Retrieved 9 November 2020 .

News reports with lay summaries: Trinity College Dublin (19 October 2020).

"High levels of microplastics released from infant feeding bottles during formula prep" .

phys.org . Retrieved 9 November 2020 .

Carrington, Damian (19 October 2020).

"Bottle-fed babies swallow millions of microplastics a day, study finds" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 9 November 2020 .

^ Zuccarello, P.; Ferrante, M.; Cristaldi, A.; Copat, C.; Grasso, A.; Sangregorio, D.; Fiore, M.; Oliveri Conti, G. (15 June 2019). "Exposure to microplastics (<10 μm) associated to plastic bottles mineral water consumption: The first quantitative study".

Water Research .

157 : 365– 371.

Bibcode : 2019WatRe.157..365Z .

doi : 10.1016/j.watres.2019.03.091 .

ISSN 0043-1354 .

PMID 30974285 .

S2CID 109940463 .

^ Zangmeister, Christopher D.; Radney, James G.; Benkstein, Kurt D.; Kalanyan, Berc (3 May 2022). "Common Single-Use Consumer Plastic Products Release Trillions of Sub-100 nm Nanoparticles per Liter into Water during Normal Use".

Environmental Science & Technology .

56 (9): 5448– 5455.

Bibcode : 2022EnST...56.5448Z .

doi : 10.1021/acs.est.1c06768 .

ISSN 0013-936X .

PMID 35441513 .

S2CID 248263169 .

^ Wichai-utcha, N.; Chavalparit, O. (1 January 2019). "3Rs Policy and plastic waste management in Thailand".

Journal of Material Cycles and Waste Management .

21 (1): 10– 22.

Bibcode : 2019JMCWM..21...10W .

doi : 10.1007/s10163-018-0781-y .

ISSN 1611-8227 .

S2CID 104827713 .

^ Mohammed, Musa; Shafiq, Nasir; Elmansoury, Ali; Al-Mekhlafi, Al-Baraa Abdulrahman; Rached, Ehab Farouk; Zawawi, Noor Amila; Haruna, Abdulrahman; Rafindadi, Aminu Darda’u; Ibrahim, Muhammad Bello (January 2021).

"Modeling of 3R (Reduce, Reuse and Recycle) for Sustainable Construction Waste Reduction: A Partial Least Squares Structural Equation Modeling (PLS-SEM)" .

Sustainability .

13 (19): 10660.

Bibcode : 2021Sust...1310660M .

doi : 10.3390/su131910660 .

ISSN 2071-1050 .

^ Zamroni, M.; Prahara, Rahma Sandhi; Kartiko, Ari; Purnawati, Dia; Kusuma, Dedi Wijaya (1 February 2020).

"The Waste Management Program Of 3R (Reduce, Reuse, Recycle) By Economic Incentive And Facility Support" .

Journal of Physics: Conference Series .

1471 (1): 012048.

Bibcode : 2020JPhCS1471a2048Z .

doi : 10.1088/1742-6596/1471/1/012048 .

S2CID 216235783 .

^ Eberle, Ute (15 August 2020).

"Could a Solution to Marine Plastic Waste Threaten One of the Ocean's Most Mysterious Ecosystems?" . Deutsche Welle. Ecowatch . Retrieved 24 August 2020 .

^ Narula, Maheshpreet Kaur (8 June 2021).

"A 'Bubble Barrier' is trapping plastic waste before it can get into the sea" . CNN . Retrieved 26 November 2021 .

^ "Waterschap en gemeente halen plastic uit de grachten" .

www.waternet.nl . Waterschap Amstel Gooi en Vecht . Retrieved 26 November 2021 .

^ Amsterdam.

"Bubble Barrier Westerdok" .

www.amstrdam.nl . Gemeente Amsterdam (City of Amsterdam) . Retrieved 26 November 2021 .

^ "Project: Limes Bubble Barrier Katwijk" .

endplasticsoup.nl . Rotary Clubs of Amsterdam. 22 July 2021 . Retrieved 26 November 2021 .

^ Wolfsbergen, Mirjam (5 September 2021).

"Limes Bubble Barrier moet plastic bij Katwijk tegenhouden voordat het de zee in stroomt" .

omroepwest.nl . Omroep West (Dutch regional news) . Retrieved 26 November 2021 .

^ a b Ritchie, Hannah; Roser, Max (1 September 2018).

"Plastic Pollution" .

Our World in Data . Retrieved 3 July 2022 .

^ "Plastic waste emitted to the ocean" .

Our World in Data . Retrieved 3 July 2022 .

^ Ritchie, Hannah (May 2021).

"Where does the plastic in our oceans come from?" .

Our World in Data . Retrieved 3 July 2022 .

^ a b Meijer, Lourens J. J.; van Emmerik, Tim; van der Ent, Ruud; Schmidt, Christian; Lebreton, Laurent (30 April 2021).

"More than 1000 rivers account for 80% of global riverine plastic emissions into the ocean" .

Science Advances .

7 (18): eaaz5803.

Bibcode : 2021SciA....7.5803M .

doi : 10.1126/sciadv.aaz5803 .

ISSN 2375-2548 .

PMC 8087412 .

PMID 33931460 .

^ "China dumps 200 million cubic metres of waste in sea after drive to stop throwing it in rivers" .

The Independent . 29 October 2019 . Retrieved 3 July 2022 .

^ Lebreton, Laurent C. M.; van der Zwet, Joost; Damsteeg, Jan-Willem; Slat, Boyan; Andrady, Anthony; Reisser, Julia (7 June 2017).

"River plastic emissions to the world's oceans" .

Nature Communications .

8 (1): 15611.

Bibcode : 2017NatCo...815611L .

doi : 10.1038/ncomms15611 .

ISSN 2041-1723 .

PMC 5467230 .

PMID 28589961 .

^ Willis, Kathryn; Hardesty, Britta Denise; Vince, Joanna; Wilcox, Chris (17 June 2022).

"Local waste management successfully reduces coastal plastic pollution" .

One Earth .

5 (6): 666– 676.

Bibcode : 2022OEart...5..666W .

doi : 10.1016/j.oneear.2022.05.008 .

ISSN 2590-3322 .

S2CID 249562648 .

^ Frost, Rosie (9 May 2022).

"Plastic waste can now be found and monitored from space" .

euronews . Retrieved 24 June 2022 .

^ "Global Plastic Watch" .

www.globalplasticwatch.org . Retrieved 24 June 2022 .

^ "Rama: Albania the first country in Europe to ban plastic bags lawfully | Radio Tirana International" .

rti.rtsh.al . 13 June 2018. Archived from the original on 29 July 2018 . Retrieved 29 July 2018 .

^ a b "Albania bans non-biodegradable plastic bags" .

Tirana Times . 4 July 2018 . Retrieved 21 July 2018 .

^ "Balkans bans the bag" .

makeresourcescount.eu . 3 July 2017 . Retrieved 23 July 2018 .

^ Wahlquist, Calla (15 April 2021).

" 'Single-use plastics' to be phased out in Australia from 2025 include plastic utensils and straws" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 21 January 2022 .

^ a b "Which Australian states are banning single-use plastics?" .

Australian Marine Conservation Society . 6 December 2021 . Retrieved 21 January 2022 .

^ "National Plastics Plan 2021" .

Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment . Australian Government. 3 October 2021 . Retrieved 21 January 2022 .

PDF CC BY 4.0.

^ Anderson, Lilia; Gbor, Nina (12 January 2024).

"Plastic waste in Australia" .

The Australia Institute . Retrieved 12 June 2025 .

^ Newburger, Emma (21 June 2022).

"Canada is banning single-use plastics, including grocery bags and straws" . CNBC . Retrieved 4 July 2022 .

^ "The Macroproblem of Microplastics" . Ohio River Valley Institute. 3 August 2020.

China, the world's biggest consumer of single-use plastics.

^ "Single-use plastic: China to ban bags and other items" . BBC. 20 January 2020 . Retrieved 23 February 2020 .

^ "China to ban single-use plastic bags and straws" . Deutsche Welle. 20 January 2020 . Retrieved 23 February 2020 .

^ Barbière, Cécile (29 April 2015).

"EU to halve plastic bag use by 2019" . Euroactive . Retrieved 23 February 2020 .

^ Matthews, Lyndsey (16 April 2019).

"Single-Use Plastics Will Be Banned in Europe by 2021" . Afar . Retrieved 23 February 2020 .

^ EUR-Lex, Directive (EU) 2019/904 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 June 2019 on the reduction of the impact of certain plastic products on the environment , accessed 8 August 2021 ^ "Single-use plastics" .

ec.europa.eu/ . European Commission . Retrieved 28 November 2021 .

^ "The importance of the SUP Directive" .

www.interregeurope.eu . Interreg Europe (GECOTTI-PE). 25 June 2020 . Retrieved 12 December 2023 .

^ EUR-Lex , Directive (EU) 2019/904 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 June 2019 on the reduction of the impact of certain plastic products on the environment (Text with EEA relevance) , accessed 12 December 2023 ^ Rall, Katharina (December 2022).

"EU Takes Step Towards Banning Plastic Waste Exports" .

Human rights watch . Retrieved 6 December 2022 .

^ European Commission, Commission welcomes political agreement on stronger control of exports of waste , IP/23/5818, published 17 November 2023, accessed 12 December 2023 ^ Tucker, Flora (3 January 2023).

"New Year, New Ban: France Tackles Disposable Packaging" .

Impakter . Retrieved 20 January 2023 .

^ Mathew, Liz (5 September 2019).

"From 2 October, Govt to crack down on single-use plastic" . The Indian Express . Retrieved 5 September 2019 .

^ "Avoiding use of bottled water" (PDF) . Retrieved 2 September 2016 .

^ "Ban on Styrofoam Products and Packaged Water Bottles" . Retrieved 2 September 2016 .

^ "Bihar bans plastic packaged water bottles" . Retrieved 2 September 2016 .

^ "Green rules of the National Games" .

The Hindu .

^ "National Games: Green Panel Recommends Ban on Plastic" .

The New Indian Express . Archived from the original on 14 July 2015.

^ "Kochi a 'Museum City' Too" .

The New Indian Express . 8 February 2016. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015 . Retrieved 27 April 2016 .

^ "National Games 2015: Simple Steps To Keep Games Green" .

yentha.com . Archived from the original on 1 December 2017 . Retrieved 26 September 2016 .

^ "Setting a New Precedent" .

The New Indian Express . Archived from the original on 25 November 2015.

^ "Plastic ban in Bangalore" (PDF) .

^ "Plastic ban in Maharashtra: What is allowed, what is banned" .

TheIndianExpress . 27 June 2018 . Retrieved 29 December 2018 .

^ "Plastic Waste Management in Maharashtra" . Maharashtra Pollution Control Board. 23 June 2018. Archived from the original on 21 August 2018 . Retrieved 29 December 2018 .

^ "India begins to ban single-use plastics including cups and straws" . Associated Press. NPR. 1 July 2022 . Retrieved 4 July 2022 .

^ Paddock, Richard C. (3 July 2020).

"After Fighting Plastic in 'Paradise Lost,' Sisters Take On Climate Change" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 4 July 2020 .

^ "How Teenage Sisters Pushed Bali To Say 'Bye-Bye' To Plastic Bags" .

NPR.org . Retrieved 3 February 2019 .

^ "Global" .

Bye Bye Plastic Bags . 12 January 2018 . Retrieved 21 January 2022 .

^ Ben Zikri, Almog; Rinat, Zafrir (3 June 2019).

"In First for Israel, Two Seaside Cities Ban Plastic Disposables on Beaches" . Haaretz . Retrieved 4 June 2019 .

^ Peleg, Bar (31 March 2020).

"Citing Environmental Concerns, Tel Aviv Bans Disposables on Beaches" . Haaretz . Retrieved 26 April 2020 .

^ a b c "16 Times Countries and Cities Have Banned Single-Use Plastics" .

Global Citizen . 25 April 2018 . Retrieved 7 April 2020 .

^ Morton, Jamie (27 June 2021).

"New plastic bans target hard-to-recycle cutlery, meat trays, takeaway containers" . New Zealand Herald . Retrieved 28 June 2021 .

^ Opara, George (21 May 2019).

"Reps pass bill banning plastic bags, prescribe fines against offenders" . Daily Post . Retrieved 27 May 2019 .

^ Burgen, Stephen.

"Tobacco companies to be billed for cleaning up cigarette butts in Spain" . The Guardian . Retrieved 20 January 2023 .

^ Martinko, Katherine (17 January 2018).

"UK supermarket promises to go plastic-free by 2023" .

TreeHugger . Retrieved 26 January 2019 .

^ Turn, Anna (2 March 2020).

"Is It Really Possible To Go 'Plastic Free'? This Town Is Showing The World How" . Huffington post . Retrieved 16 March 2020 .

^ Rosane, Olivia (18 March 2020).

"McDonald's UK Happy Meals Will Be Plastic Toy Free" . Ecowatch . Retrieved 20 March 2020 .

^ Clinton, Jane (14 January 2023).

"October start set for ban in England of single-use plastic tableware" . The Guardian . Retrieved 17 January 2023 .

^ Seddon, Sean (1 October 2023).

"Ban on single-use plastic cutlery comes into force in England" . BBC . Retrieved 10 October 2023 .

^ Bennett, Paige (23 January 2024).

"Plastic Bag Bans in U.S. Have Reduced Plastic Bag Use by Billions, Report Says" . Ecowatch . Retrieved 24 January 2024 .

^ "Water bottle ban a success; bottled beverage sales have plummeted | The Source | Washington University in St. Louis" .

The Source . 20 April 2016 . Retrieved 24 March 2020 .

^ a b c d e f "State Plastic Bag Legislation" .

^ Nace, Trevor (23 April 2019).

"New York Officially Bans Plastic Bags" . Forbes . Retrieved 12 May 2019 .

^ Gold, Michael (22 April 2019).

"Paper or Plastic? Time to Bring Your Own Bag" .

The New York Times . The New York Times . Retrieved 12 May 2019 .

^ Rosane, Olivia (1 May 2019).

"Maine First U.S. State to Ban Styrofoam Containers" . Ecowatch . Retrieved 25 November 2019 .

^ Rosane, Olivia (18 December 2019).

"Giant Eagle Becomes First U.S. Retailer of Its Size to Set Single-Use Plastic Phaseout" . Ecowatch . Retrieved 20 December 2019 .

^ Changing Markets Foundation, 17 Sept. 2020, "Ground-Breaking Report Reveals Hypocrisy of World’s Biggest Plastic Polluters: ‘Talking Trash’ Exposes How Big Plastic Has Obstructed and Undermined Proven Legislative Solutions to The Crisis for Decades" ^ Nerkar, Santul (15 November 2023).

"New York Attorney General Sues Pepsi Over Plastic Packaging" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 19 November 2023 .

^ National Public Radio, 12 September 2020 "How Big Oil Misled The Public Into Believing Plastic Would Be Recycled" ^ PBS, Frontline, 31 March 2020, "Plastics Industry Insiders Reveal the Truth About Recycling" ^ "All You Need To Know About India's 'Beat Plastic Pollution' Movement" . 13 November 2018. Archived from the original on 18 August 2021 . Retrieved 11 April 2019 .

^ "The garbage patch territory turns into a new state" . United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). 22 May 2019.

^ "Rifiuti Diventano Stato, Unesco Riconosce 'Garbage Patch' | Siti - Patrimonio Italiano Unesco" . Archived from the original on 14 July 2014 . Retrieved 3 November 2014 .

^ a b "Plastics have shaped nearly every aspect of society. Now what?" .

The Christian Science Monitor . Retrieved 14 July 2023 .

Sources Derraik, José G.B (2002).

"The pollution of the marine environment by plastic debris: A review" .

Marine Pollution Bulletin .

44 (9): 842– 52.

Bibcode : 2002MarPB..44..842D .

doi : 10.1016/S0025-326X(02)00220-5 .

PMID 12405208 .

Hopewell, Jefferson; Dvorak, Robert; Kosior, Edward (2009).

"Plastics recycling: Challenges and opportunities" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

364 (1526): 2115– 26.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2008.0311 .

PMC 2873020 .

PMID 19528059 .

Knight, Geof (2012).

Plastic Pollution . Capstone.

ISBN 978-1432960391 Clive Cookson, Leslie Hook (2019), "Millions of pieces of plastic waste found on remote island chain" , Financial Times , retrieved 31 December 2019 This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under Cc BY-SA 3.0 IGO ( license statement/permission ). Text taken from Drowning in Plastics – Marine Litter and Plastic Waste Vital Graphics​ , United Nations Environment Programme.

Further reading Lecture of Erik van Sebille ( Utrecht University ) on plastic pollution Colette, Wabnitz & Wallace J. Nichols.

Editorial: Plastic Pollution: An Ocean Emergency . 3 March 2010. 28 January 2013.

Biodegradable Plastics and Marine Litter. Misconceptions, concerns and impacts on marine environments , 2015, United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), Nairobi.

A million bottles a minute: world's plastic binge 'as dangerous as climate change' .

The Guardian . 28 June 2017.

Guess What's Showing Up In Our Shellfish? One Word: Plastics .

NPR . 19 September 2017 Microplastic pollution revealed ‘absolutely everywhere’ by new research .

The Guardian . 6 March 2019 After bronze and iron, welcome to the plastic age, say scientists .

The Guardian . 4 September 2019.

Planet Plastic: How Big Oil and Big Soda kept a global environmental calamity a secret for decades .

Rolling Stone . 3 March 2020.

Plastics an 'unfolding disaster' for US marine life . BBC, 19 November 2020.

Elizabeth Kolbert , "A Trillion Little Pieces: How plastics are poisoning us", The New Yorker , 3 July 2023, pp. 24–27. "If much of contemporary life is wrapped up in plastic, and the result of this is that we are poisoning our kids, ourselves, and our ecosystems , then contemporary life may need to be rethought." (p. 27.) External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Plastic pollution .

"22 Facts About Plastic Pollution (And 10 Things We Can Do About It)" . ecowatch.com. 7 April 2014 . Retrieved 4 January 2016 .

v t e Plastics Chemical types Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) Cross-linked polyethylene (PEX, XLPE) Ethylene vinyl acetate (EVA) Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) Poly(ethyl methacrylate) (PEMA) Polyacrylic acid (PAA) Polyamide (PA) Polybutylene (PB) Polybutylene terephthalate (PBT) Polycarbonate (PC) Polyetheretherketone (PEEK) Polyester (PEs) Polyethylene (PE) Polyethylene terephthalate (PET, PETE) Polyimide (PI) Polylactic acid (PLA) Polyoxymethylene (POM) Polyphenyl ether (PPE) Poly(p-phenylene oxide) (PPO) Polypropylene (PP) Polystyrene (PS) Polysulfone (PES) Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) Polyurethane (PU) Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) Polyvinylidene chloride (PVDC) Styrene maleic anhydride (SMA) Styrene-acrylonitrile (SAN) Tritan copolyester Mechanical types Thermoplastic Thermosetting polymer Fibre-reinforced plastic Corrugated plastic Polymeric foam High-performance plastics Additives Polymer additive Colorants Plasticizer Polymer stabilizers Biodegradable additives Filler (materials) Plastics processing Injection moulding Plastic extrusion Blow molding Film blowing Thermoforming Compression molding Calendering Transfer molding Laminating Fiberglass molding Pultrusion Plastic welding Filament winding Solvent bonding Vacuum forming Rotational molding Products Plastics industry segments Commodity plastics Construction Engineering plastics Geosynthetics High-performance plastics Nurdle Category:Plastics applications Plasticulture (Agriculture) Specific goods Blister pack Chairs Packaging film Bottles Bags Cutlery Shopping bags Foam food containers Environment and health v t e Health issues of plastics and polyhalogenated compounds (PHCs) Plasticizers : Phthalates DIBP DBP BBP (BBzP) DIHP DEHP (DOP) DIDP DINP Miscellaneous plasticizers Organophosphates Adipates ( DEHA DOA ) Monomers Bisphenol A (BPA, in Polycarbonates ) Vinyl chloride (in PVC ) Miscellaneous additives incl. PHCs PBDEs PCBs Organotins PFCs Perfluorooctanoic acid Health issues Teratogen Carcinogen Endocrine disruptor Diabetes Obesity Polymer fume fever Pollution Plastic pollution Rubber pollution Great Pacific Garbage Patch Persistent organic pollutant Dioxins List of environmental health hazards Regulations California Proposition 65 European REACH regulation Japan Toxic Substances Law Toxic Substances Control Act Waste Plastic pollution Garbage patch Great Pacific Garbage Patch Persistent organic pollutant Dioxins List of environmental health hazards Plastic recycling Biodegradable plastic Identification codes Portals : Environment Ecology NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐5cf8f5fb49‐jnzkn
Cached time: 20250812021954
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.988 seconds
Real time usage: 3.249 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 17252/1000000
Revision size: 190585/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 658935/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8852/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 36/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 1035964/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.940/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 12780828/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2803.966      1 -total
 65.87% 1846.933      2 Template:Reflist
 19.81%  555.413     68 Template:Cite_journal
 18.62%  521.996    109 Template:Cite_web
 14.73%  413.035     69 Template:Cite_news
  4.69%  131.614      2 Template:Efn
  4.60%  128.994      2 Template:Sfn
  3.67%  102.957      1 Template:Pollution_sidebar
  3.58%  100.293      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  3.04%   85.310      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:37201518:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812021954 and revision id 1305223665. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Plastic_pollution&oldid=1305223665 " Categories : Anthropocene Pollution Plastics and the environment Environmental impact of products Hidden categories: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use dmy dates from November 2019 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2010 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from April 2025 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from April 2025 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2025 Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from April 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2022 All articles needing additional references Articles needing additional references from January 2022 Articles needing additional references from February 2022 Articles containing potentially dated statements from January 2022 Free-content attribution Free content from United Nations Environment Programme Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 19:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Plastic pollution 51 languages Add topic

