Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Advantages 2 Disadvantages 3 Current practice in firefighting 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Fireman's carry 5 languages Deutsch Español Esperanto 日本語 Norsk bokmål Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Fireman's carry" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Technique for carrying another person For the grappling move of this name, see Takedown (grappling) A US Marine carrying an injured Afghan after an IED blast, 2011.

An Iranian soldier performing a fireman's carry to rescue a wounded comrade while using his pistol in a military exercise.

A firefighter carrying a worker out of a munitions factory following a fire during World War I A fireman's carry or fireman's lift (also firefighter's- ) is a technique allowing one person to carry another person without assistance, by placing the carried person across the shoulders of the carrier.

[ 1 ] The technique was commonly used by firefighters to carry injured or unconscious people away from danger, but has been replaced in firefighting due to the drawback that smoke and heat are greater higher up, and may be fatal to the person being carried.

The "fireman's carry" technique is still taught for use outside firefighting.

Soldiers use this technique to carry the wounded.

[ 1 ] Lifeguards are sometimes trained to use the fireman's carry.

Advantages [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( July 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Steps A to E Steps F to J The "Fireman's Carry" technique illustrated in a US Army training manual Carrying someone in this manner has several advantages over other methods of moving another person. The subject's torso is fairly level, which helps prevent further injuries. When the subject's weight is evenly distributed over both shoulders, it is easier to carry them for a longer distance – 50 feet (15 metres) or more.

The fireman's carry is preferred over a single-shoulder carry if someone is seriously hurt or if the person must be carried for a considerable amount of time. A person being carried over one shoulder would experience more jarring as their body is dangling more freely over the carrier's shoulder. Also, blood would be unevenly distributed if someone was dangling upside-down over the carrier's shoulder for an extended period of time. This could also be a very uncomfortable position for the carried person if they are still conscious.

The fireman's carry allows a soldier to carry an injured comrade securely using only one hand, leaving their other hand free to carry and fire their weapon if required.

Disadvantages [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( July 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In firefighting, smoke and heat are greater higher up, and may be fatal to the person being carried. The person carried is largely outside the rescuer's field of vision, and almost all vital areas are out of the rescuer's view. Thus, dangerous changes in their condition can be missed, and an inexperienced rescuer can inadvertently create or further compound injuries via collision with obstacles. Furthermore, the rescuer's obstructed peripheral vision puts both persons at risk if the incident that caused the injury is still ongoing (fire, combat, public disturbances, etc.). It is also harder to get a patient onto a rescuer's shoulders than it is to drag a patient by their shoulders.

The fireman's carry presents severe hazards if the person being carried has or may have a spinal injury, and should be avoided.

Current practice in firefighting [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( July 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The fireman's carry, utilizing back and shoulder strength, is engineered as an emergency measure to optimize power, endurance, and mobility. As such, it may not be applicable where there is ongoing hazard, the carried person is larger than the rescuer, the rescuer is otherwise unable to move the victim at all, or it is imperative to cross significant distances, quickly. It is by no means appropriate when a stretcher or a viable alternative is available, or when the rescuer has the size and strength to easily carry the subject in a gentler, more compassionate and considerate hold.

Currently, the technique preferred in firefighting involves dragging a person by the shoulders or upper clothing in a supine position across the floor or ground. This uses the rescuer's upper legs (the strongest muscles in the body) to push against the floor for leverage in order to pull the person towards an exit. This technique is also easier for rescuers who may be younger or of smaller size or stature. In addition, dragging by the shoulders helps avoid stressing a potentially injured spine.

[ citation needed ] Dragging by the feet can cause head injuries due to the victim's head bouncing on the floor.

References [ edit ] ^ a b United States Army. The Warrior Ethos and Soldier Combat Skills. Chapter 3: Combat Casualty Care and Preventive Medicine.

Accessed June 12, 2010 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Fireman's carry .

Web Version of U.S. Army FM 3-21.75 The Warrior Ethos and Soldier Combat Skills v t e Firefighting General By place Antarctica Belgium Finland France Germany Japan South Korea United Kingdom United States History Personnel and organization Battalion chief Chief fire officer Fire captain Fire chief Station officer Retained firefighter Fire marshal Fire police Firefighter assist and search team Handcrew Special operations firefighter Volunteer fire department Women in firefighting Fire department ranks by country Facilities Drill tower Fire department list Fire lookout tower Fire station Hose tower Apparatus Airport crash tender Fire command vehicle Fire engine Fire motorcycle Fireboat Firefighting apparatus Hazardous materials apparatus Light and air unit Quint Rescue vehicle Water tender Equipment Bunker gear Escape chair Fire blanket Fire brigade keys Fire bucket Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire proximity suit Fire retardant Fire shelter Fireman's pole Fireman's switch Flame retardant Fog nozzle Halligan bar Hard suction hose Hazmat suit Heat detector Hose bridge Hydraulic rescue tool ("Jaws of life") Kelly tool Nomex New York roof hook PASS device The pig Portable water tank Rotary saw Secure information box Self-contained breathing apparatus Siren Smoke detector Thermal imaging camera Terminology Backdraft Barn fire Chimney fire Dead man zone Deluge gun Door breaching Draft False alarm Fire classification Fire control Fire safety Fire triangle Fireman's carry Firewall Flash fire Flashover Gaseous fire suppression Multiple-alarm fire Rollover Stop, drop and roll Structure fire Two-in, two-out Ventilation Miscellaneous Candidate Physical Ability Test Fire camp Fire engine red Fire photography Fire protection engineering International Firefighters' Day International organizations International Fire Marshals Association International Association of Fire Chiefs International Association of Fire Fighters List of films Muster Saint Florian World Firefighters Games World Police and Fire Games Wildfires General Wildfire emergency management Wildfire suppression Equipment and tactics Aerial firefighting Controlled burn Driptorch Fire flapper Fire hose Fire lookout tower Fire rake Fire retardant Fire retardant gel Fire trail Firebreak Firefighting apparatus Firefighting foam Helicopter bucket Hose pack McLeod Modular Airborne FireFighting System Pulaski Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel Wildland fire engine Wildland water tender Personnel Fire lookout Handcrew Helitack Hotshot crew Smokejumper Wildland fire module By location Ancient Rome Australia United States History California Washington Lists Glossary of wildfire terms List of wildfires See also Fire Fire protection Category Commons Glossary Index Outline NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐zxm6c
Cached time: 20250812014405
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.307 seconds
Real time usage: 0.420 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1190/1000000
Revision size: 5966/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 69894/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1537/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 20523/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.185/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4604153/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  344.834      1 -total
 24.56%   84.680      1 Template:Fire_fighting
 23.90%   82.429      2 Template:Navbox
 21.89%   75.472      1 Template:Citations_needed
 18.34%   63.254      4 Template:Ambox
 15.95%   54.997      1 Template:Short_description
 11.86%   40.897      1 Template:Commons
 11.52%   39.714      1 Template:Sister_project
 10.98%   37.859      1 Template:Side_box
  7.60%   26.197      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3144878:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812014405 and revision id 1304283770. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fireman%27s_carry&oldid=1304283770 " Categories : Firefighting Grappling Rescue Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from July 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using multiple image with manual scaled images All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2018 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 03:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fireman's carry 5 languages Add topic

