Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Formation 2 Appearance 3 Effects on wildfires 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Flammagenitus cloud 25 languages Català Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Latviešu Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Pyrocumulus ) Cloud that forms from large fires or explosions The 2004 Willow Fire burning near Payson, Arizona , producing a flammagenitus cloud.

Firestorm schematic: (1) fire, (2) updraft, (3) strong gusty winds, (A) pyrocumulonimbus cloud A flammagenitus cloud , [ 1 ] also known as a flammagenitus , pyrocumulus cloud, or fire cloud , is a dense cumuliform cloud associated with fire or volcanic eruptions.

[ 2 ] A flammagenitus is similar dynamically in some ways to a firestorm , and the two phenomena may occur in conjunction with each other. However, either may occur without the other.

[ dubious – discuss ] [ citation needed ] Formation [ edit ] A flammagenitus cloud from the 2009 Station Fire in southern California A flammagenitus cloud is produced by the intense heating of the air from the surface. The intense heat induces convection , which causes the air mass to rise to a point of stability, usually in the presence of moisture . Phenomena such as volcanic eruptions and forest fires can induce formation of this cloud, by mechanisms similar to those that form homogenitus clouds. The presence of a low-level jet stream can enhance its formation. Condensation of ambient moisture (moisture already present in the atmosphere), as well as moisture evaporated from burnt vegetation or volcanic outgassing (water vapour being a dominant component of volcanic eruptive gases), occurs readily on particles of ash.

[ citation needed ] The 2021 Tiger Fire near Spring Valley, Arizona, producing a pyrocumulus cloud.

Flammagenitus clouds, born from a wildfire in Czech Republic in July 2022 Flammageniti contain severe turbulence, manifesting as strong gusts at the surface, which can exacerbate a large conflagration. A large flammagenitus, particularly one associated with a volcanic eruption, may also produce lightning . This is a process not yet fully understood, but is probably in some way associated with charge separation induced by severe turbulence, and, perhaps, by the nature of the particles of ash in the cloud. Large flammageniti can contain temperatures well below freezing, and the electrostatic properties of any ice that forms may also play a role. A flammagenitus that produces lightning is actually a type of cumulonimbus , a thundercloud, and is called cumulonimbus flammagenitus . The World Meteorological Organization formerly classified flammagenitus and cumulonimbus flammagenitus respectively as cumulus (mediocris or congestus) and cumulonimbus. In 2017, the WMO International Cloud Atlas chose flammagenitus as the formal name of these clouds.

[ 3 ] Appearance [ edit ] Wildfire in Yellowstone National Park produces a flammagenitus cloud.

Flammagenitus cloud above the 2014 Oregon Gulch Fire in Oregon and California, 2014. Aircraft is an F-15C Eagle .

Flammagenitus is often grayish to brown in color because of the ash and smoke associated with the fire. It also tends to expand because the ash involved in the cloud's formation increases the amount of condensation nuclei .

Wildfire in Yellowstone National Park produces pyrocumulus cloud Effects on wildfires [ edit ] A flammagenitus cloud can help or hinder a fire. Sometimes, the moisture from the air condenses in the cloud and falls as rain, often extinguishing the fire. There have been numerous examples of a large firestorm being extinguished by the flammagenitus that it created.

[ 4 ] However, if the fire is large enough, the cloud may continue to grow, and become a type of cumulonimbus cloud known as a cumulonimbus flammagenitus , which may produce lightning and start another fire.

[ 5 ] Even if there is no lightning, a cloud of this type can cause a sudden increase in wind speed, which could dramatically worsen the wildfire that created the cloud.

[ citation needed ] References [ edit ] ^ "Flammagenitus" .

World Meteorological Association . Archived from the original on 28 March 2017 . Retrieved 27 March 2017 .

^ "Pyrocumulus entry in the AMS Glossary" .

Archived from the original on 2022-12-19 . Retrieved 2017-03-28 .

^ Sutherland, Scott (March 23, 2017).

"Cloud Atlas joins the digital age while adding a dozen new cloud types" .

The Weather Network . Pelmorex Media . Retrieved 13 August 2025 .

{{ cite news }} :  CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) ^ Csifo, Noemi.

"Fire Cloud Cumulus Cumulonimbus Weather" .

Sciences 360 . R R Donelley.

Archived from the original on 22 October 2013 . Retrieved 22 October 2013 .

^ "Pyrocumulus by The Airline Pilots" .

Archived from the original on 2011-09-28 . Retrieved 2009-01-02 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Flammagenitus clouds at Wikimedia Commons v t e Cloud genera and selected species, supplementary features, and other airborne hydrometeors - WMO Latin terminology except where indicated Mesospheric Extreme-level 80–85 km Noctilucent (NLC) Polar mesospheric clouds Noctilucent type I veils Noctilucent type II bands Noctilucent type III billows Noctilucent type IV whirls Stratospheric Very high-level 15–30 km Nacreous polar stratospheric clouds (PSC) Cirriform nacreous Lenticular nacreous Nitric acid and water polar stratospheric clouds (PSC) No differentiated sub-types; tends to resemble cirrostratus Tropospheric High-level 3–18 km Cirrus (Ci) Species Cirrus castellanus (Ci cas) Cirrus fibratus (Ci fib) Cirrus floccus (Ci flo) Cirrus spissatus (Ci spa) Cirrus uncinus (Ci unc) Ci-only varieties Cirrus intortus (Ci in) Cirrus vertebratus (Ci ve) Cirrocumulus (Cc) Species Cirrocumulus castellanus (Cc cas) Cirrocumulus floccus (Cc flo) Cirrocumulus lenticularis (Cc len) Cirrocumulus stratiformis (Cc str) Cirrostratus (Cs) Species Cirrostratus fibratus (Cs fib) Cirrostratus nebulosus (Cs neb) High-level-only mutatus cloud Mutatus non-height specific (see below) Medium-level 2–8 km Altocumulus (Ac) Species Altocumulus castellanus (Ac cas) Altocumulus floccus (Ac flo) Altocumulus lacunosus (Ac la) Altocumulus lenticularis (Ac len) Altocumulus stratiformis (Ac str) Altocumulus volutus (Ac vol) Altostratus (As) Altostratus undulatus Nimbostratus (Ns) Multi-level Varieties Nimbostratus virga (Ns vir) Low-level 0–2 km Cumulonimbus (Cb) Towering vertical Species Cumulonimbus calvus (Cb cal) Cumulonimbus capillatus (Cb cap) Cb-only supplementary features Cumulonimbus cauda ((cau) Tail cloud) Cumulonimbus incus (inc) Cumulonimbus murus ((mur) Wall cloud) Cb-only accessories and other Cumulonimbus flumen ((Cb flu) Beaver tail) Overshooting top Hot tower Cumulus (Cu) Variable vertical extent Species Fractus Cumulus humilis (Cu hum) Cumulus mediocris (Cu med) ( Cumulus congestus (Cu con) ( Cumulus castellanus (unofficial alternative name for Cu con)) ( ICAO term for Cu con and "Cu cas" is  Towering cumulus [Tcu])) Other Horseshoe Trade wind cumulus Stratus (St) Species Stratus fractus (St fra) Stratus nebulosus (St neb) St-only genitus cloud and other Stratus silvagenitus (St sil) Fog (Fg) Surface level Stratocumulus (Sc) Species Stratocumulus castellanus (Sc cas) Stratocumulus floccus (Sc flo) Stratocumulus lenticularis (Sc len) Stratocumulus stratiformis (Sc str) Stratocumulus Undulatus Stratocumulus volutus (Sc vol) Low-level-only supplementary features Arcus ((arc) Shelf) Tuba ((tub) Funnel cloud) Low-level-only accessory cloud and other Pileus (pil) Velum (vel) Pannus (pan) Other- Actinoform cloud (Stratocumulus) Non-height specific Varieties Duplicatus (du) Lacunosus (la) Opacus (op) Perlucidus (pe) Radiatus (ra) Translucidus (tr) Undulatus (un) Supplementary features Asperitas (asp) Cavum (cav) Fluctus (flu) Mamma (mam) Praecipitatio (pra) Virga (vir) Mother clouds and human-made clouds (Mother cloud)+genitus (e.g. cumulogenitus (cugen) (Mother cloud)+mutatus (e.g. cumulomutatus (cumut) Homogenitus (hogen) Homomutatus (homut) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Flammagenitus_cloud&oldid=1305731177 " Categories : Cumulus Wildfire ecology Volcanism Hidden categories: CS1 maint: url-status Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from January 2014 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 19:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Flammagenitus cloud 25 languages Add topic

