Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Description 3 2014 awards 4 2015 awards 5 2016 awards 6 2017 awards 7 2018 awards 8 References Toggle the table of contents National Indigenous Human Rights Awards Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Australian annual Indigenous awards Anthony Mundine (centre) at the National Indigenous Human Rights Awards, Sydney, 2015.

The National Indigenous Human Rights Awards are annual Australian awards that recognise the contribution of Indigenous Australians to human rights and social justice . The ceremony takes place in Sydney , New South Wales .

History [ edit ] The National Indigenous Human Rights Awards were launched at the end of June 2014 at New South Wales Parliament , at the instigation of NSW parliamentarian Shaoquett Moselmane .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Description [ edit ] The award ceremony is first national Australian award ceremony dedicated solely to Indigenous human rights achievements.

[ 3 ] There are three categories of awards: [ 1 ] The Dr Yunupingu Award for Human Rights, in honour of musician and educator Mandawuy Yunupingu The Eddie Mabo Award for Social Justice, in honour of Indigenous land rights campaigner Eddie Mabo Anthony Mundine Award for Courage, in honour of boxer Anthony Mundine 2014 awards [ edit ] The inaugural National Indigenous Human Rights Awards were held on 24 June at Parliament House, Sydney . Indigenous leaders from all over Australia travelled to Sydney for the event.

[ 4 ] The ceremony was emceed by Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Linda Burney , with a keynote speech by Yalmay Yunupingu.

[ 5 ] The presenters of the awards were Yalmay Yunupingu, the wife of Dr Mandawuy Yunupingu , founder and lead singer of Yothu Yindi , and Gail Mabo , daughter of Eddie Mabo , and world champion boxer Anthony Mundine . The awards were founded by NSW Labor Parliamentarian, Shaoquett Moselmane .

[ citation needed ] The inaugural recipient of the Dr Yunupingu Award for Human Rights was Rosalie Kunoth-Monks .

[ citation needed ] The inaugural recipient of the Eddie Mabo Award for Social Justice was family of Eddie Murray.

[ citation needed ] The inaugural recipient of the Anthony Mundine Award for Courage was Barbara McGrady .

[ 6 ] 2015 awards [ edit ] Jenny Munro holding her award at the National Indigenous Human Rights Awards The 2015 awards were emceed by SBS journalist and Arrernte woman Karla Grant . The keynote speech was delivered by Narungga elder Tauto Sansbury .

[ 7 ] The recipient of the Dr Yunupingu Award for Human Rights was Tauto Sansbury.

The recipient of the Eddie Mabo Award for Social Justice was Jenny Munro .

The recipient of the Anthony Mundine Award for Courage was Adam Goodes .

2016 awards [ edit ] The recipient of the Dr Yunupingu Award for Human Rights was Dameyon Bonson.

[ 8 ] Dameyon Bonson handed back the award in February 2018 in protest of homophobic comments by Anthony Mundine in a TV reality show.

[ 9 ] The recipient of the Eddie Mabo Award for Social Justice was Mervyn Eades .

The recipient of the Anthony Mundine Award for Courage was Lex Wotton .

2017 awards [ edit ] The 2017 awards night was emceed by former international journalist and filmmaker Jeff McMullen . The keynote was presented by Senator Malarndirri McCarthy . There was a judge's toast speech by Narrungga elder, Tauto Sansbury . There were 12 finalists for the three categories; For the Dr Yunupingu Human Rights Award, 4 finalists, Rachel Perkins , award winning filmmaker, Dr Mark Wenitong, a medical doctor in Cape York, Mervyn Eades, founder and CEO of Ngalla Maya and Dr Kerry Arabena, early childhood academic. For the Eddie Mabo Social Justice Award, 4 finalists, Dr Kim Isaacs, a medical doctor in the Kimberley, Gayili Marika Yunupingu, suicide prevention campaigner, Richard Weston, CEO of The Healing Foundation and Noeletta McKenzie, youth suicide prevention worker. For the Anthony Mundine Courage Award, 4 finalists, Dr Meg Wills, justice reinvestment campaigner, Professor Chris Sarra , founder of Stronger Smarter Institute, Joe Williams , suicide prevention advocate and Clinton Pryor, who walked across Australia to raise awareness to continuing injustices to Indigenous people.

[ 10 ] The recipient of the Dr Yunupingu Award for Human Rights was Mervyn Eades.

[ 11 ] The recipient of the Eddie Mabo Award for Social Justice was Gayili Marika Yunupingu.

[ 12 ] The recipient of the Anthony Mundine Award for Courage was Professor Chris Sarra .

2018 awards [ edit ] The 5th National Indigenous Human Rights Awards were held on 18 October at Parliament House, Sydney . The ceremony was emceed by NITV journalist Karla Grant and with a keynote speech by Noongar person, lawyer and National Indigenous Critical Response Service advocate Megan Krakouer.

The recipient of the Dr Yunupingu Award for Human Rights was Megan Krakouer.

The recipient of the Eddie Mabo Award for Social Justice was Keenan Mundine.

The recipient of the Anthony Mundine Award for Courage was Clinton Prior.

References [ edit ] ^ a b Georgatos, Gerry (14 May 2014).

"Finally! National Indigenous Human Rights Awards" .

The Stringer . Retrieved 4 March 2022 .

^ "Aboriginal Deaths in Custody" .

Parliament of New South Wales (Hansard) . Government of New South Wales. 18 June 2014. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016.

^ "The birth of the National Indigenous Human Rights Awards" .

National Indigenous Times . Lismore. 9 June 2014. Archived from the original on 11 April 2015.

^ "Leaders and elders gather for human rights awards" .

SBS World News . Special Broadcasting Service. 25 June 2014.

^ Conimos, Anna (9 July 2014).

"Future Ancients" .

Neos Kosmos .

^ "Artist Talk with Barbara McGrady & John Janson-Moore | Campbelltown Arts Centre" .

c-a-c.com.au . Retrieved 20 April 2020 .

^ "Leaders converge for National Indigenous Human Rights Awards" , NITV , retrieved 1 February 2022 ^ "Human rights activists recognised at awards night" .

NITV . Retrieved 17 June 2019 .

^ "Indigenous advocate hands back human rights award after Mundine's homophobic rant" .

Star Observer . 9 February 2018 . Retrieved 17 June 2019 .

^ "COMMENT: The Human Rights Awards, a night to feel star struck by deadly Aboriginal people making a difference" .

NITV . Retrieved 17 June 2019 .

^ "COMMENT: The Human Rights Awards, a night to feel star struck by deadly Aboriginal people making a difference" .

NITV . Retrieved 17 June 2019 .

^ Brennan, Bridget (11 May 2017).

"Indigenous elder honoured for work fighting suicide in East Arnhem Land" .

ABC News . Retrieved 17 June 2019 .

v t e Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Peoples Aboriginal Australians Communities Aboriginal groups Tasmanians Torres Strait Islanders Victorians Western Australians Individuals Activists Musicians People from politics and public service Performing artists Sportspeople Visual artists Writers Culture Astronomy Bora Corroboree Country Deadly Awards Deities The Dreaming Enumeration Elders Flags Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander Kinship Kurdaitcha Literature of Indigenous Australians Marn Grook Message stick NAIDOC Week National Indigenous Human Rights Awards Outstation movement Religion and mythology Riji Seasons Sacred sites Smoking ceremony Songlines Traditional custodianship Tjurunga Torres Strait Islands Language(s) Avoidance speech Australian Aboriginal English Macro-Gunwinyguan languages Australian Creole Language groups Loanwords into English Palawa Pama–Nyungan languages Placenames Sign languages Taboo on the dead Torres Strait English Torres Strait Island languages Organisations ATSIC Aboriginal Medical Service Aborigines Advancement League Aborigines Progressive Association AIATSIS Australian Aboriginal Progressive Association Australian Aborigines' League Mass media National Congress of Australia's First Peoples National Indigenous Council Office of the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations Politics Registered Aboriginal Party Reconciliation Australia National Reconciliation Week Sorry Day TSRA Land councils Central Land Council Kimberley Land Council Maralinga Tjarutja Metropolitan Local Aboriginal Land Council NSW Aboriginal Land Council Northern Land Council South West Aboriginal Land and Sea Council Tiwi Land Council Bushcraft Boomerang Buka Bush bread Bush tucker Bush medicine Coolamon Dugout canoe Fibrecraft Fire-stick farming Food groups Humpy Possum-skin cloak Scarred tree Soaks Spinifex resin Sweets Waddy Woomera Arts Artefacts Bark painting Contemporary visual art Dance Didgeridoo Dreaming Music Music groups Rock NATSIA Award Papunya Tula Sandpainting Vibe Visual art Yininmadyemi History Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 Australian Frontier Wars Bathurst War Hawkesbury and Nepean Wars Caledon Bay crisis Cummeragunja walk-off Day of Mourning Gurindji Strike Historical figures History Prehistory Australian history wars King plates Massacres Black War Missions Native police Native Title Act 1993 New Deal for Aborigines Pilbara strike Pintupi Nine Stolen Generations Apology Tent embassy Western Australia Issues 1967 Referendum Constitutional recognition Crime Health Land rights Native title Protected Area Media portrayal Northern Territory National Emergency Response Self-determination Reconciliation Stolen Generations Half-Caste Act Uluru Statement from the Heart Treaty Truth Voice Voting rights Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Indigenous_Human_Rights_Awards&oldid=1306505767 " Categories : Human rights awards Awards established in 2014 Australian humanitarian and service awards Australian Aboriginal culture 2014 establishments in Australia Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use Australian English from July 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from July 2018 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2021 This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 02:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents National Indigenous Human Rights Awards Add languages Add topic

