Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Types 3 Notable examples 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Wide shot 9 languages العربية فارسی Gaeilge Bahasa Indonesia 日本語 Polski Português Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Long shot ) Cinematic techniques This article is about the framing of a film or photography shot. For an uninterrupted film shot, see long take .

"Long shot" redirects here. For other uses, see Long shot (disambiguation) .

An extreme wide shot in the trailer to the 1963 film Cleopatra gives an expansive view of the set.

In photography , filmmaking and video production , a wide shot (sometimes referred to as a full shot or long shot ) is a shot that typically shows the entire object or human figure and is usually intended to place it in some relation to its surroundings.

[ 1 ] These are typically shot now using wide-angle lenses (an approximately 25 mm lens in 35 mm photography and 10 mm lens in 16 mm photography).

[ 2 ] However, due to sheer distance, establishing shots and extremely wide shots can use almost any camera type.

History [ edit ] Sallie Gardner at a Gallop This type of filmmaking was a result of filmmakers trying to retain the sense of the viewer watching a play in front of them, as opposed to just a series of pictures.

The wide shot has been used since films have been made as it is a very basic type of cinematography . In 1878, one of the first true motion pictures, Sallie Gardner at a Gallop , was released.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Even though this wouldn't be considered a film in the current motion picture industry, it was a huge step towards complete motion pictures.

[ according to whom?

] It is arguable that it is very basic but it still remains that it was displayed as a wide angle as both the rider and horse are fully visible in the frame.

In the 1880s, celluloid photographic film and motion picture cameras became available so more motion pictures could be created in the form of Kinetoscope or through projectors. These early films also maintained a wide angle layout as it was the best way to keep everything visible for the viewer. Once motion pictures became more available in the 1890s, there were public screenings of many different films only being around a minute long, or even less. These films again adhered to the wide shot style. One of the first competitive filming techniques came in the form of the close-up, as George Albert Smith incorporated them into his film Hove . Though unconfirmed as the first usage of this method, it is one of the earliest recorded examples. Once the introduction of new framing techniques were introduced, more and more styles were developed and used for the benefits they could provide that wide shots couldn't.

In the early 1900s, motion pictures evolved from short, minute long, screenings to becoming full-length motion pictures. More and more cinematic techniques appeared, resulting in the wide shot being less commonly used. However, it still remained as it is almost irreplaceable in what it can achieve. When television entered the home in the 1960s, it was seen as a massive hit to the cinema industry and many saw it as the decline in cinema popularity. This in turn resulted in films having to stay ahead of television by incorporating superior quality than that of a television. This was done by adding color, but importantly it implemented the use of widescreen. This would allow a massive increase in space usable by the director, thus allowing an even wider shot for the viewer to witness more of any given shot.

Modern films will now frequently use the different types of wide shots as they are a staple in filmmaking and are almost impossible to avoid unless deliberately chosen to. In the current climate of films, the technical quality of any given shot will appear with much better clarity which has given life to some incredible shots from modern cinema. Also, given the quality of modern home entertainment mediums such as Blu-ray, 3D and Ultra HD Blu Rays, this has allowed the scope and size of any given frame to encompass more of the scene and environment in greater detail.

Types [ edit ] There are a variety of ways of framing that are considered as being wide shots; these include: Wide shot (WS) The subject comfortably takes up the whole frame. In the case of a person, head to toe.

[ 5 ] This usually achieves a clear physical representation of a character and can describe the surroundings as it is usually visible within the frame. This results in the audience having a desired (by the director) view/opinion of the character or location.

Very wide shot (VWS) The subject is only just visible in the location.

[ 5 ] This can find a balance between a "wide shot" and an "extreme wide shot" by keeping an emphasis on both the characters and the environment, almost finding a harmony between the two of them. This enables the ability to use the benefits of both types, by allowing the scale of the environment but also maintaining an element of focus on the character(s) or object(s) in frame.

Extreme wide shot (EWS) The shot is so far away from the subject that they are no longer visible.

[ 5 ] This is used to create a sense of a character being lost or almost engulfed by the sheer size of their surroundings. This can result in a character being made small or insignificant due to their situation and/or surroundings.

[ 6 ] Establishing shot (ES) A shot typically used to display a location and is usually the first shot in a new scene.

[ 7 ] These establish the setting of a film, whether that is the physical location or the time period. Mainly it gives a sense of place to the film and brings the viewer to wherever the story requires them to be.

Master shot (MS) This shot can be commonly mistaken for an establishing shot as it displays key characters and locations. However, it is actually a shot in which all relevant characters are in frame (usually for the whole duration of the scene), with inter-cut shots of other characters to shift focus.

[ 8 ] This is a very useful method for retaining audience focus as most shots in this style refrain from using cuts and therefore will keep the performances and the dialogue in the forefront of what is going on for the duration of the scene.

Notable examples [ edit ] Many directors are known for their use of the variety of wide shots. A key example of them is the frequent use of establishing shots and very wide shots in Peter Jackson 's The Lord of the Rings trilogy, showing the vast New Zealand landscape to instil awe in the audience.

[ 9 ] In the 1993 film Schindler's List , there is a running image of a small girl trapped within a concentration camp wearing a red coat (the only colour in the film). She is frequently pictured in a wide shot format as a way to display both her and the horrific surroundings to build a disturbing contrast.

In the 1939 film The Wizard of Oz , a very wide shot is used that keeps all the protagonists on screen with the Wizard's palace in clear view.

The Wizard of Oz was also one of the first mainstream motion pictures to include colour.

The 1962 Lawrence of Arabia contains an enormous number [ clarification needed ] of extreme wide shots which successfully induced the feeling of scale of the lead in his surrounding and aesthetically dwarfed him due to his surroundings making him seem more vulnerable and weak.

The 1981 film Raiders of the Lost Ark contains the use of a wide shot to show the dangerous scale of a boulder that is chasing the protagonist.

The 2008 film The Dark Knight featured a practical stunt in which a large truck and trailer are flipped nose first. This is shot very far back to give the shot more clarity and to see the flip through its entirety as opposed to cutting midway through.

In the 2015 Ridley Scott film The Martian , the protagonist Mark Watney is stranded on Mars and the film contains many wide shots.

[ clarification needed ] These are used to show the Martian landscape and give the character the sense of isolation that the film would want.

See also [ edit ] Camera operator Cinematographer Film director Long take Video production Videography References [ edit ] ^ Brown, Blain (2012).

Cinematography: Theory and Practice, Image Making for Cinematographers and Directors . Burlington, Massachusetts: Focal Press. p. 17.

ISBN 9781136047381 . Retrieved August 11, 2023 .

^ "Long Shot, Medium Shot, Close-Up" . releasing.net . Retrieved 2016-11-16 .

^ Muybridge, Eadweard (1 January 2000), Sallie Gardner at a Gallop , retrieved 10 November 2016 ^ "Sallie Gardner at a Gallop" .

HistoryByZim.com . 29 May 2013 . Retrieved 27 October 2017 .

^ a b c "Camera Shots" .

www.mediacollege.com . Retrieved 10 November 2016 .

^ Duckworth, Author A. R. (2009-01-04).

"Basic Film Techniques: Extreme Long Shot" .

The Motley View . Retrieved 2016-11-16 .

{{ cite web }} : |first= has generic name ( help ) ^ "Wide, Medium and Close Up Shots" .

www.tvdsb.ca . Retrieved 2016-11-10 .

^ "Cinematography: The Master Shot: Indie Tips" .

Indie Tips . 2014-10-25 . Retrieved 2016-11-10 .

^ Cateridge, James (2015-02-09).

Film Studies For Dummies . John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 9781118886595 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bordwell, David; Thompson, Kristin (2006).

Film Art: An Introduction . New York: McGraw-Hill.

ISBN 0-07-331027-1 .

External links [ edit ] Further shots and their descriptions Images from various films – many of which are wide shots v t e Cinematic techniques Lighting Background Cameo Fill Flood High-key Key Lens flare Low-key Mood Rembrandt Stage Soft Sound Diegetic Non-diegetic Narration Film score Sound effects Shooting Field size Wide / Long / Full American Medium Close-up Italian Two shot Camera placement Perspective Over-the-shoulder Point-of-view (POV) Reverse Trunk Single / multiple-camera setup Camera angle Tilt Aerial High-angle Bird's-eye Crane shot Jib shot Low-angle Worm's-eye view Dutch angle Camera movement Unchained camera technique Tilting Panning Whip pan Hand-held Shaky Tracking Dolly Steadicam SnorriCam Walk and talk Follow Dolly zoom Lens effects Focus Racking Depth of field Shallow Deep Zooming Other techniques Establishing shot Master shot B-roll Freeze-frame shot Long take One-shot Insert v t e Special effects Practical Aerial rigging ( wire-flying ) Air bladder effect Animatronics Bullet hit squib Costumed character Creature suit Dead-character costume Kitbashing Miniature effect ( hanging ) Prosthetic makeup Puppetry Pyrotechnics Rubber mask Matte painting Sugar glass Theatrical blood In-camera Bipacks Bullet time Dolly zoom Forced perspective Front projection Infrared photography Lens flares Lighting effects Multiple exposure Filtration Rear projection Reverse motion Schüfftan process Shutter effects Slit-scan Tilted plane focus Time-lapse Fast motion Slow motion Speed ramping Stop motion Visual Bullet time Chroma key Compositing ( digital ) Computer-generated imagery Go motion Introvision Match moving Optical printing Smallgantics Split screen Stop motion v t e Film editing Concept Choreography Synchronization Attentional control Master shot Parallel cut Technique Clues Cutaway Eyeline match Points of view Multiple exposure Optical illusion Split screen Transition Insertion Dialogue Match cut Long shot Insert Timelapsing Cut Jump cut Axial cut Wipe Dissolve Slow motion Prelap Other Fast cutting Invisible cut Montage Supercut Storytelling Cut on action Contrast cut Shot/reverse shot Flashback / Flashforward Action Smash cut Cross cut Slow cutting Walk and talk Rule 180-degree rule 30-degree rule Term Reaction shot Kuleshov effect Establishing shot Long take Internal rhythm External rhythm Footage B-roll Stock footage Editing Continuity editing Soviet montage theory Post-classical editing In-camera editing Video editing Linear video editing Non-linear editing (NLE) Video editing software Offline editing Online editing Real-time editing Vision mixing Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wide_shot&oldid=1251762573 " Categories : Cinematic techniques Television terminology Hidden categories: CS1 errors: generic name Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from October 2017 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2017 This page was last edited on 17 October 2024, at 23:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wide shot 9 languages Add topic

