Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Glossary of developmental biology Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This glossary of developmental biology is a list of definitions of terms and concepts commonly used in the study of developmental biology and related disciplines in biology , including embryology and reproductive biology , primarily as they pertain to vertebrate animals and particularly to humans and other mammals. The developmental biology of invertebrates, plants, fungi, and other organisms is treated in other articles; e.g terms relating to the reproduction and development of insects are listed in Glossary of entomology , and those relating to plants are listed in Glossary of botany .

This glossary is intended as introductory material for novices; for more specific and technical detail, see the article corresponding to each term. Additional terms relevant to vertebrate reproduction and development may also be found in Glossary of biology , Glossary of cell biology , Glossary of genetics , and Glossary of evolutionary biology .

Contents A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z See also References External links A [ edit ] acrosomal vesicle acrosome allantois One of four extraembryonic membranes formed during the development of amniotes , arising as a sac-like extension of the hindgut and having the dual function of excretion and respiration .

[ 1 ] In mammals, the allantois arises as a diverticulum made of splanchnopleure almost as soon as the hindgut is established, and quickly builds a dense network of circulatory vessels which eventually assumes responsibility for all metabolic interchange between the fetus and mother.

[ 2 ] amniocentesis amnion One of four extraembryonic membranes formed during the development of animals belonging to the clade Amniota , all of which are terrestrial vertebrates. Arising from somatopleure very early in development, the amnion grows to surround and define the amniotic cavity , which contains amniotic fluid that cushions and protects the developing embryo from injury.

[ 2 ] amniotic fluid amniotic sac archenteron Also gastrocoel .

The central internal cavity of the gastrula in most animal embryos, fated to develop into the lumen of the digestive tube ; the primitive gut . The archenteron initially has only one open end, known as the blastopore .

B [ edit ] birth blastocoel Also blastocoele , blastocele , cleavage cavity , and segmentation cavity .

The fluid-filled or yolk -filled cavity that forms in the developing blastula or blastocyst in virtually all animal species. The blastocoel appears to serve two functions: it permits cell migration during gastrulation , and it prevents cells beneath it from interacting prematurely with cells above it by physically separating them.

[ 2 ] blastocyst blastodisc blastomere blastopore blastula An early form of the animal embryo generally consisting of a hollow sphere of cells ( blastomeres ) in a single layer (the blastoderm ) surrounding a fluid-filled cavity (the blastocoel ).

[ 2 ] Mammalian embryos develop into a specialized blastula known as a blastocyst , containing a differentiated inner cell mass and trophectoderm .

blastulation A stage in the embryonic development of all animals defined by the formation of the blastula , following morulation and preceding gastrulation . During blastulation, the early embryo develops from a solid ball of cells called a morula into a hollow sphere consisting of an internal cavity surrounded by a single layer of blastomeres ; a significant amount of embryonic activity is also dedicated to establishing cell polarity and the basic axes of the body plan , determining the fates of specific cells, activating the embryonic genome , and ultimately transferring full control of gene expression from the mother to the embryo. In mammals, blastulation results in a blastocyst , a specialized blastula marked by very early differentiation of cell populations.

C [ edit ] cavitation The hollowing out of a fluid-filled space within a solid mass of cells, e.g. during blastulation or secondary neurulation .

[ 2 ] chorion Also serosa and false amnion .

1.  One of four extraembryonic membranes formed during the development of amniotes , arising from trophoblast and somatopleure as a corollary of the amnion and enclosing both the amnion and the allantois . The chorion provides the fetal contribution to the formation of the placenta .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] 2.  A tough coat surrounding the eggs of some insects and fish.

[ 2 ] cleavage concealed ovulation conception D [ edit ] delamination deuterostome developmental biology diakinesis dioestrus Also diestrus .

In the mammalian estrous cycle , the long period of quiescence following ovulation , during which the uterus prepares to receive a fertilized ovum .

[ 2 ] differentiation diplonema diplont An organism having diploid somatic cells and haploid gametes .

[ 2 ] diverticulum E [ edit ] ectoderm embryo embryo transfer embryoblast Another name for the inner cell mass , i.e. that portion of the blastocyst that actually gives rise to embryonic tissues, as opposed to extraembryonic tissues.

[ 2 ] embryogenesis Also embryogeny .

The growth and formation of the embryo ; the course of development that occurs during the time period beginning with the fertilization of the ovum and ending when the developing animal can no longer be considered an embryo, the criteria for which may vary widely and arbitrarily depending on species. In humans, the embryonic period ends nine weeks after conception, after which time the term fetus is used instead of embryo. In many other animals, embryogenesis is considered complete only after hatching or birth.

embryology embryonate Containing a developing embryo ; e.g. an embryonated hen's egg, as opposed to an unfertilized egg.

[ 2 ] endoderm endometrium epiblast epiboly estrous cycle Also oestrous cycle .

F [ edit ] Fallopian tubes false amnion See chorion .

fate map A diagram that shows what will become of each region of the embryo during the course of normal development. Fate maps are created by selectively marking populations of cells in distinct regions of the early embryo with distinct visual reporters (by any of a variety of methods designed to permit easy visualization of the marked cells, e.g. vital stains, fluorescent compounds, or retroviral transfection) and then allowing the embryo to proceed normally through the subsequent stages of development, after which each specific reporter can again be visualized, thereby revealing the new positions and morphologies of the marked cells and/or their daughter cells. Visualizing the reporters at two or more different developmental stages shows how the different parts of the embryo have moved and changed over time.

[ 2 ] fertilization follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) G [ edit ] gastrocoel See archenteron .

gastrula gastrulation A stage in the embryonic development of most animals defined by the formation of the gastrula , following blastulation and preceding neurulation . During gastrulation, the blastula or blastocyst undergoes a major reorganization from a single, continuous layer of cells surrounding a single cavity into the complex, multilayered, multicavity gastrula, in which all of the primordial germ layers are present. Though the precise pattern of morphogenetic changes constituting gastrulation varies considerably between species, all types of gastrulation are unified by five basic classes of cell movements: the invagination of one side of the blastula into the blastocoel ; the involution of the inner layer of cells over the basal surface of the outer layer; the ingression of individual cells into the embryo; the delamination of one layer into two layers via splitting or migration; and the epiboly or expansion of one layer over other cells or layers.

[ 3 ] By the end of gastrulation, the cells of the embryo have begun differentiation into distinct lineages, the basic axes of the body plan have been established (e.g. dorsal-ventral, anterior-posterior, etc.), and one or more layers of cells have been internalized, including the prospective gut .

germ cell germ layer gonad H [ edit ] histogenesis The process by which the definite cells and tissues that make up the body of an organism arise from embryonic cells; or, more generally, the generation of new tissues at any stage of life.

[ 2 ] hypoblast I [ edit ] in vitro fertilization (IVF) ingression inner cell mass invagination involution J [ edit ] K [ edit ] L [ edit ] leptonema Leydig cell M [ edit ] meiosis meiotic arrest mesoderm mid-blastula transition (MBT) morula A very early form of the animal embryo consisting of a solid ball of 16 to 32 blastomeres . By the morula stage, these cells have become flattened and have begun to develop stronger cell-to-cell adhesion, as well as to pump fluid into an internal cavity that will eventually become the blastocoel .

N [ edit ] neonatal neurula neurulation notochord O [ edit ] oestrous cycle See estrous cycle .

oocyte oogenesis organogenesis ovary oviduct ovulation ovum P [ edit ] pachynema parthenogenesis parturition placenta polar body postimplantation postnatal postpartum preimplantation prenatal primary spermatocyte primitive streak primordium pronucleus Either of the haploid gametic nuclei, i.e. that of the ovum or sperm , as they exist prior to syngamy . The female pronucleus is formed during oogenesis at the time of the second meiotic division , which occurs before fertilization ; in contrast, the nucleus of a spermatozoon is generally only considered a pronucleus after fertilization, once it is inside the cytoplasm of the egg and has begun to decondense.

[ 2 ] protoblast protostome Q [ edit ] R [ edit ] reproductive biology S [ edit ] secondary spermatocyte semen serosa See chorion .

Sertoli cell somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) somatopleure somite sperm spermatid spermatocyte spermatogonium spermiogenesis splanchnopleure superovulation T [ edit ] teratogen testis trophectoderm trophoblast U [ edit ] uterus V [ edit ] vas deferens W [ edit ] X [ edit ] Y [ edit ] Z [ edit ] zona pellucida zygonema zygote zygotic genome activation (ZGA) See also [ edit ] Introduction to developmental biology Outline of developmental biology Outline of cell biology Glossary of biology Glossary of cell biology Glossary of genetics Glossary of evolutionary biology References [ edit ] ^ a b Rugh, Roberts (1968).

The Mouse: Its Reproduction and Development . Minneapolis, Minn.: Burgess Publishing Company.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Dye, Frank J. (2002).

Dictionary of Developmental Biology and Embryology . New York: Wiley-Liss.

ISBN 9780471443575 .

^ Gilbert, Scott F. (2000).

Developmental Biology (6th ed.). Sunderland, Massachusetts: Sinauer Associates.

ISBN 0-87893-243-7 .

External links [ edit ] v t e Glossaries of science and engineering Aerospace engineering Agriculture Archaeology Architecture Artificial intelligence Astronomy Biology Botany Calculus Cell biology Cellular and molecular biology 0–L M–Z Chemistry Civil engineering Clinical research Computer hardware Computer science Developmental and reproductive biology Ecology Economics Electrical and electronics engineering Engineering A–L M–Z Entomology Environmental science Genetics and evolutionary biology Geography A–M N–Z Arabic toponyms Hebrew toponyms Western and South Asia Geology Ichthyology Machine vision Mathematics Mechanical engineering Medicine Meteorology Mycology Nanotechnology Ornithology Physics Probability and statistics Psychiatry Quantum computing Robotics Scientific naming Structural engineering Virology NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐8s6cn
Cached time: 20250812044510
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, no‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.618 seconds
Real time usage: 0.687 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 12223/1000000
Revision size: 17741/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 92695/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 34332/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 10/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 33964/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.299/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4620718/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  587.754      1 -total
 33.88%  199.103    123 Template:Term
 17.68%  103.925    124 Template:Defn
 12.78%   75.131      3 Template:Cite_book
 11.47%   67.407     84 Template:Gli
 10.83%   63.666      1 Template:Short_description
  7.49%   44.022     84 Template:Plain_text
  6.54%   38.415      1 Template:Glossaries_of_science_and_engineering
  6.27%   36.828      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.62%   33.049      1 Template:Compact_TOC Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:73382085:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812044510 and revision id 1259268588. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Glossary_of_developmental_biology&oldid=1259268588 " Categories : Developmental biology Glossaries of biology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Wikipedia glossaries using description lists This page was last edited on 24 November 2024, at 07:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Glossary of developmental biology Add languages Add topic

