Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Islamic usage and origin 2 Emergence 3 Qur'an 4 Mecca 5 Medina Toggle Medina subsection 5.1 Constitution of Medina 6 Back to Mecca 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Ummah 53 languages العربية অসমীয়া تۆرکجه বাংলা Башҡортса Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Kurdî Latina Lietuvių Malagasy Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Arabic term used to refer to the collective nation of Muslim people This article is about the Islamic concept. For the hip hop production collective, see The Ummah .

Not to be confused with Umrah or Umma .

Part of a series on Islamism Fundamentals Islam History Culture Economics Politics Secularism Ideologies Salafi movement Salafi jihadism International propagation By region Deobandi movement Deobandi jihadism Qutbism Khomeinism Shia Islamism Islamic fundamentalism Islamic nationalism Concepts Apostasy in Islam Takfir Islamic governance Caliphate Islamic democracy Islamic feminism Islamic liberalism Islamic socialism Islamic extremism Islamic state Islamic republic Spread of Islam ( of knowledge ) Jihad Islamic terrorism Jihadism Pan-Islamism Political Islam aspects Post-Islamism Sharia Shura Two-nation theory Ummah Influences Anti-communism Anti-imperialism Anti-Zionism Decolonization Islamic Golden Age Islamic revival Movements Scholastic Barelvi Dawat-e-Islami Deobandi Nurcu Salafism Madkhalism Ahl-i Hadith Sahwa movement Wahhabism International propagation by country/region Political Salafist Front Salafist Call Movement of Society for Peace Hamas Party of Democratic Action Jamaat-e-Islami Millî Görüş Muslim Brotherhood List of Islamic political parties Militant Militant Islamism based in MENA region South Asia Southeast Asia Sub-Saharan Africa Key texts The Caliphate or the Grand Imamate ( Rashīd Rīďha 1922 ) Reconstruction of Religious Thought in Islam ( Iqbal 1930s ) Principles of State and Government ( Asad 1961 ) Ma'alim fi al-Tariq ("Milestones") ( Qutb 1965 ) Islamic Government: Governance of the Jurist ("Velayat-e faqih") ( Khomeini 1970 ) Heads of state Ahmed al-Sharaa Recep Tayyip Erdoğan Ruhollah Khomeini Mohamed Morsi Muammar Gaddafi Alija Izetbegović Ismail Haniyeh Zia ul-Haq Ali Khamenei Omar al-Bashir Mohammed Omar House of Saud House of Thani Hibatullah Akhundzada Sadiq al-Mahdi Key ideologues Abu Hamza al-Masri Rabee al-Madkhali Muhammad Abduh Jamāl al-Dīn al-Afghānī Qazi Hussain Ahmad Muhammad Nasiruddin al-Albani Muhammad Asad Hassan al-Banna Rached Ghannouchi Safwat Hegazi Muhammad Iqbal Ali Khamenei Ruhollah Khomeini Necip Fazıl Kısakürek Abul A'la Maududi Abul Hasan Nadwi Taqi al-Din al-Nabhani Yusuf al-Qaradawi Sayyid Qutb Tariq Ramadan Ata Abu Rashta Rashid Rida Navvab Safavi Ali Shariati Haji Shariatullah Hassan Al-Turabi Ahmed Yassin Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab Criticism Liberal and reform movements within Islam in Europe in North America Khaled Abu al-Fadl Farag Foda Abdelwahab Meddeb Maryam Namazie Maajid Nawaaz Sam Harris Olivier Roy Bassam Tibi Muhammad Sa'id al-Ashmawi Gilles Kepel Shiraz Maher Magnus Ranstorp Related topics Islam and modernity Modernism Islam and other religions Islamophobia Islam portal Politics portal v t e Ummah ( / ˈ ʊ m ə / ; [ 1 ] Arabic : أُمَّة [ˈʊm.mæ] ) is an Arabic word meaning Muslim identity, nation, religious community, or the concept of a Commonwealth of the Muslim Believers ( أمة المؤمنين ummat al-muʼminīn ).

[ 2 ] It is a synonym for ummat al-Islām ( أمّةْ الإِسْلَامُ , lit.

'the Islamic nation'); it is commonly used to mean the collective community of Muslim people.

[ 3 ] In the Quran , the ummah typically refers to a single group that shares common religious beliefs, specifically those that are the objects of a divine plan of salvation.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The word ummah (pl.

umam [ˈʊmæm] ) means nation in Arabic . For example, the Arabic term for the United Nations is الأمم المتحدة al-Umam al-Muttaḥidah , and the term الأمة العربية al-Ummah al-ʻArabiyyah is used to refer to "the Arab Nation".

[ 6 ] Ummah is distinguished from shaʻb ( شَعْب [ˈʃæʕb] , "people"), which means a nation with common ancestry or geography. The word ummah differs from the concept of a country or people. In its greater context it is used to describe a larger group of people. For example, in Arabic the word شعب shaʻab ("people") would be used to describe the citizens of Syria . However, the term ummah is used to describe the Arab people as a whole, which includes Syrians as well as the people of the Arab world . Ummah can be a supra-national polity with a common history and identity based on religion.

Pan-Islamism advocates for the unity of Muslims in one nation as an Islamic country or an Islamic state .

[ 2 ] Islamic usage and origin [ edit ] Further information: Enjoining good and forbidding wrong and Ma'ruf The phrase Ummah Wāhidah in the Quran ( أمة واحدة , "One Nation") refers to all the Islamic world as it existed at the time. The Quran says: "You [Muslims] are the best nation brought out for Mankind, commanding what is righteous ( معروف Ma'rūf , lit. "recognized [as good]") and forbidding what is wrong ( منكر Munkar , lit. "recognized [as evil]")" [3:110]. The usage is further clarified by the Constitution of Medina , an early document said to have been negotiated by Muhammad in CE 622 with the leading clans of Medina , which explicitly refers to Jews , Christians and pagan citizens of Medina as members of the Ummah .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Emergence [ edit ] World percentage of Muslims by country Main articles: Muslim world and Caliphate Part of a series on Islamic culture Architecture Abbasid Anatolian Seljuk Chinese Fatimid Indo-Islamic Indonesian Iranian Mamluk Moorish Ottoman Somali Sudano-Sahelian Tatar Swahili Umayyad Yemeni Art Calligraphy Carpets Embroidery Glassware Miniature Pottery Clothing Abaya Agal Boubou Burqa Chador Hijab Headscarf Jilbab Jellabiya Kaftan Kameez Keffiyeh Kupiah Niqāb Salwar Songkok Taqiya Thawb Holidays Arba'een al-Ghadir Chaand Raat al-Fitr al-Adha Imamat Day New Year al-Qadr Mawlid Ramadan Bara’at Raghaib Literature Arabic Azerbaijani Balochi Bengali Crimean Tatar Gambian Hausa Indonesian Kashmiri Kazakh Kurdish Kyrgyz Malaysian Malian Nigerian Pashto Persian Punjabi Sindhi Somali South Asian Tajik Tatar Turkish Turkmen Urdu Uyghur Uzbek Music Ashik Daf Dastgah Gamelan Gendang beleq Ghazal Haḍra Hamd Jari Madih nabawi Mappilappattu Maqam Mugam Naʽat Nasheed Noha Qawwali Sufi Talempong Theatre Bangsawan Cem Karagöz and Hacivat Sama Ta'zieh Wayang Islam portal v t e Part of a series on Islam Beliefs Oneness of God Angels Holy books Prophets Judgement Day Predestination Practices Profession of faith Prayer Almsgiving Fasting Pilgrimage Texts Foundations Quran Sunnah ( Hadith , Sirah ) Tafsir (exegesis) Ijtihad Aqidah (creed) Qisas al-Anbiya ( Stories of the Prophets ) Mathnawi (poems) Fiqh (jurisprudence) Sharia (law) History Timeline Jahiliyyah Muhammad Ahl al-Bayt Sahabah Rashidun Caliphate Imamate Spread of Islam Succession to Muhammad Abbasid Caliphate Al-Andalus Golden Age Seljuk Empire Ilkhanate Timurid Renaissance Gunpowder empires Ottoman Empire Saudi Arabia Culture and society Academics Animals Art Association football Calendar Cats Censorship Children Circumcision Democracy Demographics Diaspora Denominations Sunni Shia Ibadi Economics Education Ethics Exorcism Feminism Festivals Finance Liberalism Madrasa Moral teachings Mosque Music Mysticism Philosophy Poetry Politics Proselytizing Science Sexuality LGBTQ Slavery Concubinage Social welfare Women Related topics Arabic language Apostasy Criticism Muhammad Quran Hadith Other religions Islamism Violence terrorism war Islamophobia Jihad Jihadism Salafi jihadism Deobandi jihadism Military laws Peace Pacifism Glossary Islam portal v t e At the time of Muhammad , before the conception of the ummah, Arab communities were typically governed by kinship.

[ 11 ] In other words, the political ideology of the Arabs centred on tribal affiliations and blood relations.

[ 11 ] In the midst of a tribal society, the religion of Islam emerged and along with it the concept of the ummah. The ummah emerged according to the idea that a messenger or prophet has been sent to a nation.

[ 4 ] Unlike earlier messengers, who had been sent to various nations in the past (as can be found among the Prophets in the Old Testament), Muhammad sought to develop an ummah that was universal and not only for Arabs.

[ 4 ] Muhammad saw his purpose as the transmission of a divine message and the leadership of the Islamic nation.

[ 4 ] Islam sees Muhammad as the messenger to the ummah, transmitting a divine message, and implying that God is directing the life affairs of the ummah.

[ 11 ] Accordingly, the purpose of the ummah was to be based on religion by following the commands of God , rather than kinship .

[ 11 ] Immediately after Muhammad's death in 632, caliphates were established and the Shia emerged.

[ 12 ] Caliphates were Islamic states under the leadership of a political successor to the Islamic prophet Muhammad .

[ 13 ] These polities developed into multi-ethnic trans-national empires.

[ 14 ] Qur'an [ edit ] There are 62 instances in which the term ummah is mentioned in the Qur'an , [ 15 ] and they almost always refer to ethical , linguistic , or religious bodies of people who are subject to the divine plan of salvation .

[ 4 ] [ 16 ] The meaning of the term appears to transform throughout the chronology of the Qur'an.

[ 15 ] When it is first used in the Qur'an, it is hardly distinguishable from the term qawm , which can be translated to 'people'.

[ 17 ] The Qur'an recognizes that each ummah has a messenger that has been sent to relay a divine message to the nation and that all ummah s await God's ultimate judgment.

[ 11 ] [ 16 ] Although the meaning of the ummah begins simply with a general application of the word, it gradually develops in reference to a general religious community and then evolves to specifically refer to the Muslim nation.

[ 15 ] Before it referred exclusively to Muslims, the ummah encompassed Jewish and Christian communities as one with the Muslims and referred to them as the People of the Book .

[ 11 ] [ 16 ] That is supplemented by the Constitution of Medina which declares all members of the ummah , regardless of religion, to be of "one ummah ".

[ 11 ] In those passages of the Qur'an, ummah may be referring to a unity of mankind through the shared beliefs of the monotheistic religions.

[ 15 ] Frederick Mathewson Denny argues that the most recent ummah that receives a messenger from God is the Arab ummah .

[ 16 ] As the Muslims became stronger during their residence in Medina, the Arab ummah narrowed into an ummah exclusively for Muslims.

[ 16 ] That is evidenced by the resacralisation of the Kaaba and Muhammad's command to take a pilgrimage to Mecca , along with the redirection of prayer from Jerusalem to Mecca.

[ 16 ] The period in which the term is used most often is within the Third Meccan Period, followed by the Medinian Period.

[ 16 ] The extensive use of the term during both time periods indicates that Muhammad had begun to arrive at the concept of the ummah to specify the genuine Muslim nation.

[ 16 ] Furthermore, the early Meccan passages generally equate ummah as religion, but in the Medinan passages refer more specifically to the relations of ummah and religion.

[ 16 ] The final passage that refers to ummah in the Qur'an refers to the Muslims as the "best nation" and accordingly led to it being as an exclusive reference to Islam.

[ 16 ] A verse in the Qur'an also mentions the ummah in the context of all of the messengers, [ 18 ] and that their ummah (nation) of theirs is one, and God is their Lord entirely: O messengers, eat from the good foods and work righteousness. Indeed, I, of what you do, am Knowing. And indeed this, your ummah (nation), is one ummah (nation), and I am your Lord, so fear Me. [Qur'an, Surah Al-Mu'minun (The Believers) (23:51–52)] Mecca [ edit ] Initially, it did not appear that the new Muslim nation would oppose the tribes that already existed in Mecca.

[ 19 ] The first Muslims did not need to make a break with traditional Quraysh customs since the vision for the new nation included moral norms that were not unfamiliar to the tribal society of Mecca.

[ 19 ] However, what distinguished this community from the tribes was its focus of the place of those morals within a person's life.

[ 19 ] Medina [ edit ] Main article: First Islamic state After Muhammad and the first converts to Islam were forced to leave Mecca , the community was welcomed in Medina by the Ansar, a group of Pagans who had converted to Islam.

[ 4 ] [ 20 ] Despite Medina already being occupied by numerous Jews and polytheistic tribes, the arrival of Muhammad and his followers provoked no opposition from Medina's residents.

[ 20 ] Upon arriving in Medina, Muhammad established the Constitution of Medina with the various tribal leaders in order to form the Meccan immigrants and the Medinan residents into a single nation, the ummah . Rather than limiting members of the ummah to a single tribe or religious affiliation as had been the case when the ummah first developed in Mecca, the Constitution of Medina ensured that the ummah was composed of a variety of people and beliefs essentially making it to be supra-tribal.

[ 21 ] Islamic historian, Tabari , suggested that Muhammad's initial intentions upon arriving in Medina was to establish a mosque, however this is unlikely.

[ 22 ] Tabari also claimed that Muhammad observed the first Friday prayer in Medina.

[ 23 ] It occurred on Friday because Friday served as a market day in Medina to enable Jews to observe the sabbath.

[ 23 ] Membership to the ummah was not restricted to adhering to the Muslim faith but rather encompassed all of the tribes as long as they vowed to recognize Muhammad as the nation and political figure of authority.

[ 22 ] [ 24 ] The Constitution of Medina declared that the Jewish tribes and the Muslims from Medina formed 'one ummah .' [ 11 ] It is possible that the Medinan ummah was purely secular (compared to the later transformation of the ummah in Mecca) due to its variety of beliefs and practices of its members.

[ 22 ] The purpose of the Constitution of Medina was to uphold political obligations and social relations between the various tribes.

[ 22 ] The community members in Medina, although not derived from the same faith, were committed to each other through a desire to defend the common good of the nation.

[ 22 ] In other words, the nation was united according to preserve its shared interests.

[ 22 ] The people of other religious beliefs, particularly those that are considered to be "People of the Book" were granted the special protection of God through the dhimmah contract.

[ 11 ] These other religious groups were guaranteed security by God and Muhammad because of their common religious history as being the " People of the Book ". The dhimmah served as a sort of alliance between Muslims and non-Muslims.

[ 11 ] In the earlier treaties of the dhimmah, both groups were viewed as equal in status and both were obligated to help the other. However, in later treaties, after Islam had gained more power throughout Arabia, the dhimmah was perceived as the fulfilment of the religious duties of Muslims along with the payment of zakat. With the new contract of dhimmah, non-Muslims' protection by God and Muhammad became dependent on their payment.

Constitution of Medina [ edit ] The Constitution of Medina is a document created by Muhammad to regulate social and political life in Medina.

[ 25 ] It deals with various tribal issues such as the organization and leadership of the participating tribal groups, warfare, blood money, ransom of captives, and war expenditures.

[ 26 ] It is at the beginning of the document that the Muslims from the Quraysh (those from Mecca) and the Muslims from Yathrib (those from Medina) are declared to be an ummah or one nation.

[ 26 ] The word ummah appears again when the document refers to the treaty of the Jews and states that the Yahūd Banī ' Awf, or Jews, are an ummah that exists alongside the ummah of the Muslims or may be included in the same ummah as the Muslims.

[ 26 ] The document states that the Jews who join the Muslims will receive aid and equal rights.

[ 26 ] In addition, the Jews will be guaranteed security from the Muslims, and are granted to maintain their own religion just as the Muslims will maintain theirs.

[ 26 ] This implies that the ummah is not strictly a religious nation in Medina.

[ 11 ] The Constitution of Medina lists the various Medinan tribes derived from the Aws and Khazraj as well as the several Jewish tribes that are granted to keep their tribal organization and leadership.

[ 26 ] The document also reveals that each group, the Muslims and the Jews, is responsible for its own finances except during time of war, when the two are able to share expenses.

[ 11 ] [ 26 ] Back to Mecca [ edit ] After the Muslim takeover of Mecca, membership in the ummah required a commitment to Islam.

[ 22 ] This happened as a result of Islam beginning to distinguish itself not just from Paganism but also Judaism and Christianity by emphasizing a model of nation based on Abraham .

[ 19 ] The membership of the ummah was now based on two main principles; the first is to worship God alone and secondly, in order to worship God properly one must be in a guided nation.

[ 19 ] The essentials of the new society were the new relations between human beings and God and between human beings and one another. The society was held together by the Prophet. Feuding among Muslim clans was forbidden.

[ 19 ] Muhammad's nation was designed to transform the world itself through action in the world.

[ 19 ] See also [ edit ] Islam portal Caliphate Constitution of Medina Divisions of the world in Islam Islamic missionary activity Kafir List of countries by Muslim population Muslim population growth Muslim world Organisation of Islamic Cooperation Pan-Islamism References [ edit ] ^ "umma".

The Chambers Dictionary (9th ed.). Chambers. 2003.

ISBN 0-550-10105-5 .

^ a b Bissenove (February 2004).

"Ottomanism, Pan-Islamism, and the Caliphate; Discourse at the Turn of the 20th Century" (PDF) .

BARQIYYA . Vol. 9, no. 1. American University in Cairo: The Middle East Studies Program. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 23, 2015 . Retrieved April 26, 2013 .

^ "Rohingyas and the Myth of Ummah" .

Kashmir Observer . 2017-01-05 . Retrieved 2021-03-30 .

^ a b c d e f Houtsma, M. Th (1987).

E.J. Brill's First Encyclopaedia of Islam, 1913–1936 . Brill. pp.

125– 126.

ISBN 9004082654 .

^ Houtsma, M. Th. (1987).

E.J. Brill's First Encyclopedia of Islam, 1913–1936 . E.J. Brill.

^ Team, Almaany.

"ترجمة و معنى nation في قاموس المعاني. قاموس عربي انجليزي مصطلحات صفحة 1" .

www.almaany.com .

^ Firestone, Reuven (1999).

Jihād : The Origin of Holy War in Islam . New York: Oxford University Press. p. 118.

ISBN 0195125800 .

^ "Muhammad".

Encyclopedia of Islam Online .

^ Watt, W. Montgomery (1956).

Muhammad at Medina . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

^ Serjeant, R. B. (1964). "The Constitution of Medina".

Islamic Quarterly .

8 : 4.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Watt, W. Montgomery (1972).

Muhammad at Medina . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

^ Nigosian, Solomon A. (29 January 2004).

Islam: Its History, Teaching, and Practices . Indiana University Press. p. 18.

ISBN 978-0-253-11074-9 .

^ Kadi, Wadad; Shahin, Aram A. (2013). "Caliph, caliphate".

The Princeton Encyclopedia of Islamic Political Thought : 81– 86.

^ Al-Rasheed, Madawi; Kersten, Carool; Shterin, Marat (11 December 2012).

Demystifying the Caliphate: Historical Memory and Contemporary Contexts . Oxford University Press. p. 3.

ISBN 978-0-19-932795-9 .

^ a b c d Bearman, P.; Th. Bianquis; C.E. Bosworth; E. van Donzel; W.P. Heinrichs (2013). " 'Umma' ".

Encyclopedia of Islam (Second ed.). Brill Online.

^ a b c d e f g h i j Denny, Frederick Mathewson (August 1975). "The Meaning of 'Ummah' in the Qur'an".

History of Religions .

15 (1). The University of Chicago Press: 34– 70.

doi : 10.1086/462733 .

S2CID 162244982 .

^ Team, Almaany.

"Translation and Meaning of qawm (people) in English Arabic Dictionary of terms Page 2" .

www.almaany.com .

^ "Surat Al-Mu'minun [23:51–52] – The Noble Qur'an – القرآن الكريم" .

legacy.quran.com .

^ a b c d e f g Hodgson, Marshall G. S. (1974).

The Venture of Islam: Conscience and History in a World Civilization . Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago.

^ a b Ye'or, Bat (1985).

The Dhimmi: Jews and Christians under Islam . Cranberry, NJ: Associated University Press.

^ Goitein, S.D. (1968).

Studies in Islamic History and Institutions . Leiden, Netherlands: E.J. Brill.

^ a b c d e f g Peters, Francis E.

; Esposito, John L.

(2006).

The children of Abraham: Judaism, Christianity, Islam . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-12769-9 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ a b Watt, W. Montgomery; M.V. McDonald (1987), The History of al-Tabari: The Foundation of the Community , vol. VII, Albany: State University of New York ^ Peters, F.E. (1994).

Muhammad and the Origins of Islam . Albany: State University of New York.

^ Esposito, John L. (2004). " "Ummah" ".

The Islamic World: Past and Present . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

^ a b c d e f g Lecker, Michael (2013). "Constitution of Medina".

Encyclopedia of Islam . Three.

External links [ edit ] The definition of 'Ummah' is the unity of the Muslims (archived 20 October 2007) Online Islamic Learning Resource Archived 2014-07-26 at the Wayback Machine v t e Islamic philosophy Fields Alchemy Aqidah (theology) ' Aql (intellect) Cosmology astrology medieval astronomy Eschatology Ethics Kalam (dialectic) Fiqh (jurisprudence) Logic Metaphysics Natural philosophy (physics) Peace Madrasah (education) Medieval science Medieval psychology Sufism (mysticism) Schools Early Farabism Avicennism Averroism Illuminationism Sufi cosmology metaphysics psychology Transcendent theosophy Traditionalist Contemporary Concepts ʻAṣabīya Ḥāl Iʻjaz ʼIjtihād ʻIlm ʻIrfān Ijmāʿ Maslaha Nafs Qadar Qalb Qiyās Shūrā Tawḥīd Ummah Philosophers by century ( CE ) 9th–10th Al-Kindi Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Abu al-Abbas Iranshahri Abu Bakr al-Razi Apharabius Abu Hatim al-Razi Al Amiri Ikhwan al-Safa Abu Sulayman Sijistani Ibn Masarrah Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani 11th Al-Ghazali Ibn Miskawayh Avicenna Ibn Hazm Bahmanyār Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Nasir Khusraw Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani 12th Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Afdal al-Din Kashani Ahi Evren Ahmad Yasavi Ayn-al-Quzat Averroes Ibn Tufail Omar Khayyám Suhrawardi Shams Tabrizi 13th Hajji Bektash Wali Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi Ibn Sab’in Ibn Arabi al-Abharī Nasir al-Din Tusi Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi Ibn Taymiyya 14th–16th Ibn Khaldun Yunus Emre Hajji Bayram Jalaladdin Davani Sadr ad-Din Dashtaki Aziz Mahmud Hudayi Qadi Mir Husayn al-Maybudi Mahmud Shabistari Sayyid Haydar Amuli Dawūd al-Qayṣarī Jami 17th–19th Mir Damad Mir Fendereski Mulla Sadra Mohsen Fayz Kashani Abd al-Razzaq Lahiji Mujaddid Alf-i-Sani Rajab Ali Tabrizi Qazi Sa’id Qumi Shah Waliullah Dehlawi Hādī Sabzavārī 20th– present Muhammad Husayn Tabatabaei Muhammad Iqbal Gohar Shahi Mohammad Baqir al-Sadr René Guénon Frithjof Schuon Martin Lings Fazlur Rahman Ismail al-Faruqi Seyyed Hossein Nasr Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas Abdolkarim Soroush Gholamhossein Ebrahimi Dinani Taha Abdurrahman Mohammed Abed al-Jabri Mohammed Arkoun Fouad Zakariyya Reza Davari Ardakani Ahmad Fardid Mostafa Malekian Hasanzadeh Amoli Javadi Amoli Partawi Shah Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Israel Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐xskdx
Cached time: 20250816160246
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.859 seconds
Real time usage: 1.058 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3520/1000000
Revision size: 20857/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 163985/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8627/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 181598/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.556/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21897715/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  877.225      1 -total
 31.94%  280.193      1 Template:Reflist
 20.07%  176.051     16 Template:Cite_book
 13.61%  119.433     12 Template:Transliteration
 12.24%  107.355      1 Template:Islamism_sidebar
  7.89%   69.222      1 Template:Short_description
  6.20%   54.356      1 Template:Islamic_philosophy
  5.99%   52.577      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  4.96%   43.552      1 Template:Authority_control
  4.84%   42.497      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:202444:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816160246 and revision id 1302937838. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ummah&oldid=1302937838 " Categories : Arabic words and phrases in Sharia Pan-Islamism Islamic concepts of religious geography Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Arabic-language text Pages with Arabic IPA Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 06:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ummah 53 languages Add topic

