Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background and composition 2 Plot Toggle Plot subsection 2.1 Challenges of summary 2.2 Part I 2.3 Part II 2.4 Part III 2.5 Part IV 3 Characters Toggle Characters subsection 3.1 Humphrey Chimpden Earwicker (HCE) 3.2 Anna Livia Plurabelle (ALP) 3.3 Shem, Shaun and Issy 3.4 Minor characters 4 Major themes 5 Style Toggle Style subsection 5.1 Language 5.2 A reconstruction of nocturnal life 5.3 Allusions 6 Reception 7 Publication and translation history 8 Dramatic and musical adaptions 9 Notes 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Finnegans Wake 39 languages العربية Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 贛語 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Русский Simple English Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1939 novel by James Joyce This article is about the book. For the street ballad after which it is named, see Finnegan's Wake . For the Tangerine Dream album, see Finnegans Wake (album) .

Finnegans Wake Author James Joyce Language English Publisher Faber and Faber Publication date 4 May 1939 OCLC 42692059 Dewey Decimal 823/.912 21 LC Class PR6019.O9 F5 1999 Preceded by Ulysses (1922) Finnegans Wake is a novel by the Irish writer James Joyce . It was published in instalments  starting in 1924, under the title "fragments from Work in Progress ". The final title was only revealed when the book was published on 4 May 1939.

Although the base language of the novel is English, it is an English that Joyce modified by combining and altering words from many languages into his own distinctive idiom . Some commentators believe this technique was Joyce's attempt to reproduce the way that memories, people, and places are mixed together and transformed in a dreaming or half-awakened state.

The initial reception of Finnegans Wake was largely negative, ranging from bafflement at its radical reworking of language to open hostility towards its seeming pointlessness and lack of respect for literary conventions. Joyce, however, asserted that every syllable was justified. Its allusive and experimental style has resulted in it having a reputation as one of the most difficult works in literature.

Despite the obstacles, readers and commentators have reached a broad consensus about the book's central cast of characters and, to a lesser degree, its plot. The book explores the lives of the Earwicker family, comprising the father HCE; the mother ALP; and their three children: Shem the Penman, Shaun the Postman, and Issy. Following an unspecified rumour about HCE, the book follows his wife's attempts to exonerate him with a letter, his sons' struggle to replace him, and a final monologue by ALP at the break of dawn. Emphasizing its cyclical structure, the novel ends with an unfinished line that completes the fragment with which it began.

Background and composition [ edit ] Having completed work on Ulysses , Joyce was so exhausted that he did not write a line of prose for a year.

[ 1 ] : 14 On 10 March 1923, he wrote a letter to his patron, Harriet Shaw Weaver : "Yesterday I wrote two pages—the first I have since the final Yes of Ulysses . Having found a pen, with some difficulty I copied them out in a large handwriting on a double sheet of foolscap so that I could read them." [ 2 ] This is the earliest reference to what would become Finnegans Wake .

[ 3 ] A drawing of Joyce (with eyepatch) by Djuna Barnes from 1922, the year in which Joyce began the 17-year task of writing Finnegans Wake [ 4 ] The two pages in question consisted of the short sketch " Roderick O'Conor ", concerning the historic last king of Ireland cleaning up after guests by drinking the dregs of their dirty glasses.

[ 5 ] Joyce completed another four short sketches in July and August 1923, while holidaying in Bognor . The sketches, which dealt with different aspects of Irish history, are commonly known as " Tristan and Isolde ", " Saint Patrick and the Druid", " Kevin 's Orisons", and "Mamalujo".

[ 6 ] While these sketches would eventually be incorporated into Finnegans Wake in one form or another, they did not contain any of the main characters or plot points which would later come to constitute the backbone of the book. The first signs of what would eventually become Finnegans Wake came in August 1923 when Joyce wrote the sketch "Here Comes Everybody", which dealt for the first time with the book's protagonist HCE.

[ 7 ] Over the next few years, Joyce's method became one of "increasingly obsessional concern with note-taking, since [he] obviously felt that any word he wrote had first to have been recorded in some notebook." [ 8 ] As Joyce continued to incorporate these notes into his work, the text became increasingly dense and obscure.

[ citation needed ] By 1926, Joyce had largely completed both Parts I and III. Geert Lernout asserts that Part I had, at this early stage, "a real focus that had developed out of the HCE ["Here Comes Everybody"] sketch: the story of HCE, of his wife and children. There were the adventures of Humphrey Chimpden Earwicker himself and the rumours about them in chapters 2–4, a description of his wife ALP's letter in chapter 5, a denunciation of his son Shem in chapter 7, and a dialogue about ALP in chapter 8. These texts ... formed a unity." [ 9 ] In the same year, Joyce met Maria and Eugène Jolas in Paris, just as his new work was generating an increasingly negative reaction from readers and critics, culminating in The Dial ' s refusal to publish the four chapters of Part III in September 1926.

[ 9 ] The Jolases gave Joyce valuable encouragement and material support throughout the long process of writing Finnegans Wake , [ 10 ] and published sections of the book in serial form in their literary magazine transition , under the title Work in Progress . For the next few years, Joyce worked rapidly on the book, adding what would become chapters I.1 and I.6, and revising the already written segments to make them more lexically complex.

[ 11 ] By this time, some early supporters of Joyce's work, such as Ezra Pound and the author's brother Stanislaus Joyce , had grown increasingly unsympathetic to his new writing.

[ 12 ] In order to create a more favourable critical climate, a group of Joyce's supporters (including Samuel Beckett , William Carlos Williams , and others) put together a collection of critical essays on the new work. It was published in 1929 under the title Our Exagmination Round His Factification for Incamination of Work in Progress .

[ 13 ] In July 1929, increasingly demoralised by the poor reception his new work was receiving, Joyce approached his friend James Stephens about the possibility of Stephens completing the book. Joyce wrote to Weaver in late 1929 that he had "explained to [Stephens] all about the book, at least a great deal, and he promised me that if I found it madness to continue, in my condition, and saw no other way out, that he would devote himself, heart and soul, to the completion of it, that is the second part and the epilogue or fourth." [ 14 ] Apparently Joyce chose Stephens on superstitious grounds, as he had been born in the same hospital as Joyce, exactly one week later, and shared both the first names of Joyce himself and his fictional alter-ego Stephen Dedalus .

[ 15 ] In the end, Stephens was not asked to finish the book.

[ citation needed ] In the 1930s, as he was writing Parts II and IV, Joyce's progress slowed considerably. This was due to a number of factors including the death of his father John Stanislaus Joyce in 1931; [ 16 ] concern over the mental health of his daughter Lucia ; [ 17 ] and his own health problems, chiefly his failing eyesight.

[ 18 ] Finnegans Wake was published in book form, after seventeen years of composition, on 4 May 1939. Joyce died twenty months later in Zürich , on 13 January 1941.

[ citation needed ] Plot [ edit ] Finnegans Wake consists of seventeen chapters, divided into four Parts or Books. Part I contains eight chapters, Parts II and III each contain four, and Part IV consists of only one short chapter. The chapters appear without titles, and while Joyce never provided possible chapter titles as he had done for Ulysses , he did title various sections published separately (see Publication history below). The standard critical practice is to indicate part number in Roman numerals, and chapter title in Arabic numerals, so that III.2, for example, indicates the second chapter of the third part.

Given the book's fluid and changeable approach to plot and characters, a definitive, critically agreed-upon plot synopsis remains elusive. The following synopsis attempts to summarise events in the book, which find general, although inevitably not universal, consensus among critics.

Challenges of summary [ edit ] Joyce scholars question the legitimacy of searching for a linear storyline within the complex text of Finnegans Wake .

[ 19 ] : 165 As Bernard Benstock highlights, "in a work where every sentence opens a variety of possible interpretations, any synopsis of a chapter is bound to be incomplete." [ 20 ] David Hayman has suggested that "For all the efforts made by critics to establish a plot for the Wake , it makes little sense to force this prose into a narrative mold." [ 21 ] The book's challenges have led some commentators into generalised statements about its content and themes, prompting critic Bernard Benstock to warn against the danger of "boiling down" Finnegans Wake into "insipid pap, and leaving the lazy reader with a predigested mess of generalizations and catchphrases." [ 22 ] Fritz Senn has also voiced concerns with some plot synopses, saying "we have some traditional summaries, also some put in circulation by Joyce himself. I find them most unsatisfactory and unhelpful, they usually leave out the hard parts and recirculate what we already think we know. I simply cannot believe that FW would be as blandly uninteresting as those summaries suggest." [ 23 ] The challenge of compiling a definitive synopsis of Finnegans Wake lies not only in the opacity of the book's language but also in the radical approach to plot which Joyce employed. Joyce acknowledged this when he wrote to Eugène Jolas that "I might easily have written this story in the traditional manner ... Every novelist knows the recipe ... It is not very difficult to follow a simple, chronological scheme which the critics will understand ... But I, after all, am trying to tell the story of this Chapelizod family in a new way".

[ 24 ] While crucial plot points – such as HCE's crime or ALP's letter – are endlessly discussed, the reader never encounters or experiences them firsthand, and as the details are constantly changing, they remain unknown and perhaps unknowable. Joyce himself tacitly acknowledged this radically different approach to language and plot in a 1926 letter to Harriet Weaver, outlining his intentions for the book: "One great part of every human existence is passed in a state which cannot be rendered sensible by the use of wideawake language, cutanddry grammar and goahead plot." [ 25 ] Critics have seen a precedent for the book's plot presentation in Laurence Sterne 's digressive The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman , with Thomas Keymer stating that "Tristram Shandy was a natural touchstone for James Joyce as he explained his attempt "to build many planes of narrative with a single esthetic purpose" in Finnegans Wake ".

[ 26 ] Despite Joyce's revolutionary techniques, the author repeatedly emphasized that the book was neither random nor meaningless; with Richard Ellmann quoting the author as having stated: "I can justify every line of my book." [ 27 ] To Sisley Huddleston he stated "critics who were most appreciative of Ulysses are complaining about my new work. They cannot understand it. Therefore they say it is meaningless. Now if it were meaningless it could be written quickly without thought, without pains, without erudition; but I assure you that these 20 pages now before us [i.e., chapter I.8] cost me twelve hundred hours and an enormous expense of spirit." [ 28 ] : 490 When the editor of Vanity Fair asked Joyce if the sketches in Work in Progress were consecutive and interrelated, Joyce replied "It is all consecutive and interrelated." [ 29 ] Part I [ edit ] In the first chapter of Finnegans Wake Joyce describes the fall of the primordial giant Finnegan and his awakening as the modern family man and pub owner H.C.E.

– Donald Phillip Verene 's summary and interpretation of the Wake ' s episodic opening chapter [ 30 ] The entire work forms a cycle, the book ending with the sentence-fragment "a way a lone a last a loved a long the" and beginning by finishing that sentence: "riverrun, past Eve and Adam's, from swerve of shore to bend of bay, brings us by a commodius vicus of recirculation back to Howth Castle and Environs." Joyce himself revealed that the book "ends in the middle of a sentence and begins in the middle of the same sentence." [ 31 ] The introductory chapter (I.1) establishes the book's setting as " Howth Castle and Environs" (i.e. the Dublin area), and introduces Dublin hod carrier " Finnegan ", who falls to his death from a ladder while constructing a wall.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Finnegan's wife Annie puts out his corpse as a meal spread for the mourners at his wake , but he vanishes before they can eat him.

[ 33 ] A series of episodic vignettes follows, loosely related to the dead Finnegan, most commonly referred to as "The Willingdone Museyroom", [ 34 ] "Mutt and Jute", [ 35 ] [ 36 ] and "The Prankquean".

[ 37 ] At the chapter's close a fight breaks out, whiskey splashes on Finnegan's corpse, and "the dead Finnegan rises from his coffin bawling for whiskey and his mourners put him back to rest", [ 38 ] persuading him that he is better off where he is.

[ 39 ] The chapter ends with the image of the HCE character sailing into Dublin Bay to take a central role in the story.

Fountain in Dublin representing Anna Livia Plurabelle, a character in Finnegans Wake I.2 opens with an account of "Harold or Humphrey" Chimpden receiving the nickname "Earwicker" from the Sailor King, who encounters him attempting to catch earwigs with an inverted flowerpot on a stick while manning a tollgate through which the King is passing. This name helps Chimpden, now known by his initials HCE, to rise to prominence in Dublin society as "Here Comes Everybody". He is then brought low by a rumour that begins to spread across Dublin, apparently concerning a sexual trespass involving two girls in the Phoenix Park , although details of HCE's transgression change with each retelling of events.

Chapters I.2 through I.4 follow the progress of this rumour, starting with HCE's encounter with "a cad with a pipe" in Phoenix Park. The cad greets HCE in Gaelic and asks the time, but HCE misunderstands the question as an accusation, and incriminates himself by denying rumours the cad has not yet heard. These rumours quickly spread across Dublin, gathering momentum until they are turned into a song penned by the character Hosty called " The Ballad of Persse O'Reilly ". As a result, HCE goes into hiding, where he is besieged at the closed gate of his pub by a visiting American looking for a drink after hours.

[ 40 ] HCE remains silent – not responding to the accusations or verbal abuse – dreams, is buried in a coffin at the bottom of Lough Neagh , [ 41 ] and is finally brought to trial, under the name Festy King. He is eventually freed, and goes once more into hiding. An important piece of evidence during the trial – a letter about HCE written by his wife ALP – is called for so that it can be examined in closer detail.

ALP's letter becomes the focal point as it is analysed in detail in I.5. This letter was dictated by ALP to her son Shem, a writer, and entrusted to her other son Shaun, a postman, for delivery. The letter never reaches its intended destination, ending up in a midden heap where it is unearthed by a hen named Biddy. Chapter I.6 digresses from the narrative in order to present the main and minor characters in more detail, in the form of twelve riddles and answers. In the eleventh question or riddle, Shaun is asked about his relation to his brother Shem, and as part of his response, tells the parable of the Mookse and the Gripes.

[ 42 ] : 117–122 In the final two chapters of Part I, we learn more about the letter's writer Shem the Penman (I.7) and its original author, his mother ALP (I.8). The Shem chapter consists of "Shaun's character assassination of his brother Shem", describing the hermetic artist as a forger and a "sham", before "Shem is protected by his mother [ALP], who appears at the end to come and defend her son." [ 43 ] The following chapter concerning Shem's mother, known as "Anna Livia Plurabelle", is interwoven with thousands of river names from all over the globe, and is widely considered the book's most celebrated passage.

[ 44 ] The chapter was described by Joyce in 1924 as "a chattering dialogue across the river by two washerwomen who as night falls become a tree and a stone." [ 45 ] These two washerwomen gossip about ALP's response to the allegations laid against her husband HCE, as they wash clothes in the River Liffey . ALP is said to have written a letter declaring herself tired of her mate. Their gossip then digresses to her youthful affairs and sexual encounters, before returning to the publication of HCE's guilt in the morning newspaper, and his wife's revenge on his enemies: borrowing a "mailsack" from her son Shaun the Post, she delivers presents to her 111 children. At the chapter's close, the washerwomen try to pick up the thread of the story, but their conversation is increasingly difficult as they are on opposite sides of the widening Liffey, and it is getting dark. Finally, as they turn into a tree and a stone, they ask to be told a Tale of Shem or Shaun.

[ 46 ] Part II [ edit ] While Part I of Finnegans Wake deals mostly with the parents HCE and ALP, Part II shifts that focus to their children, Shem, Shaun and Issy.

II.1 opens with a pantomime programme, which outlines, in relatively clear language, the identities and attributes of the book's main characters. The chapter then concerns a guessing game among the children, in which Shem is challenged three times to guess by "gazework" the colour which the girls have chosen.

[ 47 ] Unable to answer due to his poor eyesight, Shem goes into exile in disgrace, and Shaun wins the affection of the girls. Finally, HCE emerges from the pub and in a thunder-like voice calls the children inside.

[ 48 ] Chapter II.2 follows Shem, Shaun and Issy studying upstairs in the pub, after having been called inside in the previous chapter.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] The chapter depicts "[Shem] coaching [Shaun] how to do Euclid Bk I, 1", structured as "a reproduction of a schoolboys' (and schoolgirls') old classbook complete with marginalia by the twins, who change sides at half time, and footnotes by the girl (who doesn't)".

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] Once Shem (here called Dolph) has helped Shaun (here called Kev) to draw the Euclid diagram , the latter realises that he has drawn a diagram of ALP's genitalia, and "Kev finally realises the significance of the triangles [..and..] strikes Dolph." After this "Dolph forgives Kev" and the children are given "[e]ssay assignments on 52 famous men." [ 53 ] The chapter ends with the children's "nightletter" to HCE and ALP, in which they are "apparently united in a desire to overcome their parents." [ 54 ] Section 1: a radio broadcast of the tale of Pukkelsen (a hunchbacked Norwegian Captain), Kersse (a tailor) and McCann (a ship's husband) in which the story is told inter alia of how HCE met and married ALP.

Sections 2–3: an interruption in which Kate (the cleaning woman) tells HCE that he is wanted upstairs, the door is closed and the tale of Buckley is introduced.

Sections 4–5: the tale, recounted by Butt and Taff (Shem and Shaun) and beamed over the television, of how Buckley shot the Russian General (HCE) –Danis Rose's overview of the extremely complex chapter 2.3, which he believes takes place in the bar of Earwicker's hotel [ 55 ] II.3 moves to HCE working in the pub below the studying children. As HCE serves his customers, two narratives are broadcast via the bar's radio and television sets, namely "The Norwegian Captain and the Tailor's Daughter", [ 56 ] [ 57 ] and "How Buckley Shot the Russian General". The first portrays HCE as a Norwegian Captain succumbing to domestication through his marriage to the Tailor's Daughter. The latter, told by Shem and Shaun ciphers Butt and Taff, casts HCE as a Russian general who is shot by Buckley, an Irish soldier in the British Army during the Crimean War .

[ 58 ] Earwicker has been absent throughout the latter tale, having been summoned upstairs by ALP. He returns and is reviled by his customers, who see Buckley's shooting of the General as symbolic of Shem and Shaun's supplanting their father.

[ 59 ] This condemnation of his character forces HCE to deliver a general confession of his crimes, including an incestuous desire for young girls.

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] [ 62 ] [ 63 ] Finally a policeman arrives to send the drunken customers home, the pub is closed up, [ 64 ] and the customers disappear singing into the night as a drunken HCE, clearing up the bar and swallowing the dregs of the glasses left behind, morphs into ancient Irish high king Rory O'Connor, and passes out.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] II.4, portraying the drunken and sleeping Earwicker's dream, chronicles the spying of four old men (Matthew, Mark, Luke and John) on Tristan and Iseult 's journey.

[ 67 ] The short chapter portrays "an old man like King Mark being rejected and abandoned by young lovers who sail off into a future without him", [ 68 ] while the four old men observe Tristan and Isolde, and offer four intertwining commentaries on the lovers and themselves which are "always repeating themselves".

[ 69 ] Part III [ edit ] Part III concerns itself almost exclusively with Shaun, in his role as postman, having to deliver ALP's letter, which was referred to in Part I but never seen.

[ 70 ] [ 71 ] III.1 opens with the Four Masters' ass narrating how he thought, as he was "dropping asleep", [ 72 ] he had heard and seen an apparition of Shaun the Post.

[ 73 ] As a result, Shaun re-awakens and, floating down the Liffey in a barrel, is posed fourteen questions concerning the significance and content of the letter he is carrying. Shaun, "apprehensive about being slighted, is on his guard, and the placating narrators never get a straight answer out of him." [ 74 ] Shaun's answers focus on his own boastful personality and his admonishment of the letter's author – his artist brother Shem. The answer to the eighth question contains the story of the Ondt and the Gracehoper, another framing of the Shaun-Shem relationship.

[ 75 ] : 229–231 After the inquisition Shaun loses his balance and the barrel in which he has been floating careens over and he rolls backwards out of the narrator's earshot, before disappearing completely from view.

[ 76 ] In III.2 Shaun re-appears as "Jaunty Jaun" and delivers a lengthy and sexually suggestive sermon to his sister Issy, and her twenty-eight schoolmates from St. Brigid's School. Throughout this book Shaun is continually regressing, changing from an old man to an overgrown baby lying on his back, and eventually, in III.3, into a vessel through which the voice of HCE speaks again by means of a spiritual medium . This leads to HCE's defence of his life in the passage "Haveth Childers Everywhere". Part III ends in the bedroom of Mr. and Mrs. Porter as they attempt to copulate while their children, Jerry, Kevin and Isobel Porter, are sleeping upstairs and the dawn is rising outside (III.4). Jerry awakes from a nightmare of a scary father figure, and Mrs. Porter interrupts the coitus to go comfort him with the words "You were dreamend, dear. The pawdrag? The fawthrig? Shoe! Hear are no phanthares in the room at all, avikkeen. No bad bold faathern, dear one." [ 77 ] She returns to bed, and the rooster crows at the conclusion of their coitus at the Part's culmination.

[ 78 ] Part IV [ edit ] 1 : The waking and resurrection of [HCE]; 2 : the sunrise; 3 : the conflict of night and day; 4 : the attempt to ascertain the correct time; 5 : the terminal point of the regressive time and the [Shaun] figure of Part III; 6 : the victory of day over night; 7 : the letter and monologue of [ALP] –Roland McHugh's summary of the events of Part IV [ 79 ] Part IV consists of only one chapter, which, like the book's opening chapter, is mostly composed of a series of seemingly unrelated vignettes . After an opening call for dawn to break, [ 80 ] the remainder of the chapter consists of the vignettes "Saint Kevin", "Berkely and Patrick" and "The Revered Letter".

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] ALP is given the final word, as the book closes on a version of her Letter [ 83 ] and her final long monologue, in which she tries to wake her sleeping husband, declaring "Rise up, man of the hooths, you have slept so long!", [ 84 ] and remembers a walk they once took, and hopes for its re-occurrence. At the close of her monologue, ALP – as the river Liffey – disappears at dawn into the ocean. The book's last words are a fragment, but they can be turned into a complete sentence by attaching them to the words that start the book: A way a lone a last a loved a long the / riverrun, past Eve and Adam's, from swerve of shore to bend of bay, brings us by a commodius vicus of recirculation back to Howth Castle and Environs.

Characters [ edit ] Critics disagree on whether discernible characters exist in Finnegans Wake . For example, Grace Eckley argues that Wakean characters are distinct from one another, [ 85 ] and defends this with explaining the dual narrators, the "us" of the first paragraph, as well as Shem-Shaun distinctions [ 86 ] while Margot Norris argues that the "[c]haracters are fluid and interchangeable".

[ 87 ] Supporting the latter stance, Van Hulle finds that the "characters" in Finnegans Wake are rather "archetypes or character amalgams, taking different shapes", [ 88 ] and Riquelme similarly refers to the book's cast of mutable characters as " protean ".

[ 89 ] As early as in 1934, in response to the recently published excerpt "The Mookse and the Gripes", Ronald Symond argued that "the characters in Work in Progress , in keeping with the space-time chaos in which they live, change identity at will. At one time they are persons, at another rivers or stones or trees, at another personifications of an idea, at another they are lost and hidden in the actual texture of the prose, with an ingenuity far surpassing that of crossword puzzles ." [ 90 ] Such concealment of character identity has resulted in some disparity as to how critics identify the book's main protagonists; for example, while most find consensus that Festy King, who appears on trial in I.4, is a HCE type, not all analysts agree on this – for example Anthony Burgess believes him to be Shaun.

[ 91 ] While characters are in a constant state of flux—constantly changing names, occupations, and physical attributes—a recurring set of core characters, or character types (what Norris dubs " ciphers "), are discernible. During the composition of Finnegans Wake , Joyce used signs, or so-called "sigla", rather than names to designate these character amalgams or types. In a letter to his Maecenas, Harriet Shaw Weaver (March 1924), Joyce made a list of these sigla.

[ 88 ] For those who argue for the existence of distinguishable characters, the book focuses on the Earwicker family, which consists of father, mother, twin sons and a daughter.

Humphrey Chimpden Earwicker (HCE) [ edit ] Philip Kitcher argues for the father HCE as the book's protagonist, stating that he is "the dominant figure throughout ... His guilt, his shortcomings, his failures pervade the entire book".

[ 92 ] Bishop states that while the constant flux of HCE's character and attributes may lead us to consider him as an "anyman," he argues that "the sheer density of certain repeated details and concerns allows us to know that he is a particular, real Dubliner." The common critical consensus of HCE's fixed character is summarised by Bishop as being "an older Protestant male, of Scandinavian lineage, connected with the pubkeeping business somewhere in the neighbourhood of Chapelizod , who has a wife, a daughter, and two sons." [ 93 ] : 135 HCE is referred to by literally thousands of names throughout the book; leading Terence Killeen to argue that in Finnegans Wake "naming is ... a fluid and provisional process".

[ 94 ] HCE is at first referred to as "Harold or Humphrey Chimpden"; [ 95 ] a conflation of these names as "Haromphreyld", [ 96 ] and as a consequence of his initials "Here Comes Everybody".

[ 97 ] These initials lend themselves to phrase after phrase throughout the book; for example, appearing in the book's opening sentence as "Howth Castle and Environs". As the work progresses the names by which he may be referred to become increasingly abstract (such as " Finn MacCool ", [ 98 ] "Mr. Makeall Gone", [ 99 ] or "Mr. Porter" [ 100 ] ).

Some Wake critics, such as Finn Fordham, argue that HCE's initials come from the initials of the portly politician Hugh Childers (1827–96), who had been nicknamed "Here Comes Everybody" for his size.

[ 101 ] Many critics see Finnegan, whose death, wake and resurrection are the subject of the opening chapter, as either a prototype of HCE, or as another of his manifestations. One of the reasons for this close identification is that Finnegan is called a "man of h od, c ement and e difices" and "like H aroun C hilderic E ggeberth", [ 102 ] identifying him with the initials HCE.

Patrick Parrinder for example states that "Bygmester Finnegan ... is HCE", and finds that his fall and resurrection foreshadows "the fall of HCE early in Book I [which is] paralleled by his resurrection towards the end of III.3, in the section originally called "Haveth Childers Everywhere", when [HCE's] ghost speaks forth in the middle of a seance ." [ 103 ] : 222 Anna Livia Plurabelle (ALP) [ edit ] Patrick McCarthy describes HCE's wife ALP as "the river-woman whose presence is implied in the 'riverrun' with which Finnegans Wake opens and whose monologue closes the book. For over six hundred pages, Joyce presents Anna Livia to us almost exclusively through other characters, much as in Ulysses we hear what Molly Bloom has to say about herself only in the last chapter." [ 104 ] The most extensive discussion of ALP comes in chapter I.8, in which hundreds of names of rivers are woven into the tale of ALP's life, as told by two gossiping washerwomen. Similarly hundreds of city names are woven into "Haveth Childers Everywhere", the corresponding passage at the end of III.3 which focuses on HCE. As a result, it is generally contended that HCE personifies the city of Dublin, and his wife ALP personifies the river Liffey, on whose banks the city was built.

[ citation needed ] Shem, Shaun and Issy [ edit ] ALP and HCE have a daughter, Issy – whose personality is often split (represented by her mirror-twin). Parrinder argues that "as daughter and sister, she is an object of secret and repressed desire both to her father ... and to her two brothers." [ 105 ] These twin sons of HCE and ALP consist of a writer called Shem the Penman and a postman by the name of Shaun the Post, who are rivals for replacing their father and for their sister Issy's affection. Shaun is portrayed as a dull postman , conforming to society's expectations, while Shem is a bright artist and sinister experimenter, often perceived as Joyce's alter-ego in the book.

[ 106 ] Hugh Staples finds that Shaun "wants to be thought of as a man-about-town, a snappy dresser, a glutton and a gourmet ... He is possessed of a musical voice and is a braggart. He is not happy in his work, which is that of a messenger or a postman; he would rather be a priest." [ 107 ] Shaun's sudden and somewhat unexpected promotion to the book's central character in Part III is explained by Tindall with the assertion that "having disposed of old HCE, Shaun is becoming the new HCE." [ 108 ] Like their father, Shem and Shaun are referred to by different names throughout the book, such as "Caddy and Primas"; [ 109 ] " Mercius " and " Justius "; [ 110 ] [ 111 ] "Dolph and Kevin"; [ 112 ] and "Jerry and Kevin".

[ 113 ] These twins are contrasted in the book by allusions to sets of opposing twins and enemies in literature, mythology and history; such as Set and Horus of the Osiris story; the biblical pairs Jacob and Esau , Cain and Abel , and Saint Michael and the Devil – equating Shaun with "Mick" and Shem with "Nick" – as well as Romulus and Remus . They also represent the oppositions of time and space, [ 114 ] and tree and stone.

[ 115 ] : 224 Minor characters [ edit ] The most commonly recurring characters outside of the Earwicker family are the four old men known collectively as "Mamalujo" (a conflation of their names: Matt Gregory, Marcus Lyons, Luke Tarpey and Johnny Mac Dougall). These four most commonly serve as narrators, but they also play a number of active roles in the text, such as when they serve as the judges in the court case of I.4, or as the inquisitors who question Yawn in III.4. Tindall summarises the roles that these old men play as those of the Four Masters , the Four Evangelists , and the four Provinces of Ireland (" Matthew , from the north, is Ulster ; Mark , from the south, is Munster ; Luke , from the east, is Leinster ; and John , from the west, is Connaught ").

[ 116 ] : 255 According to Finn Fordham, Joyce related to his daughter-in-law Helen Fleischmann that "Mamalujo" also represented Joyce's own family, namely his wife Nora (mama), daughter Lucia (lu), and son Giorgio (jo).

[ 117 ] : 77 In addition to the four old men, there are a group of twelve unnamed men who always appear together, and serve as the customers in Earwicker's pub, gossipers about his sins, jurors at his trial and mourners at his wake.

[ 118 ] : 5 The Earwicker household also includes two cleaning staff: Kate, the maid, and Joe, who is by turns handyman and barman in Earwicker's pub. Tindall considers these characters to be older versions of ALP and HCE.

[ 119 ] : 4–5 Kate often plays the role of museum curator, as in the "Willingdone Museyroom" episode of 1.1, and is recognisable by her repeated motif "Tip! Tip!" Joe is often also referred to by the name "Sackerson", and Kitcher describes him as "a figure sometimes playing the role of policeman, sometimes ... a squalid derelict, and most frequently the odd-job man of HCE's inn, Kate's male counterpart, who can ambiguously indicate an older version of HCE." [ 120 ] : 39 Major themes [ edit ] Fargnoli and Gillespie suggest that the book's opening chapter "introduces [the] major themes and concerns of the book", and enumerate these as "Finnegan's fall, the promise of his resurrection, the cyclical structure of time and history (dissolution and renewal), tragic love as embodied in the story of Tristan and Iseult , the motif of the warring brothers, the personification of the landscape and the question of Earwicker's crime in the park, the precise nature of which is left uncertain throughout the Wake ." [ 121 ] Such a view finds general critical consensus, viewing the vignettes as allegorical appropriations of the book's characters and themes; for example, Schwartz argues that "The Willingdone Museyroom" episode represents the book's "archetypal family drama in military-historical terms." [ 122 ] Joyce himself referred to the chapter as a " prelude ", [ 123 ] and as an "air photograph of Irish history, a celebration of the dim past of Dublin." [ 124 ] Riquelme finds that "passages near the book's beginning and its ending echo and complement one another", [ 125 ] and Fargnoli and Gillespie representatively argue that the book's cyclical structure echoes the themes inherent within, that "the typologies of human experience that Joyce identifies [in Finnegans Wake ] are ... essentially cyclical, that is, patterned and recurrent; in particular, the experiences of birth, guilt, judgment, sexuality, family, social ritual and death recur throughout the Wake ".

[ 126 ] In a similar enumeration of themes, Tindall argues that "rise and fall and rise again, sleeping and waking, death and resurrection, sin and redemption, conflict and appeasement, and, above all, time itself ... are the matter of Joyce's essay on man." [ 127 ] Henkes and Bindervoet generally summarise the critical consensus when they argue that, between the thematically indicative opening and closing chapters, the book concerns "two big questions" which are never resolved: what is the nature of protagonist HCE's secret sin, and what was the letter, written by his wife ALP, about?

[ 128 ] HCE's unidentifiable sin has most generally been interpreted as representing man's original sin as a result of the Fall of Man . Anthony Burgess sees HCE, through his dream, trying "to make the whole of history swallow up his guilt for him" and to this end "HCE has, so deep in his sleep, sunk to a level of dreaming in which he has become a collective being rehearsing the collective guilt of man." [ 129 ] Fargnoli and Gillespie argue that although undefined, "Earwicker's alleged crime in the Park" appears to have been of a " voyeuristic , sexual, or scatological nature".

[ 121 ] ALP's letter appears a number of times throughout the book, in a number of different forms, and as its contents cannot be definitively delineated, it is usually believed to be both an exoneration of HCE, and an indictment of his sin. Herring argues that "[t]he effect of ALP's letter is precisely the opposite of her intent ... the more ALP defends her husband in her letter, the more scandal attaches to him." [ 130 ] Patrick A. McCarthy argues that "it is appropriate that the waters of the Liffey, representing Anna Livia, are washing away the evidence of Earwicker's sins as [the washerwomen speak, in chapter I.8] for (they tell us) she takes on her husband's guilt and redeems him; alternately she is tainted with his crimes and regarded as an accomplice".

[ 131 ] Style [ edit ] Language [ edit ] The Franciscan Church of the Immaculate Conception in Dublin, popularly known as Adam & Eve's, referred to in the opening of Finnegans Wake Joyce invented a unique polyglot-language or idioglossia solely for the purpose of this work. This language is composed of composite words from some sixty to seventy world languages, [ 132 ] combined to form puns , or portmanteau words and phrases intended to convey several layers of meaning at once. Senn has labelled Finnegans Wake' s language as " polysemetic ", [ 23 ] and Tindall as an " Arabesque ".

[ 133 ] Norris describes it as a language which "like poetry, uses words and images which can mean several, often contradictory, things at once" [ 134 ] The style has also been compared to rumour and gossip, especially in the way the writing subverts notions of political and scholarly authority.

[ 135 ] An early review of the book argued that Joyce was attempting "to employ language as a new medium, breaking down all grammatical usages, all time space values, all ordinary conceptions of context ... the theme is the language and the language the theme, and a language where every association of sound and free association is exploited." [ 136 ] Seconding this analysis of the book's emphasis on form over content, Paul Rosenfeld reviewed Finnegans Wake in 1939 with the suggestion that "the writing is not so much about something as it is that something itself [...] in Finnegans Wake the style, the essential qualities and movement of the words, their rhythmic and melodic sequences, and the emotional color of the page are the main representatives of the author's thought and feeling. The accepted significations of the words are secondary." [ 137 ] While commentators emphasize how this manner of writing can communicate multiple levels of meaning simultaneously, Hayman and Norris contend that its purpose is as much to obscure and disable meaning as to expand it. Hayman writes that access to the work's "tenuous narratives" may be achieved only through "the dense weave of a language designed as much to shield as to reveal them." [ 138 ] Norris argues that Joyce's language is "devious" and that it "conceals and reveals secrets." [ 134 ] Allen B. Ruch has dubbed Joyce's new language "dreamspeak," and describes it as "a language that's basically English, but extremely malleable and all-inclusive, a fusion of portmanteau words, stylistic parodies, and complex puns." [ 139 ] Although much has been made of the numerous world languages employed in the book's composite language, most of the more obscure languages appear only seldom in small clusters, and most agree with Ruch that the latent sense of the language, however manifestly obscure, is "basically English".

[ 140 ] [ 141 ] Burrell also finds that Joyce's thousands of neologisms are "based on the same etymological principles as standard English." [ 142 ] The Wake' s language is not entirely unique in literature; for example critics have seen its use of portmanteaus and neologisms as an extension of Lewis Carroll 's Jabberwocky .

[ 143 ] Although Joyce died shortly after the publication of Finnegans Wake , during the work's composition the author made a number of statements concerning his intentions in writing in such an original manner. In a letter to Max Eastman , for example, Joyce suggested that his decision to employ such a unique and complex language was a direct result from his attempts to represent the night: In writing of the night I really could not, I felt I could not, use words in their ordinary connections. Used that way they do not express how things are in the night, in the different stages – the conscious, then semi-conscious, then unconscious. I found that it could not be done with words in their ordinary relations and connections. When morning comes of course everything will be clear again ... I'll give them back their English language. I'm not destroying it for good.

[ 144 ] Joyce is also reported as having told Arthur Power that "what is clear and concise can't deal with reality, for to be real is to be surrounded by mystery." [ 145 ] On the subject of the vast number of puns employed in the work Joyce argued to Frank Budgen that "after all, the Holy Roman Catholic Apostolic Church was built on a pun. It ought to be good enough for me", [ 144 ] and to the objection of triviality he replied "Yes. Some of the means I use are trivial – and some are quadrivial ." [ 144 ] A great many of the book's puns are etymological in nature. Sources tell us that Joyce relished delving into the history and the changing meanings of words, his primary source being An Etymological Dictionary of the English Language by the Rev. Walter W. Skeat (Oxford, at the Clarendon Press; 1879). For example, one of the first entries in Skeat is for the letter A, which begins: "...

(1) adown; (2) afoot; (3) along; (4) arise; (5) achieve; (6) avert; (7) amend; (8) alas; (9) abyss ..." Further in the entry, Skeat writes: "These prefixes are discussed at greater length under the headings Of, On, Along, Arise ... Alas, Aware, Avast ..." It seems likely that these strings of words prompted Joyce to finish the Wake with a sentence fragment that included the words: "...

a way a lone a last a loved a long ..." [ 146 ] : 272ff.

Samuel Beckett collected words from foreign languages on cards for Joyce to use, and, as Joyce's eyesight worsened, wrote down the text from his dictation.

[ 147 ] Beckett described and defended the writing style of Finnegans Wake thus: "This writing that you find so obscure is a quintessential extraction of language and painting and gesture, with all the inevitable clarity of the old inarticulation. Here is the savage economy of hieroglyphics ".

[ 148 ] Faced with the obstacles to be surmounted in "understanding" Joyce's text, a handful of critics have suggested readers focus on the rhythm and sound of the language, rather than solely on "meaning." For instance, as early as 1929, Eugène Jolas stressed the importance of the aural and musical dimensions of the work.

[ 149 ] A reconstruction of nocturnal life [ edit ] Throughout the book's seventeen-year gestation, Joyce stated that with Finnegans Wake he was attempting to "reconstruct the nocturnal life", [ 150 ] and that the book was his "experiment in interpreting 'the dark night of the soul'." [ 151 ] According to Ellmann, Joyce stated to Edmond Jaloux that Finnegans Wake would be written "to suit the esthetic of the dream, where the forms prolong and multiply themselves", [ 152 ] and once informed a friend that "he conceived of his book as the dream of old Finn, lying in death beside the river Liffey and watching the history of Ireland and the world – past and future – flow through his mind like flotsam on the river of life." [ 153 ] [ 154 ] While pondering the generally negative reactions to the book Joyce said: I can't understand some of my critics, like Pound or Miss Weaver, for instance. They say it's obscure . They compare it, of course, with Ulysses . But the action of Ulysses was chiefly during the daytime, and the action of my new work takes place chiefly at night. It's natural things should not be so clear at night, isn't it now?

[ 155 ] Joyce's claims to be representing the night and dreams have been accepted and questioned with greater and lesser credulity. Harriet Weaver was among the first to suggest that the dream was not that of any one dreamer, but was rather an analysis of the process of dreaming itself.

[ 156 ] Bernard Benstock also argued that "The Dreamer in the Wake is more than just a single individual, even if one assumes that on the literal level we are viewing the dream of publican H. C. Earwicker." [ 157 ] Supporters of the claim have pointed to Part IV as providing its strongest evidence, as when the narrator asks "You mean to see we have been hadding a sound night's sleep?", [ 158 ] and later concludes that what has gone before has been "a long, very long, a dark, very dark ... scarce endurable ... night".

[ 159 ] Tindall refers to Part IV as "a chapter of resurrection and waking up", [ 160 ] and McHugh finds that the chapter contains "particular awareness of events going on offstage, connected with the arrival of dawn and the waking process which terminates the sleeping process of [ Finnegans Wake ]." [ 161 ] This conceptualisation of the Wake as a dream is a point of contention for some. Harry Burrell, a representative of this view, argues that "one of the most overworked ideas is that Finnegans Wake is about a dream. It is not, and there is no dreamer." Burrell argues that the theory is an easy way out for "critics stymied by the difficulty of comprehending the novel and the search for some kind of understanding of it." [ 162 ] [ 163 ] Other critics have been skeptical of the effort to specifically identify the dreamer of the book's narrative. According to Clive Hart, "Speculation about the 'real person' behind the guises of the dream-surrogates or about the function of the dream in relation to the unresolved stresses of this hypothetical mind is fruitless, for the tensions and psychological problems in Finnegans Wake concern the dream-figures living within the book itself." [ 164 ] Allusions [ edit ] Giambattista Vico's "La Scienza Nuova" (The New Science), an influence on the structure of Finnegans Wake Finnegans Wake incorporates a high number of intertextual allusions and references to other texts; Parrinder refers to it as "a remarkable example of intertextuality" containing a "wealth of literary reference." [ 165 ] Among the most prominent are the Irish ballad " Finnegan's Wake " from which the book takes its name, Italian philosopher Giovanni Battista Vico 's La Scienza Nuova , [ 166 ] the Egyptian Book of the Dead , the plays of Shakespeare, [ 167 ] and religious texts such as the Bible and Qur'an .

[ 168 ] : 166–167 These allusions, rather than directly quoting or referencing a source, normally enter the text in a contorted fashion, often through humorous plays on words. For example, Hamlet Prince of Denmark becomes "Camelot, prince of dinmurk" [ 169 ] and the Epistle to the Hebrews becomes a "farced epistol to the hibruws".

[ 170 ] "Commodius vicus" refers to Giambattista Vico (1668–1744), who proposed a theory of cyclical history in his work La Scienza Nuova ( The New Science ). Vico argued that the world was coming to the end of the last of three ages, these being the age of gods, the age of heroes, and the age of humans. These ideas recur throughout Finnegans Wake , informing the book's four-part structure. Vico's name appears a number of times throughout the Wake , indicating the work's debt to his theories, such as "The Vico road goes round and round to meet where terms begin".

[ 171 ] That a reference to Vico's cyclical theory of history is to be found in the opening sentence which is a continuation of the book's closing sentence – thus making the work cyclical in itself – creates the relevance of such an allusion.

One of the sources Joyce drew from is the Ancient Egyptian story of Osiris , [ 172 ] and the Egyptian Book of the Dead , a collection of spells and invocations. Bishop asserts that "it is impossible to overlook the vital presence of the Book of the Dead in Finnegans Wake , which refers to ancient Egypt in countless tags and allusions." [ 173 ] Joyce uses the Book of the Dead in Finnegans Wake , "because it is a collection of the incantations for the resurrection and rebirth of the dead on the burial".

[ 174 ] At one of their final meetings, Joyce suggested to Frank Budgen that he write an article about Finnegans Wake , entitling it "James Joyce's Book of the Dead". Budgen followed Joyce's advice with his paper "Joyce's Chapters of Going Forth by Day", highlighting many of the allusions to Egyptian mythology in the book.

[ 175 ] The Tristan and Iseult legend – a tragic love triangle between the Irish princess Iseult, the Cornish knight Tristan and his uncle King Mark – is also oft alluded to in the work, particularly in II.4. Fargnoli and Gillespie argue that "various themes and motifs throughout Finnegans Wake , such as the cuckoldry of Humphrey Chimpden Earwicker (a King Mark figure) and Shaun's attempts at seducing Issy, relate directly to Tristan and Isolde ... other motifs relating to Earwicker's loss of authority, such as the forces usurping his parental status, are also based on Tristan and Isolde." [ 176 ] The book also alludes heavily to Irish mythology , with HCE sometimes corresponding to Fionn mac Cumhaill , [ 177 ] Issy and ALP to Gráinne , and Shem/Shaun to Dermot (Diarmaid). Not only Irish mythology, but also notable real-life Irish figures are alluded to throughout the text. For example, HCE is often identified with Charles Stewart Parnell , and Shem's attack on his father in this way mirrors the attempt of forger Richard Pigott to incriminate Parnell in the Phoenix Park Murders of 1882 by means of false letters.

[ citation needed ] Finnegans Wake also makes a great number of allusions to religious texts. When HCE is first introduced in chapter I.2, the narrator relates how "in the beginning" he was a "grand old gardener", thus equating him with Adam in the Garden of Eden . Spinks further highlights this allusion by highlighting that like HCE's unspecified crime in the park, Adam also "commits a crime in a garden".

[ 178 ] : 130 Reception [ edit ] The value of Finnegans Wake as a work of literature has been a point of contention since the time of its appearance, in serial form, in literary reviews of the 1920s. Initial response, to both its serialised and final published forms, was almost universally negative. Even close friends and family were disapproving of Joyce's seemingly impenetrable text, with Joyce's brother Stanislaus "rebuk[ing] him for writing an incomprehensible night-book", [ 179 ] and former friend Oliver Gogarty believing the book to be a joke, pulled by Joyce on the literary community, referring to it as "the most colossal leg pull in literature since Macpherson's Ossian ".

[ 180 ] When Ezra Pound , a former champion of Joyce's and admirer of Joyce's Ulysses , was asked his opinion on the text, he wrote "Nothing so far as I make out, nothing short of divine vision or a new cure for the clap can possibly be worth all the circumambient peripherization." [ 181 ] H. G. Wells , in a personal letter to Joyce, argued that "you have turned your back on common men, on their elementary needs and their restricted time and intelligence ... I ask: who the hell is this Joyce who demands so many waking hours of the few thousands I have still to live for a proper appreciation of his quirks and fancies and flashes of rendering?" [ 182 ] Even Joyce's patron Harriett Weaver wrote to him in 1927 to inform him of her misgivings regarding his new work, stating "I am made in such a way that I do not care much for the output from your Wholesale Safety Pun Factory nor for the darknesses and unintelligibilities of your deliberately entangled language system. It seems to me you are wasting your genius." [ 183 ] The wider literary community was equally disparaging, with D. H. Lawrence declaring in a letter to Maria and Aldous Huxley , having read sections of the Wake appearing as "Work in Progress" in transition , "My God, what a clumsy olla putrida James Joyce is! Nothing but old fags and cabbage-stumps of quotations from the Bible and the rest, stewed in the juice of deliberate journalistic dirty-mindedness – what old and hard-worked staleness, masquerading as the all-new!" [ 25 ] Vladimir Nabokov , who had also admired Ulysses , described Finnegans Wake as "nothing but a formless and dull mass of phony folklore, a cold pudding of a book, a persistent snore in the next room ... and only the infrequent snatches of heavenly intonations redeem it from utter insipidity." [ 25 ] In response to such criticisms, transition published essays throughout the late 1920s, defending and explaining Joyce's work. In 1929, these essays (along with a few others written for the occasion) were collected under the title Our Exagmination Round His Factification for Incamination of Work in Progress and published by Shakespeare and Company . This collection featured Samuel Beckett 's first commissioned work, the essay "Dante ... Bruno. Vico.. Joyce", [ 184 ] along with contributions by William Carlos Williams , Stuart Gilbert , Marcel Brion , Eugene Jolas and others. As Margot Norris highlights, the agenda of this first generation of Wake critics and defenders was "to assimilate Joyce's experimental text to an already increasingly established and institutionalized literary avant-garde" and "to foreground Joyce's last work as spearhead of a philosophical avant-garde bent on the revolution of language".

[ 185 ] Upon its publication in 1939, Finnegans Wake received a series of mixed, but mostly negative reviews.

Louise Bogan , writing for Nation , surmised that while "the book's great beauties, its wonderful passages of wit, its variety, its mark of genius and immense learning are undeniable ..., to read the book over a long period of time gives one the impression of watching intemperance become addiction, become debauch" and argued that "Joyce's delight in reducing man's learning, passion, and religion to a hash is also disturbing." [ 186 ] Edwin Muir , reviewing in Listener wrote that "as a whole the book is so elusive that there is no judging it; I cannot tell whether it is winding into deeper and deeper worlds of meaning or lapsing into meaningless", although he too acknowledged that "there are occasional flashes of a kind of poetry which is difficult to define but is of unquestioned power." [ 187 ] B. Ifor Evans, writing in the Manchester Guardian , similarly argued that, due to its difficulties, the book "does not admit of review", and argued that, perhaps "in twenty years' time, with sufficient study and with the aid of the commentary that will doubtless arise, one might be ready for an attempt to appraise it." Taking a swipe at many of the negative reviews circulating at the time, Evans writes: "The easiest way to deal with the book would be ... to write off Mr. Joyce's latest volume as the work of a charlatan. But the author of Dubliners , A Portrait of the Artist and Ulysses is not a charlatan, but an artist of very considerable proportions. I prefer to suspend judgement ..." [ 188 ] In the time since Joyce's death, the book's admirers have struggled against public perception of the work to make exactly this argument for Finnegans Wake . One of the book's early champions was Thornton Wilder , who wrote to Gertrude Stein and Alice Toklas in August 1939, a few months after the book's publication: "One of my absorptions ... has been James Joyce's new novel, digging out its buried keys and resolving that unbroken chain of erudite puzzles and finally coming on lots of wit, and lots of beautiful things has been my midnight recuperation. A lot of thanks to him".

[ 189 ] The publication in 1944 of the first in-depth study and analysis of Joyce's final text— A Skeleton Key to Finnegans Wake by mythologist Joseph Campbell and Henry Morton Robinson —tried to prove to a skeptical public that if the hidden key or " Monomyth " could be found, then the book could be read as a novel with characters, plot, and an internal coherence. As a result, from the 1940s to the 1960s critical emphasis moved away from positioning the Wake as a "revolution of the word" and towards readings that stressed its "internal logical coherence", as "the avant-gardism of Finnegans Wake was put on hold [and] deferred while the text was rerouted through the formalistic requirements of an American criticism inspired by New Critical dicta that demanded a poetic intelligibility, a formal logic, of texts." [ 185 ] Slowly the book's critical capital began to rise to the point that, in 1957, Northrop Frye described Finnegans Wake as the "chief ironic epic of our time" [ 190 ] and Anthony Burgess lauded the book as "a great comic vision, one of the few books of the world that can make us laugh aloud on nearly every page." [ 191 ] In 1962, Clive Hart wrote the first major book-length study of the work since Campbell's Skeleton Key , Structure and Motif in "Finnegans Wake" which approached the work from the increasingly influential field of structuralism . However through the 1960s it was to be French post-structuralist theory that was to exert the most influence over readings of Finnegans Wake , refocussing critical attention back to the work's radical linguistic experiments and their philosophical consequences.

Jacques Derrida compared his ideas of literary " deconstruction " with the methods of Finnegans Wake (as detailed in the essay "Two Words for Joyce"), and more generally post-structuralism has embraced Joyce's innovation and ambition in Finnegans Wake .

[ 192 ] More recently, Finnegans Wake has become an increasingly accepted part of the critical literary canon, although detractors still remain. As an example, John Bishop described the book's legacy as that of "the single most intentionally crafted literary artifact that our culture has produced ... and, certainly, one of the great monuments of twentieth-century experimental letters." [ 140 ] The section of the book to have received the most praise throughout its critical history has been "Anna Livia Plurabelle" (I.8), which Parrinder describes as being "widely recognized as one of the most beautiful prose-poems in English." [ 193 ] Publication and translation history [ edit ] Jürgen Partenheimer 's "Violer d'amores", a series of drawings inspired by Joyce's Finnegans Wake Throughout the seventeen years that Joyce wrote the book, Finnegans Wake was published in short excerpts in a number of literary magazines, most prominently in the Parisian literary journals Transatlantic Review and Eugene Jolas 's transition . It has been argued that " Finnegans Wake , much more so than Ulysses , was very much directly shaped by the tangled history of its serial publication." [ 194 ] In late October 1923 in Ezra Pound 's Paris flat, Ford Madox Ford convinced Joyce to contribute some of his new sketches to the Transatlantic Review , a new journal that Ford was editing.

[ 195 ] The eight-page "Mamalujo" sketch became the first fragment from the book to be published in its own right, in Transatlantic Review 1.4 in April 1924.

[ 196 ] The sketch appeared under the title "From Work in Progress", a term applied to works by Ernest Hemingway and Tristan Tzara published in the same issue, and the one by which Joyce would refer to his final work until its publication as Finnegans Wake in 1939.

[ 194 ] The sketch appeared in the final published text, in radically altered form, as chapter 2.4.

[ 197 ] In 1925 four sketches from the developing work were published. "Here Comes Everybody" [ 198 ] was published as "From Work in Progress" in the Contact Collection of Contemporary Writers , edited by Robert McAlmon . "The Letter" [ 199 ] was published as "Fragment of an Unpublished Work" in Criterion 3.12 (July 1925), and as "A New Unnamed Work" in Two Worlds 1.1. (September 1925).

[ 197 ] The first published draft of "Anna Livia Plurabelle" [ 200 ] appeared in Le Navire d'Argent 1 in October, and the first published draft of "Shem the Penman" [ 201 ] appeared in the Autumn–Winter edition of This Quarter .

[ 197 ] In 1925-6 Two Worlds began to publish redrafted versions of previously published fragments, starting with "Here Comes Everybody" in December 1925, and then "Anna Livia Plurabelle" (March 1926), "Shem the Penman" (June 1926), and "Mamalujo" (September 1925), all under the title "A New Unnamed Work".

[ 197 ] Eugene Jolas befriended Joyce in 1927, and as a result serially published revised fragments from Part I in his transition literary journal. This began with the debut of the book's opening chapter, under the title "Opening Pages of a Work in Progress", in April 1927. By November chapters I.2 through I.8 had all been published in the journal, in their correct sequence, under the title "Continuation of a Work in Progress".

[ 202 ] From 1928 Part's II and III slowly began to emerge in transition , with a brief excerpt of II.2 ("The Triangle") published in February 1928, and Part III's four chapters between March 1928 and November 1929.

[ 202 ] At this point, Joyce started publishing individual chapters from Work in Progress . In 1929, Harry and Caresse Crosby , owners of the Black Sun Press , contacted Joyce through bookstore owner Sylvia Beach and arranged to print three short fables about the novel's three children Shem, Shaun and Issy that had already appeared in translation. These were "The Mookse and the Gripes", [ 203 ] "The Triangle", [ 204 ] and "The Ondt and the Gracehoper".

[ 202 ] [ 205 ] The Black Sun Press named the new book Tales Told of Shem and Shaun for which they paid Joyce US$2,000 for 600 copies, unusually good pay for Joyce at that time.

[ 206 ] : 286 [ 207 ] By 1938 virtually all of Finnegans Wake was in print in the transition serialisation and in the booklets, with the exception of Part IV. Joyce continued to revise all previously published sections until Finnegans Wake' s final published form, resulting in the text existing in a number of different forms, to the point that critics can speak of Finnegans Wake being a different entity to Work in Progress .

[ citation needed ] The book was finally published simultaneously by Faber and Faber in London and by Viking Press in New York on 4 May 1939, after seventeen years of composition.

[ 208 ] In March 2010, a new edition was published by Houyhnhnm Press in conjunction with Penguin.

[ 209 ] Editors Danis Rose and John O'Hanlon claim to make 9,000 minor "yet crucial" corrections and amendments to what they title The Restored Finnegans Wake . American scholar Tim Conley , however, laments that "The process of the editing remains concealed. Readers are repeatedly told of how much hard and honorable work has gone into the restoration, but the work itself is kept out of view and thus away from judgment." [ 210 ] He praises the 2012 Oxford edition edited by Robbert-Jan Henkes, Erik Bindervoet, and Finn Fordham for its more scholarly editorial apparatus.

[ 211 ] By turns skeptical and appreciative, he begins and concludes his review essay celebrating the existence of these new textual options.

[ 212 ] Despite its linguistic complexity, Finnegans Wake has been translated into French, [ 213 ] German, [ 214 ] Greek, [ 215 ] Japanese, [ 216 ] Korean, [ 217 ] Latin, [ 218 ] Polish, [ 219 ] Russian, [ 220 ] Serbian, [ 221 ] Spanish (by M. Zabaloy ), [ 222 ] Dutch, [ 223 ] Brazilian Portuguese, [ 224 ] Latin, [ 225 ] Turkish, [ 226 ] [ 227 ] Swedish (by B. Falk [ sv ] ), [ 228 ] Chinese, [ 229 ] [ 230 ] and Italian.

[ 231 ] Dramatic and musical adaptions [ edit ] A musical play, The Coach with the Six Insides by Jean Erdman , based on the character Anna Livia Plurabelle, [ 232 ] was performed in New York in 1962.

[ 233 ] [ 234 ] Parts of the book were adapted for the stage by Mary Manning as Passages from Finnegans Wake (1965), which in turn was adapted for film by Mary Ellen Bute .

[ 235 ] Olwen Fouéré 's solo performance play riverrun , based on the theme of rivers in Finnegans Wake , has received critical accolades around the world.

[ 236 ] [ 237 ] [ 238 ] Adam Harvey has also adapted Finnegans Wake for the stage.

[ 239 ] Martin Pearlman 's three-act Finnegan's Grand Operoar is for speakers with an instrumental ensemble.

[ 240 ] [ 241 ] A version adapted by Barbara Vann with music by Chris McGlumphy was produced by The Medicine Show Theater in April 2005.

[ 242 ] John Cage 's The Wonderful Widow of Eighteen Springs became the first musical setting of words from Finnegans Wake , approved by the Joyce Estate in 1942. He used text taken from page 558.

[ 243 ] Roaratorio: an Irish circus on Finnegans Wake (1979) combines a collage of sounds mentioned in Finnegans Wake - including farts, guns and thunderclaps - with Irish jigs and Cage reading his text Writing for the Second Time through Finnegans Wake . Cage also set Nowth upon Nacht to music in 1984.

[ 244 ] Luciano Berio set much to Joyce, and was an admirer of Finnegans Wake , [ 245 ] but only one of his pieces, A-Ronne (1975) directly refers to it (heard in the vocal fragment "run", derived from "riverrun"). Influenced by Berio, British composer Roger Marsh set selected passages concerned with the character Anna Livia Plurabelle in his 1977 Not a soul but ourselves for amplified voices using extended vocal techniques.

[ 246 ] Marsh went on to direct the unabridged (29 hour) audiobook of Finnegans Wake issued by Naxos in 2021.

[ 247 ] The Japanese composer Toru Takemitsu used several quotes from the novel in his music: its first word for his composition for piano and orchestra, riverrun (1984). His 1980 piano concerto is called Far calls. Coming, far!

taken from the last page of Finnegans Wake . Similarly, he entitled his 1981 string quartet A Way a Lone , taken from the last sentence of the work.

[ 248 ] : 521 André Hodeir composed the jazz cantata Anna Livia Plurabelle (1966). Scottish group The Wake 's second album is called Here Comes Everybody (1985).

Phil Minton set passages of the Wake to music, on his 1998 album Mouthfull of Ecstasy .

[ 249 ] In 1965 American experimental filmmaker Mary Ellen Bute directed a film adaptation of Joyce's novel under the title Passages from Finnegans Wake .

[ 250 ] In 2011 German band Tangerine Dream released his instrumental album Finnegans Wake , inspired by the novel. In 2015 Waywords and Meansigns : Recreating Finnegans Wake [in its whole wholume] set Finnegans Wake to music unabridged, featuring an international group of musicians and Joyce enthusiasts.

[ 251 ] In 2000, Danish visual artists Michael Kvium and Christian Lemmerz created a multimedia project called "the Wake", an eight-hour-long silent movie based on the book.

[ 252 ] Between 2014–2016 in Poland , many adaptations of Finnegans Wake saw completion, including publication of the text as a musical score, [ 253 ] a short film Finnegans Wake//Finneganów tren , [ 254 ] a multimedia adaptation First We Feel Then We Fall [ 255 ] and K. Bartnicki 's intersemiotic translations into sound [ 256 ] and verbovisual.

[ 257 ] In October 2020, Austrian illustrator Nicolas Mahler presented a small-format (ISO A6) 24-page comic adaptation of Finnegans Wake with reference to comic figures Mutt and Jeff .

[ 258 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Bulson, E. J., The Cambridge Introduction to James Joyce (Cambridge University Press, 2006), p. 14 .

^ Joyce, James.

Ulysses: The 1922 Text . Oxford University Press, 1998. Page xlvii.

^ Crispi, Slote 2007, p. 5 ^ Barnes, D., "James Joyce", Vanity Fair , Apr 1922, p. 65 .

^ The piece would eventually become the conclusion of Part II Chapter 3 (FW: 380.07–382.30); cf Crispi, Slote 2007, p. 5.

^ Hofheinz, p. 120.

^ Crispi, Slote 2007, pp. 12–13.

^ Mailhos 1994, p. 49 ^ a b Lernout, in Crispi, Slote 2007, p. 50 ^ Crispi, Slote 2007, p.22 ^ quoted in Crispi, Slote 2007, p. 22 ^ Ellmann 1983, pp. 577–585, 603 ^ Attridge, D.

, The Cambridge Companion to James Joyce (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press , 1990), p. 174 .

ISBN 0-521-37673-4 ^ quoted in Crispi, Slote 2007, p. 23 ^ Ellmann 1983, pp. 591–592 ^ Bulson, E. J., The Cambridge Introduction to James Joyce (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006), p. 15 .

ISBN 0-521-84037-6 ^ Eide, M., Ethical Joyce (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002), p. 110 .

ISBN 0-521-81498-7 ^ Bristow, D., Joyce and Lacan: Reading, Writing and Psychoanalysis ( Abingdon-on-Thames : Routledge , 2017), p. 129 .

^ Levitt, M. P., ed., Joyce and the Joyceans ( Syracuse : Syracuse University Press , 2002), p. 165 .

^ Benstock 1965, p. 6.

Benstock, Bernard.

"Benstock, Bernard / Joyce-again's wake: an analysis of Finnegans wake, p. xvi" . The James Joyce Scholars' Collection.

^ Hayman, David.

The "Wake" in Transit , p. 41, footnote 1.

^ Benstock 1965, p. 4.

^ a b "Fritz Senn and Finnegans Wake" . The Joyce Foundation. Archived from the original on 22 August 2007 . Retrieved 19 November 2007 .

^ quoted in Norris, Margot, The Decentered Universe of Finnegans Wake , p. 2.

^ a b c "Joyce – Quotations" .

The Brazen Head . The Modern Word . Retrieved 3 December 2007 .

^ Keymer, Thomas.

Laurence Sterne's Tristram Shandy: A Casebook , Oxford University Press, 2006.

ISBN 0-19-517561-1 ; p. 14 .

^ Ellmann 1983, p. 702.

^ Deming, R. H., ed., James Joyce (London & New York: Routledge, 1970), p. 490 .

^ Joyce, Letters III, page 193, note 8.

^ Verene, D. P.

.

Knowledge of Things Human and Divine , p. 5 ^ Joyce, Letters I , p.246 ^ Finnegan is first referred to on p.4, line 18, as "Bygmester Finnegan" ^ a b Barger, Jorn .

"The Online shorter Finnegans Wake" . Robot Wisdom. Archived from the original on 31 October 2007 . Retrieved 19 November 2007 .

^ Joyce 1939, pp. 8–10 Archived 8 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine , which presents a guided tour through a museum in the Wellington Monument , which commemorates Finnegan's fall, retold as the battle of "Willingdone" versus the "Lipoleums" and "Jinnies" at Waterloo .

^ Joyce 1939, pp. 16–18 Archived 8 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine , which describes a dialogue between respectively deaf and dumb aboriginal ancestors, who have difficulty hearing, seeing and understanding each other. Bishop characterises them as two prehistoric men who "babble and stammer imperceptively like Vico 's men"; Bishop 1986, p. 194 .

^ Herman, David (1994).

"The Mutt and Jute dialogue in Joyce's Finnegans Wake: Some Gricean Perspectives – author James Joyce; philosopher H.P. Grice" . bnet Research Center. Archived from the original on 25 September 2008 . Retrieved 20 November 2007 .

^ Joyce 1939, pp. 21–23 Archived 19 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine , which depicts Finnegan – under the name " Jarl van Hoother " – as the victim of a vengeful pirate queen , who arrives "three times at the Jarl's castle [..] each time asking a riddle and – upon the Jarl's inability to answer it – each time kidnapping a child, until the third visit results in a concession from the furious Jarl. Benstock 1965, p.268.

^ Bishop, John; collected in A Collideorscape of Joyce , p.233 ^ His mourners advise him: "Now be aisy, good Mr Finnimore, sir. And take your laysure like a god on pension and don't be walking abroad"; Joyce 1939, p.24, line 16 Archived 8 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ Benstock 1965, p.xvi.

Benstock, Bernard.

"Benstock, Bernard / Joyce-again's wake: an analysis of Finnegans wake, p. xvi" . The James Joyce Scholars' Collection.

^ Burgess, Anthony, A Shorter Finnegans Wake , p.17 ^ Tindall, W. Y., A Reader's Guide to Finnegans Wake , pp. 117–122 .

^ Fordham, F., Lots of Fun at Finnegans Wake: Unravelling Universals (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007), p. 33 .

^ A Starchamber Quiry: A James Joyce Centennial Volume, 1882–1982 , p 23, Edmund L. Epstein, Routledge, 1982, ISBN 0-416-31560-7 ^ Killeen, Terence.

"Life, Death and the Washerwomen" . Hypermedia Joyce Studies.

^ cf Patrick A. McCarthy's chapter summary in Crispi, Slote 2007, pp. 165–6 ^ Joyce 1939, p.224, lines 22,26 Archived 9 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine . According to Joyce, the piece was based on a children's game called "Angels and Devils" or "Colours," in which one child ("the devil", here played by Shem, or Nick) is supposed to guess a colour that has been chosen by the others ("the angels", here played by the girls). Joyce, Letters , I, p.295 ^ Tindall 1969, pp. 153–170 ^ Joyce 1939, pp. 282, line 5 – p.304, line 4 Archived 21 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine ^ Finnegans Wake II.2§8 (282.05–304.04), the main narrative of which is known critically as "The Triangle" and which Joyce referred to in letters as "Night Lessons", first appeared as "The Triangle" in transition 11 in February 1928 and then again under the newer title "The Muddest Thick That Was Ever Heard Dump" in Tales Told of Shem and Shaun , and finally as a book called "Storiella as She is Syung" in 1937 (Paris: Black Sun Press, June 1929). See JJA 52 and 53.

^ Joyce, Letters I , p. 242 ^ Joyce, Letters I , p405–6 ^ Benstock 1965, pp. xx–xxi ^ Fordham, Finn Lots of Fun at Finnegans Wake , p. 242 ^ Rose, The Textual Diaries of James Joyce , p.122 ^ Joyce called the Norwegian Captain's story a "wordspiderweb" and referred to it as "perhaps the most complacently absurd thing that I ever did until now ... It is the story of a Captain ... and a Dublin tailor which my god-father told me forty years ago, trying to explain the arrival of my Viking in Dublin, his marriage, and a lot of things I don't care to mention here." See, Joyce, Letters , III, p. 422 ^ Rose, The Textual Diaries of James Joyce , pp.122–3 ^ Tindall 1969, p.187 ^ Bishop, John; Introduction to Penguin's 1999 edition of Finnegans Wake , pp. xxii–xxiii ^ Rose, The Textual Diaries of James Joyce , p.129 ^ Joyce 1939, p. 361, line 36 – p.363, line 16 Archived 30 March 2010 at the Wayback Machine ^ Burgess, A Shorter Finnegans Wake , p.166 ^ Tindall 1969, pp. 202–203 ^ cf the section starting "Shatten up ship"; Joyce 1939, p. 376, line 30 – p.371, line 5 Archived 2 April 2010 at the Wayback Machine ^ Rose, The Textual Diaries of James Joyce , p. 131 ^ Tindall 1969, p.205 ^ The chapter is a composite of two shorter pieces called "Mamalujo" and "Tristan and Isolde", which Joyce had written as early as 1923. See Rose, The Textual Diaries of James Joyce , p.131 ^ Bishop, Introduction , p. xxiii ^ Tindall 1969, p.210 ^ Joyce referred to Part III's four chapters as "The Four Watches of Shaun", and characterised them as "a description of a postman travelling backwards in the night through the events already narrated. It is narrated in the form of a via crucis of 14 stations but in reality, is only a barrel rolling down the river Liffey." Joyce, Letters , vol. I, p. 214.

^ "Letter to Harriet Weaver" Archived 6 August 2022 at the Wayback Machine (24 May 1924), James Joyce Digital Archive.

^ Joyce 1939, p. 403, line 17 Archived 5 April 2010 at the Wayback Machine ^ "who was after having a great time ... in a porterhouse." Joyce 1939, p.407, lines 27–28 Archived 11 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ Wim Van Mierlo, in Crispi, Slote 2007, p. 347 ^ Tindall, A Reader's Guide to Finnegans Wake , pp. 229–231 .

^ cf "and, lusosing his harmonical balance [...] over he careened [...] by the mightyfine weight of his barrel [... and] rolled buoyantly backwards [...] out of farther earshot [...] down in the valley before [...] he spoorlessly disappealed and vanesshed [...] from circular circulatio." Joyce 1939, p.426, line 28 – p. 427, line 8 Archived 11 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ Joyce 1939, p.565 Archived 11 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ Crispi, Slote 2007, p.413 ^ McHugh, The Sigla of Finnegans Wake p. 106 ^ "Calling all downs to dayne" and "Calling all daynes to dawn"; Joyce 1939, .htm p. 593, lines 2 and 11 , respectively [ dead link ] ^ Joyce gave some hint of the intention behind the three separate episodes in conversation with Frank Budgen : "In Part IV there is in fact a triptych – though the central window is scarcely illuminated. Namely the supposed windows of the village church gradually lit up by the dawn, the windows, i.e., representing on one side the meeting of St Patrick (Japanese) & the (Chinese) Archdruid Bulkely (this by the way is all about colour) & the legend of the progressive isolation of St Kevin , the third being St Lawrence O’Toole , patron saint of Dublin; buried in Eu in Normandy." quoted in McHugh, Annotations to Finnegans Wake: Third Edition , p.613 ^ "Finnegans Wake chapter 17 review" . Robot Wisdom. Archived from the original on 31 October 2007 . Retrieved 19 November 2007 .

^ Joyce 1939, pp. 615–619 Archived 9 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine ; critics disagree on whether this is the definitive version of The Letter which has been discussed throughout, or merely another variation of it ^ Joyce 1939, p. 619 Archived 9 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ Herring, Joyce's Uncertainty Principle , p.186 ^ "Mythic Time by Grace Eckley" . Newsstead.itgo.com . Retrieved 10 June 2011 .

^ Norris, Margot, The decentered universe of Finnegans wake , p.4 ^ a b van Hulle, Dirk.

" Finnegans Wake " . The Literary Encyclopedia.

^ Riquelme 1983, p. 8 ^ Symond, Ronald , quoted in James Joyce: The Critical Heritage , p.606 ^ Burgess, A Shorter Finnegans Wake , p.17 ^ Kitcher 2007, p. 13 .

^ Bishop 1986, p. 135 .

^ Killeen, Terence.

"Life, Death, and the Washerwomen" . Hypermedia Joyce Studies: Volume 9, Number 1, 2008 ISSN 1801-1020 . Retrieved 4 January 2009 .

^ Joyce 1939, page 30, lines 2–3 Archived 21 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine ^ Joyce 1939, page 31, lines 29–30 Archived 9 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ Joyce 1939, page 32, lines 18–19 Archived 9 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ Joyce 1939, page 139, line 14 Archived 9 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine ^ Joyce 1939, page 220, line 24 Archived 14 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine ^ Joyce 1939, page 560, line 24 Archived 11 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ See Fordham, Finn. "The Universalization of Finnegans Wake and the Real HCE." Joyce, Ireland, Britain . Ed.

Gibson, Andrew ; Platt, Len. Florida James Joyce Series. Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 2007. 198-211.

ISBN 0-8130-3015-3 ^ Joyce 1939, page 4, lines 26–27, 32 Archived 2 March 2009 at the Wayback Machine ^ Parrinder 1984, p. 222 .

^ Patrick A. McCarthy, in Crispi, Slote 2007, p. 163 ^ Parrinder 1984, p. 210 .

^ cf, for example, Parrinder 1984, p. 205.

^ quoted in Norris, The De-Centred Universe of Finnegans Wake , p. 16 ^ Tindall 1969, p. 223 ^ Joyce 1939, page 14, line 12 Archived 14 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine ^ Joyce 1939, page 193, line 31 Archived 18 May 2009 at the Wayback Machine ^ Joyce 1939, page 187, 24 Archived 24 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine ^ in Chapter II.2 ^ in Chapter III.4 ^ Borg, Ruben. (2007).

The measureless time of Joyce, Deleuze and Derrida . London: Continuum.

ISBN 9780826498373 .

OCLC 153772582 .

^ Eckley, G., The Encryption of Finnegans Wake Resolved: W. T. Stead ( Lanham, MD : Hamilton Books , 2018), p. 224 .

^ Tindall 1969, p. 255 .

^ Fordham, Finn.

Lots of Fun at Finnegans Wake , p. 77 .

^ Tindall 1969, p. 5.

^ Tindall 1969, pp. 4–5.

^ Kitcher 2007, p. 39 .

^ a b Fargnoli, Gillespie, James A–Z , p.78 ^ Schwartz, John Pedro.

"In greater support of his word: Monument and Museum Discourse in Finnegans Wake " .

James Joyce Quarterly 44.1 (2006) 77–93. Archived from the original on 17 November 2015.

^ quoted in Joyce, Letters I , p.246 ^ from a note Cyril Connolly made after interviewing Joyce in 1929, quoted in A Wake Newslitter, Occasional Paper , no 1, August 1982.

^ Riquelme 1983, p.13 ^ Fargnoli, Gillespie.

James Joyce A–Z , p.74 ^ Tindall 1969, p. 4 ^ Henkes, Robbert-Jan; Bindervoetid, Erik.

"The Quiz Chapter as the Key to a Potential Schema for Finnegans Wake" . Genetic Joyce Studies – Issue 4 (Spring 2004). Archived from the original on 7 August 2007 . Retrieved 20 November 2007 .

^ Burgess, A Shorter Finnegans Wake , p.8 ^ quoted in: Herring, Joyce's Uncertainty Principle , p. 196 ^ Patrick A. McCarthy in Crispi, Slote 2007, p. 1965 ^ McHugh, Roland (2006).

Annotations to Finnegans Wake . JHU Press. p. xix.

ISBN 978-0-8018-8382-8 .

^ Tindall 1969, p.13 ^ a b Norris, The Decentered Universe of Finnegans Wake , p.120 ^ Colangelo, Jeremy, "Waking from History," p. 77.

^ "The shock of the new: Finnegans Wake by James Joyce – in lieu of review" .

The Guardian . London. 12 May 1939 . Retrieved 31 December 2008 .

^ Rosenfeld, Paul.

James Joyce's Jabberwocky , Saturday Review of Literature, 6 May 1939, pp. 10–11. Quoted in James Joyce: The Critical Heritage , p. 663 ^ Hayman, David, The "Wake" in Transit , p.42 ^ Ruch, Allen B.

"Joyce – Works: Finnegans Wake" . The Modern Word . Retrieved 9 March 2008 .

^ a b Bishop, John. Introduction to Finnegans Wake , Penguin Twentieth-Century Classics edition, 1999, p. vii ^ Tindall 1969, p. 20 ^ Burrell & Schork, 1996, p. 2.

^ Explorations in the Field of Nonsense , p 20, Wim Tigges, Rodopi, 1987, ISBN 90-6203-699-6 ^ a b c Ellman, James Joyce , p.546 ^ Cage, John.

X: writings '79–'82 , p.54 ^ Wawrzycka, J., "'Mute chime and mute peal': Notes on Translating Silences in Chamber Music ", in Wawrzycka & Zanotti, S., eds., James Joyce's Silences (London: Bloomsbury , 2018), 272ff.

^ Gluck, p. 27.

^ Beckett, Samuel, Dante ... Bruno. Vico.. Joyce , p.15 ^ "Music in Finnegans Wake" . james-joyce-music.com.

^ Mercanton 1967 ^ In a letter to Harriet Weaver, quoted in Ellmann 1983 ^ Ellmann 1983, pp. 546 ^ Marsh, Roger.

"Finnegans Wake: the Purest Blarney You Never Heard" .

The Brazen Head . The Modern Word. Archived from the original on 24 October 2007 . Retrieved 28 November 2007 .

^ Hart 1962, p.81 ^ in conversation with William Bird, quoted in Ellmann 1983, p.590 ^ Hart 1962, p.81 ^ Benstock, B (1967). "L. Boom as Dreamer in Finnegans Wake".

Publications of the Modern Language Association of America .

82 (1): 91– 97.

doi : 10.2307/461052 .

JSTOR 461052 .

^ Joyce 1939, page 597, line 1–2 Archived 9 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ Joyce 1939, page 598, lines 6–9 Archived 9 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ Tindall 1969, p.306 ^ McHugh, The Sigla of Finnegans Wake , p. 5 ^ Burrell & Schork, 1996, p. 4.

^ Parrinder 1984, p. 207 .

^ Hart 1962, p.82 ^ Parrinder 1984, p. 208 .

^ Verene 2003 presents a book-long study of allusions to Vico's New Science in Finnegans Wake ^ Cheng 1984 presents a book-long study of allusions to Shakespeare's writings in Finnegans Wake ^ Anderson, J. P., Joyce's Finnegans Wake: The Curse of Kabbalah , Vol. 2 ( Irvine, CA : Universal Publishers , 2009), pp. 166–167 .

^ Joyce 1939, p.143 Archived 29 March 2010 at the Wayback Machine ^ Joyce 1939, p.228 Archived 4 March 2009 at the Wayback Machine ^ 'Joyce 1939, p.452.21–22 Archived 8 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ Troy, Mark L.

"Mummeries of Resurrection: The Cycle of Osiris in Finnegans Wake" . Doctoral dissertation at the University of Uppsala 1976. Archived from the original on 27 October 2007 . Retrieved 10 March 2008 .

^ Bishop, Joyce's Book of the Dark , p. 86 ^ Ito, E., "In the buginning is the woid" , in Joycean Japan , Nr. 13 (James Joyce Society of Japan), June 16, 2002.

^ Budgen, Frank.

James Joyce , Horizon, 1941, rpt. Givens, p. 26.

^ Fargnoli and Gillespie, James Joyce A-Z , p. 218 ^ Fargnoli and Gillespie argue that "as an archetypal figure, Finn is an avatar of the book's central figure HCE." Fargnoli and Gillespie, James Joyce A-Z , p. 73 ^ Spinks, L., James Joyce: A Critical Guide ( Edinburgh : Edinburgh University Press , 2009) p. 130 .

^ Ellmann 1983, p. 603 ^ Quoted in Ellmann 1983, p. 722, from The Observer , 7 May 1939.

^ Ellmann 1983, p. 584, from a letter from Pound to Joyce, dated 15 November 1926.

^ Ellmann 1983, p. 688 ^ quoted in Parrinder 1984, p. 205.

^ The Complete Critical Guide to Samuel Beckett , David Pattie, Routledge, 2000, ISBN 0-415-20253-1 p 14 ^ a b Norris 1992, p.344 .

^ Bogan, Louise.

Finnegans Wake Review.

Nation , cxlviii, 6 May 1939. pp. 533–535. Quoted in James Joyce: The Critical Heritage , p.667 ^ Muir, Edwin. "Finnegans Wake Review" in Listener , 1939. Quoted in James Joyce: The Critical Heritage , p.677 ^ Evans, B. Ifor.

Manchester Guardian , 12 May 1939. Quoted in James Joyce: The Critical Heritage .

p.678 ^ Burns, E. M. (ed.), A Tour of the Darkling Plain , p.xxi ^ Frye, Anatomy of Criticism , p.323 ^ "Putting It into Words ~ Finnegans Wake" . It's About Women. Archived from the original on 15 August 2015.

^ A number of critical works have approached the question of the influence of Finnegans Wake on Derrida's writings and thinking, such as: Borg, Ruben (2007); The Measureless Time of Joyce, Deleuze and Derrida [ permanent dead link ] , London: Bloomsbury; Mahon, Peter (2007); Imagining Joyce and Derrida: Between Finnegans Wake and Glas , University of Toronto Press, ISBN 0-8020-9249-7 ; and Roughly, Alan; Reading Derrida Reading Joyce , University Press of Florida; ISBN 0-8130-1684-3 ^ Parrinder 1984, p. 205.

^ a b Crispi, Slote 2007, p. 17 ^ Ellmann 1983, p. 558 ^ O'Neill, P., Polyglot Joyce (Toronto: University of Toronto Press , 2005), ISBN 0-8020-3897-2 p 126 ^ a b c d Crispi, Slote 2007, p. 490 ^ Joyce 1939, pp. 30–34 Archived 21 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine ^ the basis of chapter 1.5 in the final published work; cf Joyce 1939, pp. 104–125 Archived 9 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ the basis of chapter 1.8 in the final published work; cf Joyce 1939, pp. 196–216 Archived 9 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ the basis of chapter 1.7 in the final published work; cf Joyce 1939, pp. 169–195 Archived 9 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b c Crispi, Slote 2007, p. 491 ^ Joyce 1939, pp. 152–159 Archived 4 April 2010 at the Wayback Machine ^ Joyce 1939, pp. 282–304 Archived 21 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine ^ Joyce 1939, pp. 414–419 Archived 11 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ Fitch, Noël Riley (1983).

Sylvia Beach and the Lost Generation: A History of Literary Paris in the Twenties and Thirties .

Norton .

ISBN 9780393302318 .

^ "Little Magazines and Fine Arts Presses" . University of Tulsa Library. Archived from the original on 20 July 2010 . Retrieved 14 June 2010 .

^ Lernout, Geert (2013). "Finishing a Book Without Title: The Final Years of "Work in Progress" ".

Joyce Studies Annual : 3– 32.

ISSN 1049-0809 .

JSTOR 26288785 .

^ Joyce, James (2012). Rose, Danis; O'Hanlon, John (eds.).

The Restored Finnegans Wake . London: Penguin Classics 2012.

ISBN 978-0-14-119229-1 .

^ Conley, Tim (Spring–Summer 2017). "Uptenable from the Orther: New Editions of Finnegans Wake ".

James Joyce Quarterly .

54 ( 3– 4): 417.

doi : 10.1353/jjq.2017.0012 .

^ Conley, Tim (Spring–Summer 2017). "Uptenable from the Orther: New Editions of Finnegans Wake ".

James Joyce Quarterly .

54 ( 3– 4): 418.

doi : 10.1353/jjq.2017.0012 .

^ Conley, Tim (Spring–Summer 2017). "Uptenable from the Orther: New Editions of Finnegans Wake ".

James Joyce Quarterly .

54 ( 3– 4): 417– 23.

doi : 10.1353/jjq.2017.0012 .

^ Veillée Pinouilles ^ Two Approaches to "Finnegans Wake", James Joyce Quarterly, Vol.30, No.3, Spring 1993, Jorg W Rademacher, quoted in JSTOR , p. 482 ^ Η «Αγρύπνια των Φίνεγκαν» κατά τον Ελευθέριο Ανευλαβή ^ James Joyce Quarterly, 41.1/2 (Fall 2003/Winter 2004), 19, Ellen Carol Jones, quoted in Two Japanese Translations of Finnegans Wake Compared , Eishiro Ito (paper) ^ "Finnegans Wake, Korea University Press" . Archived from the original on 23 August 2017 . Retrieved 23 August 2017 .

^ Pervigilium Finneganis . Ancaster Books. 9 February 2019.

^ The Strange Case of Translating "Finnegans Wake" into Polish , culture.pl, Mikołaj Gliński, 27 March 2012.

^ "На русском языке вышел полный перевод "Finnegans Wake" Джеймса Джойса" .

ГодЛитературы.РФ (in Russian). 26 December 2021 . Retrieved 23 May 2024 .

^ "Džems Džojs: Finegana buđenje, Knjiga I" .

www.pasus.rs . Retrieved 4 August 2024 .

^ Calero, César G., ¿Alguien dijo que el 'Finnegans Wake' era intraducible?

(Did someone say that Finnegans Wake was untranslatable?) El Mundo , 27 July 2016.

^ Finnegans Wake . Translated by Bindervoet, Erik; Henkes, Robbert-Jan. Amsterdam: Athenaeum-Polak & Van Gennep. 2002.

ISBN 9025322794 .

OCLC 783055731 .

^ Schüler, Donaldo ; Furlan, Mauri; Torres, Marie Hélène.

Donaldo Schüler em torno à tradução e o "Finnegans Wake" . In: Scientia Tradutionis, no. 8, 2010. Retrieved 12 November 2018.

^ |url= https://www.amazon.co.uk/dp/B07NKNB1B5 | isbn=B07NKNB1B5 |publisher=Ancaster Books |title=Pervigilium Finneganis |year=2019 |translator-first=Adam |translator-last=Roberts | ^ Finneganın Vahı (in Turkish). Translated by Çelikyay, Umur. Istanbul: Aylak Adam Yayınları. 2015.

ISBN 9786059691109 .

^ Genç, Kaya (21 December 2015).

"Finneganın Vahı" .

LRB Blog . Retrieved 6 February 2016 .

^ "Finnegans likvaka: Finnegans Wake motsvariggjord pa svenska" . August 2021.

^ Chao, Yen-hsiang (5 March 2025).

"Re-Joyce in translation: Scholar breathes Sinitic life into 'Finnegans Wake' " . Central News Agency . Retrieved 5 March 2025 .

^ Yun, Sheng.

" 'Finnegans Wake' in China" .

London Review of Books . Archived from the original on 7 November 2017 . Retrieved 1 November 2017 .

^ "Finnegans Wake, la traduzione completa" .

Oscar Mondadori (in Italian). 18 April 2019.

Archived from the original on 3 May 2025 . Retrieved 3 May 2025 .

^ James Joyce A to Z , p 66, A. Nicholas Fargnoli, Oxford University Press US, 1996, ISBN 0-19-511029-3 ^ Joyce 1939, p.359 Archived 17 December 2005 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Jean Erdman: "The Coach with the Six Insides" dance drama" . Creative Arts Television: Filmed and videotaped arts footage from 1950 to date . Retrieved 5 January 2009 .

^ "Passages from Finnegans Wake (1965)" .

The Brazen Head . The Modern Word. Archived from the original on 21 January 2009 . Retrieved 15 January 2009 .

^ "Riverrun review in The Guardian" .

TheGuardian.com . 14 February 2014 . Retrieved 5 May 2015 .

^ "Riverrun review in The Conversation" . 2 March 2015 . Retrieved 5 May 2015 .

^ Soloski, Alexis (20 September 2014).

"Riverrun review in the New York Times" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 5 May 2015 .

^ The List , 30 March, 2022 ^ Gordon, John S. (1999). " "Extreme Joyce": A Report on the North American James Joyce Symposium, in James Joyce Quarterly, 37 .1/2".

James Joyce Quarterly .

37 (1/2): 15– 18.

JSTOR 25474114 .

^ "Fun, puns at Boston Baroque's 'Finnegans Wake' " .

The Boston Globe . Retrieved 5 May 2015 .

^ Anne Midgette. ' Joyce's Musical Language Transformed Into a Musical ', in The New York Times , 11 April 2005 ^ Reinhardt, Lauriejean (2000).

"John Cage's The Wonderful Widow of Eighteen Springs " . Moldenhauer Archives of The Library of Congress.

^ "Roaratorio: an Irish circus on Finnegans wake" . www.johncage.info. Archived from the original on 20 January 2009 . Retrieved 15 January 2009 .

^ Timothy S. Murphy.

Music After Joyce: The Post-Serial Avant-Garde , UCLA (1999) ^ First recorded by Electric Phoenix on Wergo WER 60094 (1982) ^ Christina Hardyment . ' Finnegans Wake by James Joyce audiobook review — an enjoyable way to conquer this literary Everest ', in The Times , 12 June 2021 ^ Siddons, James (2002) "Toru Takemitsu" in Music of the Twentieth-century Avant-garde: A Biocritical Sourcebook , ed.

Larry Sitsky .

Santa Barbara : Greenwood .

ISBN 0313296898 , p. 521 .

^ "John Butcher & Phil Minton" . www.johnbutcher.org.uk. Archived from the original on 21 January 2009 . Retrieved 6 January 2009 .

^ Miller, N. A., "Monthly Must-See Cinema: Passages from Finnegans Wake " , Irish Film Institute .

^ "Finnegans Wake set to Music by Waywords and Meansigns" . The James Joyce Centre. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015 . Retrieved 4 June 2021 .

^ "Interview with Kvium & Lemmerz" . The Wake. Archived from the original on 21 January 2009 . Retrieved 27 April 2008 .

^ James Joyce.

Finnegans ake: Suite in the Key of E (1939) , Warsaw, 2014.

ISBN 978-83-64033-62-9 ^ Finnegans Wake Archived 5 October 2016 at the Wayback Machine , dir. M. Buszewicz, Kraków , 2014; premiere in Dublin (14 May 2014) ^ First We Feel, Then We Fall , J. Wróblewski, K. Bazarnik, 2016; premiere in London (16 June 2016) ^ Secret Code in Joyce's Finnegans Wake Cracked , Mikołaj Gliński, culture.pl, 28 January 2015 ^ Finnegans Wake Rolodexed , Mikołaj Gliński, culture.pl, 8 June 2015 ^ Mahler, Nicolas; Joyce, James (2020).

Finnegans Wake . mini kuš! #92. Riga: Grafiskie stāsti.

ISBN 978-9934-58130-4 .

References [ edit ] D. Accardi.

The Existential Quandary in Finnegans Wake (Loudonville, Siena College Press, 2006) Atherton, James S. (2009).

The Books at the Wake: A Study of Literary Allusions in James Joyce's Finnegans Wake .

Samuel Beckett ; William Carlos Williams ; et al.

Our Exagmination Round His Factification For Incamination Of Work In Progress ( Shakespeare and Company , 1929) Benstock, Bernard (1965).

Joyce-Again's Wake: An Analysis of Finnegans Wake . Seattle: University of Washington Press.

Benstock, Shari .

Nightletters: Woman's Writing in the Wake: Critical Essays on James Joyce . Ed. Bernard Benstock. Boston, Mass.: G.K. Hall & Co., 1985. 221–233.

Bishop, John (1986).

Joyce's Book of the Dark: Finnegans Wake .

University of Wisconsin Press .

ISBN 9780299108205 .

Borg, Ruben (2007).

The Measureless Time of Joyce, Deleuze and Derrida [ permanent dead link ] . London: Continuum.

Burrell, Harry; Schork, R. J. (1996).

Narrative Design in Finnegans Wake: The Wake Lock Picked . University Press of Florida.

Burgess, Anthony (ed.) A Shorter 'Finnegans Wake' (1969) —, Here Comes Everybody: An Introduction to James Joyce for the Ordinary Reader (1965); also published as Re Joyce .

—, Joysprick: An Introduction to the Language of James Joyce (1973) Joseph Campbell and Henry Morton Robinson (1961).

A Skeleton Key to Finnegans Wake Cheng, Vincent John (1984).

Shakespeare and Joyce: A Study of Finnegans Wake . Pennsylvania State University Press.

ISBN 9780271003429 .

Colangelo, Jeremy. "Waking from History: The Nation's Past and Future in Finnegans Wake ." The Edinburgh Companion to Irish Modernism . Eds. Maud Ellmann, Siân White, and Vicki Mahaffey. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2021. pp. 67–81.

Conley, Tim (2003).

Joyces mistakes: Problems of Intention, Irony and Interpretation . University of Toronto Press.

ISBN 0-8020-8755-8 .

Crispi, Luca (2007). Slote, Sam (ed.).

How Joyce Wrote Finnegans Wake: A Chapter-By-Chapter Genetic Guide . Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

ISBN 978-0-299-21860-7 .

Ellmann, Richard (1983) [1959].

James Joyce . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-503381-7 .

Flashpoint .

Finnegans Wake issue, Summer 2009 .

Fordham, Finn. 'Lots of Fun at Finnegans Wake : Unravelling Universals' (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007) Gell-Mann, Murray (1994).

The Quark and the Jaguar: Adventures in the Simple and the Complex . WH Freeman and Company.

ISBN 978-0-7167-2725-5 .

OCLC 1036835212 .

Glasheen, Adaline .

Third Census of Finnegans Wake . (Berkeley, California: University of California Press, 1977) Gluck, Barbara Reich, Beckett and Joyce: Friendship and Fiction . Bucknell University Press, 1979.

ISBN 0-8387-2060-9 .

Greene, Darragh, "'It's meant to make you laugh': Wittgenstein's joke book and Joyce's Finnegans Wake ", Textual Practice 34 (2020) Gordon, John Finnegans Wake: A Plot Summary , Gill and Macmillan and Syracuse University Press, 1986 Hart, Clive (1962).

Structure and Motif in Finnegans Wake . Evanston, Illinois: Northwestern University Press.

ISBN 0-8101-0114-9 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) available online Henke, Suzette.

James Joyce and the Politics of Desire . (New York: Routledge, 1990) Herring, Phillip F (1987).

Joyce's Uncertainty Principle Princeton University Press, New Jersey.

ISBN 0-691-06719-8 .

Hofheinz, T. C.

Joyce and the Invention of Irish History: Finnegans Wake in Context , Cambridge University Press (26 May 1995).

ISBN 978-0-521-47114-5 Kitcher, Philip (2007).

Joyce's Kaleidoscope: An Invitation to Finnegans Wake . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-532102-9 .

Joyce, James (1939).

Finnegans Wake . London: Faber and Faber.

Joyce, James (Stuart Gilbert, ed.) Letters of James Joyce Mailhos, Jacques (1994). Treip, Andrew (ed.).

Finnegans Wake: Teems of Times (European Joyce Studies 4) . Amsterdam: Rodopi .

ISBN 978-90-5183-604-2 .

McHugh, Roland.

Annotations to Finnegans Wake . 3rd ed. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 2006.

ISBN 978-0-8018-8381-1 .

—, The Sigla of Finnegans Wake . (University of Texas Press, 1976) —, The Finnegans Wake Experience . (University of California Press, 1981) Mercanton, James (1967).

Les heures de James Joyce . Diffusion PUF.

ISBN 2-86869-207-9 .

Norris, Margot (1992). Dettmar, Kevin (ed.).

The Postmodernization of Finnegans Wake Reconsidered . University of Michigan Press.

Pagán, Alberte (2000).

A voz do trevón. Unha aproximación a Finnegans Wake . Laiovento. ISBN 84-89896-66-6 Parrinder, Patrick (1984).

James Joyce . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-28398-1 .

Riquelme, John Paul (1983).

Teller and Tale in Joyce's Fiction . The Johns Hopkins University Press.

ISBN 0-8018-2854-6 .

Rose, Danis.

The Textual Diaries of James Joyce (Dublin, The Lilliput Press, 1995) Rosenbloom, Eric (2007).

A Word in Your Ear: How and Why to Read James Joyce's Finnegans . Wake Booksurge Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-4196-0930-5 .

Verene, Donald Phillip (2003).

Knowledge of Things Human and Divine: Vico's New Science and Finnegans Wake . Yale University Press.

William York Tindall (1996).

A Reader's Guide to Finnegans Wake . Syracuse University Press.

ISBN 9780815603856 .

(Reprint).

Wilson, Robert Anton .

Coincidance . (New Falcon Publications; Rev edition (February 1991)). Contains several essays on Finnegans Wake.

External links [ edit ] Finnegans Wake at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Joyce reading a portion of "Anna Livia Plurabelle", 1929 Problems playing this file? See media help .

Complete text of Finnegans Wake at Archive.org (however, note that the OCR'd text found there is riddled with typos, so it is not recommended to use it for searching through the book).

Finnegans Wake at Faded Page (Canada) Online text of Finnegans Wake Another Online text of Finnegans Wake Finnegans Wake Extensible Elucidation Treasury (FWEET) A searchable database with more than 95,000 notes on Finnegans Wake gathered from numerous sources.

The James Joyce Scholars' Collection includes etexts of several works of Wakean scholarship.

Finnegans Wake page at The Brazen Head Terence McKenna lecture 'Surfing Finnegan's Wake' Art of the States: To Wake the Dead [ usurped ] song cycle by Stephen Albert set to texts from Finnegans Wake Concordance of Finnegans Wake Contos contados de Finnegan e HCE ( Finnegans Wake, I.i-ii ), translation into Galician (bilingual edition).

v t e James Joyce Works Novels A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man (1916) Ulysses (1922) Finnegans Wake (1939) Short stories Dubliners (1914, written 1904–07) " The Sisters " " Eveline " " After the Race " " An Encounter " " Araby " " The Boarding House " " Counterparts " " Clay " " A Painful Case " " Ivy Day in the Committee Room " " A Mother " " Two Gallants " " A Little Cloud " " Grace " " The Dead " Play Exiles (1918) Poetry Chamber Music (1907) Pomes Penyeach (1927) Posthumous publications Stephen Hero (1944) Giacomo Joyce (1968) The Cats of Copenhagen (2012) Finn's Hotel (2013) Adaptations Translations of Ulysses Ulysses in Nighttown (1958 play) Ulysses (1967 film) A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man (1977 film) Ulysses (1982 broadcast) The Dead (1987 film) James Joyce's The Dead (1999 musical) Bloom (2003 film) Waywords and Meansigns (2015–2017 audio) Related Harriet Shaw Weaver Obscenity trial of Ulysses in The Little Review United States v. One Book Called Ulysses Bellsybabble Bloomsday James Joyce Award James Joyce Centre James Joyce Tower and Museum Museum of Literature Ireland Quark Volta Cinematograph Zurich James Joyce Foundation Scholars of Anthony Burgess Frank Delaney Richard Ellmann Alan Warren Friedman Francisco García Tortosa Stuart Gilbert Adaline Glasheen Michael Groden Hugh Kenner Ira Nadel David Norris William H. Quillian C. George Sandulescu Fritz Senn John Simpson Ronald Symond William York Tindall José María Valverde Ernst von Glasersfeld Academic works about Hamlet and the New Poetic: James Joyce and T. S. Eliot James Joyce (biography) James Joyce Quarterly Joysprick Our Exagmination Round His Factification for Incamination of Work in Progress A Skeleton Key to Finnegans Wake Family Nora Barnacle (wife) Lucia Joyce (daughter) John Stanislaus Joyce (father) Stanislaus Joyce (brother) Stephen James Joyce (grandson) Mary Gertrude Joyce (sister) v t e Tristan and Iseult Characters Anguish of Ireland Brangaine Iseult Kahedin Mark of Cornwall Meliodas Morholt Tristan Medieval sources Thomas of Britain's Tristran Béroul's Tristan Gottfried von Strassburg's Tristan Prose Tristan " Cligès " " Chevrefoil " Folie Tristan d'Oxford Sir Tristrem Ystorya Trystan Later literature Tristram and Iseult (1852) Tristram of Lyonesse (1882) Tristan (1903) The Famous Tragedy of the Queen of Cornwall (1923) Finnegans Wake (1939) Tristan and Iseult (1971) Arthur Rex (1978) The Old French Tristan Poems (1980) Music Tristan und Isolde (1865, Wagner) Discography Tristan chord " Liebestod " Souvenirs de Munich ( ca.

1887) Turangalîla-Symphonie (1949, Messiaen) Tristan (1975, Henze) Qntal III: Tristan und Isolde (2003) " Tristan " (2005) Film The Eternal Return (1943) The Woman Next Door (1981) Lovespell (1981) Fire and Sword (1982) In the Shadow of the Raven (1988) Tristan & Isolde (2006) Art Tristan Quilt Tristram and Isoude stained glass panels Tristan and Isolde (Egusquiza) v t e James Joyce 's Finnegans Wake (1939) Inspirations Achmet Borumborad " Finnegan's Wake " The New Science The House by the Churchyard Inclusions " The Ballad of Persse O'Reilly " Bellsybabble Quark Books Our Exagmination Round His Factification for Incamination of Work in Progress (1929) A Skeleton Key to Finnegans Wake (1944) The Gutenberg Galaxy (1962) War and Peace in the Global Village (1968) Joysprick (1973) Music The Wonderful Widow of Eighteen Springs (1942) Bitter Ending (1972) Roaratorio (1979) Symphony No. 1 RiverRun (1983) Nowth upon Nacht (1984) Waywords and Meansigns (2015) Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Spain Croatia Chile Israel Other IdRef MusicBrainz work ELMCIP NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐sf4rm
Cached time: 20250817044113
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.561 seconds
Real time usage: 1.745 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14723/1000000
Revision size: 129502/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 236455/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11961/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 411474/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.848/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8511211/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1465.307      1 -total
 36.95%  541.374      1 Template:Reflist
 13.44%  196.993     33 Template:Cite_web
 10.82%  158.542     28 Template:Cite_book
  8.23%  120.585     18 Template:Rp
  7.74%  113.423     18 Template:R/superscript
  6.16%   90.274      4 Template:Navbox
  5.96%   87.365      1 Template:Infobox_book
  5.68%   83.253      1 Template:James_Joyce
  5.34%   78.284     18 Template:ISBN Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:79578:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044113 and revision id 1303229929. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Finnegans_Wake&oldid=1303229929 " Categories : Finnegans Wake 1939 novels Books written in fictional dialects Novels about dreams Experimental literature Faber & Faber books Irish novels adapted into films Irish satirical novels Macaronic language Modernist novels Nonlinear narrative novels Novels by James Joyce Novels first published in serial form Novels set in Dublin (city) Novels set in Ireland Works originally published in The Transatlantic Review (1924) Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2016 Articles with dead external links from July 2021 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) CS1 Turkish-language sources (tr) CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Good articles Use dmy dates from February 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 CS1 errors: ISBN date Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles with hAudio microformats Articles with Project Gutenberg links This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 19:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Finnegans Wake 39 languages Add topic

