Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life Toggle Life subsection 1.1 Family 1.2 Rule 2 Writing and philosophy 3 Influences 4 Anecdotes 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Periander 35 languages العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Беларуская Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Magyar مصرى Nederlands Polski Português Русский Shqip Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Periander of Corinth ) Tyrant of Corinth Periander Tyrant of Corinth Periander, Roman copy after a Greek original of the 4th century BC, Vatican Museums .

Reign 627–585 BC Predecessor Cypselus Successor Psammetichus Born prior to 635 BC Corinth Died 585 BC Corinth Consort Lyside Issue Cypselus II Lycophron Greek Περίανδρος House Cypselid Father Cypselus Mother Cratea Religion Greek polytheism Periander ( / ˌ p ɛ r i ˈ æ n d ər / ; Greek : Περίανδρος ; died c. 585 BC) was the second tyrant of the Cypselid dynasty that ruled over ancient Corinth . Periander's rule brought about a prosperous time in Corinth's history, as his administrative skill made Corinth one of the wealthiest city states in Greece.

[ 1 ] Several accounts state that Periander was a cruel and harsh ruler, but others [ 2 ] [ citation needed ] claim that he was a fair and just king who worked to ensure that the distribution of wealth in Corinth was more or less even.  He is often considered one of the Seven Sages of Greece , men of the 6th century BC who were renowned for centuries for their wisdom. (The other Sages were most often considered to be Thales , Solon , Cleobulus , Chilon , Bias and Pittacus .) [ 1 ] Life [ edit ] Family [ edit ] Periander was the second tyrant of Corinth [ 3 ] and the son of Cypselus , the founder of the Cypselid dynasty. Because of his father, he was called Cypselides (Κυψελίδης).

[ 4 ] Cypselus’ wife was named Cratea. There were rumors that she and her son, Periander, slept together.

[ 5 ] Periander married Lyside (whom he often referred to as Melissa), daughter of Procles and Eristenea of Epidaurus .

[ 5 ] They had two sons: Cypselus, who was said to be weak-minded, and Lycophron , a man of intelligence.

[ 5 ] According to the book Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers , Periander, in a fit of rage, kicked his wife or threw her down a set of stairs so hard that she was killed.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Greek historian Herodotus has alluded to suggestions that Periander had defiled the corpse of his wife , employing a metaphor: "Periander baked his bread in a cold oven".

[ 7 ] Grief for his mother and anger at his father drove Lycophron to take refuge in Corcyra .

[ 6 ] When Periander was much older and looking to have his successor at his side, he sent for Lycophron.

[ 5 ] When the people of Corcyra heard of this, they killed Lycophron rather than let him depart.  The death of his son caused Periander to fall into a despondency that eventually led to his death.

[ 5 ] Periander was succeeded by his nephew, Psammetichus, who ruled for just three years and was the last of the Cypselid tyrants.

[ citation needed ] Rule [ edit ] Periander built Corinth into one of the major trading centers in Ancient Greece .

[ 3 ] Ruins of ancient Corinth near the Temple of Apollo, the centre of Periander’s power.

He established colonies at Potidaea in Chalcidice and at Apollonia in Illyria , [ 3 ] conquered Epidaurus, formed positive relationships with Miletus and Lydia , and annexed Corcyra, where his son lived much of his life.

[ 3 ] Periander is also credited with inventing a transport system, the Diolkos , across the Isthmus of Corinth . Tolls from goods entering Corinth's port accounted for nearly all the government revenues, which Periander used to build temples and other public works, and to promote literature and arts. He had the poet Arion come from Lesbos to Corinth for an arts festival in the city. Periander held many festivals and built many buildings in the Doric style . The Corinthian style of pottery was developed by an artisan during his rule.

Periander's style of leadership and politics was termed a 'tyranny'. Tyrants favored the poor over the rich, sometimes confiscating landlord's possessions and enacting laws that limited their privileges. They also started the construction of temples, ports and fortifications, and improved the drainage of the city and supply of water. Periander adopted measures that benefitted commerce.

[ 2 ] Diogenes Laertius recounts a legend about his death, that he did not want others to know where he was buried. "He ordered two young men to go out at night by a certain road which he pointed out to them; they were to kill the man they met and bury him. He afterwards ordered four more to go in pursuit of the two, kill them and bury them; again, he dispatched a larger number in pursuit of the four. Having taken these measures, he himself encountered the first pair and was slain." [ 8 ] Writing and philosophy [ edit ] Periander was said to be a patron of literature, who both wrote and appreciated early philosophy. He is said to have written a didactic poem 2,000 lines long.

[ 5 ] In the Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers , Diogenes Laërtius points out that writers disagree on who the Seven Sages are. It is posited that Periander tried to improve order in Corinth; although he appears on Diogenes Laërtius's list, his extreme measures and despotic gestures make him more suited to a list of famous tyrants than of wise men.

[ 2 ] Diogenes Laertius recounts some adages by him: Tyrants who intend to be safe should make loyalty their bodyguard, not arms. Pleasures are transient, honours are immortal. Be moderate in prosperity, prudent in adversity. Be the same to your friends whether they are in prosperity or in adversity. Whatever agreement you make, stick to it. Correct not only the offenders but also those who are on the point of offending.

[ 8 ] Influences [ edit ] Periander is referenced by many contemporaries in relation to philosophy and leadership. Most commonly he is mentioned as one of the Seven Sages of Ancient Greece , a group of philosophers and rulers from early Greece, but some authors leave him out of the list. In Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers , Diogenes Laertius, a philosopher of the 3rd century AD, lists Periander as one of these Seven Sages.

Ausonius also refers to Periander as one of the Sages in his work The Masque of the Seven Sages .

[ 9 ] Some scholars have argued that the ruler named Periander was a different person from the sage of the same name. Diogenes Laërtius writes that "Sotion, and Heraclides, and Pamphila in the fifth book of her Commentaries say that there were two Perianders; the one a tyrant, and the other a wise man, and a native of Ambracia. Neanthes of Cyzicus makes the same assertion, adding, that the two men were cousins to one another. Aristotle says, that it was the Corinthian Periander who was the wise one; but Plato contradicts him." [ 10 ] Anecdotes [ edit ] According to Herodotus ( Histories 5.92), Periander once sought advice on governance from Thrasybulus , the tyrant of Miletus. Instead of responding directly, Thrasybulus led the messenger through a field and silently cut down the tallest ears of wheat. When the messenger reported this, Periander interpreted it as a recommendation to eliminate the most prominent citizens, those who stood out, in order to secure his rule. This parable became a well-known metaphor for autocratic control. A version of the story appears in Livy ( Ab Urbe Condita 1.54), where the Roman king Tarquinius Superbus uses a similar method involving poppy heads. Both versions serve to illustrate how tyrants may suppress potential rivals through subtle but ruthless means.

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Diolkos References [ edit ] ^ a b "Seven Wise Men of Greece" .

Columbia Encyclopedia (6 Copyright © 2023 ed.) – via www.infoplease.ocm.

^ a b c Gomez, Carlos (2019).

The Encyclopedia of Ancient Greece . United Kingdom: Amber Books Ltd. pp.

89– 92.

ISBN 978-1-78274-762-8 .

^ a b c d "Periander" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

^ Charlton T. Lewis, Charles Short, A Latin Dictionary, Cypsĕlus ^ a b c d e f g Laertius, Diogenes.

"Life of Periander" . Archived from the original on 2011-07-22 . Retrieved 2014-05-02 .

^ a b Gentleman of Cambridge (1731).

The history of Periander, King of Corinth . printed: and sold by J. Roberts in Warwick-Lane.

^ Herodotus The Histories , 5.92g ^ a b Diogenes Laertius, Lives of Eminent Philosophers . D. L. 1.7 ^ Ausonius.

"The Masque of the Seven Sages" .

^ Pausanias.

"Description of Greece" .

^ Herodotus, Histories 5.92; Livy, Ab Urbe Condita 1.54.

External links [ edit ] Quotations related to Periander at Wikiquote Media related to Periander at Wikimedia Commons Laërtius, Diogenes .

"The Seven Sages: Periander" .

Lives of the Eminent Philosophers . Vol. 1:1. Translated by Hicks, Robert Drew (Two volume ed.). Loeb Classical Library.

v t e Rulers of Ancient Corinth Heleidae Aeëtes Bounos Epopeus Corinthus Polybus Creon Jason Sisyphidae Sisyphus Glaucus Bellerophon Ornytion Thoas Damophon Propodas two kings at the same time Doridas and Hyanthidas Heracleidae Aletidae Aletes Ixion Agelas I Prymnes Bacchiadae Bacchis Agelas II Eudaemus Aristomedes Agemon Alexander Telestes Automenes Pritanius Cypselid tyrants Cypselus I Periander Psammetichus (Cypselus II) v t e Seven Sages of Greece Cleobulus of Lindos Solon of Athens Chilon of Sparta Bias of Priene Thales of Miletus Pittacus of Mytilene Periander of Corinth ( Myson of Chenae ) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 WorldCat National Germany France BnF data Poland People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Periander&oldid=1305073703 " Categories : Ancient Greek monarchs Necrophiles Seven Sages of Greece 7th-century BC Greek philosophers 6th-century BC Greek philosophers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Greek-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 Commons category link from Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating the template Lives of the Eminent Philosophers This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 22:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Periander 35 languages Add topic

