Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Population Toggle Population subsection 2.1 In North America 2.1.1 Pacific Coast 2.1.2 Atlantic Coast 3 Subspecies 4 Habitat and diet 5 Behaviour, survival, and reproduction 6 Notable individuals 7 See also 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Footnotes 8.2 Bibliography 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Harbor seal 67 languages العربية Aragonés Azərbaycanca Basa Bali Български Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Diné bizaad Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ / inuktitut Iñupiatun Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית Kalaallisut ქართული Kaszëbsczi Kotava Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lingála Magyar مصرى Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла Scots Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Species of pinniped "Common seal" redirects here. For the common seal of a company, see Company seal .

Harbor seal P. v. vitulina off Lismore , Scotland , 2015 Conservation status Least Concern ( IUCN 3.1 ) [ 1 ] Scientific classification Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Mammalia Order: Carnivora Suborder: Caniformia Parvorder: Pinnipedia Family: Phocidae Genus: Phoca Species: P. vitulina Binomial name Phoca vitulina Linnaeus , 1758 [ 2 ] Subspecies P. vitulina concolor ( DeKay , 1842) P. vitulina mellonae ( Doutt , 1942) P. vitulina richardii (Gray, 1864) P. vitulina stejnegeri ( J. A. Allen , 1902) P. vitulina vitulina ( Linnaeus , 1758) Harbour Seal Range The harbor (or harbour ) seal ( Phoca vitulina ), also known as the common seal , is a true seal found along temperate and Arctic marine coastlines of the Northern Hemisphere . The most widely distributed species of pinniped (walruses, eared seals, and true seals), they are found in coastal waters of the northern Atlantic and Pacific oceans, Baltic and North seas.

Harbour seals are brown, silvery white, tan, or grey, with distinctive V-shaped nostrils. An adult can attain a length of 1.85 m (6.1 ft) and weigh up to 168 kg (370 lb).

Blubber under the seal's skin helps to maintain body temperature. Females outlive males (30–35 years versus 20–25 years). Harbor seals stick to familiar resting spots or haulout sites, generally rocky areas (although ice, sand, and mud may also be used) where they are protected from adverse weather conditions and predation, near a foraging area. Males may fight over mates under water and on land. Females bear a single pup after a nine-month gestation, which they care for alone. Pups can weigh up to 16 kg (35 lb) and are able to swim and dive within hours of birth. They develop quickly on their mothers' fat-rich milk, and are weaned after four to six weeks.

The global population of harbor seals is 350,000–500,000, but the freshwater subspecies Ungava seal in Northern Quebec is endangered.

[ 1 ] Once a common practice, sealing is now illegal in many nations within the animal's range.

Description [ edit ] Skull of a harbor seal Skeleton of a harbor seal in the Seal Museum in Iceland Individual harbor seals possess a unique pattern of spots, either dark on a light background or light on a dark. They vary in colour from brownish black to tan or grey; underparts are generally lighter. The body and flippers are short, heads are rounded. Nostrils appear distinctively V-shaped. As with other true seals, there is no pinna (ear flap). An ear canal may be visible behind the eye. Including the head and flippers, they may reach an adult length of 1.85 m (6.1 ft) and a weight of 55 to 168 kg (120 to 370 lb).

[ 3 ] Females are generally smaller than males.

Population [ edit ] White harbor seal on moss, Alaska There are an estimated 350,000–500,000 harbor seals worldwide.

[ 1 ] While the population is not threatened as a whole, the Greenland , Hokkaidō and Baltic Sea populations are exceptions. Local populations have been reduced or eliminated through disease (especially the phocine distemper virus ) and conflict with humans , both unintentionally and intentionally.  Killing seals perceived to threaten fisheries is legal in Norway , and Canada , but commercial hunting is illegal. Seals are also taken in subsistence hunting and accidentally as bycatch (mainly in bottomset nets). Along the Norwegian coast, bycatch accounted for 48% of pup mortality.

[ 4 ] Killing or taking seals has been illegal in the United Kingdom since 1 March 2021.

[ 5 ] Seals in the United Kingdom are protected by the 1970 Conservation of Seals Act , which prohibits most forms of killing. In the United States , the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 prohibits the killing of any marine mammals , and most local ordinances, as well as NOAA , instruct people to leave them alone unless serious danger to the seal exists.

In North America [ edit ] Pacific Coast [ edit ] The California population of subspecies P. v. richardii amounted to about 25,000 individuals as of 1984. Pacific harbor seals or California harbor seals are found along the entire Pacific Coast shoreline of the state. They prefer to remain relatively close to shore in subtidal and intertidal zones, and have not been seen beyond the Channel Islands as a pelagic form; moreover, they often venture into bays and estuaries and even swim up coastal rivers. They feed in shallow littoral waters on herring , flounder , hake , anchovy , codfish , and sculpin .

[ 6 ] Breeding occurs in California from March to May, with pupping between April and May, depending on local populations. As top-level feeders in the kelp forest , harbor seals enhance species diversity and productivity. They are preyed upon by killer whales (orcas) and white sharks . Haul out sites in California include urban beaches and from time to time they can be seen having a nap on the beach in all of San Francisco Bay, which would include the conurbation of Richmond , Oakland , and San Francisco , the Greater Los Angeles area, which would include Santa Barbara , the city of Los Angeles itself, and Long Beach , and all of San Diego Bay , most famously beaches near La Jolla .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Considerable scientific inquiry has been carried out by the Marine Mammal Center and other research organisations beginning in the 1980s regarding the incidence and transmission of diseases in harbor seals in the wild, including analysis of phocine herpesvirus .

[ 13 ] In San Francisco Bay , some harbor seals are fully or partially reddish in colour, possibly caused by an accumulation of trace elements such as iron or selenium in the ocean, or a change in the hair follicles.

[ 14 ] Although some of the largest harbor seal pupping areas are found in California, they are also found north along the Pacific Coast in Oregon, Washington, British Columbia and Alaska. Large populations move with the season south along the west coast of Canada and may winter on the islands in Washington and Oregon. Pupping is known to occur in both Washington and Oregon as of 2020. People are advised to stay at least 50m (164 ft) away from harbor seals that have hauled out on land, especially the pups, as mothers will abandon them when there is excessive human activity nearby.

[ 15 ] A Harbor Seal nursery on ice in front of The Grand Pacific Glacier in Glacier Bay National Park, Alaska Atlantic Coast [ edit ] Historically, the range of the harbor seal extended from the mouth of the St. Lawrence River and Greenland to the sandy beaches of North Carolina, a distance of well over 1,600 km (990 mi). Evidence of their presence in these areas is consistent with both the fossil record as well as a few landmarks named after them during colonisation: Robbin's Reef, off of Bayonne, New Jersey, gets its name from the Dutch word robben, meaning " seals ". On the border between Canada and the US is an island known as Machias Seal Island , a place where today the harbor seal will occasionally visit but is now a sanctuary for puffins. Over the course of hundreds of years, however, the seal was wiped out steadily by being shot on sight by fishermen and by massive pollution. The evidence for this is found in documents all along the coast of New England which put a bounty on the head of every seal shot, as well as the accounts of harbormasters. New York City, when it was founded in the 1640s, was founded on top of an enormous estuary teeming with life that included the harbor seal. Oil in the 1800s started the process of pollution that was later compounded by even more toxic 20th century chemicals that included PCB 's and dioxin . By the time of the 1972 Clean Water Act , New York Harbor was almost dead-almost no living thing could survive in it.

[ 16 ] Approximately 500 km (310 mi) to the north, Boston Harbor was equally polluted. Raw sewage had been dumped in the harbor since the late 1800s and the stench of faecal matter in the Charles River was overpowering, as evidenced by the song " Dirty Water " by the Standells , written in 1966. Flatfish, abundant in the area, had enormous tumors in their livers by the 1980s and the harbor seal was long gone, shot to oblivion.

[ 17 ] As of 2020, however, the seals have returned. They never were extirpated from Canada and certain pockets of the Maine coast, and thus an important mother population was created from whence the species could reclaim the home of their ancestors. Currently, they are sighted as far south as the barrier islands of North Carolina on a regular basis, [ 18 ] with Massachusetts being the southernmost point of known pupping areas along the Atlantic Coast.

[ 19 ] Harbor seals move south from eastern Canadian waters to breed along the coast of Maine , Cape Cod , and the South Shore in Massachusetts in May and June, and return northward in fall. Others will head south from these areas to "vacation" in warmer waters, particularly young seals unable to compete with adults for food and territory; they do not return north until spring.

One park ranger in New York City, which is in the centre of its West Atlantic range, says that "New York is like their Miami resort".

[ 16 ] This refers to the habit of young seals leaving Cape Cod and even some Arctic waters to inhabit the harbor in winter. In 2018 the New York Post reported that the harbor is now "cleaner than it has been in 110 years", [ 20 ] and since the first decade of the 21st century, the harbor seal has found the old turf of its ancestors to be a land of plenty and the water to be livable. Within sight of the New York skyline, known colonies of harbor seals are found on Hoffman [ 21 ] and Swinburne Islands [ 22 ] as well as portions of Red Hook [ 23 ] and Staten Island , [ 24 ] readily hauling out every from October until very early May. Known favourite foods of the seal are returning in grand numbers to New York Harbor as well as nearby New Jersey, from Raritan Bay all the way down the entire Jersey Shore , with schools of mossbunker regularly attracting harbor seals, their cousins the grey seals, dolphins and, most recently, whales.

[ 25 ] Both the northern and southern shores of Long Island have a reliable population of harbor seals as well as greys, where they will take sand lance as well as some species of crab as part of their diet.

Subspecies [ edit ] Harbor seal in Svalbard The five proposed subspecies of Phoca vitulina are: Image Subspecies Common Name Distribution P. v. vitulina ( L.

, 1758) Eastern Atlantic common seal Europe and northwestern Asia.

P. v. concolor ( DeKay , 1842) Western Atlantic common seal Inhabit eastern North America. The validity of this subspecies is questionable, and not supported by genetic evidence. They might be part of the Eastern Atlantic subspecies.

[ 26 ] P. v. mellonae ( Doutt , 1942) Ungava seal ( Lacs des Loups Marins seals) Found in eastern Canada in fresh water P. v. richardii (Gray, 1864) Pacific common seal Western North America.

Phoca vitulina stejnegeri ( J. A. Allen , 1902) Insular seal Eastern Asia. Currently not recognised as a separate subspecies, but part of P. v. richardii [ 27 ] Habitat and diet [ edit ] Harbor seals at Point Lobos , California Harbor seal in the freshwater Connecticut River , following the shad run Harbor seals prefer to frequent familiar resting sites. They may spend several days at sea and travel up to 50 km in search of feeding grounds, and will also swim more than a hundred miles upstream into fresh water in large rivers in search of migratory fish like shad and likely salmon .

[ citation needed ] Resting sites may be both rugged, rocky coasts, such as those of the Hebrides or the shorelines of New England , or sandy beaches, like the ones that flank Normandy in Northern France or the Outer Banks of North Carolina.

[ 1 ] Harbor seals frequently congregate in harbours, bays, sandy intertidal zones, [ 1 ] and estuaries in pursuit of prey fish such as salmon , [ 28 ] menhaden , anchovy , sea bass , herring , mackerel , cod , whiting and flatfish , and occasionally shrimp , crabs , mollusks , and squid . Atlantic subspecies of either Europe or North America also exploit deeper-dwelling fish of the genus Ammodytes as a food source and Pacific subspecies have been recorded occasionally consuming fish of the genus Oncorhynchus . Although primarily coastal, dives of over 500 m have been recorded.

[ 29 ] Harbor seals have been recorded to attack, kill and eat several kinds of ducks.

[ 30 ] Behaviour, survival, and reproduction [ edit ] Harbor seal swimming Harbor seal colony in Helgoland , Germany Harbor seals are solitary, but are gregarious when hauled out and during the breeding season, though they do not form groups as large as some other seals. When not actively feeding, they haul to rest. They tend to be coastal, not venturing more than 20 km offshore. The mating system is not known, but thought to be polygamous . Females give birth once per year, with a gestation period around nine months. Females have a mean age at sexual maturity of 3.72 years and a mean age at first parturition of 4.64.

[ 31 ] Both courtship and mating occur under water.

[ 32 ] [ 31 ] Researchers have found males gather under water, turn on their backs, put their heads together, and call to attract females ready for breeding.

[ 33 ] Pregnancy rate of females was 92% from age 3 to age 36, with lowered reproductive success after the age of 25 years.

[ 31 ] Birthing of pups occurs annually on shore. The timing of the pupping season varies with location, [ 34 ] occurring in February for populations in lower latitudes, and as late as July in the subarctic zone. The mothers are the sole providers of care, with lactation lasting 24 days.

[ 35 ] The single pups are born well developed, capable of swimming and diving within hours. Suckling for three to four weeks, pups feed on the mother's rich, fatty milk and grow rapidly; born weighing up to 16 kg, the pups may double their weight by the time of weaning .

A pup Pup nursing at Point Lobos in California.

Harbor seals must spend a great deal of time on shore when molting , which occurs shortly after breeding. This onshore time is important to the life cycle, and can be disturbed when substantial human presence occurs.

[ 36 ] The timing of onset of molt depends on the age and sex of the animal, with yearlings molting first and adult males last.

[ 37 ] A female mates again immediately following the weaning of her pup.  Harbor seals are sometimes reluctant to haul out in the presence of humans, so shoreline development and access must be carefully studied, and if necessary managed, in known locations of seal haul out.

[ citation needed ] In comparison to many pinniped species, and in contrast to otariid pinnipeds, harbor seals are generally regarded to be more vocally reticent. However, they do use non-harmonic vocalisations to maintain breeding territories and to attract mates during specified times of year, [ 38 ] and also during mother and pup interactions.

[ 39 ] Annual survival rates were calculated at 0.91 for adult males, [ 31 ] and 0.902 for adult females.

[ 40 ] Maximum age for females was 36 and for males 31 years.

[ 31 ] Notable individuals [ edit ] Andre , rescued and trained by his owner Harry Goodridge , he became an iconic figure in his hometown of Rockport, Maine .

Hoover , also rescued from a Maine harbor. Hoover became famous for his ability to imitate human speech, something not observed in any other mammal.

Popeye , the official seal of Friday Harbor, Washington , notable for her common sightings up until 2019, when she was presumed to have died. She was identified and named from her cloudy left eye. There is a statue of her in the Port of Friday Harbor.

Freddie, a seal pup commonly spotted along the Thames in central London. Named after Freddie Mercury due to his bushy whiskers and playfulness. Freddie was known to travel unusually far into London from the Thames Estuary, and was often sighted as far west as Hammersmith . On 21 March 2021 he had to be put down after he was violently mauled by an out-of-control dog.

[ 41 ] See also [ edit ] Marine life portal Mammals portal Conservation of Seals Act 1970 (in the UK) Marine Mammal Protection Act (in the United States) Wadden Sea Agreement (in the Netherlands, Germany and Denmark) References [ edit ] Footnotes [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Lowry, L. (2016).

" Phoca vitulina " .

IUCN Red List of Threatened Species .

2016 : e.T17013A45229114.

doi : 10.2305/IUCN.UK.2016-1.RLTS.T17013A45229114.en . Retrieved 12 November 2021 .

^ Linnæus, Carl (1758).

Systema naturæ per regna tria naturæ, secundum classes, ordines, genera, species, cum characteribus, differentiis, synonymis, locis. Tomus I (in Latin) (10th ed.). Holmiæ (Stockholm): Laurentius Salvius. p. 38 . Retrieved 23 November 2012 .

^ Burnie, David; Wilson, Don E. (2001).

Animal . New York City: DK Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-7894-7764-4 .

^ Bjørge, A.; Øien, N.; Hartvedt, S.; Bøthum, G.; Bekkby, T. (2002). "Dispersal and bycatch mortality in grey, Halichoerus grypys, and harbour, Phoca vitulina, seals tagged at the Norwegian coast".

Mar. Mammal Sci .

18 (4): 963– 976.

Bibcode : 2002MMamS..18..963B .

doi : 10.1111/j.1748-7692.2002.tb01085.x .

S2CID 84812505 .

^ "Seals" .

GOV.UK . Retrieved 2022-02-08 .

^ Newby, T.C. (1978).

Pacific Harbor Seal pp 184–191 in D. Haley, ed.

Marine Mammals of Eastern North Pacific and Arctic Waters , Pacific Search Press, Seattle WA.

^ "Pinniped Management Plan" (PDF) .

File.lacounty.gov . Retrieved 21 March 2022 .

^ "How to safely spot sea lions and seals along the Southern California coast" .

Scpr.org . 22 August 2011.

^ "Santa Barbara - Stranded Marine Mammals" .

Santabarbaraca.gov . 6 June 2022.

^ "Why sharks and seals are coming to Los Angeles and Long Beach ports" .

Presstelegram.com . 11 December 2016.

^ "Harbor Seals: At Home in the Bay" .

Baykeeper.org . August 2013.

^ "Forget Pier 39: Harbor seals find spot in East Bay" .

Mercurynews.com . 9 August 2016.

^ Goldstein, T., Mazet, J.A.K., Gulland, F.M.D., Rowles, T., Harvey, J.T., Allen, S.G., King, D.P., Aldridge, B.M., Stott, J.L. (2004). The transmission of phocine herpesvirus -1 in rehabilitating and free-ranging Pacific harbor seals ( Phoca vitulina ) in California .

Veterinary Microbiology ; 103:131–141.

^ "The Marine Mammal Center" .

The Marine Mammal Center . Retrieved 2019-07-02 .

^ "Public urged to refrain from approaching seal pups on local beaches" .

Chinookobserver.com . 21 May 2020.

^ a b "Why These Seals Left New York—and Why They Came Back | Lenora Todaro" .

Catapult.co . 20 March 2019.

^ Moore, Michael (14 January 2019).

"Boston "Harbor of Shame" Successfully Ends 30-Year Cleanup" .

Inverse.com . Retrieved 21 March 2022 .

^ Horan, Jack (17 February 2016).

"Seals Swim to NC, Visit the Outer Banks" .

News and Observer . Retrieved 6 October 2020 .

^ "Cape Cod Seals" .

Coastalstudies.org .

^ Spitznagel, Eric (2019-08-10).

"Why New York harbor is the cleanest it's been in 110 years" .

New York Post . Retrieved 2020-10-06 .

^ Newman, Andy (25 March 2006).

"Swimmers from the North Delight Scientists and Sightseers" .

The New York Times .

^ Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine : "Seals Making A Comeback In NYC Waters" .

YouTube . 20 March 2019.

^ "What To Do If You See An Adorable Seal Wandering Around NYC" .

Gothamist.com . 2020-01-15 . Retrieved 2020-10-06 .

^ "Hundreds of seals are now calling the waters around NYC home" .

Ny1.com . Retrieved 2020-10-06 .

^ "A Vision for Menhaden: Supporting Anglers, Wildlife, and Businesses From Florida to Maine" .

Pew.org . 9 November 2017 . Retrieved 2020-10-06 .

^ Berta, A.; Churchill, M. (2012). "Pinniped Taxonomy: evidence for species and subspecies".

Mammal Review .

42 (3): 207– 234.

doi : 10.1111/j.1365-2907.2011.00193.x .

^ Society for Marine Mammalogy (13 November 2016).

"Committee on Taxonomy. List of marine mammal species and subspecies" .

Society for Marine Mammalogy . Retrieved 6 September 2021 .

^ Photographic evidence ^ Burns, J.J. (2002). Harbor seal and spotted seal Phoca vitulina and P. largha . In: W.F. Perrin, B. Wursig and J.G.M. Thewissen (eds), Encyclopedia of Marine Mammals Academic Press. pp. 552–560.

^ "Harbour seal kills and eats duck" Archived 2012-05-03 (Date mismatch) at the Wayback Machine , Tetrapod Zoology , 6 March 2008.

^ a b c d e Härkönen, T.; Heide-Jørgensen, M.-P. (1990-12-01). "Comparative life histories of East Atlantic and other harbour seal populations".

Ophelia .

32 (3): 211– 235.

doi : 10.1080/00785236.1990.10422032 .

ISSN 0078-5326 .

^ Allen, Sarah G. (1985). "Mating Behavior in the Harbor Seal".

Marine Mammal Science .

1 (1): 84– 87.

Bibcode : 1985MMamS...1...84A .

doi : 10.1111/j.1748-7692.1985.tb00532.x .

^ Van Parijs, S.M.; Kovacs, K.M. (2002). "In-air and underwater vocalizations of eastern Canadian harbour seals, Phoca vitulina ".

Canadian Journal of Zoology .

80 (7): 1173– 1179.

doi : 10.1139/z02-088 .

^ Temte, J. L. (1994). Photoperiod control of birth timing in harbour seal ( Phoca vitulina ).

Journal of Zoology (London) 233: 369–384.

^ Daryl Boness and W. Don Bowen, "The Evolution of Maternal Care in Pinnipeds", BioScience. 46(9):645-654. 1996.

JSTOR 1312894 ^ Patrick Sullivan, Gary Deghi and C.Michael Hogan, Harbor Seal Study for Strawberry Spit, Marin County, California , Earth Metrics file reference 10323, BCDC and County of Marin, 23 January 1989.

^ Reder, S.; Lydersen, C.; Arnold, W.; Kovacs, K.M. (2003). "Haulout behaviour of High Arctic harbour seals ( Phoca vitulina vitulina ) in Svalbard, Norway".

Polar Biology .

27 (1): 6– 16.

Bibcode : 2003PoBio..27....6R .

doi : 10.1007/s00300-003-0557-1 .

S2CID 25505946 .

^ Matthews, L. P. & Parks, S. E. (2017).

"Source levels and call parameters of harbor seal breeding vocalisations near a terrestrial haulout ite in Glacier Bay National Park and Preserve" .

The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America .

141 (3): EL274 – EL280 .

Bibcode : 2017ASAJ..141L.274M .

doi : 10.1121/1.4978299 .

PMID 28372144 .

^ Perry, E. A. & Renouf, D. (1988). "further studies of the role of harbour seal (Phoca vitulina) pup vocalizations in preventing separation of mother-pup pairs".

Canadian Journal of Zoology .

66 (4): 934– 938.

doi : 10.1139/z88-138 .

^ Manugian, S. C.; Greig, D.; Lee, D.; Becker, B. H.; Allen, S.; Lowry, M. S. & Harvey, J. T. (2017). "Survival probabilities and movements of harbor seals in central California".

Marine Mammal Science .

33 (1): 154– 171.

Bibcode : 2017MMamS..33..154M .

doi : 10.1111/mms.12350 .

^ "Freddie the seal death: Dog owner sought by police after Thameside attack" .

BBC News . 23 March 2021 . Retrieved 10 August 2022 .

Bibliography [ edit ] van den Toorn, Jaap (1999-09-21).

"Harbor seals" . Jaap's Marine Mammal Pages. Archived from the original on 2006-03-11 . Retrieved 2006-06-26 .

California Wildlife, Volume III, Mammals , edited by David C. Zeiner, William F. Laudenslayer and Kenneth E. Meyer, published by the California Department of Fish and Game , April 1990.

CRC Handbook of Marine Mammal Medicine.

edited by Leslie A Dierauf, Frances M D Gulland,  CRC Press (2001) ISBN 0-8493-0839-9 Hewitt, Joan (2002).

A Harbor Seal Pup Grows Up.

Carolrhoda Books.

ISBN 1-57505-166-4 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Phoca vitulina .

"Phoca vitulina" .

Integrated Taxonomic Information System . Retrieved 23 March 2006 .

Harbor Seals at Stanford University Images and movies of the Harbor seal — ARKive photos of harbor seal haulouts from Japan to France —SealWatch archive Harbor Seal —Marine Mammal Center North American Mammals: Phoca vitulina —Smithsonian Institution v t e Extant Carnivora species Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Mammalia Infraclass: Eutheria Superorder: Laurasiatheria Feliformia ("cat-like" carnivorans) Feliformia African palm civet ( Nandinia binotata ) Feloidea Prionodon (Asiatic linsangs) Banded linsang ( P. linsang ) Spotted linsang ( P. pardicolor ) Felidae (cats) Pantherinae Neofelis Sunda clouded leopard ( N. diardi ) Clouded leopard ( N. nebulosa ) Panthera Snow leopard ( P. uncia ) Tiger ( P. tigris ) Jaguar ( P. onca ) Lion ( P. leo ) Leopard ( P. pardus ) Felinae sensu stricto Bay cat lineage Pardofelis Marbled cat ( P. marmorata ) Catopuma Bay cat ( C. badia ) Asian golden cat ( C. temminckii ) Caracal lineage Serval ( Leptailurus serval ) Caracal African golden cat ( C. aurata ) Caracal ( C. caracal ) Leopardus Pampas cat ( L. colocola ) Geoffroy's cat ( L. geoffroyi ) Kodkod ( L. guigna ) Southern tiger cat ( L. guttulus ) Andean mountain cat ( L. jacobita ) Ocelot ( L. pardalis ) Oncilla ( L. tigrinus ) Margay ( L. wiedii ) Lynx Canada lynx ( L. canadensis ) Eurasian lynx ( L. lynx ) Iberian lynx ( L. pardinus ) Bobcat ( L. rufus ) Puma lineage Acinonyx Cheetah ( A. jubatus ) Jaguarundi ( Herpailurus yagouaroundi ) Puma Cougar ( P. concolor ) Leopard cat lineage Pallas's cat ( Otocolobus manul ) Prionailurus Leopard cat ( P. bengalensis ) Sunda leopard cat  ( P. javanensis ) Flat-headed cat ( P. planiceps ) Rusty-spotted cat ( P. rubiginosus ) Fishing cat ( P. viverrinus ) Felis Chinese mountain cat ( F. bieti ) Domestic cat ( F. catus ) Jungle cat ( F. chaus ) African wildcat ( F. lybica ) Sand cat ( F. margarita ) Black-footed cat ( F. nigripes ) European wildcat ( F. silvestris ) Viverroidea see below↓ Viverroidea Viverridae Palm civets Hemigalinae Owston's palm civet ( Chrotogale owstoni ) Otter civet ( Cynogale bennettii ) Hose's palm civet ( Diplogale hosei ) Banded palm civet ( Hemigalus derbyanus ) Paradoxurinae Binturong ( Arctictis binturong ) Small-toothed palm civet ( Arctogalidia trivirgata ) Sulawesi palm civet ( Macrogalidia musschenbroekii ) Masked palm civet ( Paguma larvata ) Paradoxurus Asian palm civet ( P. hermaphroditus ) Brown palm civet ( P. jerdoni ) Golden palm civet ( P. zeylonensis ) Viverrinae sensu lato Viverrinae sensu stricto Small Indian civet ( Viverricula indica ) African civet ( Civettictis civetta ) Viverra Malabar large-spotted civet ( V. civettina ) Large-spotted civet ( V. megaspila ) Malayan civet ( V. tangalunga ) Large Indian civet ( V. zibetha ) Genettinae Poiana (African linsangs) Central African oyan ( P. richardsonii ) West African oyan ( P. leightoni ) Genetta (genets) subgenus Genetta (paraphyletic) Abyssinian genet ( G. abyssinica ) Common genet ( G. genetta ) South African small-spotted genet ( G. felina ) subgenus Eugenetta (paraphyletic) Angolan genet ( G. angolensis ) Cape genet ( G. tigrina ) subgenus Herpailuropoda (paraphyletic) Bourlon's genet ( G. bourloni ) Johnston's genet ( G. johnstoni ) Hausa genet ( G. thierryi ) Giant forest genet ( G. victoriae ) subgenus Pardogale (paraphyletic) Pardine genet ( G. pardina ) King genet ( G. poensis ) subgenus Prionailuropoda Letaba genet ( G. letabae ) Rusty-spotted genet ( G. maculata ) Schouteden's genet ( G. schoutedeni ) subgenus Leptailuropoda (paraphyletic) Crested servaline genet ( G. cristata ) Servaline genet ( G. servalina ) subgenus Osbornictis Aquatic genet ( G. piscivora ) Herpestoidea see below↓ Herpestoidea Hyaenidae (hyenas) Proteles Aardwolf ( P. cristata ) Hyaeninae (bone-crushing hyenas) Striped hyena ( Hyaena hyaena ) Brown hyena ( Parahyaena brunnea ) Crocuta Spotted hyena ( C. crocuta ) Herpestidae sensu lato Eupleridae (Malagasy carnivorans) Euplerinae (Malagasy civets) Fossa ( Cryptoprocta ferox ) Malagasy civet ( Fossa fossana ) Eupleres (falanoucs) Eastern falanouc ( E. goudotii ) Western falanouc ( E. major ) Galidiinae (vontsira) Ring-tailed vontsira ( Galidia elegans ) Galidictis Broad-striped Malagasy mongoose ( G. fasciata ) Grandidier's mongoose ( G. grandidieri ) Narrow-striped mongoose ( Mungotictis decemlineata ) Salanoia Brown-tailed mongoose ( S. concolor ) Durrell's vontsira ( S. durrelli ) Herpestidae sensu stricto (mongooses) Mungotinae Suricata Meerkat ( S. suricatta ) Liberian mongoose ( Liberiictus kuhni ) Mungos Gambian mongoose ( M. gambianus ) Banded mongoose ( M. mungo ) Pousargues's mongoose ( Dologale dybowskii ) Helogale Ethiopian dwarf mongoose ( H. hirtula ) Common dwarf mongoose ( H. parvula ) Crossarchus (kusimanses) Alexander's kusimanse ( C. alexandri ) Angolan kusimanse ( C. ansorgei ) Common kusimanse ( C. obscurus ) Flat-headed kusimanse ( C. platycephalus ) Herpestinae Marsh mongoose ( Atilax paludinosus ) Long-nosed mongoose ( Xenogale naso ) Urva (Asian mongooses) Small Indian mongoose ( U. auropunctata ) Short-tailed mongoose ( U. brachyura ) Indian grey mongoose ( U. edwardsii ) Indian brown mongoose ( U. fusca ) Javan mongoose ( U. javanica ) Collared mongoose ( U. semitorquata ) Ruddy mongoose ( U. smithii ) Crab-eating mongoose ( U. urva ) Stripe-necked mongoose ( U. vitticolla ) White-tailed mongoose ( Ichneumia albicauda ) Yellow mongoose ( Cynictis penicillata ) Selous's mongoose ( Paracynictis selousi ) Meller's mongoose ( Rhynchogale melleri ) Bdeogale Bushy-tailed mongoose ( B. crassicauda ) Jackson's mongoose ( B. jacksoni ) Black-footed mongoose ( B. nigripes ) Herpestes (slender mongooses) Angolan slender mongoose ( H. flavescens ) Egyptian mongoose ( H. ichneumon ) Somalian slender mongoose ( H. ochracea ) Cape gray mongoose ( H. pulverulenta ) Common slender mongoose ( H. sanguinea ) Caniformia ("dog-like" carnivorans) Canidae (dogs) Urocyon Gray fox ( U. cinereoargenteus ) Island fox ( U. littoralis ) Vulpini Bat-eared fox ( Otocyon megalotis ) Nyctereutes (raccoon dogs) Common raccoon dog ( N. procyonoides ) Japanese raccoon dog ( N. viverrinus ) Vulpes (true foxes ) Bengal fox ( V. bengalensis ) Blanford's fox ( V. cana ) Cape fox ( V. chama ) Corsac fox ( V. corsac ) Tibetan fox ( V. ferrilata ) Arctic fox ( V. lagopus ) Kit fox ( V. macrotis ) Pale fox ( V. pallida ) Rüppell's fox ( V. rueppelli ) Swift fox ( V. velox ) Red fox ( V. vulpes ) Fennec fox ( V. zerda ) Canini (true dogs) Cerdocyonina (zorro) Maned wolf ( Chrysocyon brachyurus ) Speothos Bush dog ( S. venaticus ) Short-eared dog ( Atelocynus microtis ) Crab-eating fox ( Cerdocyon thous ) Lycalopex (South American foxes) Culpeo ( L. culpaeus ) Darwin's fox ( L. fulvipes ) South American gray fox ( L. griseus ) Pampas fox ( L. gymnocercus ) Sechuran fox ( L. sechurae ) Hoary fox ( L. vetulus ) Canina (wolf-like canids) Lupulella Side-striped jackal ( L. adustus ) Black-backed jackal ( L. mesomelas ) Lycaon African wild dog ( L. pictus ) Dhole ( Cuon alpinus ) Canis Golden jackal ( C. aureus ) Domestic dog ( C. familiaris ) Coyote ( C. latrans ) African wolf ( C. lupaster ) Wolf ( C. lupus ) Eastern wolf ( C. lycaon ) Red wolf ( C. rufus ) Ethiopian wolf ( C. simensis ) Arctoidea Ursidae (bears) Ailuropoda Giant panda ( A. melanoleuca ) Tremarctos Spectacled bear ( T. ornatus ) Ursinae Sloth bear ( Melursus ursinus ) Sun bear ( Helarctos malayanus ) Ursus American black bear ( U. americanus ) Asian black bear ( U. thibetanus ) Brown bear ( U. arctos ) Polar bear ( U. maritimus ) Mustelida Pinnipedia (seals) see below↓ Musteloidea see below↓ Pinnipedia (seals) Odobenidae Walrus ( Odobenus rosmarus ) Otariidae (eared seals) Callorhinus (northern fur seals ) Northern fur seal ( C. ursinus ) Otariinae ( sea lions ) Steller sea lion ( Eumetopias jubatus ) Zalophus California sea lion ( Z. californianus ) Galápagos sea lion ( Z. wollebaeki ) South American sea lion ( Otaria flavescens ) Neophoca Australian sea lion ( N. cinerea ) New Zealand sea lion ( Phocarctos hookeri ) Arctocephalus (southern fur seals ) South American fur seal ( A. australis ) Australasian fur seal ( A. forsteri ) Galápagos fur seal ( A. galapagoensis ) Antarctic fur seal ( A. gazella ) Juan Fernández fur seal ( A. philippii ) Brown fur seal ( A. pusillus ) Guadalupe fur seal ( A. townsendi ) Subantarctic fur seal ( A. tropicalis ) Phocidae (earless seals or true seals) Phocinae ("northern seals") Bearded seal ( Erignathus barbatus ) Hooded seal ( Cystophora cristata ) Phocini Harp seal ( Pagophilus groenlandicus ) Ribbon seal ( Histriophoca fasciata ) Grey seal ( Halichoerus grypus ) Phoca Spotted seal ( P. largha ) Harbor seal ( P. vitulina ) Pusa Caspian seal ( P. caspica ) Ringed seal ( P. hispida ) Baikal seal ( P. sibirica ) Monachinae ("southern seals") Monachini (monk seals) Mediterranean monk seal ( Monachus monachus ) Neomonachus Hawaiian monk seal ( N. schauinslandi ) Mirounga (elephant seals) Northern elephant seal ( M. angustirostris ) Southern elephant seal ( M. leonina ) Lobodontini (Antarctic seals) Leopard seal ( Hydrurga leptonyx ) Weddell seal ( Leptonychotes weddellii ) Crabeater seal ( Lobodon carcinophagus ) Ross seal ( Ommatophoca rossi ) Musteloidea Ailuridae Red panda ( Ailurus fulgens ) Mephitidae ( skunks ) Conepatus (hog-nosed skunks) Molina's hog-nosed skunk ( C. chinga ) Humboldt's hog-nosed skunk ( C. humboldtii ) American hog-nosed skunk ( C. leuconotus ) Striped hog-nosed skunk ( C. semistriatus ) Mephitis Hooded skunk ( M. macroura ) Striped skunk ( M. mephitis ) Mydaus (stink badgers) Sunda stink badger ( M. javanensis ) Palawan stink badger ( M. marchei ) Spilogale (spotted skunks) Southern spotted skunk ( S. angustifrons ) Western spotted skunk ( S. gracilis ) Eastern spotted skunk ( S. putorius ) Pygmy spotted skunk ( S. pygmaea ) Procyonidae Kinkajou ( Potos flavus ) Bassariscus Ringtail ( B. astutus ) Cacomistle ( B. sumichrasti ) Procyon (raccoons) Crab-eating raccoon ( P. cancrivorus ) Raccoon ( P. lotor ) Cozumel raccoon ( P. pygmaeus ) Bassaricyon (olingos) Eastern lowland olingo ( B. alleni ) Northern olingo ( B. gabbii ) Western lowland olingo ( B. medius ) Olinguito ( B. neblina ) Nasuina (coatis) Nasua White-nosed coati ( N. narica ) South American coati ( N. nasua ) Nasuella (mountain coatis) Eastern mountain coati ( N. meridensis ) Western mountain coati ( N. olivacea ) Mustelidae see below↓ Mustelidae Mustelidae American badger ( Taxidea taxus ) Mellivora Honey badger ( M. capensis ) Melinae Arctonyx (hog badgers) Northern hog badger ( A. albogularis ) Greater hog badger ( A. collaris ) Sumatran hog badger ( A. hoevenii ) Meles (Eurasian badgers) Japanese badger ( M. anakuma ) Caucasian badger ( M. canescens ) Asian badger ( M. leucurus ) European badger ( M. meles ) Melogale (ferret-badgers) Vietnam ferret-badger ( M. cucphuongensis ) Bornean ferret badger ( M. everetti ) Chinese ferret-badger ( M. moschata ) Javan ferret-badger ( M. orientalis ) Burmese ferret-badger ( M. personata ) Formosan ferret-badger ( M. subaurantiaca ) Guloninae Tayra ( Eira barbara ) Pekania Fisher ( P. pennanti ) Gulo Wolverine ( G. gulo ) Martes (martens) American marten ( M. americana ) Pacific marten ( M. caurina ) Yellow-throated marten ( M. flavigula ) Beech marten ( M. foina ) Nilgiri marten ( M. gwatkinsii ) European pine marten ( M. martes ) Japanese marten ( M. melampus ) Sable ( M. zibellina ) Ictonychinae Lyncodontini Patagonian weasel ( Lyncodon patagonicus ) Galictis (grisons) Lesser grison ( G. cuja ) Greater grison ( G. vittata ) Ictonychini (African polecats) Vormela Marbled polecat ( V. peregusna ) African striped weasel ( Poecilogale albinucha ) Ictonyx Saharan striped polecat ( I. libycus ) Striped polecat ( I. striatus ) Lutrinae (otters) Giant otter ( Pteronura brasiliensis ) Lontra North American river otter ( L. canadensis ) Marine otter ( L. felina ) Neotropical otter ( L. longicaudis ) Southern river otter ( L. provocax ) Enhydra Sea otter ( E. lutris ) Spotted-necked otter ( Hydrictis maculicollis ) Lutra Eurasian otter ( L. lutra ) Hairy-nosed otter ( L. sumatrana ) Lutrogale Smooth-coated otter ( L. perspicillata ) Aonyx African clawless otter ( A. capensis ) Asian small-clawed otter ( A. cinereus ) Congo clawless otter ( A. congicus ) Mustelinae Neogale (New World weasels) Amazon weasel ( N. africana ) Colombian weasel ( N. felipei ) Long-tailed weasel ( N. frenata ) American mink ( N. vison ) Mustela (weasels) subgenus Mustela (paraphyletic) Sichuan weasel ( M. aistoodonnivalis ) Mountain weasel ( M. altaica ) Stoat/Beringian ermine ( M. erminea ) Haida ermine ( M. haidarum ) Yellow-bellied weasel ( M. kathiah ) Least weasel ( M. nivalis ) American ermine ( M. richardsonii ) subgenus Lutreola (paraphyletic) Japanese weasel ( M. itatsi ) European mink ( M. lutreola ) Indonesian mountain weasel ( M. lutreolina ) Malayan weasel ( M. nudipes ) Siberian weasel ( M. sibirica ) Back-striped weasel ( M. strigidorsa ) subgenus Putorius Steppe polecat ( M. eversmannii ) Ferret ( M. furo ) Black-footed ferret ( M. nigripes ) European polecat ( M. putorius ) See also: Mink Polecat Taxon identifiers Phoca vitulina Wikidata : Q26913 Wikispecies : Phoca vitulina ADW : Phoca_vitulina ARKive : phoca-vitulina BioLib: 2221 BOLD : 16605 CoL : 4GK65 CMS : phoca-vitulina EoL : 46559162 EPPO : PJOCVI Fauna Europaea : 305353 Fauna Europaea (new) : a66204d1-ad2e-4184-b04c-3d7fb221fdb0 GBIF : 2434793 iNaturalist : 41708 IRMNG : 11223773 ITIS : 180649 IUCN : 17013 MDD : 1005926 MSW : 14001060 NatureServe : 2.104705 NBN : NBNSYS0000005135 NCBI : 9720 NOAA : harbor-seal Observation.org : 395 OBIS : 137084 Open Tree of Life : 698422 Paleobiology Database : 72268 SeaLifeBase : 68964 TSA : 13569 WoRMS : 137084 ZooBank : 064A76C7-49C4-4231-842D-67C82DACD58E Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Harbor_seal&oldid=1306324390 " Categories : IUCN Red List least concern species Fauna of the Eastern United States Fauna of the North Sea Fauna of the Holarctic realm Mammals described in 1758 Mammals of Canada Mammals of Iceland Mammals of the United States Phocins Pinnipeds of Asia Pinnipeds of Europe Pinnipeds of North America Pinnipeds of the Arctic Ocean Animal taxa named by Carl Linnaeus Habitats Directive species Biota of the Temperate Northern Pacific Hidden categories: CS1 Latin-language sources (la) Webarchive template wayback links Webarchive template warnings Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from May 2025 Articles with 'species' microformats All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2012 Commons link from Wikidata Taxonbars with 30–34 taxon IDs This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 04:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Harbor seal 67 languages Add topic

