Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Macro and micro analysis of labour markets 2 Macroeconomics of labour markets 3 Neoclassical microeconomics Toggle Neoclassical microeconomics subsection 3.1 Neoclassical supply 3.2 Neoclassical demand 3.3 Equilibrium 4 Monopsony 5 Asymmetric information Toggle Asymmetric information subsection 5.1 Search models 6 Personnel economics: hiring and incentives Toggle Personnel economics: hiring and incentives subsection 6.1 Discrimination and inequality 7 See also 8 References 9 Sources 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Labour economics 50 languages العربية অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latviešu Magyar Македонски Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Shqip Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Labour (economics) ) Study of the markets for wage labour For the journal, see Labour Economics (journal) .

This article may lack focus or may be about more than one topic .

Please help improve this article , possibly by splitting the article or organising a disambiguation page . There might be further discussion about this on the talk page .

( January 2025 ) A "help wanted" sign seeks available workers for jobs.

Part of the behavioral sciences Economics Outline Index Glossary Economists Principles of Economics Tools and methodology Economic theory Mathematical modeling Game theory Rational choice Cognitive science ( Behavioral ) Economic equilibrium Empirical methods Experimental National accounts Econometrics Time series Spatial Prescriptive and policy Welfare analysis Social choice theory Rational choice theory Cost–benefit analysis Branches and subfields Applied Econometrics International Heterodox Micro Macro Mainstream Mathematical Mech. design Methodology Political Industrial org.

Market design Applications Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Economics portal Society portal v t e Labour economics seeks to understand the functioning and dynamics of the markets for wage labour .

Labour is a commodity that is supplied by labourers , usually in exchange for a wage paid by demanding firms.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Because these labourers exist as parts of a social, institutional, or political system, labour economics must also account for social, cultural and political variables.

[ 3 ] Labour markets or job markets function through the interaction of workers and employers. Labour economics looks at the suppliers of labour services (workers) and the demanders of labour services (employers), and attempts to understand the resulting pattern of wages, employment, and income. These patterns exist because each individual in the market is presumed to make rational choices based on the information that they know regarding wage, desire to provide labour, and desire for leisure. Labour markets are normally geographically bounded, but the rise of the internet has brought about a 'planetary labour market' in some sectors.

[ 4 ] Labour is a measure of the work done by human beings. It is conventionally contrasted with other factors of production , such as land and capital . Some theories focus on human capital , or entrepreneurship , (which refers to the skills that workers possess and not necessarily the actual work that they produce). Labour is unique to study because it is a special type of good that cannot be separated from the owner (i.e. the work cannot be separated from the person who does it). A labour market is also different from other markets in that workers are the suppliers and firms are the demanders.

[ 1 ] Macro and micro analysis of labour markets [ edit ] There are two sides to labour economics. Labour economics can generally be seen as the application of microeconomic or macroeconomic techniques to the labour market. Microeconomic techniques study the role of individuals and individual firms in the labour market. Macroeconomic techniques look at the interrelations between the labour market, the goods market, the money market, and the foreign trade market. It looks at how these interactions influence macro variables such as employment levels, participation rates, aggregate income and gross domestic product .

Macroeconomics of labour markets [ edit ] Job advertisement board in Shenzhen The labour market in macroeconomic theory shows that the supply of labour exceeds demand, which has been proven by salary growth that lags productivity growth. When labour supply exceeds demand, salary faces downward pressure due to an employer's ability to pick from a labour pool that exceeds the jobs pool. However, if the demand for labour is larger than the supply, salary increases, as employee have more bargaining power while employers have to compete for scarce labour.

[ 5 ] The labour force (LF) is defined as the number of people of working age , who are either employed or actively looking for work (unemployed). The labour force participation rate (LFPR) is the number of people in the labour force divided by the size of the adult civilian noninstitutional population (or by the population of working age that is not institutionalized ), LFPR = LF/Population.

[ 6 ] The non-labour force includes those who are not looking for work, those who are institutionalized (such as in prisons or psychiatric wards), stay-at-home spouses, children not of working age, and those serving in the military. The unemployment level is defined as the labour force minus the number of people currently employed. The unemployment rate is defined as the level of unemployment divided by the labour force. The employment rate is defined as the number of people currently employed divided by the adult population (or by the population of working age). In these statistics , self-employed people are counted as employed.

[ 6 ] The labour market has the ability to create a higher derivative efficiency of labour, especially on a national and international level, compared to simpler forms of labour distribution, leading to a higher financial GDP growth and output. An efficient labour market is important for the private sector as it drives up derivative income through the reduction of relative costs of labour. This presupposes that division of labour is used as a method to attain cost efficiency.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Variables like employment level, unemployment level, labour force, and unfilled vacancies are called stock variables because they measure a quantity at a point in time. They can be contrasted with flow variables which measure a quantity over a duration of time. Changes in the labour force are due to flow variables such as natural population growth, net immigration, new entrants, and retirements . Changes in unemployment depend on inflows (non-employed people starting to look for jobs and employed people who lose their jobs that are looking for new ones) and outflows (people who find new employment and people who stop looking for employment). When looking at the overall macroeconomy, several types of unemployment have been identified, which can be separated into two categories of natural and unnatural unemployment.

[ 6 ] Natural Unemployment Frictional unemployment – This reflects the fact that it takes time for people to find and settle into new jobs that they feel are appropriate for them and their skill set.

[ 6 ] Technological advancement often reduces frictional unemployment; for example, internet search engines have reduced the cost and time associated with finding work and hiring decisions .

Structural unemployment – The number of jobs available in an industry are insufficient to provide jobs to all persons who are interested in working or qualified to work in that industry. This can be due to the changes in industries prevalent in a country or because wages for the industry are too high, causing people to want to supply their labour to that industry.

[ 6 ] Seasonal unemployment – Unemployment due to seasonal fluctuations of demand for workers across industries, such as in the retail industry after holidays that involve a lot of shopping are over.

[ 6 ] Natural rate of unemployment (also known as full employment ) – This is the summation of frictional and structural unemployment, that excludes cyclical contributions of unemployment (e.g. recessions) and seasonal unemployment. It is the lowest rate of unemployment that a stable economy can expect to achieve, given that some frictional and structural unemployment is inevitable. Economists do not agree on the level of the natural rate, with estimates ranging from 1% to 5%, or on its meaning – some associate it with "non-accelerating inflation ". The estimated rate varies between countries and across time.

[ 6 ] Unnatural Unemployment Demand deficient unemployment (also known as cyclical unemployment ) – Any level of unemployment beyond the natural rate caused by the failure of markets to clear , generally due to insufficient aggregate demand in the economy. During a recession, demand is deficient, causing the underutilisation of inputs (including labour).

Aggregate expenditure (AE) can be increased by increasing consumption spending (C), investment spending (I), government spending (G), or increasing exports (X), since AE = C + I + G + X.

Neoclassical microeconomics [ edit ] Neoclassical economists view the labour market as similar to other markets in that the forces of supply and demand jointly determine the price (in this case the wage rate) and quantity (in this case the number of people employed).

However, the labour market differs from other markets (like the markets for goods or the financial market) in several ways. In particular, the labour market may act as a non-clearing market . While according to neoclassical theory most markets quickly attain a point of equilibrium without excess supply or demand, this may not be true of the labour market: it may have a persistent level of unemployment. Contrasting the labour market to other markets also reveals persistent compensating differentials among similar workers.

Models that assume perfect competition in the labour market, as discussed below, conclude that workers earn their marginal product of labour.

[ 10 ] Neoclassical supply [ edit ] See also: Labour supply and Price elasticity of supply The neoclassical model analyzes the trade-off between leisure hours and working hours.

Railroad work Households are suppliers of labour. In microeconomic theory, people are assumed to be rational and seeking to maximize their utility function . In the labour market model, their utility function expresses trade-offs in preference between leisure time and income from time used for labour. However, they are constrained by the hours available to them.

Formulas below will have to be updated as Major constraint: a problem with this is seven-day work week, made up usually of 5 work days and 2 off-days, built upon 8000 year old work-rest schedule, from the Sumerians. 5/2 schedule is a-symmetrical, as labor supply and demand would considerably change (see below) as well as work participation; the new schedule is  symmetrical, much more supply by women, and care-givers, willing workers constrained by having only three days availability. symmetrical: two 3-day part-time people can take on one job (below). the 5/2 is a major constraint on people work/life freedom, wrecks havoc on lives and productivity choices. people are so un-productive and un-free with their time/life that most are not able to have progeny. most people are working for society/the rich, in a work-time prison, they are told when to check-in, when to eat, when to check out, and when to have rest, just like farming chickens. A two-day no-choice rest, usually un-productive, just throw away 2/7 of one's life.

To get out of this problem, different civilizations tried different combinations, the Romans used 8 (= 7 work + 1 rest), the French Revolutionaries tried 10 (= 9 work + 1 rest), Russians tried 6 (= 5 work + 1 rest), then 5 (= 4 work + 1 rest). all failed. but there is a solution described in John N. Peters ″Better Work/Life Balance Productivity Schedule for much Better Work/Rest/Exercise Quality of Life″ [ 11 ] Let w denote the hourly wage, k denote total hours available for labour and leisure, L denote the chosen number of working hours, π denote income from non-labour sources, and A denote leisure hours chosen. The individual's problem is to maximise utility U , which depends on total income available for spending on consumption and also depends on the time spent in leisure, subject to a time constraint, with respect to the choices of labour time and leisure time: maximise U ( w L + π π , A ) subject to L + A ≤ ≤ k {\displaystyle {\text{maximise}}\quad U(wL+\pi ,A)\quad {\text{subject to}}\quad L+A\leq k} This is shown in the graph below, which illustrates the trade-off between allocating time to leisure activities and allocating it to income-generating activities. The linear constraint indicates that every additional hour of leisure undertaken requires the loss of an hour of labour and thus of the fixed amount of goods that that labour's income could purchase. Individuals must choose how much time to allocate to leisure activities and how much to working . This allocation decision is informed by the indifference curve labelled IC 1 . The curve indicates the combinations of leisure and work that will give the individual a specific level of utility. The point where the highest indifference curve is just tangent to the constraint line (point A), illustrates the optimum for this supplier of labour services.

If consumption is measured by the value of income obtained, this diagram can be used to show a variety of interesting effects. This is because the absolute value of the slope of the budget constraint is the wage rate. The point of optimisation (point A) reflects the equivalency between the wage rate and the marginal rate of substitution [ 12 ] of leisure for income (the absolute value of the slope of the indifference curve). Because the marginal rate of substitution of leisure for income is also the ratio of the marginal utility of leisure (MU L ) to the marginal utility of income (MU Y ), one can conclude: M U L M U Y = d Y d L , {\displaystyle {{MU^{L}} \over {MU^{Y}}}={{dY} \over {dL}},} where Y is total income and the right side is the wage rate.

Effects of a wage increase If the wage rate increases, this individual's constraint line pivots up from X,Y 1 to X,Y 2 . He/she can now purchase more goods and services. His/her utility will increase from point A on IC 1 to point B on IC 2 .
To understand what effect this might have on the decision of how many hours to work, one must look at the income effect and substitution effect .

The wage increase shown in the previous diagram can be decomposed into two separate effects. The pure income effect is shown as the movement from point A to point C in the next diagram. Consumption increases from Y A to Y C and – since the diagram assumes that leisure is a normal good – leisure time increases from X A to X C . (Employment time decreases by the same amount as leisure increases.) The Income and Substitution effects of a wage increase But that is only part of the picture. As the wage rate rises, the worker will substitute away from leisure and into the provision of labour—that is, will work more hours to take advantage of the higher wage rate, or in other words substitute away from leisure because of its higher opportunity cost . This substitution effect is represented by the shift from point C to point B. The net impact of these two effects is shown by the shift from point A to point B. The relative magnitude of the two effects depends on the circumstances. In some cases, such as the one shown, the substitution effect is greater than the income effect (in which case more time will be allocated to working), but in other cases, the income effect will be greater than the substitution effect (in which case less time is allocated to working). The intuition behind this latter case is that the individual decides that the higher earnings on the previous amount of labour can be "spent" by purchasing more leisure.

The Labour Supply curve If the substitution effect is greater than the income effect, an individual's supply of labour services will increase as the wage rate rises, which is represented by a positive slope in the labour supply curve (as at point E in the adjacent diagram, which exhibits a positive wage elasticity ). This positive relationship is increasing until point F, beyond which the income effect dominates the substitution effect and the individual starts to reduce the number of labour hours he supplies (point G) as wage increases; in other words, the wage elasticity is now negative.

The direction of the slope may change more than once for some individuals, and the labour supply curve is different for different individuals.

Other variables that affect the labour supply decision, and can be readily incorporated into the model, include taxation, welfare, work environment, and income as a signal of ability or social contribution.

Neoclassical demand [ edit ] See also: Labour demand A firm's labour demand is based on its marginal physical product of labour (MPP L ). This is defined as the additional output (or physical product) that results from an increase of one unit of labour (or from an infinitesimal increase in labour). (See also Production theory basics .) Labour demand is a derived demand; that is, hiring labour is not desired for its own sake but rather because it aids in producing output, which contributes to an employer's revenue and hence profits. The demand for an additional amount of labour depends on the Marginal Revenue Product (MRP) and the marginal cost (MC) of the worker. With a perfectly competitive goods market, the MRP is calculated by multiplying the price of the end product or service by the Marginal Physical Product of the worker. If the MRP is greater than a firm's Marginal Cost, then the firm will employ the worker since doing so will increase profit . The firm only employs however up to the point where MRP=MC, and not beyond, in neoclassical economic theory.

[ 12 ] The MRP of the worker is affected by other inputs to production with which the worker can work (e.g. machinery), often aggregated under the term " capital ". It is typical in economic models for greater availability of capital for a firm to increase the MRP of the worker, all else equal.

Education and training are counted as " human capital ". Since the amount of physical capital affects MRP, and since financial capital flows can affect the amount of physical capital available, MRP and thus wages can be affected by financial capital flows within and between countries, and the degree of capital mobility within and between countries.

[ 13 ] According to neoclassical theory, over the relevant range of outputs, the marginal physical product of labour is declining (law of diminishing returns). That is, as more and more units of labour are employed, their additional output begins to decline.

Additionally, although the MRP is a good way of expressing an employer's demand, other factors such as social group formation can the demand, as well as the labour supply. This constantly restructures exactly what a labour market is, and leads way to cause problems for theories of inflation.

[ 3 ] Equilibrium [ edit ] A firm's labour demand in the short run (D) and a horizontal supply curve (S) The marginal revenue product of labour can be used as the demand for labour curve for this firm in the short run. In competitive markets , a firm faces a perfectly elastic supply of labour which corresponds with the wage rate and the marginal resource cost of labour (W = S L = MFC L ). In imperfect markets, the diagram would have to be adjusted because MFC L would then be equal to the wage rate divided by marginal costs. Because optimum resource allocation requires that marginal factor costs equal marginal revenue product, this firm would demand L units of labour as shown in the diagram.

The demand for labour of this firm can be summed with the demand for labour of all other firms in the economy to obtain the aggregate demand for labour. Likewise, the supply curves of all the individual workers (mentioned above) can be summed to obtain the aggregate supply of labour. These supply and demand curves can be analysed in the same way as any other industry demand and supply curves to determine equilibrium wage and employment levels.

Wage differences exist, particularly in mixed and fully/partly flexible labour markets. For example, the wages of a doctor and a port cleaner, both employed by the NHS , differ greatly. There are various factors concerning this phenomenon. This includes the MRP of the worker. A doctor's MRP is far greater than that of the port cleaner. In addition, the barriers to becoming a doctor are far greater than that of becoming a port cleaner. To become a doctor takes a lot of education and training which is costly, and only those who excel in academia can succeed in becoming doctors. The port cleaner, however, requires relatively less training. The supply of doctors is therefore significantly less elastic than that of port cleaners. Demand is also inelastic as there is a high demand for doctors and medical care is a necessity, so the NHS will pay higher wage rates to attract the profession.

Monopsony [ edit ] Main article: Monopsony Some labour markets have a single employer and thus do not satisfy the perfect competition assumption of the neoclassical model above. The model of a monopsonistic labour market gives a lower quantity of employment and a lower equilibrium wage rate than does the competitive model.

Asymmetric information [ edit ] An advertisement for labour from Sabah and Sarawak, seen in Jalan Petaling , Kuala Lumpur In many real-life situations, the assumption of perfect information is unrealistic. An employer does not necessarily know how hard workers are working or how productive they are. This provides an incentive for workers to shirk from providing their full effort, called moral hazard .

[ 14 ] Since it is difficult for the employer to identify the hard-working and the shirking employees, there is no incentive to work hard and productivity falls overall, leading to the hiring of more workers and a lower unemployment rate.

One solution that is used to avoid a moral hazard is stock options that grant employees the chance to benefit directly from a firm's success. However, this solution has attracted criticism as executives with large stock-option packages have been suspected of acting to over-inflate share values to the detriment of the long-run welfare of the firm. Another solution, foreshadowed by the rise of temporary workers in Japan and the firing of many of these workers in response to the 2008 financial crisis , is more flexible job- contracts and -terms that encourage employees to work less than full-time by partially compensating for the loss of hours, relying on workers to adapt their working time in response to job requirements and economic conditions instead of the employer trying to determine how much work is needed to complete a given task and overestimating.

[ citation needed ] Another aspect of uncertainty results from the firm's imperfect knowledge about worker ability. If a firm is unsure about a worker's ability, it pays a wage assuming that the worker's ability is the average of similar workers. This wage under compensates high-ability workers which may drive them away from the labour market as well as at the same time attracting low-ability workers. Such a phenomenon, called adverse selection , can sometimes lead to market collapse.

[ 14 ] One way to combat adverse selection, firms will try to use signalling , pioneered by Michael Spence , whereby employers could use various characteristics of applicants differentiate between high-ability or low-ability workers. One common signal used is education, whereby employers assume that high-ability workers will have higher levels of education.

[ 1 ] Employers can then compensate high-ability workers with higher wages. However, signalling does not always work, and it may appear to an external observer that education has raised the marginal product of labour, without this necessarily being true.

Search models [ edit ] Main articles: Search theory and Matching theory (macroeconomics) One of the major research achievements of the 1990–2010 period was the development of a framework with dynamic search , matching, and bargaining.

[ 15 ] Personnel economics: hiring and incentives [ edit ] At the micro level, one sub-discipline eliciting increased attention in recent decades is analysis of internal labour markets , that is, within firms (or other organisations), studied in personnel economics from the perspective of personnel management . By contrast, external labour markets "imply that workers move somewhat fluidly between firms and wages are determined by some aggregate process where firms do not have significant discretion over wage setting." [ 16 ] [ 17 ] The focus is on "how firms establish, maintain, and end employment relationships and on how firms provide incentives to employees," including models and empirical work on incentive systems and as constrained by economic efficiency and risk/incentive tradeoffs relating to personnel compensation.

[ 18 ] Discrimination and inequality [ edit ] Inequality and discrimination in the workplace can have many effects on workers.

In the context of labour economics, inequality is usually referring to the unequal distribution of earning between households.

[ 1 ] Inequality is commonly measured by economists using the Gini coefficient . This coefficient does not have a concrete meaning but is more used as a way to compare inequality across regions. The higher the Gini coefficient is calculated to be the larger inequality exists in a region. Over time, inequality has, on average, been increasing. This is due to numerous factors including labour supply and demand shifts as well as institutional changes in the labour market. On the shifts in labour supply and demand, factors include demand for skilled workers going up more than the supply of skilled workers and relative to unskilled workers as well as technological changes that increase productivity; all of these things cause wages to go up for skilled labour while unskilled worker wages stay the same or decline. As for the institutional changes, a decrease in union power and a declining real minimum wage, which both reduce unskilled workers wages, and tax cuts for the wealthy all increase the inequality gap between groups of earners.

As for discrimination, it is the difference in pay that can be attributed to the demographic differences between people, such as gender, race, ethnicity, religion, sexual orientation, etc, even though these factors do not affect the productivity of the worker.

[ 1 ] Many regions and countries have enacted government policies to combat discrimination, including discrimination in the workplace. Discrimination can be modelled and measured in numerous ways. The Oaxaca decomposition is a common method to calculate the amount of discrimination that exists when wages differ between groups of people. This decomposition aims to calculate the difference in wages that occurs because of differences in skills versus the returns to those skills.

[ 1 ] A way of modelling discrimination in the workplace when dealing with wages are Gary Becker 's taste models. Using taste models, employer discrimination can be thought of as the employer not hiring the minority worker because of their perceived cost of hiring that worker is higher than that of the cost of hiring a non-minority worker, which causes less hiring of the minority. Another taste model is for employee discrimination, which does not cause a decline in the hiring of minorities, but instead causes a more segregated workforce because the prejudiced worker feels that they should be paid more to work next to the worker they are prejudiced against or that they are not paid an equal amount as the worker they are prejudiced against. One more taste model involves customer discrimination, whereby the employers themselves are not prejudiced but believe that their customers might be, so therefore the employer is less likely to hire the minority worker if they are going to interact with customers that are prejudiced. There are many other taste models other than these that Gary Becker has made to explain discrimination that causes differences in hiring in wages in the labour market.

[ 19 ] See also [ edit ] Organized labour portal Economics portal Business portal Society portal Affective labour Beveridge curve Consumer theory Conditional factor demands Career and Life Planning Education Collective bargaining Cost the limit of price Demographic economics Employment Unemployment Employment Protection Legislation Compensation of employees Employment-to-population ratio Economic rent Global labor arbitrage Offshore outsourcing Housework Human resources Human Resource Management Systems Income tax Industrial relations Labour market flexibility Labour power Manual labour Price elasticity of demand Price elasticity of supply Frisch elasticity of labor supply Salary inversion Volunteer Unfree labour References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f Borjas, George J. (14 January 2015).

Labor economics (Seventh ed.). New York, NY.

ISBN 978-0-07-802188-6 .

OCLC 889577338 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ "Definition of LABOR" .

www.merriam-webster.com . Retrieved 2022-03-01 .

^ a b Tarling, R. (1987). "Labour Markets". In Eatwell, John ; Milgate, Murray ; Newman, Peter (eds.).

The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics (1st ed.).

London : Palgrave Macmillan . pp.

1– 4.

doi : 10.1057/978-1-349-95121-5_1213-1 .

ISBN 978-1-349-95121-5 .

^ Graham, Mark; Anwar, Mohammad Amir (2019-04-01).

"The global gig economy: Towards a planetary labour market?" .

First Monday .

doi : 10.5210/fm.v24i4.9913 .

ISSN 1396-0466 .

S2CID 108292032 .

^ Kenton, Will (March 30, 2022).

"Labor Market Explained: Theories and Who Is Included" .

Investopedia . Retrieved January 26, 2023 .

^ a b c d e f g Mankiw, N. Gregory (2016).

Principles of economics (Eighth ed.). Boston, MA, USA: Cengage Learning .

ISBN 978-1-305-58512-6 .

OCLC 974706695 .

^ "What is 'Labour Market' " . The Economic Times . Retrieved 15 September 2022 .

^ Karanassou, Marika; Sala, Hector; Snower, Dennis J.

"The Macroeconomics of the Labor Market: Three Fundamental Views" (PDF) . Institute for the Study of Labor . Retrieved 15 September 2022 .

^ Frenkel, Roberto; Ros, Jaime.

"Unemployment, macroeconomic policy and labor market flexibility: Argentina and Mexico in the 1990s" (PDF) .

repositorio.cepal.org . Retrieved 15 September 2022 .

^ Gustav Ranis (February 1997).

"The Micro-Economics of "Surplus Labor" " (PDF) . Yale University . Retrieved January 23, 2023 .

^ https://www.amazon.com/Balance-Productivity-Schedule-Exercise-Quality-ebook/dp/B014LNS3RS/ref=sr_1_1?crid=2BPFDHO5BDR7W&dib=eyJ2IjoiMSJ9.8CkRPHrU_9_jV8v-m9hiOFG-SMCTSNlWOJf4c_WdcSb5Xoth7iTUrpsClcn0M_rBJk7uIttxYe2V17-y8GiPaMpYxIN7cd0Mrb8Z6FzlKtw.lTIpYrrb26gwupmy91I0hJpoIIfmeL_XChYqAqZDjIM&dib_tag=se&keywords=john+n.+peters+work+life+balance&qid=1754451970&s=books&sprefix=john+n.+peters+work+life+balance%2Cstripbooks%2C77&sr=1-1 ^ a b Frank, Robert H.

(2008).

Microeconomics and Behavior (PDF) (Seventh ed.).

McGraw Hill /Irwin.

ISBN 978-0-07-337573-1 . Retrieved January 26, 2023 .

^ Hacker, R. Scott (2000). "The Impact of International Capital Mobility on the Volatility of Labour Income".

Annals of Regional Science .

34 (2): 157– 172.

Bibcode : 2000ARegS..34..157H .

doi : 10.1007/s001689900005 .

S2CID 154020468 .

^ a b Froeb, Luke M.; McCann, Brian T.; Shor, Mikhael; Ward, Michael R. (2016).

Managerial economics : a problem solving approach (Fourth ed.). Boston, MA.

ISBN 978-1-305-25933-1 .

OCLC 900237955 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ "The Prize in Economic Sciences 2010" (PDF) .

NobelPrize.org (Press release).

Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences . Nobel Prize Outreach AB. October 11, 2010 . Retrieved January 26, 2023 .

^ Lazear, Edward P.

; Oyer, Paul (October 2004).

"Internal and external labor markets: a personnel economics approach" (PDF) .

Labour Economics .

11 (5): 527– 554.

doi : 10.1016/j.labeco.2004.01.001 .

S2CID 17727574 . Archived from the original (PDF) on February 1, 2014 . Retrieved January 26, 2023 .

^ "JEL Classification Codes Guide: M5 Personnel Economics" .

American Economic Association . Retrieved January 26, 2023 .

^ Oyer, Paul; Scott, Schaefer (2011).

Personnel Economics: Hiring and Incentives (PDF) . Handbook of Labor Economics. Vol. 4B. pp.

1769– 1823.

doi : 10.1016/S0169-7218(11)02418-X .

ISBN 9780444534521 .

S2CID 17678162 . Retrieved January 26, 2023 .

^ Becker, Gary S.

(1971).

The economics of discrimination (2d ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press .

ISBN 0-226-04115-8 .

OCLC 173468 .

Sources [ edit ] Thompson, E. P.

(1966).

The Making of the English Working Class (reprinted ed.).

New York City : Vintage Books .

ISBN 9780394703220 .

Further reading [ edit ] Richard Blundell and Thomas MaCurdy, 2008. "labour supply," The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics , 2nd Edition Freeman, R.B.

, 1987. "Labour economics," The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics , v. 3, pp. 72–76.

John R. Hicks , 1932, 2nd ed., 1963.

The Theory of Wages . London, Macmillan.

Handbook of Labor Economics . Elsevier. Amsterdam: North-Holland. Links to one-page chapter previews for each volume: Orley C. Ashenfelter and Richard Layard , ed., 1986, v.

1 & 2 ; Orley Ashenfelter and David Card , ed., 1999, v.

3A , 3B , and 3C Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, ed., 2011, v.

4A & 4B .

Mark R. Killingsworth, 1983.

Labour Supply . Cambridge: Cambridge Surveys of Economic Literature.

Jacob Mincer , 1974.

Schooling, Experience, and Earnings . New York: Columbia University Press.

Anindya Bakrie & Morendy Octora, 2002.

Schooling, Experience, and Earnings . New York, Singapore National University: Columbia University Press.

Acocella, Nicola; Di Bartolomeo, Giovanni; Hibbs, Douglas A. (2008). "Labor market regimes and the effects of monetary policy".

Journal of Macroeconomics .

30 : 134– 156.

doi : 10.1016/j.jmacro.2006.08.006 .

hdl : 2077/25796 .

S2CID 5758901 .

Cain, Glen G. (1976). "The Challenge of Segmented Labor Market Theories to Orthodox Theory: A Survey".

Journal of Economic Literature .

14 (4): 1215– 1257.

JSTOR 2722547 .

Lindbeck, Assar ; Snower, Dennis J.

(1986). "Wage Setting, Unemployment, and Insider-Outsider Relations".

American Economic Review .

76 (2): 235– 239.

JSTOR 1818771 .

McGaughey, Ewan (2014-06-30).

"Behavioural Economics and Labour Law" .

SSRN Electronic Journal .

doi : 10.2139/ssrn.2460685 .

ISSN 1556-5068 .

S2CID 151022170 .

SSRN 2460685 .

Archived from the original on 2016-11-04.

Head, Simon (2005-02-11).

The New Ruthless Economy: Work and Power in the Digital Age .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 9780195179835 .

Khan, Ali (2006-10-12).

"The Dignity of Manual Labor" .

SSRN Electronic Journal .

ISSN 1556-5068 .

SSRN 936890 .

Archived from the original on 2019-11-12.

Miller, Doug (2013-02-05).

"Towards Sustainable Labour Costing in UK Fashion Retail" .

SSRN Electronic Journal .

doi : 10.2139/ssrn.2212100 .

ISSN 1556-5068 .

S2CID 166733679 .

SSRN 2212100 .

Archived from the original on 2017-01-27.

External links [ edit ] Ageing workers EU-OSHA The Labour Economics Gateway – Collection of Internet sites that are of interest to labour economists Labour & Worklife Program at Harvard Law School, Changing Labour Markets Project W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research ILO: Key Indicators of the Labour Market (KILM).

2007 LabourFair Resources – Link to Fair Labour Practices Labour Research Network – Labour research programme treating various fields Labour Research Department – Independent labour economics research organisation v t e Economics Theoretical Microeconomics Decision theory Price theory Game theory Contract theory Mechanism design Macroeconomics Mathematical economics Complexity economics Computational economics Agent-based computational economics Behavioral economics Pluralism in economics Empirical Econometrics Economic statistics Experimental economics Economic history Applied Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Schools ( history ) Attention Mainstream Heterodox American (National) Ancient thought Austrian Behavioral Buddhist Chartalism Modern monetary theory Chicago Classical Critique of political economy Democratic Disequilibrium Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgism Happiness Historical Humanistic Institutional Keynesian Neo- ( neoclassical–Keynesian synthesis ) New Post- Circuitism Malthusianism Marginalism Marxian Neo- Mercantilism Mixed Mutualism Neoclassical Lausanne New classical Real business-cycle theory New institutional Physiocracy Socialist Stockholm Supply-side Thermo Economists de Mandeville Quesnay Smith Malthus Say Ricardo von Thünen List Bastiat Cournot Mill Gossen Marx Walras Jevons George Menger Marshall Edgeworth Clark Pareto von Böhm-Bawerk von Wieser Veblen Gesell Fisher Pigou Heckscher von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Knight Polanyi Frisch Sraffa Myrdal Hayek Kalecki Röpke Kuznets Tinbergen Robinson von Neumann Hicks Lange Leontief Galbraith Koopmans Schumacher Friedman Samuelson Simon Buchanan Arrow Baumol Solow Rothbard Greenspan Sowell Becker Ostrom Sen Lucas Stiglitz Thaler Hoppe Krugman Piketty more Lists Glossary Economists Publications ( journals ) Schools Category Index Lists Outline Publications Business portal v t e Syndicalism Precursors Guild socialism Orthodox Marxism Revolutions of 1848 Utopian socialism Variants Anarchist Council communism De Leonism Fascist Green Nationalist Sorelianism Economics Co-operative economics Labour economics General strike Labour rights Labour unionisation Workers' self-management Mutual aid Organisations International Workingmen's Association (1864–1876) IWA–AIT and affiliates Argentine Regional Workers' Federation (FORA) Brazilian Workers Confederation (COB) Confederación Nacional del Trabajo (CNT–AIT, Spain) Confederation of Revolutionary Anarcho-Syndicalists (CRAS, Russia) Free Workers' Union (FAU, Germany) Norsk Syndikalistisk Forbund (NSF–IAA, Norway) Solidarity Federation (SF–IWA, Britain) Confédération Générale du Travail (CGT, France) General Confederation of Labour (CGT, Spain) Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) IWW-Chile IWW-South Africa Irish Transport and General Workers' Union (ITGWU) Fagoppositionens Sammenslutning (FS, Denmark) National Workers' Union (UON, Portugal) Sveriges Arbetares Centralorganisation (SAC, Sweden) People Bain Berth De Ambris De Leon Delesalle Fitzgerald Griffuelhes Haywood Janvion Jouhaux Lagardelle Larkin Monatte García Panunzio Pelloutier Rocker Sorel Valois Related topics Communism Copyleft Corporatism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of copyright Critique of work Fascism Labour power Libertarian socialism Post-capitalism Revisionism Socialism Anarchism portal Communism portal Labour economics Organized Labour Politics portal Socialism portal Syndicalism Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐9xsm8
Cached time: 20250818030412
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.687 seconds
Real time usage: 0.911 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3276/1000000
Revision size: 51542/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 153701/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11194/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 130889/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.438/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8771543/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  690.079      1 -total
 27.16%  187.431      1 Template:Reflist
 17.50%  120.784      1 Template:Economics_sidebar
 17.20%  118.660      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 16.79%  115.872      9 Template:Cite_book
 10.92%   75.327      1 Template:Unfocused
 10.75%   74.166      2 Template:Navbox
 10.15%   70.056      1 Template:Ambox
  9.34%   64.437      1 Template:Economics
  9.20%   63.455      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:18178:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818030412 and revision id 1306506421. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Labour_economics&oldid=1306506421 " Categories : Labour economics Factors of production Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles lacking focus from January 2025 All Wikipedia articles lacking focus All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2020 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 03:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Labour economics 50 languages Add topic

