Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of the concept 2 Functions and criticism 3 Communities of academic disciplines 4 Interactions Toggle Interactions subsection 4.1 Multidisciplinary 4.2 Transdisciplinary 4.3 Cross-disciplinary 5 Bibliometric studies of disciplines 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Academic discipline 43 languages العربية বাংলা Български Boarisch Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu Íslenska עברית Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Shqip Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Српски / srpski Tagalog Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Українська اردو 粵語 中文 Betawi ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Discipline (academia) ) Academic field of study or profession Not to be confused with School discipline .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Academic discipline" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) An academic discipline or academic field is a subdivision of knowledge that is taught and researched at the college or university level. Disciplines are defined (in part) and recognized by the academic journals in which research is published, and the learned societies and academic departments or faculties within colleges and universities to which their practitioners belong. Academic disciplines are conventionally divided into the humanities (including philosophy , language , art and cultural studies ), the scientific disciplines (such as physics , chemistry , and biology ); and the formal sciences like mathematics and computer science .

[ citation needed ] The social sciences are sometimes considered a fourth category.

[ citation needed ] It is also known as a field of study , field of inquiry , research field and branch of knowledge .

[ citation needed ] The different terms are used in different countries and fields.

Individuals associated with academic disciplines are commonly referred to as experts or specialists . Others, who may have studied liberal arts or systems theory rather than concentrating in a specific academic discipline, are classified as generalists .

[ citation needed ] While each academic discipline is a more or less focused practice, scholarly approaches such as multidisciplinarity/interdisciplinarity , transdisciplinarity , and cross-disciplinarity integrate aspects from multiple disciplines, thereby addressing any problems that may arise from narrow concentration within specialized fields of study.

[ citation needed ] For example, professionals may encounter trouble communicating across academic disciplines because of differences in jargon, specified concepts, or methodology .

[ citation needed ] Some researchers believe that academic disciplines may, in the future, be replaced by what is known as Mode 2 [ 1 ] or "post-academic science", [ 2 ] which involves the acquisition of cross-disciplinary knowledge through the collaboration of specialists from various academic disciplines.

[ citation needed ] History of the concept [ edit ] The University of Paris in 1231 consisted of four faculties : Theology , Medicine , Canon Law and Arts .

[ 3 ] Educational institutions originally used the term "discipline" to catalog and archive the new and expanding body of information produced by the scholarly community. Disciplinary designations originated in German universities during the beginning of the nineteenth century.

[ citation needed ] Most academic disciplines have their roots in the mid-to-late-nineteenth century secularization of universities, when the traditional curricula were supplemented with non-classical languages and literatures , social sciences such as political science , economics , sociology and public administration , and natural science and technology disciplines such as physics , chemistry , biology , and engineering .

[ citation needed ] In the early twentieth century, new academic disciplines such as education and psychology were added. In the 1970s and 1980s, there was an explosion of new academic disciplines focusing on specific themes, such as media studies , women's studies , and Africana studies . Many academic disciplines designed as preparation for careers and professions, such as nursing , hospitality management , and corrections , also emerged in the universities. Finally, interdisciplinary scientific fields of study such as biochemistry and geophysics gained prominence as their contribution to knowledge became widely recognized. Some new disciplines, such as public administration , can be found in more than one disciplinary setting; some public administration programs are associated with business schools (thus emphasizing management), while others are linked to  political science  (emphasizing policy analysis ).

[ citation needed ] As the twentieth century approached, these designations were gradually adopted by other countries and became the accepted conventional subjects. However, these designations differed between various countries.

[ 4 ] In the twentieth century, the natural science disciplines included: physics , chemistry , biology , geology , and astronomy . The social science disciplines included: economics , politics , sociology , and psychology .

[ citation needed ] Prior to the twentieth century, categories were broad and general, which was expected due to the lack of interest in science at the time.  Most practitioners of science were amateurs and were referred to as "natural historians" and "natural philosophers"—labels that date back to Aristotle—instead of "scientists".

[ 5 ] Natural history referred to what we now call life sciences and natural philosophy referred to the current physical sciences.

Prior to the twentieth century, few opportunities existed for science as an occupation outside the educational system. Higher education provided the institutional structure for scientific investigation, as well as economic support for research and teaching. Soon, the volume of scientific information rapidly increased and researchers realized the importance of concentrating on smaller, narrower fields of scientific activity. Because of this narrowing, scientific specializations emerged. As these specializations developed, modern scientific disciplines in universities also improved their sophistication. Eventually, academia's identified disciplines became the foundations for scholars of specific specialized interests and expertise.

[ 6 ] Functions and criticism [ edit ] An influential critique of the concept of academic disciplines came from Michel Foucault in his 1975 book, Discipline and Punish . Foucault asserts that academic disciplines originate from the same social movements and mechanisms of control that established the modern prison and penal system in eighteenth-century France , and that this fact reveals essential aspects they continue to have in common: "The disciplines characterize, classify, specialize; they distribute along a scale, around a norm, hierarchize individuals in relation to one another and, if necessary, disqualify and invalidate." (Foucault, 1975/1979, p. 223) [ 7 ] Communities of academic disciplines [ edit ] Communities of academic disciplines can be found outside academia within corporations, government agencies, and independent organizations, where they take the form of associations of professionals with common interests and specific knowledge. Such communities include corporate think tanks , NASA , and IUPAC . Communities such as these exist to benefit the organizations affiliated with them by providing specialized new ideas, research, and findings.

Nations at various developmental stages will find the need for different academic disciplines during different times of growth. A newly developing nation will likely prioritize government, political matters and engineering over those of the humanities, arts and social sciences. On the other hand, a well-developed nation may be capable of investing more in the arts and social sciences. Communities of academic disciplines would contribute at varying levels of importance during different stages of development.

Interactions [ edit ] These categories explain how the different academic disciplines interact with one another.

Multidisciplinary [ edit ] Multidisciplinary (or pluridisciplinary) knowledge is associated with more than one existing academic discipline or profession. A multidisciplinary community or project is made up of people from different academic disciplines and professions. One key question is how well the challenge can be decomposed into subparts, and then addressed via the distributed knowledge in the community. The lack of shared vocabulary between people and communication overhead can sometimes be an issue in these communities and projects. If challenges of a particular type need to be repeatedly addressed so that each one can be properly decomposed, a multidisciplinary community can be exceptionally efficient and effective.

[ citation needed ] There are many examples of a particular idea appearing in different academic disciplines, all of which came about around the same time. One example of this scenario is the shift from the approach of focusing on sensory awareness of the whole, "an attention to the 'total field ' ", a "sense of the whole pattern, of form and function as a unity", an "integral idea of structure and configuration". This has happened in art (in the form of cubism), physics, poetry, communication and educational theory. According to Marshall McLuhan , this paradigm shift was due to the passage from the era of mechanization, which brought sequentiality, to the era of the instant speed of electricity, which brought simultaneity.

[ 8 ] Multidisciplinary approaches also encourage people to help shape the innovation of the future. The political dimensions of forming new multidisciplinary partnerships to solve the so-called societal Grand Challenges were presented in the Innovation Union and in the European Framework Programme, the Horizon 2020 operational overlay. Innovation across academic disciplines is considered the pivotal foresight of the creation of new products, systems, and processes for the benefit of all societies' growth and wellbeing. Regional examples such as Biopeople and industry-academia initiatives in translational medicine such as SHARE.ku.dk in Denmark provide evidence of the successful endeavour of multidisciplinary innovation and facilitation of the paradigm shift.

[ citation needed ] Transdisciplinary [ edit ] Main article: Transdisciplinarity In practice, transdisciplinary can be thought of as the union of all interdisciplinary efforts. While interdisciplinary teams may be creating new knowledge that lies between several existing disciplines, a transdisciplinary team is more holistic and seeks to relate all disciplines into a coherent whole.

Cross-disciplinary [ edit ] Cross-disciplinary knowledge is that which explains aspects of one discipline in terms of another. Common examples of cross-disciplinary approaches are studies of the physics of music or the politics of literature .

Bibliometric studies of disciplines [ edit ] Bibliometrics can be used to map several issues in relation to disciplines, for example, the flow of ideas within and among disciplines (Lindholm-Romantschuk, 1998) [ 9 ] or the existence of specific national traditions within disciplines.

[ 10 ] Scholarly impact and influence of one discipline on another may be understood by analyzing the flow of citations.

[ 11 ] The Bibliometrics approach is described as straightforward because it is based on simple counting. The method is also objective but the quantitative method may not be compatible with a qualitative assessment and therefore manipulated. The number of citations is dependent on the number of persons working in the same domain instead of inherent quality or published result's originality.

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Art school Outline of academic disciplines List of academic fields Seven liberal arts References [ edit ] ^ Gibbons, Michael; Camille Limoges, Helga Nowotny, Simon Schwartzman, Peter Scott, & Martin Trow (1994).

The New Production of Knowledge: The Dynamics of Science and Research in Contemporary Societies . London: Sage.

^ Ziman, John (2000).

Real Science: What It Is, and What It Means . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

^ History of Education , Encyclopædia Britannica (1977, 15th edition), Macropaedia Volume 6, p. 337 ^ Jacques Revel (2003). "History and the Social Sciences". In Porter, Theodore ; Ross, Dorothy (eds.).

Cambridge History of Science: The Modern Social Sciences, Vol. 5 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

391 –404.

ISBN 0521594421 .

^ "How The Word 'Scientist' Came To Be" .

NPR . National Public Radio.

Archived from the original on November 3, 2014 . Retrieved November 3, 2014 .

^ Cohen, E; Lloyd, S.

"Disciplinary Evolution and the Rise of Transdiscipline" (PDF) . Informing Science: the International Journal of an Emerging Transdiscipline.

Archived (PDF) from the original on March 27, 2022 . Retrieved November 3, 2014 .

^ Foucault, Michel (1977). Discipline and Punish: The birth of the prison. Trans. Alan Sheridan. New York: Vintage. (Translation of: Surveiller et punir; naissance de la prison. [Paris] : Gallimard, 1975).

^ "McLuhan: Understanding Media" .

Understanding Media . 1964. p. 13. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008.

^ Lindholm-Romantschuk, Y. (1998). Scholarly book reviewing in the social sciences and humanities. The flow of ideas within and among disciplines. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press.

^ Ohlsson, H. (1999). Is there a Scandinavian psychology? A bibliometric note on the publication profiles of Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden.

Scandinavian Journal of Psychology , 40, 235–39.

^ Serenko, A. & Bontis, N. (2013).

The intellectual core and impact of the knowledge management academic discipline.

Archived December 10, 2015, at the Wayback Machine Journal of Knowledge Management, 17(1), 137–55.

^ "Bibliometrics | The Guidelines project" .

www.guidelines.kaowarsom.be . Archived from the original on July 5, 2018 . Retrieved 2018-07-05 .

Further reading [ edit ] Abbott, A. (1988).

The System of Professions: An Essay on the Division of Expert Labor , University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-00069-5 Augsburg, T. (2005), Becoming Interdisciplinary: An Introduction to Interdisciplinary Studies.

Dogan, M. & Pahre, R. (1990). "The fate of formal disciplines: from coherence to dispersion". In Creative Marginality: Innovation at the Intersections of Social Sciences . Boulder, CO: Westview. pp. 85–113.

Dullemeijer, P. (1980). " Dividing biology into disciplines: Chaos or multiformity?

" Journal Acta Biotheoretica , 29(2), 87–93.

Fagin, R.; Halpern, J.Y.; Moses, Y. & Vardi, M.Y. (1995).

Reasoning about Knowledge , MIT Press.

ISBN 0-262-56200-6 Gibbons, M.; Limoges, C.; Nowotny, H.; Schwartzman, S.; Scott, P. & Trow, M. (1994).

The New Production of Knowledge: The Dynamics of Science and Research in Contemporary Societies . London: Sage.

Golinski, J. (1998/2005).

Making Natural Knowledge: Constructivis, and the History of Science . New York: Cambridge University Press. Chapter 2: "Identity and discipline". Part II: The Disciplinary Mold . pp. 66–78.

Hicks, D. (2004). " The Four Literatures of Social Science ". IN: Handbook of Quantitative Science and Technology Research: The Use of Publication and Patent Statistics in Studies of S&T Systems . Ed. Henk Moed. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic.

Hyland, K. (2004).

Disciplinary Discourses: Social Interactions in Academic Writing . New edition. University of Michigan Press/ESL.

Klein, J.T. (1990).

Interdisciplinarity: History, Theory, and Practice . Detroit: Wayne State University Press.

Krishnan, Armin (January 2009), What are Academic Disciplines? Some observations on the Disciplinarity vs. Interdisciplinarity debate (PDF) , NCRM Working Paper Series, Southampton: ESRC National Centre for Research Methods , retrieved 10 September 2017 Leydesdorff, L. & Rafols, I. (2008).

A global map of science based on the ISI subject categories .

Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology .

Lindholm-Romantschuk, Y. (1998).

Scholarly Book Reviewing in the Social Sciences and Humanities: The Flow of Ideas within and among Disciplines . Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press.

Martin, B. (1998).

Information Liberation: Challenging the Corruptions of Information Power . London: Freedom Press Morillo, F.; Bordons, M. & Gomez, I. (2001). " An approach to interdisciplinarity bibliometric indicators ".

Scientometrics , 51(1), 203–22.

Morillo, F.; Bordons, M. & Gomez, I. (2003). "Interdisciplinarity in science: A tentative typology of disciplines and research areas".

Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 54(13), 1237–49.

Newell, A. (1983). "Reflections on the structure of an interdiscipline". In Machlup, F. & U. Mansfield (Eds.), The Study of Information: Interdisciplinary Messages . pp. 99–110. NY: John Wiley & Sons.

Pierce, S.J. (1991). "Subject areas, disciplines and the concept of authority".

Library and Information Science Research , 13, 21–35.

Porter, A.L.; Roessner, J.D.; Cohen, A.S. & Perreault, M. (2006). " Interdisciplinary research: meaning, metrics and nurture ".

Research Evaluation , 15(3), 187–95.

Prior, P. (1998).

Writing/Disciplinarity: A Sociohistoric Account of Literate Activity in the Academy . Lawrence Erlbaum. (Rhetoric, Knowledge and Society Series) Qin, J.; Lancaster, F.W. & Allen, B. (1997). " Types and levels of collaboration in interdisciplinary research in the sciences ".

Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 48(10), 893–916.

Rinia, E.J.; van Leeuwen, T.N.; Bruins, E.E.W.; van Vuren, H.G. & van Raan, A.F.J. (2002). " Measuring knowledge transfer between fields of science ".

Scientometrics , 54(3), 347–62.

Sanz-Menendez, L.; Bordons, M. & Zulueta, M. A. (2001). " Interdisciplinarity as a multidimensional concept: its measure in three different research areas ".

Research Evaluation , 10(1), 47–58.

Stichweh, R. (2001). "Scientific Disciplines, History of". Smelser, N.J. & Baltes, P.B. (eds.).

International Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences . Oxford: Elsevier Science. pp. 13727–31.

Szostak, R. (October 2000). Superdisciplinarity: A Simple Definition of Interdisciplinarity With Profound Implications. Association for Integrative Studies, Portland, Oregon. (Meeting presentation) Tengström, E. (1993). Biblioteks- och informationsvetenskapen – ett fler- eller tvärvetenskapligt område? Svensk Biblioteksforskning (1), 9–20.

Tomov, D.T. & Mutafov, H.G. (1996). "Comparative indicators of interdisciplinarity in modern science".

Scientometrics , 37(2), 267–78.

van Leeuwen, T.N. & Tijssen, R.J.W. (1993). "Assessing multidisciplinary areas of science and technology – A synthetic bibliometric study of Dutch nuclear-energy research".

Scientometrics , 26(1), 115–33.

van Leeuwen, T.N. & Tijssen, R.J.W. (2000). "Interdisciplinary dynamics of modern science: analysis of cross-disciplinary citation flows".

Research Evaluation , 9(3), 183–87.

Weisgerber, D.W. (1993). "Interdisciplinary searching – problems and suggested remedies – A Report from the ICSTI Group on Interdisciplinary Searching".

Journal of Documentation , 49(3), 231–54.

Wittrock, B. (2001). "Disciplines, History of, in the Social Sciences".

International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences , pp. 3721–28. Smeltser, N.J. & Baltes, P.B. (eds.). Amsterdam: Elsevier.

External links [ edit ] Association for Interdisciplinary Studies Sandoz, R. (ed.), Interactive Historical Atlas of the Disciplines , University of Geneva Academic discipline at the Collin's Dictionary Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐sjfh6
Cached time: 20250812015917
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.443 seconds
Real time usage: 0.571 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3930/1000000
Revision size: 22659/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 60946/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9265/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 37006/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.295/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6432813/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  520.877      1 -total
 24.21%  126.119      1 Template:Reflist
 19.60%  102.080      1 Template:Authority_control
 15.36%   80.004      1 Template:Cite_book
 14.81%   77.143     13 Template:Fix
 14.30%   74.500      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 12.20%   63.531      8 Template:Citation_needed
 12.17%   63.406      1 Template:Short_description
 11.65%   60.686      1 Template:Ambox
  7.12%   37.067      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:14924067:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812015917 and revision id 1291420141. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Academic_discipline&oldid=1291420141 " Categories : Academic disciplines Teaching Main topic articles Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2025 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2010 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2013 This page was last edited on 21 May 2025, at 03:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Academic discipline 43 languages Add topic

