Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Personal life 2 Career and works Toggle Career and works subsection 2.1 Political philosophy 2.2 Thought experiments regarding utilitarianism 2.3 Epistemology 2.4 Later works 2.5 Later reflections on libertarianism 2.6 Philosophical method 3 Bibliography 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Robert Nozick 49 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Kurdî Latviešu Magyar മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Volapük Yorùbá 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American political philosopher (1938–2002) Robert Nozick Nozick in 1977 Born ( 1938-11-16 ) November 16, 1938 New York City, U.S.

Died January 23, 2002 (2002-01-23) (aged 63) Cambridge, Massachusetts , U.S.

Education Education Columbia University ( BA ) Princeton University ( PhD ) Oxford University Doctoral advisors Carl Gustav Hempel Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic Libertarianism Main interests Political philosophy , ethics, epistemology Notable ideas Utility monster , experience machine , entitlement theory of justice , night-watchman state , Nozick's Lockean proviso , [ 1 ] Wilt Chamberlain argument , paradox of deontology , [ 2 ] deductive closure , Nozick's four conditions on knowledge , rejection of the principle of epistemic closure This article is part of a series on Libertarianism in the United States Schools Agorism Anarcho-capitalism Austro Authoritarian Autarchism Bleeding-heart Christian Conservative Consequentialist Feminist Fusionism Geo Green Market anarchism Minarchism Natural-rights Neo Paleo Panarchism Paternalist Propertarianism Socialist Techno Transhumanist Voluntaryism Principles Anti-imperialism Civil libertarianism Constitutionalism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Economic freedom Evictionism Free banking Free market Free-market environmentalism Free migration Free trade Free will Freedom of association Freedom of contract Freedom of speech Homestead principle Individuality Individualism Liberty Limited government Localism Marriage privatization Natural rights and legal rights Non-aggression principle Non-interventionism Non-politics Non-voting Open border Polycentric law Private defense agency Private property Public choice theory Restorative justice Right to bear arms Right to privacy Rugged Individualism Self-ownership Single tax Small government Spoiled ballot Spontaneous order Stateless society Tax resistance Title-transfer theory of contract Voluntary association Voluntary society History Age of Enlightenment Abolitionism in the United States Classical liberalism Anti-Federalists Transcendentalism Individualist anarchism in the United States Old Right New Left New Right Freedom School Economics Austrian School Economic liberalism Fiscal conservatism Georgism Laissez-faire Neoliberalism Supply-side economics Intellectuals Andrews Barnett Block Boudreaux Brennan Caplan Carson Chamberlain Chartier Chodorov Cowen Ebeling Epstein Franklin D. Friedman M. Friedman P. Friedman R. Friedman Galambos Garrett George Griffin Gordon Harper Hazlitt Heinlein Hess Hoppe Hospers Huemer Jefferson Kinsella Konkin R. Lane Liggio LeFevre Machan Mencken Menger Mises Nock Nozick Paterson Rand Raico Read Robertson Rockwell Rothbard Samuels Schulman Sciabarra Scott Skousen Smith Spooner Somin Sowell Sumner Sutton Stephenson Szasz Taleb Thoreau Tuccille Tucker Volokh Wilder Williams Wilson (Clyde) Wilson (Robert) Politicians Amash Barr Brakey Burt Chafee Cleveland Flake Goldwater Jacobs Johnson Jorgensen Lee Massie McAfee Nolan Oliver Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Polis Sanford Sarwark Sununu Ventura Weld Wu Commentators Chamberlain Gillespie Gutfeld Jones Kauffman McElroy Miller Napolitano Postrel Pugsley Rogan Smith Soave Stone Stossel Welch Will Woods Activists Ben Garrison Jillette Koch (Charles) Koch (David) Reitman Kubrick Smith Prince Teller Thiel Literature The Anarchist Cookbook Anarchy, State, and Utopia The Betrayal of the American Right The Case Against Education Civil Disobedience Conceived in Liberty The Creature from Jekyll Island Defending the Undefendable The Discovery of Freedom End the Fed The Ethics of Liberty For a New Liberty Free to Choose The Future and Its Enemies The God of the Machine It Usually Begins with Ayn Rand Liberty The Machinery of Freedom Man, Economy and State The Moon is a Harsh Mistress The Mainspring of Human Progress The Market for Liberty The Myth of the Rational Voter No, They Can't No Treason New Libertarian Manifesto Our Enemy, the State The Problem of Political Authority Progress and Poverty Protection or Free Trade Radicals for Capitalism Seeing Like a State To Serve and Protect The Unconstitutionality of Slavery Issues Abortion Capital punishment Criticism Foreign affairs Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political parties Politics State Theories of law Symbols Come and take it Gadsden flag Idols Ron Swanson Patrick Bateman Walter White Organizations Cato Institute Federalist Society Free State Project Foundation for Economic Education International Alliance of Libertarian Parties Libertarian Party Liberty International Mises Institute Reason Foundation Reason (magazine) Students for a Democratic Society Students for Liberty Young Americans for Liberty Movements American militia movement Boogaloo movement Dark Enlightenment Objectivist movement Objectivism Sovereign citizen movement Comparable Libertarianism in Hong Kong Libertarianism in the United Kingdom ( England ) Related Conservatism in the United States Left-libertarianism Liberalism in the United States Libertarian Democrat Libertarian Republican Libertarian science fiction On Democracy in America Outline of libertarianism Right-libertarianism Liberalism portal Conservatism portal Libertarianism portal United States portal v t e This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Robert Nozick ( / ˈ n oʊ z ɪ k / ; November 16, 1938 – January 23, 2002) was an American philosopher. He held the Joseph Pellegrino University Professorship at Harvard University , [ 3 ] and was president of the American Philosophical Association . He is best known for his book Anarchy, State, and Utopia (1974), a libertarian answer to John Rawls ' A Theory of Justice (1971), in which Nozick proposes his minimal state as the only justifiable form of government. His later work Philosophical Explanations (1981) advanced notable epistemological claims, namely his counterfactual theory of knowledge. It won Phi Beta Kappa society's Ralph Waldo Emerson Award the following year.

Nozick's other work involved ethics, decision theory , philosophy of mind , metaphysics and epistemology . His final work before his death, Invariances (2001), introduced his theory of evolutionary cosmology , by which he argues invariances, and hence objectivity itself, emerged through evolution across possible worlds .

[ 4 ] Personal life [ edit ] Nozick was born in Brooklyn to a family of Jewish descent. His mother was born Sophie Cohen, and his father was a Jew from a Russian shtetl who had been born with the name Cohen and who ran a small business.

[ 5 ] Nozick attended the public schools in Brooklyn. He was then educated at Columbia University ( A.B.

1959, summa cum laude ), where he studied with Sidney Morgenbesser ; Princeton University (PhD 1963) under Carl Hempel ; and at Oxford University as a Fulbright Scholar (1963–1964).

At one point, Nozick joined the Young People's Socialist League , and at Columbia University he founded the local chapter of the Student League for Industrial Democracy . He began to move away from socialist ideals when exposed to Friedrich Hayek 's The Constitution of Liberty , claiming he "was pulled into libertarianism reluctantly" when he found himself unable to form satisfactory responses to libertarian arguments.

[ 6 ] Nozick was initiated into the Alpha-Tau chapter of the Kappa Sigma Fraternity while at Columbia in 1956.

After receiving his undergraduate degree in 1959, he married Barbara Fierer. They had two children, Emily and David. The Nozicks eventually divorced; Nozick later married the poet Gjertrud Schnackenberg .

Nozick died in 2002 after a prolonged struggle with stomach cancer .

[ 7 ] He was interred at Mount Auburn Cemetery in Cambridge, Massachusetts .

Career and works [ edit ] Political philosophy [ edit ] Nozick's first book, Anarchy, State, and Utopia (1974), argues that only a minimal state limited to the functions of protection against "force, fraud, theft, and administering courts of law" can be justified, as any more extensive state would violate people's individual rights.

[ 8 ] Nozick believed that a distribution of goods is just when brought about by free exchange among consenting adults, trading from a baseline position where the principles of entitlement theory are upheld. In one example, Nozick uses the example of basketball player Wilt Chamberlain to show that even when large inequalities subsequently emerge from the processes of free transfer (i.e. paying extra money just to watch Wilt Chamberlain play), the resulting distributions are just so long as all consenting parties have freely consented to such exchanges.

Anarchy, State, and Utopia is often contrasted to John Rawls 's A Theory of Justice in popular academic discourse, as it challenged the partial conclusion of Rawls's difference principle , that "social and economic inequalities are to be arranged so that they are to be of greatest benefit to the least-advantaged members of society".

Nozick's philosophy also claims to heritage from John Locke 's Second Treatise on Government and seeks to ground Locke's state of nature, but breaks distinctly with Locke on the question of self-ownership by attempting to secularize his doctrine of natural law without accepting it.

[ 9 ] Instead, Nozick appealed to the second formulation of Immanuel Kant 's categorical imperative : that people should be treated as an end in themselves, not merely as a means to an end. Nozick terms this the 'separateness of persons', saying that "there is no social entity...there are only individual people", and that we ought to "respect and take account of the fact that [each individual] is a separate person".

[ 10 ] Most controversially, Nozick argued that consistent application of libertarian self-ownership would allow for consensual, non-coercive enslavement contracts between adults.

[ 11 ] He rejected the notion of inalienable rights advanced by Locke and most contemporary capitalist-oriented libertarian academics, writing in Anarchy, State, and Utopia that the typical notion of a "free system" would allow individuals to voluntarily enter into non-coercive slave contracts .

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] Anarchy, State, and Utopia received a National Book Award in the category of Philosophy and Religion in the year following its original publication.

[ 16 ] Thought experiments regarding utilitarianism [ edit ] Early sections of Anarchy, State, and Utopia , akin to the introduction of A Theory of Justice , see Nozick implicitly join Rawls's attempts to discredit utilitarianism . Nozick's case differs somewhat in that it mainly targets hedonism and relies on a variety of thought experiments, although both works draw from Kantian principles.

Most famously, Nozick introduced the experience machine in an attempt to show that ethical hedonism is not truly what individuals desire, nor what we ought to desire: There are also substantial puzzles when we ask what matters other than how people's experiences feel "from the inside." Suppose there were an experience machine that would give you any experience you desired. Superduper neuropsychologists could stimulate your brain so that you would think and feel you were writing a great novel, or making a friend, or reading an interesting book. All the time you would be floating in a tank, with electrodes attached to your brain. Should you plug into this machine for life, preprogramming your life's experiences?

[ 17 ] Nozick claims that life in an experience machine would have no value, and provides several explanations as to why this might be, including (but not limited to): the want to do certain things, and not just have the experience of doing them; the want to actually become a certain sort of person; and that plugging into an experience machine limits us to a man-made reality.

Another thought experiment Nozick proposes is the utility monster , designed to show that average utilitarianism could lead to a situation where the needs of the vast majority were sacrificed for one individual. In his exploration of deontological ethics and animal rights, Nozick coins the phrase "utilitarianism for animals, Kantianism for people", wherein the separateness of individual humans is acknowledged but the only moral metric assigned to animals is that of maximizing pleasure: [Utilitarianism for animals, Kantianism for people] says: (1) maximize the total happiness of all living beings; (2) place stringent side constraints on what one may do to human beings.

[ 18 ] Before introducing the utility monster, Nozick raises a hypothetical scenario where someone might, "by some strange causal connection", kill 10,000 unowned cows painlessly by snapping their fingers, asking whether it would be morally wrong to do so.

[ 19 ] On the calculus of pleasure that "utilitarianism for animals, Kantianism for people" uses, assuming the death of these cows could be used to provide pleasure for humans in some way, then the (painless) deaths of the cows would be morally permissible as it has no negative impact upon the utilitarian equation.

Nozick later explicitly raises the example of utility monsters to "embarrass [utilitarian theory]": since humans benefit from the mass sacrifice and consumption of animals, and also possess the ability to kill them painlessly (i.e., without any negative effect on the utilitarian calculation of net pleasure), it is permissible to humans to maximize their consumption of meat so long as they derive pleasure from it. Nozick takes issue with this as it makes animals "too subordinate" to humans, counter to his view that animals ought to "count for something".

[ 20 ] a Epistemology [ edit ] In Philosophical Explanations (1981), Nozick provided novel accounts of knowledge , free will , personal identity , the nature of value , and the meaning of life. He also put forward an epistemological system which attempted to deal with both the Gettier problem and those posed by skepticism . This highly influential argument eschewed justification as a necessary requirement for knowledge.

[ 21 ] : ch. 7 Nozick gives four conditions for S's knowing that P (S=Subject / P=Proposition): P is true S believes that P If it were the case that (not-P), S would not believe that P If it were the case that P, S would believe that P Nozick's third and fourth conditions are counterfactuals . He called this the "tracking theory" of knowledge. Nozick believed the counterfactual conditionals bring out an important aspect of our intuitive grasp of knowledge: For any given fact, the believer's method (M) must reliably track the truth despite varying relevant conditions. In this way, Nozick's theory is similar to reliabilism . Due to certain counterexamples that could otherwise be raised against these counterfactual conditions, Nozick specified that: If P weren't the case and S were to use M to arrive at a belief whether or not P, then S wouldn't believe, via M, that P.

If P were the case and S were to use M to arrive at a belief whether or not P, then S would believe, via M, that P.

[ 22 ] A major feature of Nozick's theory of knowledge is his rejection of the principle of deductive closure .  This principle states that if S knows X and S knows that X implies Y, then S knows Y.  Nozick's truth tracking conditions do not allow for the principle of deductive closure.

Later works [ edit ] The Examined Life (1989), aimed towards a more general audience, explores themes of love, the impact of death, questions of faith, the nature of reality, and the meaning of life. The book takes its name from the quote by Socrates , that "the unexamined life is not worth living". In it, Nozick attempts to find meaning in everyday experiences, and considers how we might come to feel "more real".

[ 23 ] In this pursuit, Nozick discusses the death of his father, reappraises the experience machine, and proposes "the matrix of reality" as a means of understanding how individuals might better connect with reality in their own lives.

[ 24 ] The Nature of Rationality (1993) presents a theory of practical reason that attempts to embellish classical decision theory. In this work, Nozick grapples with Newcomb's problem and the Prisoner's Dilemma , and introduces the concept of symbolic utility to explain how actions might symbolize certain ideas, rather than being carried out to maximize expected utility in the future.

Socratic Puzzles (1997) is a collection of Nozick's previous papers alongside some new essays. While the discussions are quite disparate, the essays generally draw from Nozick's previous interests in both politics and philosophy. Notably, this includes Nozick's 1983 review of The Case for Animal Rights by Tom Regan , where he says animal rights activists are often considered "cranks" and appears to go back on the vegetarian position he previously maintained in Anarchy, State and Utopia .

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] Nozick's final work, Invariances (2001), applies insights from physics and biology to questions of objectivity in such areas as the nature of necessity and moral value . Nozick introduces his theory of truth, in which he leans towards a deflationary theory of truth , but argues that objectivity arises through being invariant under various transformations. For example, space-time is a significant objective fact because an interval involving both temporal and spatial separation is invariant, whereas no simpler interval involving only temporal or only spatial separation is invariant under Lorentz transformations . Nozick argues that invariances, and hence objectivity itself, emerged through a theory of evolutionary cosmology across possible worlds .

[ 27 ] Later reflections on libertarianism [ edit ] Nozick pronounced some misgivings about libertarianism – specifically his own work Anarchy, State and Utopia – in his later publications. Some later editions of The Examined Life advertise this fact explicitly in the blurb, saying Nozick "refutes his earlier claims of libertarianism" in one of the book's essays, "The Zigzag of Politics". In the introduction of The Examined Life , Nozick says his earlier works on political philosophy "now [seem] seriously inadequate", and later repeats this claim in the first chapter of The Nature of Rationality .

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] In these works, Nozick also praised political ideals which ran contrary to the arguments canvassed in Anarchy, State and Utopia . In The Examined Life , Nozick proposes wealth redistribution via an inheritance tax and upholds the value of liberal democracy .

[ 30 ] In The Nature of Rationality , Nozick calls truth a primary good , explicitly appropriating Rawls' A Theory of Justice .

[ 31 ] In the same work, however, Nozick implies that minimum wage laws are unjust, b and later denigrates Marxism before vindicating capitalism, making reference to Adam Smith 's The Wealth of Nations .

[ 32 ] Nozick also broke away from libertarian principles in his own personal life, invoking rent control laws against Erich Segal – who was at one point Nozick's landlord – and winning over $30,000 in a settlement. Nozick later claimed to regret doing this, saying he was moved by "intense irritation" with Segal and his legal representatives at the time, and was quoted in an interview saying "sometimes you have to do what you have to do".

[ 33 ] Some of Nozick's later works seem to endorse libertarian principles. In Invariances , Nozick advances the "four layers of ethics", which at its core maintains an explicitly libertarian underpinning.

[ 34 ] In Socratic Puzzles , Nozick republished some of his old essays with a libertarian grounding, such as "Coercion" and "On The Randian Argument", alongside new essays such as "On Austrian Methodology" and "Why Do Intellectuals Oppose Capitalism?". However, Nozick does allude to some continued reservations about libertarianism in its introduction, saying that "it is disconcerting to be known primarily for an early work".

[ 35 ] Scholars and journalists have since debated what Nozick's true political position was before the end of his life.

[ 36 ] Writing for Slate , Stephen Metcalf notes one of Nozick's core claims in The Examined Life , that actions done through government serve as markers of "our human solidarity". Metcalf then postulates that Nozick felt this was threatened by neoliberal politics.

[ 37 ] Libertarian journalist Julian Sanchez , who interviewed Nozick shortly before his death, claims that Nozick "always thought of himself as a libertarian in a broad sense, right up to his final days, even as his views became somewhat less 'hardcore'".

[ 38 ] Philosophical method [ edit ] Nozick was sometimes admired for the exploratory style of his philosophizing, often content to raise tantalizing philosophical possibilities and then leave judgment to the reader. In his review of The Nature of Rationality , Anthony Gottlieb praised this style, noting its place in Nozick's approach to writing philosophy: "From Mr. Nozick you always expect fireworks, even if some of them go off in their box...Start pondering a sentence and you will find yourself led away prematurely by a parenthetical question; think about the question and you will be dragged into a discursive footnote...Yet it is worth the effort – certainly for regular readers of philosophy, and often for others." [ 39 ] Jason Brennan has related this point to Nozick's "surprising amount of humility, at least in his writings". Brennan makes a point of showing how this enabled Nozick to reach surprising conclusions while also drawing attention to one of Nozick's more famous quotes which also made the headline of his obituary in The Economist , that "there is room for words on subjects other than last words".

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] Nozick was also notable for drawing from literature outside of philosophy, namely economics , physics , evolutionary biology , decision theory , anthropology , and computer science , amongst other disciplines.

[ 42 ] Bibliography [ edit ] Anarchy, State, and Utopia (1974) ISBN 063119780X Philosophical Explanations (1981) ISBN 0198246722 The Examined Life (1989) ISBN 0671725017 The Nature of Rationality (1993/1995) ISBN 0691020965 Socratic Puzzles (1997) ISBN 0674816536 Invariances: The Structure of the Objective World (2001/2003) ISBN 0674012453 See also [ edit ] Conservatism portal Libertarianism portal Philosophy portal American philosophy Classical liberalism List of American philosophers List of liberal theorists Neoclassical liberalism A Theory of Justice: The Musical!

– in which a fictional Nozick is one of the characters Notes [ edit ] a.

^ Nozick's discussion of animal rights pre-dates Peter Singer 's more comprehensive Animal Liberation . Singer's utilitarian position on animal rights was known to Nozick at the time, however, and he expresses misgivings about this in Chapter 3 (footnote 11) of Anarchy, State and Utopia .

b.

^ From p. 27 of The Nature of Rationality : "On these grounds, one might claim that certain antidrug enforcement measures symbolize reducing the amount of drug use and that minimum wage laws symbolize helping the poor" References [ edit ] ^ Mack, Eric (May 30, 2019). "Robert Nozick's Political Philosophy". In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on April 25, 2023 . Retrieved May 30, 2019 – via Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

^ "How can a concern for the non-violation of C [i.e. some deontological constraint] lead to refusal to violate C even when this would prevent other more extensive violations of C ?": Robert Nozick, Anarchy, State and Utopia , Basic Books (1974), p. 30 as quoted by Ulrike Heuer, "Paradox of Deontology, Revisited", in: Mark Timmons (ed.), Oxford Studies in Normative Ethics . Oxford University Press (2011).

^ "Robert Nozick, 1938–2002".

Archived April 12, 2019, at the Wayback Machine Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association , November 2002: 76 (2).

^ Dictionary of Modern American Philosophers , Vol. 1, edited by John R. Shook, Thoemmes Press, 2005, p. 1838 ^ "Professor Robert Nozick" .

Daily Telegraph . 2002.

ISSN 0307-1235 .

Archived from the original on August 2, 2018 . Retrieved August 1, 2018 .

^ Albert Zlabinger (December 1, 1977).

"An Interview with Robert Nozick" .

www.libertarianism.org . CATO Institute.

Archived from the original on July 24, 2024 . Retrieved December 12, 2023 .

^ For biographies, memorials, and obituaries see: Feser, Edward (May 4, 2005).

"Robert Nozick (1938–2002)" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on December 10, 2015 . Retrieved January 2, 2012 .

"Obituary:Professor Robert Nozick" .

Daily Telegraph . January 28, 2002.

Archived from the original on August 2, 2018 . Retrieved April 17, 2017 .

Ryan, Alan (April 12, 2014).

"Obituary: Professor Robert Nozick" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on October 20, 2017 . Retrieved April 17, 2017 .

Schaefer, David Lewis.

"Robert Nozick and the Coast of Utopia" .

The New York Sun .

Archived from the original on December 22, 2019 . Retrieved April 17, 2017 .

O'Grady, Jane (February 1, 2007).

"Robert Nozick: Leftwing political philosopher whose rightward shift set the tone for the Reagan-Thatcher era" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on March 31, 2019 . Retrieved April 17, 2017 .

correction from original of 26 January 2002 Philosopher Nozick dies at 63 From the Harvard Gazette Archived September 18, 2012, at the Wayback Machine Robert Nozick Memorial minute Archived January 4, 2006, at the Wayback Machine ^ Feser, Edward.

"Robert Nozick (1938—2002)" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on February 26, 2017 . Retrieved March 13, 2017 .

^ Nozick, Robert. 1974.

Anarchy, State, and Utopia . New York, NY: Basic Books. Chapter 1. p. 9:  Only when some divergence between our conception and Locke's is relevant to political philosophy, to our argument about the state, will it be mentioned. The completely accurate statement of the moral background, including the precise statement of the moral cheory and its underlying basis, would require a full-scale presentation and is a task for another time. (A lifetime?) That task is so crucial, the gap left without its accomplishment so yawning, that it is only a minor comfort to note that we here are following the respectable tradition of Locke, who does not provide anything remotely resembling a satisfactory explanation of the status and basis of the law of nature in his Second Treatise.

^ Nozick, Robert (1974).

Anarchy, State, and Utopia . Basic Books. pp.

32– 33.

^ Nozick, Robert. 1974.

Anarchy, State, and Utopia . New York, NY: Basic Books. Chapter 10. p. 331.

^ Ellerman, David (September 2005).

" Translatio versus Concessio : Retrieving the Debate about Contracts of Alienation with an Application to Today's Employment Contract" (PDF) .

Politics & Society .

35 (3). Sage Publications: 449– 80.

doi : 10.1177/0032329205278463 .

S2CID 158624143 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on April 7, 2020 . Retrieved April 17, 2017 .

^ A summary of the political philosophy of Robert Nozick by R. N. Johnson Archived February 4, 2002, at the Wayback Machine ^ Jonathan Wolff (October 25, 2007).

"Robert Nozick, Libertarianism, And Utopia" Archived October 6, 2019, at the Wayback Machine ^ Nozick on Newcomb's Problem and Prisoners' Dilemma by S. L. Hurley Archived March 1, 2005, at the Wayback Machine ^ "National Book Awards – 1975 National Book Foundation . Retrieved March 8, 2012.

Archived September 9, 2011, at the Wayback Machine .

^ Nozick, Robert (1974).

Anarchy, State, and Utopia . Basic Books. pp.

42– 43.

^ Nozick, Robert (1974).

Anarchy, State, and Utopia . Basic Books. p. 39.

^ Nozick, Robert (1974).

Anarchy, State, and Utopia . Basic Books. p. 36.

^ Nozick, Robert (1974).

Anarchy, State, and Utopia . Basic Books. pp.

35– 42.

^ Schmidtz, David (2002).

Robert Nozick . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0521006716 .

^ Keith Derose, Solving the Skeptical Problem ^ Nozick, Robert (1989).

The Examined Life: Philosophical Meditations , pp. 7–8, 15. Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-0671725013 ^ Nozick, Robert (1989).

The Examined Life: Philosophical Meditations , pp. 182–183. Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-0671725013 ^ Nozick, Robert (1989).

Socratic Puzzles , pp. 280–285. Harvard University Press.

^ "Animal Rights" .

The New York Times . December 18, 1983.

Archived from the original on December 14, 2023.

^ Dictionary of Modern American Philosophers , Vol. 1, edited by John R. Shook, A&C Black, 2005, p. 1838 ^ Nozick, Robert (1989).

The Examined Life: Philosophical Meditations , p. 17. Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-0671725013 ^ Nozick, Robert (1989).

The Nature of Rationality , p. 32. Princeton University Press.

ISBN 0691020965 ^ Nozick, Robert (1989).

The Examined Life: Philosophical Meditations , pp. 28–32. Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-0671725013 ^ Nozick, Robert (1989).

The Nature of Rationality , p. 68. Princeton University Press.

ISBN 0691020965 ^ Nozick, Robert (1989).

The Nature of Rationality , p. 27, 130–131. Princeton University Press.

ISBN 0691020965 ^ Sanchez, Julian (April 8, 2003).

"Nozick's Apartment" .

Archived from the original on December 14, 2023 . Retrieved December 14, 2023 .

^ Nozick, Robert (2001).

Invariances , pp. 280–282. Harvard University Press ^ Nozick, Robert (1989).

Socratic Puzzles , p. 17. Harvard University Press.

^ Herbjørnsrud, Dag (2002).

Leaving Libertarianism: Social Ties in Robert Nozick's New Philosophy . Oslo, Norway: University of Oslo.

Archived from the original on April 25, 2023 . Retrieved October 12, 2015 .

^ Metcalf, Stephen (June 24, 2011).

"The Liberty Scam: Why even Robert Nozick, the philosophical father of libertarianism, gave up on the movement he inspired" .

slate.com .

Archived from the original on October 9, 2018 . Retrieved April 17, 2017 .

^ Julian Sanchez , "Nozick, Libertarianism, and Thought Experiments" Archived June 17, 2019, at the Wayback Machine .

^ Gottlieb, Anthony (August 22, 1993).

"Why Do You Do the Things You Do?" .

The New York Review of Books . Retrieved March 8, 2024 .

^ Brennan, Jason (June 29, 2011).

"Nozick on Philosophical Explorations: There is Room for Words other than Last Words" .

Bleeding Heart Libertarians .

Archived from the original on July 24, 2024 . Retrieved March 8, 2024 .

^ "Not all words need be last words" .

The Economist .

Archived from the original on March 8, 2024 . Retrieved March 8, 2024 .

^ Williams, Bernard.

"Cosmic Philosopher" .

The New York Review of Books .

Archived from the original on August 2, 2018 . Retrieved August 1, 2018 .

Further reading [ edit ] Cohen, G. A.

(1995). "Robert Nozick and Wilt Chamberlain: How Patterns Preserve Liberty".

Self-Ownership, Freedom, and Equality . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

19– 37.

ISBN 978-0521471749 .

OCLC 612482692 .

Frankel Paul, Ellen; Fred D. Miller, Jr. and Jeffrey Paul (eds.), (2004) Natural Rights Liberalism from Locke to Nozick , Cambridge University Press , ISBN 0521615143 Frankel Paul, Ellen (2008).

"Nozick, Robert (1938–2002)" . In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications , Cato Institute . pp.

360– 62.

doi : 10.4135/9781412965811.n220 .

ISBN 978-1412965804 .

LCCN 2008009151 .

OCLC 750831024 .

Archived from the original on January 9, 2023 . Retrieved January 7, 2016 .

Mack, Eric (2014) Robert Nozick's Political Philosophy Archived July 12, 2015, at the Wayback Machine , Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , June 22, 2014.

Robinson, Dave & Groves, Judy (2003).

Introducing Political Philosophy . Icon Books.

ISBN 184046450X .

Schaefer, David Lewis (2008) Robert Nozick and the Coast of Utopia Archived August 21, 2014, at the Wayback Machine , The New York Sun , April 30, 2008.

Wolff, Jonathan (1991), Robert Nozick: Property, Justice, and the Minimal State.

Polity Press.

ISBN 978-0745680453 Kymlicka, Will (2002).

Contemporary Political Philosophy: An Introduction (2nd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. Chapter 4 Libertarianism.

ISBN 0198782748 .

External links [ edit ] Robert Nozick: Political Philosophy – overview of Nozick in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Robert Nozick at Find a Grave v t e Epistemology Epistemologists William Alston Aquinas Robert Audi Augustine A. J. Ayer George Berkeley Laurence BonJour Gilles Deleuze Keith DeRose René Descartes John Dewey Fred Dretske Edmund Gettier Alvin Goldman Nelson Goodman Paul Grice Anil Gupta Susan Haack David Hume Immanuel Kant Søren Kierkegaard Peter Klein Saul Kripke Hilary Kornblith David Lewis John Locke G. E. Moore John McDowell Robert Nozick Alvin Plantinga Plato Duncan Pritchard James Pryor Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine Thomas Reid Bertrand Russell Gilbert Ryle Wilfrid Sellars Susanna Siegel Ernest Sosa P. F. Strawson Baruch Spinoza Timothy Williamson Ludwig Wittgenstein Nicholas Wolterstorff Vienna Circle more...

Theories Coherentism Constructivism Contextualism Empiricism Evolutionary epistemology Fallibilism Feminist epistemology Fideism Foundationalism Holism Infinitism Innatism Naïve realism Naturalized epistemology Phenomenalism Positivism Rationalism Reductionism Reliabilism Representational realism Skepticism Transcendental idealism Concepts A priori knowledge A posteriori knowledge Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction Belief Certainty Common sense Descriptive knowledge Exploratory thought Epistemic injustice Epistemic virtue Gettier problem Induction Internalism and externalism Justification Knowledge Meta Objectivity Privileged access Problem of induction Problem of other minds Perception Procedural knowledge Proposition Regress argument Simplicity Truth Uncertainty Related articles Faith and rationality Formal epistemology Metaepistemology Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Category Outline Portal WikiProject Stubs Discussion v t e Libertarianism Origins Age of Enlightenment Anarchism Aristotelianism Liberalism classical radical Schools Libertarian capitalism ( Right-libertarianism ) Anarcho-capitalism Autarchism Fusionism Libertarianism bleeding-heart christian consequentialist conservative feminism geo green natural-rights neo paleo paternalism techno crypto transhumanism Libertarian authoritarianism neo-reactionary Minarchism Neo-classical liberalism Objectivism Propertarianism Voluntaryism Libertarian socialism ( Left-libertarianism ) Anarchism black collectivist communist feminism free-market agorism green individualist egoist insurrectionary libertarian communism mutualism pacifist philosophical queer social syndicalist Autonomism Communalism Guild socialism Libertarian Marxism communization mao-spontex Syndicalism Concepts Anti-capitalism Anti-statism Civil libertarianism Crypto-anarchism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Evictionism Expropriative anarchism Federalism (anarchist) Free association (Marxism and anarchism) Free market Free-market environmentalism Freedom of association Freedom of choice Freedom of contract Gift economy Homestead principle Illegalism Individualism Individualist feminism Individual reclamation Liberty Libertarianism (metaphysics) Localism Natural law Natural rights and legal rights Night-watchman state Non-aggression principle Participatory economics Property is theft!

Refusal of work Self-ownership Single tax Spontaneous order Stateless society Voluntary association Voluntary society Workers' councils Workers' self-management Philosophers Left-wing Bakunin Bookchin Camus Chomsky Cleyre Déjacque Fourier Godwin Goldman Guérin Hodgskin Kropotkin Marcuse Öcalan Proudhon Warren Tucker Right-wing Bastiat Block Brennan Emerson D. Friedman M. Friedman R. Friedman Goldwater Hayek Herbert Hoppe Jillette Kinsella Korwin-Mikke Lane Locke von Mises de Molinari Nock Nozick Paterson Rand Read Rothbard Simon Spencer Stossel Other George Hess Konkin de La Boétie McElroy Paine Spooner Stirner Szasz Thoreau Politicians Cleveland Coolidge Farage Gandhi Johnson Jorgensen Korwin-Mikke Milei Paul Sarwark Issues Abortion Affirmative action Anarcho-capitalism and minarchism Capital punishment Foreign intervention Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political alliances Political parties Theories of law War on Drugs Works Atlas Shrugged (1957) The Market for Liberty (1970) For a New Liberty: The Libertarian Manifesto (1973) Law, Legislation and Liberty (1973–1979) Anarchy, State, and Utopia (1974) Free to Choose (1980) Related Abolitionism Anti-collectivism Anti-communism Anti-fascism Anti-socialism Austro-libertarianism Center for Libertarian Studies Civil libertarianism Classical liberalism Conscientious objector Constitutionalism Cultural liberalism Economic liberalism Freeman on the land movement Fusionism Geolibertarianism Georgism Green libertarianism Libertarian conservatism Libertarian Democrats Libertarian socialism Libertarian Republicans Libertarian science fiction Libertarianism in the United Kingdom Libertarianism in the United States Objectivism Public choice theory Small government Sovereign citizen movement Technolibertarianism Libertarianism portal Outline of libertarianism v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Portal : Politics Robert Nozick at Wikipedia's sister projects : Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC 2 Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐s2wmr
Cached time: 20250817044611
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.138 seconds
Real time usage: 1.428 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8140/1000000
Revision size: 38914/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 314320/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13416/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 198126/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.663/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23763303/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1016.595      1 -total
 18.07%  183.663      1 Template:Reflist
 16.65%  169.248      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 11.23%  114.139      1 Template:Libertarianism_US
 10.97%  111.501      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 10.34%  105.158      1 Template:Political_philosophy
  8.10%   82.386      2 Template:Lang
  6.67%   67.850      4 Template:Navbox
  6.56%   66.676     10 Template:Cite_book
  6.13%   62.340     16 Template:ISBN Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:26275:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044611 and revision id 1304268377. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Robert_Nozick&oldid=1304268377 " Categories : 1938 births 2002 deaths 20th-century American male writers 20th-century American non-fiction writers 20th-century American philosophers 21st-century American male writers 21st-century American non-fiction writers 21st-century American philosophers American anti-communists American epistemologists American ethicists American libertarians American logicians American metaphysicians American male non-fiction writers American people of Russian-Jewish descent American philosophers of law American philosophers of mind American political philosophers American political writers American social philosophers Analytic philosophers Burials at Mount Auburn Cemetery Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences fellows Columbia College (New York) alumni Corresponding fellows of the British Academy Critical theorists Critics of Marxism Deaths from stomach cancer in Massachusetts Harvard University Department of Philosophy faculty Jewish American non-fiction writers Jewish philosophers Kantian philosophers Libertarian theorists Mathematicians from New York (state) National Book Award winners Natural law ethicists People from Belmont, Massachusetts Philosophers of economics Philosophy of Robert Nozick Presidents of the American Philosophical Association Princeton University alumni Right-libertarianism Writers from Brooklyn Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from March 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from June 2023 Articles with hCards Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 01:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Robert Nozick 49 languages Add topic

