Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Local variations Toggle Local variations subsection 2.1 France 2.2 United States 2.2.1 Louisiana 2.2.2 Georgia 2.3 Philippines 2.4 Scotland 2.5 Cuba 2.6 India 3 In social ecology 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Usufruct 36 languages العربية Български Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ქართული Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Latina Lietuvių Magyar Malti Монгол Nederlands Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย ᏣᎳᎩ Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Real right in civil law for limited use Property law Part of the common law series Types Personal property Community property Real property Unowned property Acquisition Gift Adverse possession Deed Conquest Discovery Accession Lost, mislaid, and abandoned property Treasure trove Bailment License Alienation Estates in land Allodial title Fee simple Fee tail Life estate Defeasible estate Future interest remainder Concurrent estate Leasehold estate Condominiums Real estate Land tenure Conveyancing Bona fide purchaser Torrens title Strata title Deeds registration Estoppel by deed Quitclaim deed Mortgage Equitable conversion Action to quiet title Escheat Future use control Restraint on alienation Rule against perpetuities Rule in Shelley's Case Doctrine of worthier title Nonpossessory interest Lien Easement Profit Usufruct Covenant Equitable servitude Related topics Fixtures Waste Partition Practicing without a license Property rights Mineral rights Water rights prior appropriation riparian Lateral and subjacent support Assignment Nemo dat Quicquid plantatur Conflict of property laws Blackacre Security deposit Other common law areas Contract law Tort law Wills , trusts and estates Criminal law Evidence Higher category: Law and Common law v t e Usufruct ( / ˈ j uː z j uː f r ʌ k t / ) [ 1 ] is a limited real right (or in rem right) found in civil law and mixed jurisdictions that unites the two property interests of usus and fructus : Usus ( use , as in usage of or access to) is the right to use or enjoy a thing possessed, directly and without altering it.

Fructus ( fruit , as in the fruits of production) is the right to derive profit from a thing possessed: for instance, by selling crops, leasing immovables or annexed movables, taxing for entry, and so on.

A usufruct is either granted in severalty or held in common ownership , as long as the property is not damaged or destroyed. The third civilian property interest is abusus (literally abuse ), the right to alienate the thing possessed, either by consuming or destroying it (e.g., for profit), or by transferring it to someone else (e.g., sale , exchange , gift ). Someone enjoying all three rights has full ownership .

Generally, a usufruct is a system in which a person or group of persons uses the real property (often land) of another. The "usufructuary" does not own the property, but does have a legally cognizable interest in it, which is sanctioned or contractually granted by the owner. Two different types of usufruct exist: perfect and imperfect. In perfect usufruct, the usufructuary is entitled to the use of the property but cannot substantially change it. For example, an owner of a house can grant a usufruct to a resident; the resident could live in (use) the house, but could not (without the owner's assent) renovate it or tear it down and build a bigger house.

[ 2 ] An imperfect usufruct gives the usufructuary some rights to modify the property. For example, if a land owner grants a piece of land to a usufructuary for agriculture, the usufructuary may be given the right to make improvements for agricultural purposes such as building a barn or laying irrigation pipes. This, however, may be ill-advised for the usufructuary inasmuch as they do not own whatever improvements they make and have no claim against the owner for their value, unless this is specifically laid out in the contract creating the usufruct.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ additional citation(s) needed ] In many cases of tenure by usufruct, such as the ejido system in Mexico , individuals or groups may only acquire the usufruct of the property, not legal ownership.

[ 5 ] Usufructs are similar in nature to common-law life estates , save that a usufruct can be granted for a specified term rather than for life.

History [ edit ] Usufruct comes from civil law , under which it is a subordinate real right ( ius in re aliena ) of specified duration, usually for a person's lifetime. The holder of a usufruct, known as the usufructuary, has the right to use ( usus ) the property and enjoy its fruits ( fructus ). In modern terms, fructus more or less corresponds to the profit derived, as when selling the "fruits" (in both literal and figurative senses) of the land, or leasing homes on the land to tenants.

Fruits refers to any renewable commodity on the property, including (among others) agricultural goods (literal "fruits", hence the name), livestock, goods produced in a factory, or rents from tenants. These may be divided into civil ( fructus civiles ), industrial ( fructus industriales ), and natural fruits ( fructus naturales ), the latter of which, in Roman law, included slaves and livestock .

Under Roman law , usufruct was a type of personal servitude ( servitutes personarum ), a beneficial right in another's property. The usufructuary never had possession (in the legal sense) of the property (on the basis that if he possessed at all, he did so through the owner), but did have an interest in the property itself for the specified period (either a set term or a lifetime). Unlike the owner, the usufructuary did not have a right of alienation ( abusus ), but could sell or lease the usufructuary interest. Even though the usufructary did not hold possessory title, he had a cause of action against infringements on his usufruct rights by a third party, such as theft of goods from the property.

In some now-disused systems of customary law among the indigenous peoples of the Americas , usufruct refers to the legal concept that all land is publicly owned , but individuals and groups can acquire the right to use certain areas, usually for agriculture. Some cultures held this to be similar in concept to a perfect usufruct; one could not damage the land so as to reduce its future productivity. Ancient examples of usufruct are found in the Code of Hammurabi and the Law of Moses . The Law of Moses forbade landowners from harvesting the edges of their fields, and reserved the gleanings for the poor.

[ 6 ] Thomas Jefferson famously wrote in 1789 that "Earth belongs – in usufruct – to the living." Jefferson's metaphor means that, like a usufructuary, human beings have the right to use the earth for their own benefit and derive profit from it, but only to the extent that their actions do not impoverish the earth's bounty for future generations. It was, in other words, an expression both of rights (of the living) and obligations (of the living to those yet to be born). Jefferson's use of the word "living" is critical here: he meant that the usufructuaries of the world are those who are alive, not deceased past generations. This idea would profoundly influence Jefferson over the course of his life, and would lead to his acknowledgement that the Constitution of the United States would be revised by future generations, and was part of the reason that the Constitution includes a provision for its own amendment.

[ 7 ] Local variations [ edit ] France [ edit ] In France , usufructs are often created as part of inheritance . Under French law an indefeasible portion known as the forced estate passes to the deceased's surviving spouse and issue (with shares apportioned according to the number of children), with the rest of the estate – the free estate – free to dispose of by will . However, if there is a surviving spouse , they may elect to do one of the following: 1) Distribute the forced estate as is, or convert it into a usufruct 2) Break up the estate into a distributable portion and a usufruct good for the children's lifetime.

If a usufruct is chosen, a value is set for the usufruct interest for inheritance tax purposes and payable by the surviving spouse, with regard to their age. The value of movable property associated with the estate is calculated based on the appraised value of the estate's assets. The value of the surviving spouse's usufruct is subtracted, and whatever balance as remains is divided among the heirs on the death of the surviving spouse. The surviving spouse may do whatever they wish with the movable assets (household items, furniture and the like), with the monetary value of the items going to the children. Title to assets does not pass, and the usufruct is dissolved on death or at the end of a term of years.

Trust and usufruct are distinct and subject to different rules. French law is distinct from Roman law in understanding usufructs not as a type of servitude , but rather possessory interests.

United States [ edit ] Louisiana [ edit ] Although the United States is for the most part a common law jurisdiction, employing life estate for those purposes for which civil law uses usufruct, Louisiana is a hybrid jurisdiction in the French tradition, at least in civil matters. In Louisiana, usufructs are created in a manner similar to other real rights, by gift ("donation"), will ("testament"), or operation of law . Nevertheless, they are typically granted cestui que vie [ further explanation needed ] . Unless otherwise provided in a will, a person's share of community property accedes to descendants as bare title holders ("naked owners"); nevertheless, if that person has a living spouse, the latter will receive a usufruct in that portion of the estate until death or remarriage (La. Civil Code art. 890). Under other conditions, the parents of the deceased may acquire similar usufruct rights.

[ 8 ] Georgia [ edit ] While Georgia does not share Louisiana's civil law history, the Georgia General Assembly created usufructs by statute in 1876.

[ 9 ] In Georgia, usufruct refers to "rights or privileges usually arising out of landlord and tenant relationships, and with privileges granted to tenants holding less interest in real estate than estate for years".

[ 10 ] Under Georgia law, if a landowner grants a lease for fewer than five years, it is a usufruct, and the landowner retains the estate.

[ 11 ] Georgia courts also hold that usufructs are created when the terms of contract between lessor and leaseholder are "so pervasive as to be fundamentally inconsistent with the concept of an estate for years ", or where the landowner retains "dominion and control" over a business operating on the property.

[ 12 ] Philippines [ edit ] Philippine law relating to usufruct is set forth primarily in Title VI of the Philippine Civil Code.

[ 13 ] Scotland [ edit ] A liferent , the Scots law term for an usufruct, is the right to receive, for one's life, the fruits of an asset (real property or otherwise), without the right to sell it. The holder of such a right is known as the liferenter. The owner of a property burdened by a usufruct is called the fiar and right of ownership is known as the fee.

Cuba [ edit ] Usufruct tenure was introduced in Cuba as part of a reorganization of the agricultural sector during the Special Period . As a legacy of sanctions and a struggling economy, Cuba had accumulated many crumbling buildings that could not be repaired. These were torn down and the empty lots lay idle for years until the food shortages forced major changes in Cuban agriculture to increase the efficiency of land use. Initially, this occurred by extralegal agricultural use of abandoned area. Later, usufruct tenure was established, giving farmers rights to product grown on usufruct land on a profit-sharing basis, but not ownership of the land itself.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] India [ edit ] Usufructuary mortgage in the Indian market denotes a unique property financing arrangement where a mortgage issuer grants an usufruct to a mortgage holder. This distinctive mortgage type integrates property ownership with debt service, granting the mortgagee the right to utilize and derive income from the property. Usufructuary mortgages are common in the agricultural sector; their purpose is to facilitate access to credit for cash-poor farmers whose assets are principally in land. The Indian legal system recognizes and regulates usufructary mortgages.

In social ecology [ edit ] Usufruct is a central concept in social ecology .

Murray Bookchin defines usufruct informally as The freedom of individuals in a community to appropriate resources merely by virtue of the fact that they are using them [ 16 ] Bookchin contrasts Usufruct with other property relations, saying: Usufruct, in short, differs qualitatively from the quid pro quo of reciprocity, exchange, and mutual aid — all of which are trapped within history's demeaning account books with their "just" ratios and their "honest" balance sheets.

[ 16 ] He pairs the concept of usufruct with complementarity and the irreducible minimum as core to his ethical world view.

What "civilization" has given us, in spite of itself, is the recognition that the ancient values of usufruct, complementarity, and the irreducible minimum must be extended from the kin group to humanity as a whole.

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Look up usufruct in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Cestui que Classical liberalism Common ownership Dominium Dower Easement Fee simple Four Fs (legal) Freedom to roam Freehold (law) Geolibertarianism Georgism Gleaning Leasehold Minnesota v. Mille Lacs Band of Chippewa Indians Mutualism (economic theory) Perpetual usufruct Profit (real property) Right-of-way (railroad) Rights of way in England and Wales Squatting Trover Usucaption References [ edit ] This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Usufruct" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ^ "usufruct" .

Oxford English Dictionary second edition . Oxford University Press. 1989 . Retrieved 19 December 2018 .

^ Investopedia Staff (2003-11-24).

"Usufruct" .

Investopedia . Retrieved 2018-08-03 .

^ "Property Matters: The Ins and Outs Of a Usufruct - Property24.com" .

www.property24.com . Retrieved 2018-08-03 .

^ "Usufruct | law" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2018-08-03 .

^ OECD (2003-11-04).

OECD Environmental Performance Reviews: Mexico 2003 . OECD Publishing.

ISBN 978-92-64-10501-0 .

^ Leviticus 19:9-10, 23:22.

^ "The Earth Belongs in Usufruct to the Living | The Papers of Thomas Jefferson" .

jeffersonpapers.princeton.edu . Archived from the original on 2018-03-19 . Retrieved 2018-08-03 .

^ La. C.C. art. 891.

^ Ga. L. 1876, p. 35, § 1.

^ Roe v. Doe , 246 Ga. 138, 140, 268 S.E.2d 901, 904 (1980) (quoting Martin v. Heard , 239 Ga. 816, 818 – 19, 238 S.E.2d 899, 901 (1977)).

^ O.C.G.A. § 44-7-1 ^ Diversified Golf, LLC v. Hart County Bd. of Tax Assessors , 267 Ga. App. 8, 14, 598 S.E.2d 791, 796 (2004) (quoting Camp v. Delta Air Lines , 232 Ga. 37, 40, 205 S.E.2d 194 (1974); Allright Parking of Georgia v. Joint City-County Bd. of Tax Assessors , 244 Ga. 378, 387, 260 S.E.2d 315 (1979); Buoy v. Chatham County Bd. of Tax Assessors , 142 Ga. App. 172, 173, 235 S.E.2d 556 (1977)).

^ Book II, Property, Ownership, and its Modifications , Republic Act No. 386, The Civil Code of the Philippines (June 18, 1949), Chan Robles Law Library.

^ Clifford L. Staten (2005).

The History of Cuba . Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 9781403962591 .

^ Audrey C. Fusco (2008).

Local Food, Sustainability, and Cuba's National Food Program (PDF) (Thesis).

^ a b c Bookchin, Murray (1982).

The Ecology of Freedom: The Emergence and Dissolution of Hierarchy .

v t e Property By owner Collective Common Communal Community Crown Customary Cooperative Private Public Self Social State Unowned By nature Croft Estate (landed) Intangible Intellectual indigenous Personal Tangible real Commons Common land Common-pool resource Digital Global Information Knowledge Theory Bundle of rights Commodity fictitious commodities Common good (economics) Excludability First possession appropriation homestead principle Free-rider problem Game theory Georgism Gift economy Labor theory of property Law of rent rent-seeking Legal plunder Natural rights Ownership Property rights primogeniture usufruct women's Right to property Rivalry Tragedy of the commons anticommons Applications Acequia (watercourse) Ejido (agrarian land) Estate legal literary real Forest types Huerta Inheritance executor Land tenure Property law alienation easement restraint on alienation real estate title Rights Air Fishing Forest-dwelling (India) Freedom to roam Grazing pannage Hunting Land aboriginal indigenous squatting Littoral Mineral Bergregal Right of way Water prior-appropriation riparian Disposession / redistribution Bioprospecting biopiracy Collectivization Eminent domain Enclosure Eviction Expropriation Farhud Forced migration population transfer repatriation Illegal fishing Illegal logging Land Back Land reform Legal plunder Piracy Poaching Primitive accumulation Privatization Regulatory taking Slavery bride buying human trafficking spousal husband-selling wife selling wage Tax inheritance poll progressive property Theft Scholars ( key work ) Frédéric Bastiat The Law Ronald Coase Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State Henry George Progress and Poverty Garrett Hardin David Harvey John Locke Two Treatises of Government Karl Marx Das Kapital Marcel Mauss The Gift John Stuart Mill Elinor Ostrom Karl Polanyi The Great Transformation Pierre-Joseph Proudhon What Is Property?

David Ricardo Murray N. Rothbard The Ethics of Liberty Jean-Jacques Rousseau The Social Contract Adam Smith The Wealth of Nations Categories: Property Property law by country Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Usufruct&oldid=1306499663 " Categories : Property law Civil law (legal system) Civil law legal terminology Property law legal terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles needing additional references Articles needing additional references from August 2018 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2024 Articles needing additional references from May 2010 This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 02:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Usufruct 36 languages Add topic

