Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Industrial production 2 Knowledge production 3 Depreciation 4 Marxism and Marxist theory of class Toggle Marxism and Marxist theory of class subsection 4.1 Determinant of class 5 Related terms 6 See also 7 Footnotes 8 References Toggle the table of contents Means of production 52 languages العربية Aragonés Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Furlan 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Kurdî Latina Latviešu Magyar Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Inputs used in the production of goods and services with economic value This article is about the economics term. For the 2003 album, see Means of Production .

Part of the behavioral sciences Economics Outline Index Glossary Economists Principles of Economics Tools and methodology Economic theory Mathematical modeling Game theory Rational choice Cognitive science ( Behavioral ) Economic equilibrium Empirical methods Experimental National accounts Econometrics Time series Spatial Prescriptive and policy Welfare analysis Social choice theory Rational choice theory Cost–benefit analysis Branches and subfields Applied Econometrics International Heterodox Micro Macro Mainstream Mathematical Mech. design Methodology Political Industrial org.

Market design Applications Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Economics portal Society portal v t e In political philosophy , the means of production refers to the generally necessary assets and resources that enable a society to engage in production .

[ 1 ] While the exact resources encompassed in the term may vary, it is widely agreed to include the classical factors of production ( land , labour , and capital ) as well as the general infrastructure and capital goods necessary to reproduce stable levels of productivity .

[ 2 ] It can also be used as an abbreviation of the "means of production and distribution" which additionally includes the logistical distribution and delivery of products, generally through distributors ; or as an abbreviation of the "means of production, distribution, and exchange" which further includes the exchange of distributed products, generally to consumers .

[ 3 ] The concept of "Means of Production" is used by researchers in various fields of study — including politics , economics , and sociology — to discuss, broadly, the relationship between anything that can have productive use, its ownership , and the constituent social parts needed to produce it.

Industrial production [ edit ] CNT-FAI worker cooperative in Barcelona producing wood and steel products From the perspective of a firm, a firm uses its capital goods, [ 4 ] which are also known as tangible assets as they are physical in nature. Unfinished goods are transformed into products and services in the production process. Even if capital goods are not traded on the market as consumer goods, they can be valued as long as capital goods are produced commodities, which are required for production. The total values of capital goods constitute the capital value.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The social means of production are capital goods and assets that require organized collective labor effort, as opposed to individual effort, to operate on.

[ 7 ] The ownership and organization of the social means of production is a key factor in categorizing and defining different types of economic systems .

The means of production includes two broad categories of objects: instruments of labor (tools, factories , infrastructure , etc.) and subjects of labor ( natural resources and raw materials ). People operate on the subjects of labor using the instruments of labor to create a product; or stated another way, labor acting on the means of production creates a good.

[ 8 ] In an agrarian society the principal means of production is the soil and the shovel. In an industrial society the means of production become social means of production and include factories and mines.

Knowledge production [ edit ] In a knowledge economy , learning, research, development, innovation, ideas and creativity are the means of [knowledge] production; communication such as books, articles, videos disseminated both physically and digitally over the Internet are a means of [knowledge] distribution. In a broad sense, the "means of production" also includes the "means of distribution " such as stores, the internet and railroads ( Infrastructural capital ).

[ 9 ] Depreciation [ edit ] The means of production of the firm may depreciate, which means there is a loss in the economic value of capital goods or tangible assets (e.g. machinery, factory equipment) due to wear and tear, and aging. This is known as the depreciation of capital goods.

[ 10 ] Marxism and Marxist theory of class [ edit ] Part of a series on the Marxian critique of political economy Concepts Capitalist mode of production Capital Commodity Concrete and abstract labour Critique of political economy Means of production Mode of production Productive forces Relations of production Socially necessary labour time Socialization Wage labour Wage slavery Wertkritik Wertabspaltungskritik Value-form Topics Crisis theory Imperialism Historical materialism Technological unemployment Falling profit-rate tendency Works Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844 Wage Labour and Capital A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy Grundrisse Das Kapital Theories of Surplus Value Value, Price and Profit People Karl Marx Friedrich Engels Roman Rosdolsky Isaak Illich Rubin Étienne Balibar Robert Kurz Mark Fisher Claus Peter Ortlieb Moishe Postone NML Hans-Georg Backhaus Helmut Reichelt Michael Heinrich Journals Monthly Review New School Economic Review Crisis and Critique Historical Materialism Socialist register Capital & Class Related topics Critique of political economy Economics Marxist sociology Socialism portal v t e Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e The analysis of the technological sophistication of the means of production and how they are owned is a central component in the Marxist theoretical framework of historical materialism and in Marx's critique of political economy , and later in Marxian economics .

In Marx's work and subsequent developments in Marxist theory, the process of socioeconomic evolution is based on the premise of technological improvements in the means of production. As the level of technology improves with respect to productive capabilities, existing forms of social relations become superfluous and unnecessary as the advancement of technology integrated within the means of production contradicts the established organization of society and its economy .

The increasing efficiency of the means of production via the  creation and adaptation of new technologies over time has a tendency to rearrange local and global market structures, leading to the disruption of existing profit pools, creating the possibility of massive economic impact.

Disruptive technologies can lead to the devaluation of various forms of labor power, up to the point of making human labor power economically noncompetitive in certain applications, potentially widening income inequality.

[ 11 ] According to Marx, escalating tension between the upper and lower class is a major consequence of technology decreasing the value of labor force and the contradictory effect an evolving means of production has on established social and economic systems. Marx believed increasing inequality between the upper and lower classes acts as a major catalyst of class conflicts , which develop to a point where the existing mode of production inevitably becomes unsustainable, either collapsing or being overthrown in a social revolution , at which point the contradictory relationship between technological advancement and the value of labor force is resolved by the emergence of a new mode of production based on a different set of social relations including, most notably, different patterns of ownership for the means of production.

[ 12 ] Ownership of the means of production and control over the surplus product generated by their operation is the fundamental factor in delineating different modes of production . Capitalism is defined as private ownership and control over the means of production, where the surplus product becomes a source of unearned income for its owners. Under this system, profit-seeking individuals or organizations undertake a majority of economic activities. However, capitalism does not indicate all material means of production are privately owned as partial economies are publicly owned.

[ 13 ] Determinant of class [ edit ] Marx's theory of class defines classes in their relation to their ownership and control of the means of production. In a capitalist society, the bourgeoisie , or the capitalist class, is the class that owns the means of production and derives a passive income from their operation. Examples of the capitalist class include business owners, shareholders and the minority of people who own factories, machinery and lands. Countries considered as the capitalist countries include Australia, Canada, the U.S., and other nations which hold a free market economy. In modern society, small business owners, minority shareholders and other smaller capitalists are considered as Petite bourgeoisie according to Marx's theory, which is distinct from bourgeoisie and proletariat as they can buy the labour of others but also work along with employees.

In contrast, the proletariat , or working class , comprises the majority of the population that lacks access to the means of production and are therefore induced to sell their labour power for a wage or salary to gain access to necessities, goods and services.

[ 14 ] According to Marx, wages and salaries are considered as the price of labour power , related to working hours or outputs produced by the labour force. At the company level, an employee does not control and own the means of production in a capitalist mode of production. Instead, an employee is performing specific duties under a contract of employment, working for wages or salaries.

[ 15 ] As for firms and profit-seeking organizations, from a personnel economics perspective, to maximize efficiency and productivity there must be an equilibrium between labour markets and product markets. In human resource practices, compensation structure tends to shift towards pay-for-performance bonus or incentive pay rather than base salary to attract the right workers, even if conflicts of interest exist in an employer-worker relationship.

[ 16 ] To the question of why classes exist in human societies in the first place, Karl Marx offered a historical and scientific explanation that it was the cultural practice of ownership of the means of production that gives rise to them. This explanation differs dramatically from other explanations based on "differences in ability" between individuals or on religious or political affiliations giving rise to castes . This explanation is consistent with the bulk of Marxist theory in which Politics and Religion are seen as mere outgrowths ( superstructures ) of the basic underlying economic reality of a people.

[ 17 ] Related terms [ edit ] Factors of production are defined by German philosopher Karl Marx in his book Das Kapital as labor, subjects of labor , and instruments of labor: the term is equivalent to means of production plus labor. The factors of production are often listed in economic writings derived from the classical school as "land, labour and capital". Marx sometimes used the term " productive forces " equivalently with " factors of production "; in Kapital , he uses "factors of production", in his famous Preface to his Critique of Political Economy : A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy , he uses "productive forces" (that may depend on the translation).

Production relations (German: Produktionsverhältnis ) are the relations humans enter into with each other in using the means of production to produce. Examples of such relations are employer /employee, buyer/seller, the technical division of labour in a factory, and property relations.

Mode of production (German: Produktionsweise ) means the dominant way in which production is organised in society. For instance, " capitalism " is the name for the capitalist mode of production in which the means of production are owned privately by a small class (the bourgeoisie ) who profits off the labor of the working class (the proletariat ).

Communism is a mode of production in which the means of production are not owned by anyone, but shared in common , without class-based exploitation . Besides capitalism and communism, there is another mode of production which is called a Mixed Economic System. In a mixed economy, private ownership of capital goods are protected and a certain level of the market economy is allowed. However, the government has the right to intervene in the market and economic activities for social objectives. Different from the pure capitalism, the government regulation exists to control particular means of production over the private business sector. Different from communism, the majority of means of production are privately owned rather than shared in common.

[ 18 ] See also [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Means of production .

Capital (economics) Clause IV Factors of production Information revolution Gross fixed capital formation Nationalization Productive forces Property Private property Privatization Relations of production Socialization (economics) Footnotes [ edit ] ^ Gould, Peter; Olsson, Gunnar, eds. (1977).

A Search for Common Ground . London: Pion. p. 215.

ISBN 9780850860931 . Retrieved 8 April 2023 .

[...] Hindess and Hirst (1977, page 65) [...] define means of production as 'all the conditions necessary to the operation of a particular labour process which are combined in the units of production in which that process takes place' [...].

^ Edmundson, William A. (2020).

"What Are "The Means of Production"?*" .

Journal of Political Philosophy .

28 (4): 422– 423.

doi : 10.1111/jopp.12211 .

ISSN 1467-9760 .

S2CID 212948343 .

It takes the means of production to comprise anything that is or can be put to productive use... the means of production consist of anything that enables or could enable the extraction of surplus value (exploitation). Similarly, for Proudhon, goods not meant for immediate consumption, whose accumulation might introduce social inequality ^ Marx, Karl; Dobb, Maurice (1971).

A contribution to the critique of political economy . London: Lawrence and Wishart. Archived at marxists.org ^ Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (April 19, 1990).

Marxian Economics: The New Palgrave . W. W. Norton & Company. p.

76 .

ISBN 978-0393958607 .

The conception of capital within orthodox economics. Within orthodox economics, the term 'capital' generally refers to the means of production.

^ Tuovila, Alicia.

"Capital Goods Definition" .

Investopedia . Retrieved 2021-04-24 .

^ Hennings, K. H. (1987), Palgrave Macmillan (ed.), "Capital as a Factor of Production" , The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics , London: Palgrave Macmillan UK, pp.

1– 11, doi : 10.1057/978-1-349-95121-5_20-1 , ISBN 978-1-349-95121-5 , retrieved 2021-04-24 ^ Karl Kautsky (1983).

Selected Political Writings . 978-0333283844. p. 9.

Here we encounter a further characteristic of the modern wage proletarian. He works not with the individual but with social means of production, means of production so extensive that they can be operated only by a society of workers, not by the individual worker.

^ Michael Evans, Karl Marx , London, England, 1975. Part II, Chap. 2, sect. a; p. 63.

^ Flower, B. O.

The Arena , Volume 37. The Arena Pub. Co, originally from Princeton University. p. 9 ^ Black, John (2017).

A dictionary of economics . Nigar Hashimzade, Gareth D. Myles (5 ed.). [Oxford].

ISBN 978-0-19-181994-0 .

OCLC 970401192 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ James, Manyika (2013).

"Disruptive technologies: Advances that will transform life, business, and the global economy" (PDF) .

www.mckinsey.com .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2020-07-22 . Retrieved 2021-04-25 .

^ Mode of Production . Marxism.org ^ Black, John (2017).

Capitalism--A dictionary of economics . Nigar Hashimzade, Gareth D. Myles (5 ed.). [Oxford].

ISBN 978-0-19-181994-0 .

OCLC 970401192 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Ishiyama, Breuning, John, Marijke (October 22, 2010).

21st Century Political Science: A Reference Handbook . SAGE Publications, Inc.

For Marx, class was defined by an individual's relationship to the means of production...Class is determined by the extent to which people own most, some, or little of the means of production, or by their relationship to the means of production. It generally conflicts over control or access to the means of production that drives history.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Black, John (2017).

Employee--A dictionary of economics . Nigar Hashimzade, Gareth D. Myles (5 ed.). [Oxford].

ISBN 978-0-19-181994-0 .

OCLC 970401192 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Lazear, Edward P.; Shaw, Kathryn L. (2007).

"Personnel Economics: The Economist's View of Human Resources" .

The Journal of Economic Perspectives .

21 (4): 91– 114.

doi : 10.1257/jep.21.4.91 .

ISSN 0895-3309 .

JSTOR 30033753 .

^ Frederick Engels: Socialism: Utopian and Scientific Chapter III Historical Materialism Marx2mao.com.  p. 74 ^ Investopedia Staff.

"Mixed Economic System Definition" .

Investopedia . Retrieved 2021-04-25 .

Nolan P. K Lenski 2009 References [ edit ] Institute of Economics of the Academy of Sciences of the U.S.S.R. (1957).

Political Economy: A Textbook . London: Lawrence and Wishart.

v t e Marxist phraseology and terminology Philosophy and politics ( Marxist ) Barracks communism Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Bourgeois democracy Bourgeois nationalism Bourgeois revolution Bourgeois right Bourgeois socialism Capitalist mode of production Class struggle Commodification Dialectics Dictatorship of the proletariat Historical materialism Imperialism Liquidationism Lumpenproletariat Means of labor Metabolic rift Petite bourgeoisie Primitive accumulation of capital Proletarian internationalism Proletarian revolution Pure communism Revisionism Revolutionary spontaneity Revolutionary wave Scientific socialism Socialist mode of production Super-imperialism Theoretician Two-stage theory Wage slavery Workers of the world, unite!

Workers' council Workers' control World communism World revolution Sociology and economics ( Marxian ) Critique of political economy Accumulation of capital Capital Capitalist mode of production Crisis of capitalism Commanding heights of the economy Commodity Commodity production Dominant ideology Exchange value Free association Law of value Materialism Means of production Mode of production Productive forces Production for use Relations of production Ruling class Simple commodity production Socialist mode of production Socially necessary labour time Socialization Social murder Subject of labor Surplus value Use value Value Worker cooperative Marxist–Leninist Anti-revisionism Cadre Central Committee Democratic centralism Dual power Enemy of the people Foco General line of the party National liberation New class People's democracy Politburo Political rehabilitation Popular front Real socialism Revisionism Revolutionary terror Secretariat Self-criticism Socialist accumulation Socialism in one country Social fascism Social imperialism Soviet democracy Democracy in Marxism United front Vanguardism Trotskyist Deformed workers' state Degenerated workers' state French Turn Permanent revolution Social revolution Transitional demand Uneven and combined development United front World revolution Maoist Antagonistic contradiction Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Continuous revolution theory The East wind prevails over the West wind Four Olds Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Mass line New Democracy Whole-process people's democracy One Divides Into Two People's war Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun Revisionism Revolutionary base area Revolution is not a dinner party Social imperialism Struggle session Other People's Multiparty Democracy Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐bmnfr
Cached time: 20250812000113
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.563 seconds
Real time usage: 0.704 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2354/1000000
Revision size: 18613/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 169695/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11812/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 132212/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.320/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7622043/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  533.875      1 -total
 33.73%  180.076      3 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 31.47%  168.023      1 Template:Reflist
 24.03%  128.274      1 Template:Economics_sidebar
 20.62%  110.061      7 Template:Cite_book
 12.52%   66.838      1 Template:Short_description
 10.05%   53.645      2 Template:Hlist
  7.52%   40.153      1 Template:Marxist_&amp;_Communist_phraseology
  6.89%   36.798      1 Template:Navbox
  6.79%   36.229      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:47155:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812000113 and revision id 1304146132. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Means_of_production&oldid=1304146132 " Categories : Marxist terminology Communism Socialism Capitalism Marxian economics Production economics Labour economics Capital (economics) Factors of production Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 07:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Means of production 52 languages Add topic

