Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Plot summary 2 Reviews 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Idoru 6 languages Français Italiano Magyar Português Română Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1996 novel by William Gibson This article is about the novel. For the Japanese cultural phenomenon, see Japanese idol . For the rock band, see The Idoru .

Idoru cover of the United Kingdom edition Author William Gibson Language English Series Bridge trilogy Genre Science fiction , post-cyberpunk Publisher Viking Press Publication date September 4, 1996 Media type print (hardback and paperback), audiobook Pages 304 ISBN 978-0-14-024107-5 OCLC 39158749 Preceded by Virtual Light Followed by All Tomorrow's Parties Idoru is the second book in William Gibson 's Bridge trilogy .

Idoru is a science-fiction novel set in a postmodern , dystopian, cyberpunk future. One of the main characters, Colin Laney, has a talent for identifying nodal points , analogous to Gibson's own: Laney's node-spotter function is some sort of metaphor for whatever it is that I actually do. There are bits of the literal future right here, right now, if you know how to look for them. Although I can't tell you how; it's a non-rational process.

— William Gibson, August 1999.

[ 1 ] Plot summary [ edit ] In the post-Tokyo/San Francisco earthquake world of the early 21st century, Colin Laney is referred to agents of rock and roll megastar Rez (of the musical group Lo/Rez) for a job using his peculiar talent of sifting through vast amounts of mundane data to find "nodal points" of particular relevance. Rez has claimed to want to marry a synthetic personality named Rei Toei , the Idoru (a Japanese virtual idol ) of the title, a claim stranger than usual and therefore questioned by his loyal staff, particularly by his head of security, Keith Blackwell. Blackwell believes that someone is manipulating Rez, and wants Laney to find out who. Simultaneously, the Seattle chapter of the Lo/Rez fan club is discussing exactly the same topic of the unbelievable marriage of human and AI construct. Fourteen-year-old Chia Pet McKenzie is chosen by the group to go to Tokyo and meet with the Tokyo chapter to find out what is really happening. On the flight she meets a woman named Maryalice, who dupes her into unwittingly carrying a contraband item through customs in Tokyo.

Laney accepts his new position warily, but is conflicted throughout much of the novel by his past involvement with a powerful infotainment organization, " SlitScan ", which thrives on destroying media personalities by exposing their secrets. In the course of this earlier job he feels responsible for the death of an innocent party. His talent had allowed him a foreshadowing of a probable suicide , but SlitScan had tried to limit Laney's role to passive observer. However, Laney's conscience snapped – he attempted at the last moment to stop the suicide, but instead became mired in a scandal. Yet another organization claiming to be a media watchdog steps in and tries to pull Laney away from SlitScan to use his story to expose SlitScan's involvement in illegal spying. This goes awry and Laney is left alone, high and dry. Further complicating Laney's life is that Kathy Torrance, his controller from SlitScan, is attempting to blackmail him with false evidence into betraying his current employers, Lo/Rez, by exposing whatever secret she thinks they are hiding.

Chia, after being brought to the club run by Maryalice's boyfriend Eddie, is helped to escape by one of the club's employees who perceives that she is in danger. She takes with her the contraband which was slipped into her luggage. When she meets with the local Tokyo chapter of the Lo/Rez fan club, she is disappointed by their seeming indifference to the impending "wedding", and they inform her this is merely an unfounded rumor. Disbelieving, Chia decides to investigate on her own and seeks the help of her host Mitsuko's brother Masahiko, an otaku who is a member of the hacker community the "Walled City" (a virtual community based on Kowloon Walled City ). Masahiko and Chia embark on a search for the truth to the marriage of Rez and Rei by going to the club where Rez announced the event, though the club no longer exists in the rapidly changing Tokyo scene. Masahiko is informed by other denizens of Walled City that he is being watched, both on the net and physically at the home of himself and his sister. Chia admits to Masahiko that she has found something in her luggage and that might be what the unknown men are seeking. The contraband turns out to be a highly illegal nanotech assembler – a device used for high-speed material fabrication – which Eddie smuggled in on behalf of the Kombinat . Chia and Masahiko go to a love hotel to try to hide from the searchers. It is there that all the parties converge. When Chia and Masahiko link into the net, the Idoru (Rei) manifests herself in Chia's Venice simulation once she realizes Chia is playing a part in her evolution. Maryalice finds the hotel through their taxi record, letting herself into their room. Lamenting her recent breakup with Eddie over the botched smuggling operation, she tells them that giving back the device won't stop them from being killed as witnesses.

Masahiko and Chia go onto the Net to get the help of Chia's friend Zona Rosa (Spanish for " pink zone ") who claims to be the leader of a Mexico City "girl gang", and from the denizens of the distributed system , Walled City. In short order, Maryalice's boyfriend Eddie shows up with a member of the Kombinat to reclaim the nanotech device. This prompts Zona Rosa (who has been viewing events over the net) into making a terrible personal sacrifice to save Chia. Events rapidly come to a head when Rez and Blackwell arrive. Laney sees events occurring (and about to occur) in the datastreams and rushes with Lo/Rez's support crew to the love hotel. A deal is struck, and most of the parties are accommodated. The ultimate resolution is left open as to whether the Rez/Rei union has become possible with the nanotechnology they have now obtained.

Reviews [ edit ] Backstab #11 [ 2 ] References [ edit ] ^ Johnston, Anthony (August 1999).

"William Gibson : All Tomorrow's Parties : Waiting For The Man" .

Spike . Retrieved 2007-07-13 .

^ "Backstab #011" . 1998.

External links [ edit ] SF Site Reviews - A review by Leon Olszewski v t e William Gibson List of works List of awards and nominations Novels Sprawl trilogy Neuromancer (1984) Count Zero (1986) Mona Lisa Overdrive (1988) Bridge trilogy Virtual Light (1993) Idoru (1996) All Tomorrow's Parties (1999) Blue Ant trilogy Pattern Recognition (2003) Spook Country (2007) Zero History (2010) Jackpot series The Peripheral (2014) Agency (2020) Other The Difference Engine (with Bruce Sterling ) (1990) Archangel (2016) Short stories " Fragments of a Hologram Rose " " Johnny Mnemonic " " The Gernsback Continuum " " Hinterlands " " New Rose Hotel " " The Belonging Kind " " Burning Chrome " " Red Star, Winter Orbit " " The Winter Market " " Dogfight " " Skinner's Room " Burning Chrome collection Nonfiction Agrippa (A Book of the Dead) " Disneyland with the Death Penalty " No Maps for These Territories Distrust That Particular Flavor Television " Kill Switch " " First Person Shooter " Characters Molly Millions Bobby Newmark Rei Toei Cayce Pollard Hubertus Bigend Story elements Cyberspace Megacorporation Locative art Intrusion Countermeasures Electronics Raygun Gothic Derivative works Neuromancer video game Johnny Mnemonic film New Rose Hotel film Node Magazine William Gibson: A Literary Companion The Peripheral TV series Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Idoru&oldid=1295276862 " Categories : 1996 Canadian novels Novels by William Gibson 1996 science fiction novels Cyberpunk novels Bridge trilogy Viking Press books Novels about music Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 June 2025, at 19:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Idoru 6 languages Add topic

