Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Iconography 3 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 3.1 Birth 3.2 Boon from Brahma 3.3 Devotee of Shiva 3.4 Family 3.5 Priestly ministers 4 Other legends Toggle Other legends subsection 4.1 Vishnu's cursed doorkeeper 4.2 Other conflicts 4.3 Rape of Rambha 5 Worship and temples Toggle Worship and temples subsection 5.1 Worship 5.2 Temples 6 Influence on culture and art Toggle Influence on culture and art subsection 6.1 Ravana-Dahan (burning effigy of Ravana) 6.2 Ravanahatha 7 In other religions Toggle In other religions subsection 7.1 Jainism 7.2 Dravidian movement 8 In popular culture 9 See also 10 References 11 Bibliography 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Ravana 59 languages العربية অসমীয়া अवधी Basa Bali বাংলা भोजपुरी བོད་ཡིག Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français ગુજરાતી गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Lietuvių मैथिली മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ଓଡ଼ିଆ ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Română Русский संस्कृतम् Scots සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Sunda Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย ತುಳು Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Primary antagonist in the Hindu epic Ramayana Several terms  redirect here. For other uses, see Ravan (disambiguation) .

Ravana Ravana,  South India, 18th century CE Devanagari रावण Sanskrit transliteration Rāvaṇa Affiliation Shaivism , Lanka , Rakshasa Predecessor Kubera (King of Lanka) Successor Vibhishana (King of Lanka) Abode Lanka Mount Pushpaka Vimana Texts Ramayana and its versions Genealogy Parents Vishrava (father) Kaikasi (mother) Siblings Kumbhakarna (younger brother) Vibhishana (younger brother) Shurpanakha (younger sister) Spouse Mandodari (chief-queen) Dhanyamalini and a thousand junior wives [ 1 ] Children Meghanada Akshayakumara Narantaka Devantaka Atikaya Trishira (sons) Part of a series on Hinduism Hindus Mythology Origins Historical History Indus Valley Civilisation Vedic religion Dravidian folk religion Śramaṇa Tribal religions in India Traditional Itihasa-Purana Epic-Puranic royal genealogies Epic-Puranic chronology Sampradaya (traditions) Major Sampradaya (traditions) Vaishnavism Pancharatra Shaivism Kapalika Pashupata Pratyabhijña Shaktism Smartism Other Sampradaya (traditions) Deities Absolute Reality / Unifying Force Brahman Trimurti Brahma Vishnu Shiva Tridevi Saraswati Lakshmi Parvati Other major Devas / Devis Vedic Deities: Tridasha Adityas Rudras Vasus Ashvins Mahadevi Other Vedic Deities Post-Vedic: Avatar Dashavatara Durga Navadurga Mahavidya Kartikeya Ganesha Hanuman Radha Shakti Sita Devatas Vishvakarma Kubera Concepts Worldview Cosmology Mythology Ontology Tattvas Subtle elements Panchikarana Gross elements Guṇas Purusha Prakṛti Supreme reality Brahman Nirguna Saguna Om Saccidānanda God Ishvara Devas / Devi Devatas God in Hinduism God and gender Puruṣārtha (meaning of life) Dharma Artha Kama Moksha Āśrama (stages of life) Brahmacharya Gṛhastha Vānaprastha Sannyasa Three paths to liberation Bhakti yoga Jnana yoga Karma yoga Liberation Mokṣa-related topics: Paramātman Maya Karma Saṃsāra Mind Ātman (self) Anātman (non-self) Sūkṣma śarīra (subtle body) Antaḥkaraṇa (mental organs) Prajña (wisdom) Ānanda (happiness) Viveka (discernment) Vairagya (dispassion) Sama (equanimity) Dama (temperance) Uparati (self-settledness) Titiksha (forbearance) Shraddha (faith) Samadhana (concentration) Arishadvargas (six enemies) Ahamkara (attachment) Ethics Niti śastra Yamas Niyama Ahimsa Achourya Aparigraha Brahmacharya Satya Damah Dayā Akrodha Arjava Santosha Tapas Svādhyāya Shaucha Mitahara Dāna Sources of dharma Epistemology Pratyakṣa (perception) Anumāṇa (inference) Upamāṇa (comparison, analogy) Arthāpatti (postulation, presumption) Anupalabdi (non-perception, negation) Śabda (word, testimony) Practices Worship , sacrifice, and charity Puja Ārtī Prarthana Śrauta Temple Murti Bhakti Japa Bhajana Kīrtana Yajna Homa Tarpana Vrata Prāyaścitta Tirtha Yatra Tirthadana Matha Nritta-Nritya Dāna Sevā Yoga Exorcism Meditation Tapas Dhyana Samādhāna Nididhyāsana Yoga Sadhu Yogi Yogini Asana Sādhanā Hatha yoga Jnana yoga Bhakti yoga Karma yoga Rāja yoga Kundalini yoga Arts Bharatanatyam Kathak Kathakali Kuchipudi Manipuri Mohiniyattam Odissi Sattriya Bhagavata Mela Yakshagana Dandiya Raas Carnatic music Pandav Lila Kalaripayattu Silambam Adimurai Rites of passage Garbhadhana Pumsavana Pumsavana Simantonayana Simantonnayana Jatakarma Nāmakaraṇa Nishkramana Annaprashana Chudakarana Karnavedha Vidyāraṃbhaṃ Upanayana Keshanta Ritushuddhi Samavartanam Vivaha Antyesti Festivals Diwali Holi Maha Shivaratri Navaratri Durga Puja Ramlila Vijayadashami-Dussehra Raksha Bandhan Ganesh Chaturthi Vasant Panchami Rama Navami Janmashtami Onam Makar Sankranti Kumbh Mela Pongal Ugadi Vaisakhi Bihu Puthandu Vishu Ratha Yatra Philosophical schools Six Astika schools Samkhya Yoga Nyaya Vaisheshika Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Advaita Dvaita Vishishtadvaita Achintya Bheda Abheda Shuddhadvaita Svabhavika Bhedabheda Akshar Purushottam Darshan Other schools Ājīvika Buddhism Jainism Charvaka Gurus, Rishi, philosophers Ancient Saptarshi Vashistha Kashyapa Atri Jamadagni Gotama Vishvamitra Bharadwaja Agastya Angiras Aruni Ashtavakra Jaimini Kanada Kapila Patanjali Pāṇini Prashastapada Raikva Satyakama Jabala Valmiki Vyasa Yajnavalkya Medieval Abhinavagupta Adi Shankara Akka Mahadevi Allama Prabhu Alvars Basava Chaitanya Ramdas Kathiababa Chakradhara Chāngadeva Dadu Dayal Eknath Gangesha Upadhyaya Gaudapada Gorakshanatha Haridasa Thakur Harivansh Jagannatha Dasa Jayanta Bhatta Jayatīrtha Jiva Goswami Jñāneśvar Kabir Kanaka Dasa Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Madhusūdana Madhva Matsyendranatha Morya Gosavi Mukundarāja Namadeva Narahari Tirtha Narasimha Saraswati Nayanars Nimbarkacharya Srinivasacharya Prabhākara Purandara Dasa Raghavendra Swami Raghunatha Siromani Raghuttama Tirtha Ram Charan Ramananda Ramanuja Ramprasad Sen Ravidas Rupa Goswami Samarth Ramdas Sankardev Satyanatha Tirtha Siddheshwar Sripada Srivallabha Sripadaraja Surdas Swaminarayan Śyāma Śastri Tukaram Tulsidas Tyagaraja Vācaspati Miśra Vadiraja Tirtha Vallabha Valluvar Vedanta Desika Vidyaranya Vyasaraja Modern Aurobindo Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Bhaktivinoda Thakur Chandrashekarendra Saraswati Chinmayananda Dayananda Saraswati Jaggi Vasudev Krishnananda Saraswati Mahavatar Babaji Mahesh Yogi Narayana Guru Nigamananda Nisargadatta Maharaj Prabhupada Radhakrishnan R. D. Ranade Ramakrishna Rama Tirtha Ramana Maharshi Ravi Shankar Ramdas Samarth Sathya Sai Baba Shirdi Sai Baba Shraddhanand Satyadhyana Tirtha Siddharameshwar Maharaj Sivananda Trailanga U. G. Krishnamurti Upasni Maharaj Vethathiri Maharishi Vivekananda Yogananda Texts Sources and classification of scripture Śruti Smṛti Ācāra Ātmatuṣṭi Scriptures Timeline of Hindu texts Vedas Rigveda Yajurveda Samaveda Atharvaveda Divisions Samhita Brahmana Aranyaka Upanishads Upanishads Principal Upanishads Rigveda: Aitareya Kaushitaki Yajurveda: Brihadaranyaka Isha Taittiriya Katha Shvetashvatara Maitri Samaveda: Chandogya Kena Atharvaveda: Mundaka Mandukya Prashna Vedangas Shiksha Chandas Vyākaraṇa Nirukta Kalpa Jyotisha Other scriptures Bhagavad Gita Agama s (Hinduism) Itihasas Ramayana Mahabharata Puranas Vishnu Purana Bhagavata Purana Devi Bhagavata Purana Naradiya Purana Vāmana Purana Matsya Purana Garuda Purana Brahma Purana Brahmanda Purana Brahma Vaivarta Purana Bhavishya Purana Padma Purana Agni Purana Shiva Purana Linga Purana Kūrma Purana Skanda Purana Varaha Purana Markandeya Purana Upavedas Ayurveda Dhanurveda Gandharvaveda Sthapatyaveda Shastras , sutras , and samhitas Dharma Shastra Artha Śastra Shilpa Shastras Kama Sutra Brahma Sutras Samkhya Sutras Mimamsa Sutras Nyāya Sūtras Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Yoga Sutras Pramana Sutras Charaka Samhita Sushruta Samhita Natya Shastra Panchatantra Naalayira Divya Prabandham Tirumurai Ramcharitmanas Yoga Vasistha Swara yoga Panchadasi Stotras , stutis and Bhashya Kanakadhara Stotra Shiva Stuti Vayu Stuti Tamil literature Tirumurai Naalayira  Divya Prabandham Tirumurukāṟṟuppaṭai Tiruppukal Kural Kamba Ramayanam/Ramavataram Five Great Epics Eighteen Greater Texts Eighteen Lesser Texts Athichudi Iraiyanar Akapporul Abirami Antati Thiruvilaiyadal Puranam Vinayagar Agaval Other texts Hindu culture & society Society Varna Brahmin Kshatriya Kayastha Vaishya Shudra Dalit Jāti Gotra Dvija Dasa Hindu art Hindu art Hindu iconography Shilpa Shastras Rasa (aesthetics) Indian aesthetics Yantra Hindu architecture Hindu architecture Hindu temple architecture Vastu shastra Talamana Hindu music Hindu music Shruti (music) Svara Alankāra Tala (music) Raga Rasa (aesthetics) Sangita Vadya Natya Shastra Food & diet customs Ahimsa Diet in Hinduism Sattvic diet Mitahara Jhatka Vrata Time keeping practices Hindu units of time Hindu calendar Panchangam Vikram Samvat Shaka era Hindu pilgrimage Pilgrimage sites Other society-related topics Discrimination Persecution Nationalism Hindutva Organisations Reform movements Other topics Hinduism by country Greater India Balinese Hinduism Caribbean Shaktism Template:Hindu scriptures and texts Hinduism & other religions Hinduism and Jainism / and Buddhism / and Sikhism / and Judaism / and Christianity / and Islam Other related links (templates) Hindu scriptures & texts Hindu philosphy Sampradayas (traditions) Shaivism Vaishnavism Shaktism Glossary Outline Hinduism portal v t e Ravana ( Sanskrit : रावण , romanized : Rāvaṇa , lit.

'roaring') is the principal antagonist of the ancient Hindu epic Ramayana and its several other versions . He is traditionally depicted as a ten-headed rakshasa (demon) king of Lanka .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] In the Ramayana , Ravana is described as the eldest son of sage Vishrava and Kaikasi . He abducted Rama 's wife, Sita , and took her to his kingdom of Lanka , where he held her in the Ashoka Vatika .

[ 5 ] Rama, with the support of vanara King Sugriva and his army of vanaras, launched a rescue operation for Sita against Ravana in Lanka. Ravana was subsequently slain, and Rama rescued his beloved wife Sita.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Ravana was well-versed in the six shastras and the four Vedas , including the Shiva Tandava Stotra .

[ 8 ] Ravana is also considered to be the most revered devotee of Shiva . Images of Ravana are often seen associated with Shiva at temples. He also appears in the Buddhist Mahayana text Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra , in Buddhist Jatakas , as well as in Jain Ramayanas . In Vaishnava scriptures , he is depicted as one of Vishnu 's cursed doorkeepers.

[ 9 ] Etymology Statue of Ravana at Koneswaram Hindu Temple , Sri Lanka The word Rāvaṇa ( Sanskrit : रावण) means "Roaring" (active), the opposite of Vaiśravaṇa which means to "hear distinctly" (passive).

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Both Ravana and Vaiśravaṇa, who is commonly known as Kubera , are considered to be patronymics derived from "sons of Vishrava ".

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Ravana was a title later taken on by Dashānana, and it means "the one with ten (dasha) faces (anana)". Further, roravana is Sanskrit for "loud roaring." In Abhinava Gupta's Krama Shaiva scripture, yāsām rāvanam is used as an expression to mean people who are truly aware of the materialism of their environment.

[ citation needed ] Ravana has many other popular names such as Dasis Ravana, Dasis Sakvithi Maha Ravana, Dashaanan, Ravula, Lankapati, Lankeshwar, Lankeshwaran, Ravanasura and Ravanaeshwaran.

[ 14 ] Iconography Ravana is depicted and described as having ten heads, although he is sometimes shown with only nine heads since he cut one off to convince Shiva.

[ 15 ] He is described as a devout follower of Shiva, a great scholar, a capable ruler, and a maestro of the Veena . Ravana is also depicted as the author of the Ravana Samhita , a book on Hindu astrology , and the Arka Prakasham , a book on Siddha medicine and treatment. Ravana possessed a thorough knowledge of Siddha and political science . In some later versions, he is said to have possessed the nectar of immortality, which was stored inside his belly thanks to a celestial boon from Brahma . In the War with Lord Rama, Ravana was killed by a powerful Brahma's weapon shot by Rama which was gifted to Rama by Sage Agstya.

[ 16 ] [ page needed ] Biography Birth Painting depicting Ravana cutting off Jatayu 's wing while abducting Sita , by Raja Ravi Varma Ravana was born to the Brahmin sage Vishrava and the Rakshasa princess Kaikasi in Treta Yuga .

[ 17 ] Villagers from Bisrakh in Uttar Pradesh claim that Bisrakh was named after Vishrava, and that Ravana was born there.

[ 18 ] Ravana's paternal grandfather, the sage Pulastya , [ 19 ] was one of the ten Prajapatis , or mind-born sons of Brahma , and one of the Saptarishi (seven great sages) in the first Manvantara (age of Manu ). His maternal grandfather was Sumali (or Sumalaya), the king of the Rakshasas and the son of Sukesha. Sumali had ten sons and four daughters. Sumali wished for Kaikasi to marry the most powerful being in the mortal world, so as to produce an exceptional heir. He rejected the kings of the world, as they were less powerful than him. Kaikasi searched among the sages and finally chose Vishrava, the father of Kubera. Ravana and his siblings were born to the couple and they completed their education from their father, with Ravana being a great scholar of the Vedas.

[ citation needed ] Boon from Brahma Ravana and his two brothers, Kumbhakarna and Vibhishana , performed penance on Mount Gokarna for 10,000 years and won boons from Brahma. Ravana was blessed with a boon that would make him invincible to all the creations of Brahma, except for humans.

[ 20 ] He also received weapons, a chariot, as well as the ability to shapeshift from Brahma.

[ citation needed ] According to the Ramayana , demigods approached Brahma since Ravana was causing harm on Earth. Lord Vishnu appeared and gave blessings that he will incarnate as a human (Rama) and kill Ravana since his invincibility boon did not include humans.

[ 21 ] Devotee of Shiva See also: Ravananugraha Ravananugraha theme One of the most popular images of Shiva is called "Ravananugraha", which was popular in the Gupta era . It depicts Ravana beneath Mount Kailash playing a veena made out of his head and hands, and strings made out of his tendons, while Shiva and Parvati sit on top of the mountain.

[ 22 ] [ full citation needed ] According to scriptures, Ravana once tried to lift Mount Kailash, but Shiva pushed the mountain into place and trapped Ravana beneath it. For a thousand years, the imprisoned Ravana sang Shiva Tandava Stotra , a hymn in praise of Shiva, who finally blessed him and granted him an invincible sword and a powerful linga (Shiva's iconic symbol, Atmalinga) to worship. But this incident has little to no evidence in Valmiki Ramayana.

[ 23 ] [ 22 ] Family Queen Mandodari and the women of Lanka mourning the death of Ravana. Bas-relief of 9th century Prambanan Temple, Java, Indonesia Ravana's parents were the sage Vishrava (son of Pulastya ) and Kaikesi (daughter of Sumali and Ketumati ). Ravana had seventeen maternal uncles and three maternal aunts.

Dhumraksha , Prahastha , Akampana , Vajramushti , Suparshwa and Virupaksha , a few of his maternal uncles, were generals in the Lanka army.

Kaikesi 's father, Sumali and uncle, Malyavan were instrumental in making Ravana the king of Lanka by advising him to receive boons from Brahma, defeat Kubera, and establish rakshasa rule in the three worlds .

[ 24 ] Ravana's granduncle was Malyavan , who opposed the war with Rama and Lakshmana. He also had another granduncle named Mali who was killed by Vishnu .

[ 24 ] According to Sundara Kanda of Valmiki Ramayana , Ravana had over a thousand wives, with Mandodari , the daughter of the celestial architect Maya , being his chief queen.

[ 1 ] His sons were Meghanada , Atikaya , Akshayakumara , Narantaka , Devantaka and Trishira .

Priestly ministers In some accounts, Ravana is said to have had Shukracharya , the priest of the Asuras, as his minister, and in other accounts, Brihaspati , the priest of the Devas.

[ citation needed ] One account narrates how Ravana ordered Brihaspati to recite the Chandi stava (mantras of Chandi), more specifically the Devi Mahatmya, in order to stave off defeat. According to the Krttivasa text, Ravana arranged for a peaceful yajna , and invited Brihaspati to start the recitation of Chandi.

[ 25 ] [ full citation needed ] Ravana in Sanskrit drama of Kerala , India- Kutiyattam . Artist: Guru Nātyāchārya Māni Mādhava Chākyār [ 26 ] Other legends Vishnu's cursed doorkeeper In the Bhagavata Purana , Ravana and his brother Kumbhakarna are said to be reincarnations of Jaya and Vijaya , gatekeepers at Vaikuntha (the abode of Vishnu ), and were cursed to be born on Earth for their insolence.

[ 27 ] These gatekeepers refused entry to the Sanatha Kumara monks who, because of their powers and austerity, appeared as young children. For their insolence, the monks cursed them to be expelled from Vaikuntha and to be born on Earth.

[ 27 ] [ 9 ] Vishnu agreed that they should be punished and gave them two options. First, that they could be born seven times as normal mortals and devotees of Vishnu, or be born three times as strong and powerful beings, but as enemies of Vishnu. Eager to be back with the Lord, they chose the latter option. The curse of the first birth was fulfilled by Hiranyakashipu and his brother Hiranyaksha in Satya Yuga , when they were both vanquished by earlier avatars of Vishnu (Hiranyaksha by Varaha , and Hiranyakashipu by Narasimha ). Ravana and his brother Kumbhakarna were born to fulfill the curse in their second birth as enemies of Vishnu in Treta Yuga . The curse of the third birth was fulfilled by Dantavakra and Shishupala in the Dvapara Yuga , when they both were slain by Krishna , the eighth avatar.

[ 9 ] Other conflicts Ravana had fought with the demons named Nivatakavacha along with his army for an entire year but was unable to kill them due to Brahma's boon. The war was stopped by Brahma and Ravana formed an alliance with them, he learnt several magical tricks or maya from those demons.

[ 28 ] Ravana had defeated the vanara warriors namely Hanuman, Sugriva, Neela and even Rama's brother Lakshmana twice during his war with Rama.

[ 28 ] As per the original six books of Valmiki Ramayana, only lord Rama the incarnation of Vishnu defeated Ravana and killed him after several days of single duel.

Once, upon hearing a discourse from Sage Sanatkumara , Ravana attempted to invade Vaikuntha . Only Ravana managed to enter Vaikuntha's capital, Shwetadwipa, where he was hopelessly outmatched by the inhabitants and was forced to retreat.

He killed Anaranya, the king of Ayodhya , although he cursed Ravana to be slain by Rama.

Ravana had wrestled his brother Kubera and vanquished him for the Pushpaka Vimana .

He also fought Marutta (Chakravarti King of Ushiraviga), Gadhi ( Vishwamitra 's father), Dushyanta ( Bharata 's father), Suratha (King of Vidarbha ), Gaya (Chakravarti king of Dharmaranya), and Paurava (King of Anga ).

Rape of Rambha Ravana is regarded to have once caught sight of the apsara Rambha and was filled with lust. Even as the apsara resisted his advances by asserting that she was his daughter-in-law, he raped her. When she reported this to her husband, Nalakuvara , he cursed Ravana to be unable to cause violence to any woman who did not consent to being with him, his head splitting into a number of pieces if he did so. This incident is stated to explain why Ravana could not force the abducted Sita to submit to his desire.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Worship and temples Thotsakan (Ravana)'s sculpture as a guardian of Wat Phra Kaew , Thailand Worship Ravana is worshipped as one of Shiva's most revered followers, [ 31 ] and he is even worshipped in some Shiva temples.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] [ 33 ] King Shiv Shankar built a Ravana temple in Kanpur , Uttar Pradesh . The Ravana temple is open once a year, on the day of Dashera , to perform puja for the welfare of Ravana.

[ 34 ] Ravana is also worshipped by Hindus of Bisrakh , who claim their town to be his birthplace.

[ 35 ] The Sachora Brahmins of Gujarat claim to be descendants of Ravana, and sometimes have "Ravan" as their surnames.

[ 36 ] Saraswat Brahmins from Mathura claim Ravana as a saraswat Brahmin as per his lineage.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] There has also been reference to "Ravani", the lineage of Upadhyaya Yasastrata II, who was of the Gautama gotra and Acharya Vasudatta's son, and described as "born of Ravani".

[ 39 ] [ full citation needed ] The Gondi people of central India claim to be descendants of Ravana, and have temples for him, his wife Mandodari, and their son Meghnad. They also state that Ravana was an ancient Gond king, the tenth dharmaguru of their tribe, and the eighteenth lingo (divine teacher). Annually on Dussehra , the Gondis from the village of Paraswadi carry an image of Ravana riding on an elephant in a procession.

[ 40 ] Temples The following temples in India are for Ravana as a Shiva Bhakta.

Dashanan Temple, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh [ 41 ] Ravana Temple, Bisrakh, Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh [ 41 ] Kakinada Ravana Temple, Andhra Pradesh [ 41 ] Ravangram Ravana Temple, Vidisha, Madhya Pradesh [ 41 ] Mandsaur, Madhya Pradesh [ 41 ] Mandore Ravan Temple, Jodhpur [ 42 ] Baijanath Temple, Kangra District, Himachal Pradesh [ 42 ] Ravaleshwara temple- Malavalli, mandya district of Karnataka Influence on culture and art Ravana with Hanuman in tholu bommalata , a shadow puppet tradition of Andhra Pradesh , India A carnival of Ravana Ravana-Dahan (burning effigy of Ravana) An effigy of Ravana with burning sparklers on Dusshera .

Dashehra Diwali Mela in Manchester, England, 2006 Effigies of Ravana are burned on Vijayadashami in many places throughout India to symbolize Rama's triumph over evil.

[ 43 ] Ravanahatha According to mythology, the ravanahatha , an ancient bowed string instrument , was created by Ravana and is still used as a Rajasthani folk instrument.

[ 44 ] In other religions In the Rin-spuns-pa Tibetan Ramayana, it is prophesied that Ravana will return as the Buddha incarnation of Vishnu in Kali Yuga.

The Arunachal Pradesh Tai Khamti Ramayana (Phra Chow Lamang) shows Rama as a Bodhisattva who was reborn so Ravana could torture him.

In the Laotian Buddhist text Phra Lak Phra Lam , Rama is a Bodhisattva and the embodiment of virtues, while Ravana is a Brahmin (" mahabrahma ") son of Virulaha who is highly materialistic.

[ citation needed ] In the Cambodian Buddhist text Preah Ream , Buddha is an incarnation of Rama and Ravana is a rakshasa.

[ citation needed ] In the Thai Buddhist text Ramakien , Ravana is a rakshasa [ 45 ] known as "Thotsakan" (ทศกัณฐ์, from Sanskrit दशकण्ठ, Daśakaṇṭha, "ten necks"), and is depicted with green skin.

[ citation needed ] In the Karandavyuha Sutra , Yama asks if the visitor in hell (Avalokitesvara), whom he hasn't seen yet, is a god or a demon, and whether he is Vishnu, Mahesvara , or the rakshasa Ravana.

Jainism Further information: Salakapurusa A diorama in Jain Museum of Madhuban depicting Ravana Jain accounts vary from the traditional Hindu accounts of the Ramayana. The incidents are placed at the time of the 20th Tirthankara , Munisuvrata . In Jainism, both Rama and Ravana were devout Jains.

[ 46 ] Ravana was a Vidyadhara king who had magical powers, [ 47 ] and Lakshmana, not Rama, was the one who ultimately killed Ravana.

[ 48 ] Dravidian movement Pulavar Kuzhanthai 's Ravana Kaaviyam is a panegyric on Ravana that is made up of 3,100 poetic stanzas in which Ravana is the hero. The book was released in 1946, and was subsequently banned by India's Congress led government. The ban was later lifted in 1971.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] [ 51 ] In popular culture Sri Lanka named its first satellite Raavana 1 after Ravana.

[ 52 ] Ravana appears as the primary antagonist in films and television series based on the Ramayana . Movies like Bhakta Ravana (1938) and its Telugu ( 1940 and 1958 ) and Kannada ( 1958 ) adaptations as well as television series Raavan (2006-2008) [ 53 ] are focused on the tale on Ravana. The Tamil film Raavanan (2010) and its Hindi counterpart Raavan (2010) narrate the epic from Ravana's perspective in a modern setting.

Author Anand Neelakantan published the novel Asura: Tale of the Vanquished in 2012, in which the character Ravana is depicted as a human-like figure.

Author Amish Tripathi 's 2019 novel Raavan: Enemy of Aryavarta chronicles the life of Ravana until the time he kidnaps Sita .

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] It is the third book in Tripathi's Ram Chandra Series.

[ 56 ] Hardeep Singh portrayed him in the 2024 Hindi film Singham Again .

See also Asura Bull Demon King Daitya Danava (Hinduism) Keibu Keioiba Rakshasa References ^ a b Kant, Anjani (2008).

Women and the Law . APH Publishing.

ISBN 978-81-7648-456-5 .

^ Wheeler, James Talboys (1869).

The History of India from the Earliest Ages . Vol. II The Rámáyana and the Vedic period. N. Trubner & Co. p. 281.

^ Brown, Nathan Robert (2 August 2011).

The Mythology of Supernatural: The signs and symbols behind the popular TV show . Berkley Boulevard books, Newwork.

ISBN 9781101517529 . Retrieved 12 May 2020 .

^ Justin W. Henry, Ravana's Kingdom: The Ramayana and Sri Lankan History from Below , Oxford University Press, p.3 ^ "Sunderkand explanation" (PDF) .

sunderkandsatsangsamuh.org . Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 July 2021 . Retrieved 12 May 2020 .

^ Das, Subhamoy.

"The Ramayana" .

Learn Religions . Retrieved 12 May 2020 .

Summary by Stephen Knapp ^ "Ravana" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 12 May 2020 .

^ Vālmīki; Menon, Ramesh (26 May 2004).

The Ramayana: A Modern Retelling of the Great Indian Epic . Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0-86547-695-0 .

^ a b c Pankaj, Bhavana (31 July 2019).

"Where Ravana is Vishnu's true Bhakta" .

The Statesman . Retrieved 1 July 2020 .

^ a b Aiyangar Narayan (1909) "Essays On Indo-Aryan Mythology-Vol.", p.413 ^ a b "Cologne Scan" .

sanskrit-lexicon.uni-koeln.de .

^ The Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmīki: An Epic of Ancient India. Ayodhyākāṇḍa . Motilal Banarsidass Publishers. 25 April 2007. p. 30.

ISBN 9788120831636 – via Google Books.

^ Hopkins, Edward Washburn (1915).

Epic Mythology . Strassburg, DE: K.J. Trübner. p. 142.

^ "10 Names of Ravana" .

LifeStalker . 6 October 2014 . Retrieved 18 May 2021 .

^ "When Ravana tore his head and a hand to apologize to Lord Shiva" .

www.mensxp.com . 26 October 2015 . Retrieved 5 May 2022 .

^ Valmiki .

Ramayana .

Tulsidas . Vibhishana, Lanka Kanda; Samvaad, Rama (eds.).

Ramcharitmanas .

^ Etteth, Ravi Shankar (4 March 2024).

The Brahmin . Westland.

ISBN 978-93-5776-137-6 .

^ Dutta, Prabhash K. (10 October 2016).

"Did you know? Ravana was born in Greater Noida West" .

India Today . Retrieved 2 July 2020 .

^ Rajarajan, R.K.K. (2018).

"Woven Threads of the Rāmāyaṇa The Early Āḻvārs on Brahmā and Rāvaṇa" .

Romanian Journal of Indian Studies .

2 : 9– 45.

^ Manglik, Reshu (29 September 2017).

"Happy Dussehra 2017: 11 important facts to know about Ravana, primary antagonist of epic Ramayana" .

indiatvnews.com . Retrieved 14 July 2020 .

^ Rosen, Steven (2006).

Essential Hinduism . Westport, Conn.: Praeger. pp.

68– 69.

ISBN 0-275-99006-0 .

OCLC 70775665 .

^ a b Kala pp. 38–42 ^ Rathore, Vinod.

"Know the unique story of Ravana's devotion to Shiva" .

News Track . Retrieved 14 July 2020 .

^ a b Mittal, J.P. (2006).

History of Ancient India (a new version: From 7300 BC to 4250 BC . Atlantic Publishers & Dist. p. 200.

ISBN 978-81-269-0615-4 .

^ Nagar, Shanti Lal.

Genesis and Evolution of the Rāma Kathā in Indian Art, Thought, Literature, and Culture: From the earliest period to modern times . Vol. 2.

^ Chākyār, Māni Mādhava (1996).

Nātyakalpadrumam . New Delhi, IN: Sangeet Natak Akademi. p. 6.

^ a b Ninan, M.M. (23 June 2008).

The Development of Hinduism . Madathil Mammen Ninan. p. 241.

ISBN 978-1-4382-2820-4 .

^ a b "Valmiki Ramayana" .

www.valmikiramayan.net . Retrieved 5 August 2025 .

^ Doniger, Wendy (March 2014).

On Hinduism . OUP USA. p. 535.

ISBN 978-0-19-936007-9 .

^ Vālmīki (2007).

The Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmīki: An Epic of Ancient India. Araṇyakāṇḍa . Motilal Banarsidass Publishers. p. 393.

ISBN 978-81-208-3164-3 .

^ a b "Ravana has his temples, too" . Spectrum.

The Sunday Tribune . 21 October 2007.

^ Vachaspati, S. (2005).

Ravana Brahma . Tenali, India: Rudrakavi Sahitya Peetham, Gandhi Nagar.

^ Dave, Kamalesh Kumar (2008).

Dashanan (in Hindi).

Jodhpur , India: Akshaya Jyotish Anusandan Kendra.

^ Siddiqui, Faiz (10 October 2016).

"A temple where demon king has his day" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 14 September 2018 .

^ "Only the elderly come to mourn Ravana in 'birthplace' Bisrakh" .

The Indian Express . 4 October 2014 . Retrieved 14 June 2016 .

^ People of India . Vol. 4: A–G. Oxford University Press. p. 3061.

^ "Mathura lawyer seeks ban on burning of Ravana effigies" .

The Indian Express . 26 September 2017.

^ Qureshi, Siraj (12 October 2016).

"A Dussehra without burning Ravana: This Brahmin community in Agra wants an end to practice" .

India Today .

^ " [no title cited] ".

Indian Culture: Journal of the Indian Research Institute .

15 . I.B. Corporation.

^ Rashid, Omar (24 October 2015).

"Celebrating Ravan" .

The Hindu .

^ a b c d e "Five temples of Ravana in India where demon king is worshipped" . India TV. 11 October 2016.

^ a b "Unique Ravana temples in India" . Travel guide.

Native Planet . 27 April 2018.

^ "Dussehra 2018: What is the significance Of Ravana Dahan?" . Dehli news.

NDTV.com . Retrieved 1 July 2020 .

^ "Sri Lankan revives Ravana's musical instrument" .

The Island . Sri Lanka. 9 March 2008.

^ Vyas, Lallan Prasad.

Prachi Darshan . p. 98.

^ Sharma, S.R. (1940).

Jainism and Karnataka Culture . Dharwar, IN: Karnatak Historical Research Society. p. 76.

^ Dalal, Roshen (2010).

Hinduism: An alphabetical guide .

Penguin Books India. p. 338.

ISBN 9780143414216 .

^ Ramanujan, A.K. (1991).

"Three hundred Rāmāyaṇas: Five examples and Three thoughts on Translation" . In Paula Richman (ed.).

Many Rāmāyaṇas: The diversity of a narrative tradition in south Asia . University of California Press. p. 35.

ISBN 978-0-520-07589-4 .

^ Pandian, M.S.S. (2 November 1998).

"Ravana as antidote" .

Outlook India . Archived from the original on 16 January 2018 . Retrieved 20 June 2019 .

^ Nalankilli, Thanjai (April 2006).

"Censorship of Dravidian voices in Tamil Nadu (India) in 1948, 1949" .

Tamil Tribune . Archived from the original on 8 January 2018.

^ Sivapriyan, E.T.B. (5 August 2020).

"Ram Temple: Tamilians praise Ravana on Twitter " .

Deccan Herald . Retrieved 21 November 2021 .

^ Yamunan, Sruthisagar (6 July 2019).

"Why Sri Lanka named its first-ever satellite after Ravana" .

Scroll.in . Retrieved 2 July 2020 .

^ "Zee TV enters new genre with 'Ravan' on Saturdays at 9" .

Indiantelevision.com . 16 November 2006.

^ "Amish Tripathi's 'Raavan: Enemy of Aryavarta' hits stands" .

Business Standard . 2 July 2019 . Retrieved 4 July 2019 .

^ "Amish Tripathi's 'Raavan- Enemy of Aryavarta' to release in July" .

The Times of India . 8 May 2019 . Retrieved 4 July 2019 .

^ "Excerpt: Raavan; Enemy of Aryavarta by Amish" .

Hindustan Times . 29 June 2019 . Retrieved 4 July 2019 .

Bibliography Doniger, Wendy (1993).

Purana Perennis: Reciprocity and transformation in Hindu and Jaina texts .

SUNY Press .

ISBN 9780791413814 – via Google Books.

Udayakumar, S.P. (2005).

Presenting the Past: Anxious history and ancient future in Hindutva India . Greenwood Publishing Group.

External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ravana .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Ravana .

"Rawana the Historical King of Heladiwa" .

Ramayana Research . Archived from the original on 8 July 2013.

Preceded by Kubera Emperor of Lanka Succeeded by Vibhisana v t e Ramayana Ikshvaku dynasty Dasharatha Kausalya Sumitra Kaikeyi Rama Bharata Lakshmana Shatrughna Sita Urmila Mandavi Shrutakirti Lava Kusha Vanara Hanuman Sugriva Vali Angada Tara Rumā Nala Nila Kesari Anjana Makaradhwaja Rakshasa Ravana Vibhishana Kumbhakarna Indrajit Akshayakumara Atikaya Kabandha Khara Dushana Mandodari Dhanyamalini Lavanasura Malyavan Maricha Mayasura Narantaka-Devantaka Prahasta Sarama Subahu Sulochana Sumali Shurpanakha Tataka Trijata Trishira Viradha Sages Agastya Ahalya Arundhati Bharadvaja Kambhoja Parashurama Vasishtha Vishvamitra Rishyasringa Valmiki Other figures and concepts Lakshmana rekha Jambavan Janaka Kushadhvaja Jatayu Manthara Maya Sita Sampati Shabari Shanta Shravana Kumara Vedavati Shambuka Places Ayodhya Mithila Dandakaranya Kishkindha Lanka Oshadhiparvata Books/Kandas Bala Ayodhya Aranya Kishkindha Sundara Yuddha Uttara Versions Adbhuta Ramayana Adhyathmaramayanam Adhyatma Ramayana (Sanskrit) Ananda Ramayana Bhanubhakta Ramayana (Nepali) Bhaṭṭikāvya (Sanskrit) Bilanka Ramayana (Odia) Hikayat Seri Rama Jagamohana Ramayana (Odia) Kakawin Ramayana Kamba Ramayanam (Tamil) Krittivasi Ramayana (Bengakl) Maharadia Lawana Molla Ramayanam (Telugu) Phra Lak Phra Ram Raghunatha Ramayana (Telugu) Ramakien Ramayana Kalpavruksham Ramcharitmanas (Awadhi) Ranganatha Ramayanamu Reamker Saptakanda Ramayana Sri Ramayana Darshanam Sri Ramayanamu (Telugu) Trai Bhet Yama Zatdaw Related Ramlila Portals : Hinduism India Religion Sri Lanka Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐24lbp
Cached time: 20250817043840
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.215 seconds
Real time usage: 1.462 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7598/1000000
Revision size: 34329/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 228635/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10029/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 225837/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.740/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21610144/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1191.058      1 -total
 34.35%  409.180      1 Template:Reflist
 17.86%  212.780     25 Template:Cite_book
 11.26%  134.145      1 Template:Infobox_deity
  9.33%  111.147      1 Template:Langx
  8.45%  100.588      1 Template:Infobox
  8.28%   98.643     11 Template:Fix
  7.13%   84.966      7 Template:Citation_needed
  6.10%   72.624      1 Template:Hinduism
  5.93%   70.591      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:100234:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043840 and revision id 1306033729. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ravana&oldid=1306033729 " Categories : Brahmins Characters in the Ramayana Danavas Demons in Hinduism Evil gods Hindu gods Legendary monarchs Rakshasa in the Ramayana Salakapurusa Legendary creatures with supernumerary body parts Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value CS1 Hindi-language sources (hi) Wikipedia semi-protected pages Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles having different image on Wikidata and Wikipedia Use Indian English from July 2013 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Use dmy dates from November 2020 Articles containing Sanskrit-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2022 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2020 All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from July 2022 Commons category link is on Wikidata CS1: unfit URL This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 14:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ravana 59 languages Add topic

