Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography and ecology 2 History 3 Recreation Toggle Recreation subsection 3.1 Beach activities 3.2 Vehicle access 3.3 Fishing 3.4 Cycling 3.5 Dogs and horses 3.6 Camping 4 References Toggle the table of contents Northern Pegasus Bay Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 43°19′33″S 172°41′44″E ﻿ / ﻿ 43.3259565°S 172.6956407°E ﻿ / -43.3259565; 172.6956407 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Regional park in New Zealand Northern Pegasus Bay Pegasus Bay, with Northern Pegasus Bay in the distance Location New Zealand Coordinates 43°19′33″S 172°41′44″E ﻿ / ﻿ 43.3259565°S 172.6956407°E ﻿ / -43.3259565; 172.6956407 Northern Pegasus Bay is a regional park in the northern part of Canterbury's Pegasus Bay in New Zealand's South Island . It is operated by Environment Canterbury .

[ 1 ] The regional park covers an area north of Waimakariri River , including the beaches in Kairaki , The Pines Beach , Woodend , Waikuku , Leithfield , Amberley and Ashley River / Rakahuri estuary.

[ 1 ] Geography and ecology [ edit ] The sandy and pebbly beaches, river mouths, estuaries and dunes provide a range of important habitats.

[ 1 ] The Ashley Rakahuri Estuary is major site for birds on the South Island east coast, with colonies of spotted shags / pārekareka and white-fronted terns / kahawai regularly sighted. Other rate native bird species in the reserve include banded dotterels , pied stilts , the endangered wrybill , black billed gulls / tarāpuka and black fronted terns / tarapiroe . There are also seasonal migrations of grey tailed tattlers , whimbrels , eastern curlews , bar tailed godwits and red knots .

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] The mixed sand and gravel beaches of Northern Pegasus Bay have been eroding since the 1980s. This, combined with heavy rainfall, has been affecting [ 2 ] tuatua in the bay.

[ 3 ] The Waimakariri District Council bylaw governing the park was changed in 2016 to restrict vehicles, horse riders, vehicles and dogs.

[ 4 ] The changes were aimed at improving public safety, reducing public nuisance and protecting the environment.

[ 5 ] The bylaw was further amended the following year to restrict drone usage.

[ 6 ] In November 2018, extra enforcement patrols were introduced after four-wheel drivers caused destruction to the beach.

[ 7 ] University of Canterbury research, published in November 2020, found vehicles on Northern Pegasus Bay beaches had a significant impact on the environment and other beach users. Dune health had improved after vehicle permits were required.

[ 8 ] In January 2021 Environment Canterbury dealt with three breaches of the park bylaw. It also warned people to stop recreational driving on the beach after a vehicle was seen driving at speech down the beachfront at The Pines Beach.

[ 9 ] Recreation [ edit ] Beach activities [ edit ] Swimming and surfing are safe at all beaches, except at Kairaki Beach close to the Waimakariri River mouth. A surf club patrols Waikuku, Pegasus Town and Woodend during summer months.

[ 1 ] Land sailing is allowed on sea beaches and the Ashley Rakahuri estuary, with some rules in place.

[ 1 ] Gas barbecues and picnics are allowed in areas free of vegetation, but fires are not allowed and there are no on-site barbecues.

[ 1 ] Use of drones and microlights is restricted to protect sea and marine birds.

[ 1 ] This includes a ban on using a drone or model aircraft, or taking off or landing a microlight or helicopter, in the Ashley / Rakahuri and Saltwater Creek estauarine areas.

[ 6 ] Vehicle access [ edit ] Two-wheel motorbikes and recreational driving is banned.

[ 10 ] Vehicles are only allowed on the beach to transport recreational equipment such as boats, surf boards and fishing gear, and can get caught in changing tides.

[ 11 ] Fishing [ edit ] Fishing is allowed in a range of places around the reserve.

Surfcasting is allowed along beach fronts.

Whitebaiting is permitted during the season at river mouths, but a permit is required at the Ashley River mouth.

Salmon fishing is possible at several places, particularly at Kairaki Beach.

[ 1 ] Offshore kayak fishing and boat fishing is safer in the bay than in the Canterbury Bight due to the lack of strong undertows and longshore rips. The bay is suitable for drag netting of flounder and other fish, particularly just north of Kairaki at the Waimakariri River mouth.

[ 12 ] Cycling [ edit ] There are several cycling tracks within the reserve. A short track from Amberley Beach to the Waipara River mouth, where a four-wheel-drive track continues on to the Amberley Rocks. Kowai Track runs from the Leithfield Hotel to Leithfield Beach. Tutaepatu Trail connects Waikuku Beach to Woodend Beach, connecting to the Pegasus Trail to Kairaki Beach.

[ 1 ] Dogs and horses [ edit ] Dogs must be controlled at all times, and are prohibited in the Ashley-Rakahuri estuary area.

[ 1 ] Horse riding is permitted along sections of the bay below the high tide line. However, horses are prohibited from the Ashley Rakahuri Estuary, Kowai River mouth, Waipara River mouth, and between the Waikuku Beach horse-float car-park and the north side of the Ashley Rakahuri estuary.

[ 1 ] Camping [ edit ] There are campgrounds at Kairaki, Woodend, Waikuku, Leithfield and Amberley Beaches, but freedom camping is not permitted on the beaches or shore.

[ 1 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m "Northern Pegasus Bay" .

ecan.govt.nz .

Environment Canterbury .

^ Hall, S D (1995).

Morphology and morphodynamics of the beaches of northern Pegasus Bay .

University of Canterbury . p. 155.

^ Marsden, I D (2000).

"Variability in low tide populations of tuatua, Paphies donacina, in Pegasus Bay, Canterbury, New Zealand" .

New Zealand Journal of Marine and Freshwater Research .

34 (2): 359– 37.

doi : 10.1080/00288330.2000.9516938 .

S2CID 83903512 .

^ Ineson, John (20 April 2016).

"Consultation reopens on Northern Pegasus Bay bylaw" .

stuff.co.nz .

The Christchurch Press .

^ "Summary of Key Changes" (PDF) .

ref.coastalrestorationtrust.org.nz .

Waimakariri District Council .

^ a b Salmons, Matthew (9 April 2017).

"Drone rules amended for Waimakariri district" .

stuff.co.nz .

The Christchurch Press .

^ Dangerfield, Emma (2 November 2018).

"Four-wheel-drivers ignoring rules, damaging Waimakariri beaches" .

stuff.co.nz .

The Christchurch Press .

^ Kirk, Ben (November 2020).

The Impact of Vehicles on Northern Pegasus Bay Beaches (PDF) .

Christchurch : University of Canterbury .

^ Dangerfield, Emma (26 January 2021).

"Recreational drivers warned to stay off North Canterbury beaches or risk prosecution" .

stuff.co.nz .

The Christchurch Press .

^ "Beaches & Estuary" .

waimakariri.govt.nz .

Waimakariri District Council .

^ Nutbrown, Kim (22 January 2019).

"Changing tides trap motorists on North Canterbury's Pines Beach" .

stuff.co.nz .

The Christchurch Press .

^ "Pegasus Bay fish spots" .

fishing.net.nz . The Fishing Website.

v t e Waimakariri District , New Zealand Populated places; seat: Rangiora • Waimakariri District Council Kaiapoi-Woodend Ward Kaiapoi-Tuahiwi Sub-Division Clarkville Kaiapoi Kairaki Ohapuku The Pines Beach Flaxton Tuahiwi Woodend-Sefton Sub-Division Coldstream Pegasus Saltwater Creek Sefton Waikuku Waikuku Beach Woodend Woodend Beach Oxford-Ohoka Ward Ohoka-Swannanoa Sub-Division Eyreton Eyrewell Mandeville North Ohoka Swannanoa West Eyreton Wetheral Wilsons Siding Oxford Sub-Division Ashley Gorge Bennetts Bexley Burnt Hill Carleton Coopers Creek Gammans Creek Glenburn Glentui Horrellville Lees Valley Oxford Okuku Range Rockford Starvation Hill The Warren View Hill Okuku Hills Rangiora-Ashley Ward Ashley Sub-Division Ashley Loburn Loburn North Okuku Whiterock Cust Fernside Springbank Summerhill Rangiora Sub-Division Rangiora Southbrook Schools Primary Ashgrove Ashley Clarkville Cust Fernside Kaiapoi Borough Kaiapoi North Loburn North Loburn Ohoka Pegasus Bay (formerly Waikuku ) Rangiora Borough Sefton Southbrook St Joseph's St Patrick's Swannanoa Tuahiwi West Eyreton Woodend View Hill Secondary Kaiapoi High Karanga Mai Young Parents' College Rangiora High Area Oxford Area Rangiora New Life Disestablished Primary Okuku Whiterock Facilities Dudley Park, Rangiora Mandeville Sports Centre Rangiora Recreation Ground Rangiora Airport Sports clubs Rangiora AFC Waimakariri United Electorates Historic Ashley Hurunui Kaiapoi Rangiora Current Kaikōura Waimakariri Member of Parliament for the Kaikōura electorate N Doug Kidd (1996–99) N Lynda Scott (1999–2005) N Colin King (2005–14) N Stuart Smith (2014–present) for the Waimakariri electorate L Mike Moore (1996–99) L Clayton Cosgrove (1999–2011) N Kate Wilkinson (2011–14) N Matt Doocey (2014–present) Mayor Trevor Inch (1989–95) Janice Skurr (1995–2001) Jim Gerard (2001–07) Ron Keating (2007–10) David Ayers (2010–2019) Dan Gordon (2019–present) Bodies of water Ashley Gorge Ashley River / Rakahuri Cam River / Ruataniwha Cust River Glentui River Kaiapoi River Karetu River Lilburne River Makerikeri River Okuku River Pegasus Bay Waimakariri Gorge Waimakariri River Ashley Estuary Transportation State Highway 71 Main North Line Eyreton Branch Oxford Branch Public transport in Christchurch Go Bus Christchurch Other MainPower Compass FM 104.9 bold - main town; bold & italics - minor town; normal text - locality; italics - minor locality v t e Protected areas of New Zealand Conservation parks Ahuriri Aorangi Aotea Catlins Coromandel Craigieburn Eyre Mountains/Taka Ra Haka Hakatere Hāwea Hanmer Kaimai Mamaku Kaimanawa Kaweka Ka Whata Tu O Rakihouia Korowai / Torlesse Tussocklands Lake Sumner Mavora Lakes Mount Richmond Northland North-west Nelson Oteake Pirongia Pureora Remutaka Ruahine Raukumara Ruataniwha Tararua Te Kahui Kaupeka Te Papanui Victoria Whakarewarewa Whirinaki Te Pua-a-Tāne Ecological islands Brook Waimārama Sanctuary Bushy Park Sanctuary Mountain Maungatautari Orokonui Ecosanctuary Tawharanui Open Sanctuary Zealandia Government purpose reserves Pāuatahanui Wildlife Reserve Pukaha / Mount Bruce National Wildlife Centre Historic reserves Hāpūpū / J M Barker Maungauika / North Head Puhi Kai Iti / Cook Landing Site Stony Batter Te Kuri a Paoa/Young Nick's Head Marine reserves Akaroa Auckland Islands Cape Rodney-Okakari Point Hautai Hawea (Clio Rocks) Hikurangi Horoirangi Kahukura (Gold Arm) Kahurangi Kapiti Kermadec Islands Kutu Parera (Gaer Arm) Long Bay-Okura Long Island-Kokomohua Moana Uta (Wet Jacket Arm) Motu Manawa-Pollen Island Moutere Hauriri / Bounty Islands Moutere Ihupuku / Campbell Island Moutere Mahue / Antipodes Island Parininihi Piopiotahi (Milford Sound) Pohatu / Flea Bay Poor Knights Islands Punakaiki Taipari Roa (Elizabeth Island) Tapuae Taputeranga Taumoana (Five Finger Peninsula) Tauparikākā Tāwharanui Te Angiangi Te Awaatu Channel (The Gut) Te Hapua (Sutherland Sound) Te Matuku Te Paepae o Aotea (Volkner Rocks) Te Tapuwae o Hua (Long Sound) Te Tapuwae o Rongokako Tonga Island Tuhua (Mayor Island) Ulva Island-Te Wharawhara Waiau Glacier Coast Westhaven (Te Tai Tapu) Whanganui-A-Hei (Cathedral Cove) Whangarei Harbour National parks Current Abel Tasman Aoraki / Mount Cook Arthur's Pass Egmont Fiordland Kahurangi Mount Aspiring Nelson Lakes Paparoa Rakiura Tongariro Westland Tai Poutini Whanganui Former Te Urewera National reserves Hāpūpū / J M Barker Lewis Pass Puhi Kai Iti / Cook Landing Site Subantarctic Islands Te Kuri a Paoa/Young Nick's Head Recreation reserves Bastion Point Otago Central Rail Trail Truby King Recreation Reserve Regional parks Akatarawa Ambury Ashley Rakahuri Ātiu Creek Auckland Botanic Gardens Āwhitu Battle Hill Farm Belmont Duder East Harbour Ferrymead Glenfern Sanctuary Hunua Ranges Kaitoke Lake Tekapo Long Bay Mahurangi Motukorea Browns Island Muriwai Mutukaroa / Hamlins Hill Ōmana Onekawa Te Mawhai Orere Point Pākiri Pakuratahi Papamoa Hills Queen Elizabeth Scandrett Shakespear Tāpapakanga Tāwharanui Tawhitokino Te Ārai Te Muri Te Rau Pūriri Waharau Waimakariri River Wainuiomata Regional Park Waitākere Ranges Waitawa Wenderholm Whakanewha Whakatīwai Scenic reserves Alice Eaves Reserve Bruce Park Goldie Bush Peel Forest Park Waro Limestone Wetlands Awarua Wetland Farewell Spit Firth of Thames Kopuatai Peat Dome Manawatū Estuary Pāuatahanui Wildlife Reserve Wairarapa Moana Whangamarino Other areas Fensham Reserve Hutt Water Collection Area Northern Pegasus Bay Wainuiomata Water Collection Area Whitireia Other Amenity area Ecological area Sanctuary area Wilderness area Wildlife management area Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Northern_Pegasus_Bay&oldid=1292579249 " Categories : Parks in the Canterbury Region Regional parks of New Zealand Tourist attractions in the Canterbury Region Protected areas of the Canterbury Region Waimakariri District Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use New Zealand English from April 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in New Zealand English Use dmy dates from December 2021 Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 27 May 2025, at 19:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Northern Pegasus Bay Add languages Add topic

