Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Hominidae 1.2 Homininae 1.3 Homo 1.3.1 Tool-use 1.4 Homo sapiens 1.4.1 Homo sapiens intelligence 2 Models Toggle Models subsection 2.1 Massive modularity of mind 2.2 Social brain hypothesis 2.2.1 Criticism 2.3 Cultural intelligence hypothesis 2.3.1 Overview 2.3.2 Further empirical evidence 2.3.3 Transformative cultural intelligence hypothesis 2.4 Reduction in aggression 2.5 Sexual selection 2.5.1 Critique 2.6 Intelligence as a disease-resistance sign 2.7 Ecological dominance-social competition model 2.8 Intelligence dependent on brain size 2.8.1 Expanded cortical regions 2.9 Cellular, genetic, and circuitry changes 2.10 Group selection 2.11 Nutritional status 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Evolution of human intelligence 12 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Français עברית ქართული 日本語 پښتو Português کوردی 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The evolution of human intelligence is closely tied to the evolution of the human brain and to the origin of language . The timeline of human evolution spans approximately seven million years, [ 1 ] from the separation of the genus Pan until the emergence of behavioral modernity by 50,000 years ago. The first three million years of this timeline concern Sahelanthropus , the following two million concern Australopithecus and the final two million span the history of the genus Homo in the Paleolithic era.

Many traits of human intelligence, such as empathy , theory of mind , mourning , ritual , and the use of symbols and tools , are somewhat apparent in other great apes , although they are in much less sophisticated forms than what is found in humans like the great ape language .

History [ edit ] Hominidae [ edit ] Hominin timeline This box: view talk edit −10 — – −9 — – −8 — – −7 — – −6 — – −5 — – −4 — – −3 — – −2 — – −1 — – 0 — Miocene Pliocene Pleistocene Hominini Nakalipithecus Samburupithecus Ouranopithecus ( Ou. turkae ) ( Ou. macedoniensis ) Chororapithecus Oreopithecus Sivapithecus Sahelanthropus Graecopithecus Orrorin ( O. praegens ) ( O. tugenensis ) Ardipithecus ( Ar. kadabba ) ( Ar. ramidus ) Australopithecus ( Au. africanus ) ( Au. afarensis ) ( Au. anamensis ) H. habilis ( H. rudolfensis ) ( Au. garhi ) H. erectus ( H. antecessor ) ( H. ergaster ) ( Au. sediba ) H. heidelbergensis Homo sapiens Neanderthals Denisovans ← Earlier apes ← Gorilla split ← Chimpanzee split ← Earliest bipedal ← Earliest sign of Ardipithecus ← Earliest sign of Australopithecus ← Earliest stone tools ← Earliest sign of Homo ← Dispersal beyond Africa ← Earliest fire / cooking ← Earliest rock art ← Earliest clothes ← Modern humans H o m i n i d s P a r a n t h r o p u s ( million years ago ) Further information: Primate empathy , Great ape language , and Lucy Temerlin The great apes (Hominidae) show some cognitive and empathic abilities.

Chimpanzees can make tools and use them to acquire foods and for social displays ; they have mildly complex hunting strategies requiring cooperation, influence and rank; they are status conscious, manipulative and capable of deception ; they can learn to use symbols and understand aspects of human language including some relational syntax , concepts of number and numerical sequence.

[ 2 ] One common characteristic that is present in species of "high degree intelligence" (i.e. dolphins, great apes, and humans - Homo sapiens ) is a brain of enlarged size. Additionally, these species have a more developed neocortex, a folding of the cerebral cortex, and von Economo neurons . Said neurons are linked to social intelligence and the ability to gauge what another is thinking or feeling and are also present in bottlenose dolphins.

[ 3 ] Homininae [ edit ] Chimpanzee mother and baby Around 10 million years ago , the Earth's climate entered a cooler and drier phase, which led eventually to the Quaternary glaciation beginning some 2.6 million years ago. One consequence of this was that the north African tropical forest began to retreat, being replaced first by open grasslands and eventually by desert (the modern Sahara ). As their environment changed from continuous forest to patches of forest separated by expanses of grassland, some primates adapted to a partly or fully ground-dwelling life where they were exposed to predators , such as the big cats , from whom they had previously been safe.

These environmental pressures caused selection to favor bipedalism - walking on hind legs. This gave the Homininae's eyes greater elevation, the ability to see approaching danger further off, and a more efficient means of locomotion.

[ citation needed ] It also freed their arms from the task of walking and made the hands available for tasks such as gathering food. At some point the bipedal primates developed handedness , giving them the ability to pick up sticks, bones and stones and use them as weapons , or as tools for tasks such as killing smaller animals, cracking nuts , or cutting up carcasses . In other words, these primates developed the use of primitive technology . Bipedal tool-using primates from the subtribe Hominina date back to as far as about 5 to 7 million years ago, such as one of the earliest species, Sahelanthropus tchadensis .

From about 5 million years ago, the hominin brain began to develop rapidly in both size and differentiation of function.
There has been a gradual increase in brain volume as humans progressed along the timeline of evolution (see Homininae ), starting from about 600 cm 3 in Homo habilis up to 1500 cm 3 in Homo neanderthalensis . Thus, in general there's a positive correlation between brain volume and intelligence.

[ 4 ] However, modern Homo sapiens have a brain volume slightly smaller (1250 cm 3 ) than neanderthals, and the Flores hominids ( Homo floresiensis ), nicknamed hobbits, had a cranial capacity of about 380 cm 3 (considered small for a chimpanzee) about a third of that of Homo erectus . It is proposed that they evolved from H. erectus as a case of insular dwarfism. With their three-times-smaller brain, the Flores hominids apparently used fire and made tools as sophisticated as those of their ancestor H. erectus .

Homo [ edit ] Further information: Homo Roughly 2.4 million years ago Homo habilis had appeared in East Africa : the first known human species, and the first known to make stone tools , yet the disputed findings of signs of tool use from even earlier ages and from the same vicinity as multiple Australopithecus fossils may put to question how much more intelligent than its predecessors H. habilis was.

The use of tools conferred a crucial evolutionary advantage, and required a larger and more sophisticated brain to co-ordinate the fine hand movements required for this task.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Our knowledge of the complexity of behaviour of Homo habilis is not limited to stone culture; they also had habitual therapeutic use of toothpicks.

[ 7 ] A larger brain requires a larger skull , and thus is accompanied by other morphological and biological evolutionary changes. One such change required for the female to have a wider birth canal for the newborn's larger skull to pass through. The solution to this was to give birth at an early stage of fetal development, before the skull grew too large to pass through the birth canal. Other accompanying adaptations were the smaller maxillary and mandibular bones, smaller and weaker facial muscles, and shortening and flattening of the face resulting in modern-human's complex cognitive and linguistic capabilities as well as the ability to create facial expressions and smile.

[ 6 ] Consequentially, dental issues in modern humans arise from these morphological changes that are exacerbated by a shift from nomadic to sedentary lifestyles.

[ 6 ] Humans' increasingly sedentary lifestyle to protect their more vulnerable offspring led them to grow even more dependent on tool-making to compete with other animals and other humans, and rely less on body size and strength.

[ 6 ] About 200,000 years ago Europe and the Middle East were colonized by Neanderthals , extinct by 39,000 years ago following the appearance of modern humans in the region from 40,000 to 45,000 years ago.

History of humans In the Late Pliocene, hominins were set apart from modern great apes and other closely related organisms by the anatomical evolutionary changes resulting in bipedalism, or the ability to walk upright.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Characteristics such as a supraorbital torus, or prominent eyebrow ridge, and flat face also makes Homo erectus distinguishable. Their brain size substantially sets them apart from closely related species, such as H. habilis , as seen by an increase in average cranial capacity of 1000 cc. Compared to earlier species, H. erectus developed keels and small crests in the skull showing morphological changes of the skull to support increased brain capacity. It is believed that Homo erectus were, anatomically, modern humans as they are very similar in size, weight, bone structure, and nutritional habits. Over time, however, human intelligence developed in phases that is interrelated with brain physiology, cranial anatomy and morphology, and rapidly changing climate and environments.

[ 9 ] Drawing of Acheulean handaxe from Spain from front, back, side, and top profile Tool-use [ edit ] The study of the evolution of cognition relies on the archaeological record made up of assemblages of material culture, particularly from the Paleolithic Period , to make inferences about our ancestors' cognition. Paleo-anthropologists from the past half-century have had the tendency of reducing stone tool artifacts to physical products of the metaphysical activity taking place in the brains of hominins. Recently, a new approach called 4E cognition (see Models for other approaches) has been developed by cognitive archaeologists Lambros Malafouris , Thomas G. Wynn , and Karenleigh A. Overmann , to move past the "internal" and "external" dichotomy by treating stone tools as objects with agency in both providing insight to hominin cognition and having a role in the development of early hominin cognition.

[ 10 ] The 4E cognition approach describes cognition as embodied, embedded, enactive, and extended, to understand the interconnected nature between the mind, body, and environment.

[ 10 ] There are four major categories of tools created and used throughout human evolution that are associated with the corresponding evolution of the brain and intelligence. Stone tools such as flakes and cores used by Homo habilis for cracking bones to extract marrow, known as the Oldowan culture, make up the oldest major category of tools from about 2.5 and 1.6 million years ago. The development of stone tool technology suggests that our ancestors had the ability to hit cores with precision, taking into account the force and angle of the strike, and the cognitive planning and capacity to envision a desired outcome.

[ 11 ] Stone tools from the Paleolithic Period , also known as the Stone Age, are indicative of cognitive advancements throughout human evolutionary history.

Acheulean culture, associated with Homo erectus , is composed of bifacial, or double-sided, hand-axes, that "requires more planning and skill on the part of the toolmaker; he or she would need to be aware of principles of symmetry".

[ 11 ] In addition, some sites show evidence that selection of raw materials involved travel, advanced planning, cooperation, and thus communication with other hominins.

[ 11 ] The third major category of tool industry marked by its innovation in tool-making technique and use is the Mousterian culture. Compared to previous tool cultures, in which tools were regularly discarded after use, Mousterian tools, associated with Neanderthals , were specialized, built to last, and "formed a true toolkit".

[ 11 ] The making of these tools, called the Levallois technique , involves a multi-step process which yields several tools. In combination with other data, the formation of this tool culture for hunting large mammals in groups evidences the development of speech for communication and complex planning capabilities.

[ 11 ] While previous tool cultures did not show great variation, the tools of early modern Homo sapiens are robust in the amount of artifacts and diversity in utility. There are several styles associated with this category of the Upper Paleolithic , such as blades, boomerangs, atlatls (spear throwers), and archery made from varying materials of stone, bone, teeth, and shell. Beyond use, some tools have been shown to have served as signifiers of status and group membership. The role of tools for social uses signal cognitive advancements such as complex language and abstract relations to things.

[ 11 ] Homo sapiens [ edit ] " The Lion-man ", found in the Hohlenstein-Stadel cave of Germany's Swabian Alb and dated to 40,000 years ago, is associated with the Aurignacian culture and is the oldest known anthropomorphic animal figurine in the world.

Dates approximate, consult articles for details ( From 2,000,000 BC to 2013 AD in (partial) exponential notation ) See also : Java Man (−1.75e+06), Yuanmou Man (−1.75e+06: -0.73e+06), Lantian Man (−1.7e+06), Nanjing Man (- 0.6e+06), Tautavel Man (- 0.5e+06), Peking Man (- 0.4e+06), Solo Man (- 0.4e+06), and Peștera cu Oase (- 0.378e+05) Homo sapiens intelligence [ edit ] Further information: Intelligence , Archaic humans , Behavioral modernity , and Early human migration The eldest findings of Homo sapiens in Jebel Irhoud , Morocco date back c.

300,000 years [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Fossils of Homo sapiens were found in East Africa which are c. 200,000 years old. It is unclear to what extent these early modern humans had developed language , music , religion , etc. The cognitive tradeoff hypothesis proposes that there was an evolutionary tradeoff between short-term working memory and complex language skills over the course of human evolution.

[ 14 ] According to proponents of the Toba catastrophe theory , the climate in non-tropical regions of the earth experienced a sudden freezing about 70,000 years ago, because of a huge explosion of the Toba volcano that filled the atmosphere with volcanic ash for several years. This reduced the human population to less than 10,000 breeding pairs in equatorial Africa, from which all modern humans are descended. Being unprepared for the sudden change in climate, the survivors were those intelligent enough to invent new tools and ways of keeping warm and finding new sources of food (for example, adapting to ocean fishing based on prior fishing skills used in lakes and streams that became frozen).

[ citation needed ] Around 80,000–100,000 years ago, three main lines of Homo sapiens diverged, bearers of mitochondrial haplogroup L1 (mtDNA) / A (Y-DNA) colonizing Southern Africa (the ancestors of the Khoisan / Capoid peoples), bearers of haplogroup L2 (mtDNA) / B (Y-DNA) settling Central and West Africa (the ancestors of Niger–Congo and Nilo-Saharan speaking peoples), while the bearers of haplogroup L3 remained in East Africa.

[ citation needed ] The "Great Leap Forward" leading to full behavioral modernity sets in only after this separation. Rapidly increasing sophistication in tool-making and behaviour is apparent from about 80,000 years ago, and the migration out of Africa follows towards the very end of the Middle Paleolithic , some 60,000 years ago. Fully modern behaviour, including figurative art , music , self-ornamentation, trade , burial rites etc. is evident by 30,000 years ago. The oldest unequivocal examples of prehistoric art date to this period, the Aurignacian and the Gravettian periods of prehistoric Europe , such as the Venus figurines and cave painting ( Chauvet Cave ) and the earliest musical instruments (the bone pipe of Geissenklösterle , Germany , dated to about 36,000 years ago).

[ 15 ] Motor and sensory areas of the cerebral cortex; dashed areas shown are commonly left hemisphere dominant.

The human brain has evolved gradually over the passage of time; a series of incremental changes occurring as a result of external stimuli and conditions. It is crucial to keep in mind that evolution operates within a limited framework at a given point in time. In other words, the adaptations that a species can develop are not infinite and are defined by what has already taken place in the evolutionary timeline of a species. Given the immense anatomical and structural complexity of the brain, its evolution (and the congruent evolution of human intelligence), can only be reorganized in a finite number of ways. The majority of said changes occur either in terms of size or in terms of developmental timeframes.

[ 16 ] The cerebral cortex is divided into four lobes (frontal, parietal, occipital, and temporal) each with specific functions. The cerebral cortex is significantly larger in humans than in any other animal and is responsible for higher thought processes such as reasoning, abstract thinking, and decision making.

[ 17 ] Another characteristic that makes humans special and sets them apart from any other species is our ability to produce and understand complex, syntactic language. The cerebral cortex, particularly in the temporal, parietal, and frontal lobes, are populated with neural circuits dedicated to language. There are two main areas of the brain commonly associated with language, namely: Wernicke's area and Broca's area . The former is responsible for the understanding of speech and the latter for the production of speech. Homologous regions have been found in other species (i.e. Area 44 and 45 have been studied in chimpanzees) but they are not as strongly related to or involved in linguistic activities as in humans.

[ 18 ] Models [ edit ] Massive modularity of mind [ edit ] Each card has a number on one side, and a patch of color on the other. Which card or cards must be turned over to test the idea that if a card shows an even number on one face, then its opposite face is blue?

Each card has an age on one side, and a drink on the other. Which card or cards must be turned over to test the idea that if someone is drinking alcohol then they must be over 18?

In 2004, psychologist Satoshi Kanazawa argued that g was a domain-specific , species-typical , information processing psychological adaptation , [ 19 ] and in 2010, Kanazawa argued that g correlated only with performance on evolutionarily unfamiliar rather than evolutionarily familiar problems, proposing what he termed the "Savanna-IQ interaction hypothesis".

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] In 2006, Psychological Review published a comment reviewing Kanazawa's 2004 article by psychologists Denny Borsboom and Conor Dolan that argued that Kanazawa's conception of g was empirically unsupported and purely hypothetical and that an evolutionary account of g must address it as a source of individual differences .

[ 22 ] In response to Kanazawa's 2010 article, psychologists Scott Barry Kaufman , Colin G. DeYoung , Deirdre Reis, and Jeremy R. Gray gave 112 subjects a 70-item computerized version of the Wason selection task (a logic puzzle ) in a social relations context as proposed by Leda Cosmides and John Tooby in The Adapted Mind , [ 23 ] and found instead that "performance on non-arbitrary, evolutionarily familiar problems is more strongly related to general intelligence than performance on arbitrary, evolutionarily novel problems".

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Peter Cathcart Wason originally demonstrated that not even 10% of subjects found the correct solution and his finding was replicated.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Psychologists Patricia Cheng , Keith Holyoak , Richard E. Nisbett , and Lindsay M. Oliver demonstrated experimentally that subjects who have completed semester-long college courses in propositional calculus do not perform better on the Wason selection task than subjects who do not complete such college courses.

[ 28 ] Tooby and Cosmides originally proposed a social relations context for the Wason selection task as part of a larger computational theory of social exchange after they began reviewing the previous experiments about the task beginning in 1983.

[ 23 ] Despite other experimenters finding that some contexts elicited more correct subject responses than others, no theoretical explanation for differentiating between them was identified until Tooby and Cosmides proposed that disparities in subjects performance on contextualized versus non-contextualized variations of the task was an artifact of the task measuring a specialized cheater-detection module .

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Tooby and Cosmides later noted that whether there are evolved cognitive mechanisms for the content-blind rules of logical inference is disputed, [ 31 ] [ 32 ] and consistently noted that a body of research about the Wason selection task had concluded that cognitive adaptations for social exchange were not a by-product of general-purpose reasoning mechanisms, domain-general learning mechanisms, or g .

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] Relatedly, economist Thomas Sowell has noted that numerous studies finding disparities between the mean test scores of ethnic groups on intelligence tests have found that ethnic groups with lower mean test scores have tended to perform worst on spatial , non-verbal, or abstract reasoning test items.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] Writing after the completion of the Human Genome Project in 2003, psychologist Earl B. Hunt noted in 2011 that no genes related to differences in cognitive skills across various racial and ethnic groups had ever been discovered.

[ 38 ] In 2012, American Psychologist published a review by Nisbett, psychologists Joshua Aronson , Clancy Blair , Diane F. Halpern , and Eric Turkheimer , economist William Dickens , and philosopher James R. Flynn of findings since the publication of the 1995 American Psychological Association report on intelligence that concluded that almost no single-nucleotide genetic polymorphisms that have been discovered are consistently associated with variation in IQ in the normal range, and that adoption research on race and intelligence showed that differences could be entirely accounted for by environmental factors.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] In 2021, subsequent research using polygenic scores for educational attainment and cognitive performance in African and European samples from the 1000 Genomes Project found no evidence of divergent selection by race and a statistically insignificant contribution to racial differences in IQ.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] Flynn had argued earlier that the Flynn effect presented multiple paradoxes for g as a psychological trait with a heritable basis because the increases in the statistical average scores among later birth year cohorts born in the 20th century were occurring without sufficient increases in vocabulary size, general knowledge, and ability to solve arithmetical problems, and that the increases were so large that they would imply that the statistically average members of the birth year cohorts in the late 19th century and early 20th century (the Lost Generation and the Greatest Generation ) would have been intellectually disabled (as well as more distant human ancestors).

[ 43 ] Hunt noted that the latter paradox would imply that half of the soldiers who served in the U.S. military during World War II would not pass the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery in 2008.

[ 44 ] Flynn proposed that these paradoxes could be answered by the increasing use of abstraction, logic, and scientific reasoning to address problems, [ 45 ] while Nisbett argued that the Flynn effect was largely attributable to increases in formal education among human populations during the 20th century.

[ 46 ] In 2010, psychologist David Marks found through 8 statistical analyses that average population IQ scores across race, time, and nationality correlated with literacy rates between a range of 0.79 and 0.99, which led to the conclusion that both the Flynn effect and racial differences in mean scores on intelligence tests were statistical artifacts of uncontrolled variation in literacy rates due to test performance requiring literacy.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] However, in reference to theoretical issues with constructivism in mathematics education and the failure of whole language in literacy education, psychologist David C. Geary and cognitive scientist Steven Pinker have noted that literacy, numeracy , and formal mathematical and logical reasoning are not psychological adaptations but biologically secondary cognitive skills (i.e.

acquired characteristics ) that require extensive practice after formal, explicit, and direct instruction in contrast with natural language and number sense , since language acquisition and numerosity develop automatically and unconsciously due to specialized neurobiological systems for language and numerical cognition which the biologically secondary cognitive skills lack.

[ 53 ] Pinker has also noted that writing is not a cultural universal since writing systems were independently invented only a few times in human history and most societies documented by ethnographers lacked writing systems, [ 54 ] while literacy rates in European countries did not begin to exceed 50 percent until the 17th century since the movable-type printing press was not invented until the 15th century.

[ 55 ] Similarly to the lack of improvement in performance on the Wason selection task by college students that take courses in propositional calculus, Pinker referenced the response by professional mathematicians and statisticians to the solution to the Monty Hall problem published in Parade in 1990 in noting the dominance of automatic processes over controlled processes for formal logical reasoning following the dual process model proposed by psychologists Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky .

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] While Pinker has suggested that the evolution of human intelligence could be explained by intelligence itself being the product of metaphor (stemming from the ability to create arbitrary morphemes ) and combinatorial grammar (allowing nesting of verb phrases in syntax ) that together enable the infinite composition of sentences , [ 58 ] [ 59 ] [ 60 ] Pinker has also argued that the Flynn effect is likely caused by increased amounts of formal education in addition to other factors.

[ 61 ] Noting that Kaufman and psychologist Robert Sternberg identified a lack of consensus about how to define human intelligence, [ 62 ] psychologists Jay Joseph and Ken Richardson have argued that the construct validity of intelligence tests is questionable due to definitions of intelligence being based on the intuitions of psychologists, that tests measure formal education more than innate intelligence because test items are included because of how such items reflect academic performance, and that the Flynn effect provides evidence against heritability causing even within-group differences in general intelligence due to the confounding effect of shared birth dates and nationalities between pairs of identical twins reared apart from different generations in test performance.

[ 63 ] While Hunt defended the methodology of twin and adoption research in behavioral genetics , [ 64 ] Hunt also noted that the only candidate genes behavioral geneticists had proposed being related to g were associated with below average IQ scores and that none had been identified that were associated with above average IQ scores.

[ 44 ] Although Hunt expressed some reservations about the construct validity of g (referencing the research of psychologist Louis Leon Thurstone ) and acknowledged the impact of literacy on IQ test performance, [ 65 ] Hunt defended the fluid and crystallized intelligence models of g in psychometrics , [ 66 ] and argued that alternatives to psychometric models (such as the theory of multiple intelligences and the triarchic theory of intelligence ) lacked empirical support.

[ 67 ] Hunt also argued that research on the evolution of the brain showed evidence for g as a general problem-solving mechanism.

[ 68 ] Conversely, Pinker has argued that research in cognitive neuroscience has shown that the brain is more characterized by functional specialization .

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] While Geary has attempted to integrate g with evolutionary psychology , [ 71 ] Tooby, Cosmides, and Pinker have all argued that the human mind is better understood as a system of dedicated intelligences and domain-specific learning systems that are adaptively specialized rather than characterized by a general intelligence factor and a domain-general learning system that enables the passive cultural learning and socialization of a blank slate .

[ 76 ] Tooby and Cosmides suggested that the human mind does have a domain-general, content-independent, and general-purpose improvisational intelligence that resembles general intelligence, and which possibly evolved to generate solutions in novel situations where the dedicated intelligences did not produce an optimal response.

[ 77 ] [ 25 ] [ 24 ] However, in light of the frame problem in artificial intelligence and because all adaptations require selection pressure from recurrent problems, Tooby and Cosmides argue that a complete blank slate mind entirely shaped by general intelligence following the standard social science model is not computationally capable of performing the cognitive tasks or solving the adaptive problems that the human mind evolved to perform and solve, such as visual perception , language acquisition, recognizing emotional expressions , mate choice , cultural learning, and cheater-detection in social exchange.

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] [ 75 ] Social brain hypothesis [ edit ] Further information: Dunbar's number The social brain hypothesis was proposed by British anthropologist Robin Dunbar , who argues that human intelligence did not evolve primarily as a means to solve ecological problems, but rather as a means of surviving and reproducing in large and complex social groups.

[ 80 ] [ 81 ] Some of the behaviors associated with living in large groups include reciprocal altruism, deception, and coalition formation. These group dynamics relate to Theory of Mind or the ability to understand the thoughts and emotions of others, though Dunbar himself admits in the same book that it is not the flocking itself that causes intelligence to evolve (as shown by ruminants ).

[ 80 ] Dunbar argues that when the size of a social group increases, the number of different relationships in the group may increase by orders of magnitude. Chimpanzees live in groups of about 50 individuals whereas humans typically have a social circle of about 150 people, which is also the typical size of social communities in small societies and personal social networks; [ 82 ] this number is now referred to as Dunbar's number . In addition, there is evidence to suggest that the success of groups is dependent on their size at foundation, with groupings of around 150 being particularly successful, potentially reflecting the fact that communities of this size strike a balance between the minimum size of effective functionality and the maximum size for creating a sense of commitment to the community.

[ 82 ] According to the social brain hypothesis, when hominids started living in large groups, selection favored greater intelligence. As evidence, Dunbar cites a relationship between neocortex size and group size of various mammals.

[ 80 ] Criticism [ edit ] Phylogenetic studies of brain sizes in primates show that while diet predicts primate brain size, sociality does not predict brain size when corrections are made for cases in which diet affects both brain size and sociality. The exceptions to the predictions of the social intelligence hypothesis, which that hypothesis has no predictive model for, are successfully predicted by diets that are either nutritious but scarce or abundant but poor in nutrients.

[ 83 ] Researchers have found that frugivores tend to exhibit larger brain size than folivores .

[ 83 ] One potential explanation for this finding is that frugivory requires "extractive foraging", or the process of locating and preparing hard-shelled foods, such as nuts, insects, and fruit.

[ 84 ] Extractive foraging requires higher cognitive processing, which could help explain larger brain size.

[ 84 ] However, other researchers argue that extractive foraging was not a catalyst in the evolution of primate brain size, demonstrating that some non primates exhibit advanced foraging techniques.

[ 84 ] Other explanations for the positive correlation between brain size and frugivory highlight how the high-energy, frugivore diet facilitates fetal brain growth and requires spatial mapping to locate the embedded foods.

[ 83 ] Meerkats have far more social relationships than their small brain capacity would suggest. Another hypothesis is that it is actually intelligence that causes social relationships to become more complex, because intelligent individuals are more difficult to learn to know.

[ 85 ] There are also studies that show that Dunbar's number is not the upper limit of the number of social relationships in humans either.

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] The hypothesis that it is brain capacity that sets the upper limit for the number of social relationships is also contradicted by computer simulations that show simple unintelligent reactions to be sufficient to emulate "ape politics" [ 88 ] and by the fact that some social insects such as the paper wasp do have hierarchies in which each individual has its place (as opposed to herding without social structure) and maintains their hierarchies in groups of approximately 80 individuals with their brains smaller than that of any mammal.

[ 89 ] Insects provide an opportunity to explore this since they exhibit an unparalleled diversity of social forms to permanent colonies containing many individuals working together as a collective organism and have evolved an impressive range of cognitive skills despite their small nervous systems.

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] [ 92 ] Social insects are shaped by ecology, including their social environment. Studies aimed to correlating brain volume to complexity have failed to identify clear correlations between sociality and cognition because of cases like social insects. In humans, societies are usually held together by the ability of individuals to recognize features indicating group membership. Social insects, likewise, often recognize members of their colony allowing them to defend against competitors. Ants do this by comparing odors which require fine discrimination of multicomponent variable cues.

[ 93 ] Studies suggest this recognition is achieved through simple cognitive operations that do not involve long-term memory but through sensory adaptation or habituation.

[ 94 ] In honeybees, their symbolic 'dance' is a form of communication that they use to convey information with the rest of their colony. In an even more impressive social use of their dance language, bees indicate suitable nest locations to a swarm in search of a new home. The swarm builds a consensus from multiple 'opinions' expressed by scouts with different information, to finally agree on a single destination to which the swarm relocates.

[ 95 ] Cultural intelligence hypothesis [ edit ] Overview [ edit ] Similar to, but distinct from the social brain hypothesis, is the cultural intelligence or cultural brain hypothesis, which dictates that human brain size, cognitive ability, and intelligence have increased over generations due to cultural information from a mechanism known as social learning.

[ 96 ] The hypothesis also predicts a positive correlation between species with a higher dependency and more frequent opportunities for social learning and overall cognitive ability.

[ 97 ] This is because social learning allows species to develop cultural skills and strategies for survival; in this way it can be said that heavily cultural species should in theory be more intelligent.

[ 98 ] Humans have been widely acknowledged as the most intelligent species on the planet, with big brains with ample cognitive abilities and processing power which outcompete all other species.

[ 99 ] In fact, humans have shown an enormous increase in brain size and intelligence over millions of years of evolution.

[ 100 ] This is because humans have been referred to as an 'evolved cultural species'; one that has an unrivalled reliance on culturally transmitted knowledge due to the social environment around us.

[ 101 ] This is down to social transmission of information which spreads significantly faster in human populations relative to changes in genetics.

[ 102 ] Put simply, humans are the most cultural species there is, and are therefore the most intelligent species there is. The key point when concerning evolution of intelligence is that this cultural information has been consistently transmitted across generations to build vast amounts of cultural skills and knowledge throughout the human race.

[ 103 ] Dunbar's social brain hypothesis on the other hand dictates that our brains evolved primarily due to complex social interactions in groups, [ 104 ] so in this way the two hypotheses are distinct from each other in that the cultural intelligence hypothesis focuses more on an in increase in intelligence from socially transmitted information. A shift in focus from 'social' interactions to learning strategies can be seen through this.

[ 97 ] The hypothesis can also be seen to contradict the idea of human 'general intelligence' by emphasising the process of cultural skills and information being learned from others.

[ 105 ] In 2018, Muthukrishna and researchers constructed a model based on the cultural intelligence hypothesis which revealed relationships between brain size, group size, social learning and mating structures.

[ 97 ] The model had three underlying assumptions: Brain size, complexity and organisation were grouped into one variable A larger brain results in larger capacity for adaptive knowledge More adaptive knowledge increases fitness of organisms Using evolutionary simulation, the researchers were able to confirm the existence of hypothesised relationships. Results concerning the cultural intelligence hypothesis model showed that larger brains can store more information and adaptive knowledge, thus supporting larger groups. This abundance of adaptive knowledge can then be used for frequent social learning opportunities.

Further empirical evidence [ edit ] As previously mentioned, social learning is the foundation of the cultural intelligence hypothesis and can be described simplistically as learning from others. It involves behaviours such as imitation, observational learning, influences from family and friends and explicit teaching from others.

[ 106 ] What sets humans apart from other species is that, due to our emphasis on culturally acquired information, humans have evolved to already possess significant social learning abilities from infancy. Neurological studies on nine month old infants were conducted by researchers in 2012 to demonstrate this phenomenon.

[ 107 ] The study involved infants observing a caregiver making a sound with a rattle over a period of one week. The brains of the infants were monitored throughout the study. Researchers found that the infants were able to activate neural pathways associated with making a sound with the rattle without actually doing the action themselves, showing human social learning in action- infants were able to understand the effects of a particular action simply by observing the performance of the action by someone else. Not only does this study demonstrate the neural mechanisms of social learning, but it also demonstrates our inherent ability to acquire cultural skills from those around us from the very start of our lives- it therefore shows strong support for the cultural intelligent hypothesis.

Various studies have been conducted to show the cultural intelligence hypothesis in action on a wider scale. One particular study in 2016 investigated two orangutan species, including the more social Sumatran species and the less sociable Bornean species. The aim was to test the notion that species with a higher frequency of opportunities for social learning should evolve to be more intelligent.

[ 108 ] Results showed that the Sumatrans consistently performed better in cognitive tests compared to the less sociable Borneans. The Sumatrans also showed greater inhibition and more cautious behaviour within their habitat. This was one of the first studies to show evidence for the cultural intelligence hypothesis in a non human species- frequency of learning opportunities had gradually produced differences in cognitive abilities between the two species.

Transformative cultural intelligence hypothesis [ edit ] A study in 2018 proposed an altered variant of the original version of the hypothesis called the 'transformative cultural intelligence hypothesis'.

[ 109 ] The research involved investigating four year old's problem solving skills in different social contexts. The children were asked to extract a floating object from a tube using water. Nearly all were unsuccessful without cues, however most children succeeded after being shown a pedagogical solution suggesting video. When the same video was shown in a non pedagogical manner however, the children's success in the task did not improve. Crucially, this meant that the children's physical cognition and problem solving ability was therefore affected by how the task was socially presented to them. Researchers thus formulated the transformative cultural intelligence hypothesis, which stresses that our physical cognition is developed and affected by the social environment around us. This challenges the traditional cultural intelligence hypothesis which states that it is human's social cognition and not physical cognition which is superior to our nearest primate relatives; [ 105 ] showing unique physical cognition in humans affected by external social factors. This phenomenon has not been seen in other species.

Reduction in aggression [ edit ] Another theory that tries to explain the growth of human intelligence is the reduced aggression theory (aka self-domestication theory). According to this strand of thought, what led to the evolution of advanced intelligence in Homo sapiens was a drastic reduction of the aggressive drive. This change separated us from other species of monkeys and primates, where this aggressivity is still in plain sight, and eventually lead to the development of quintessential human traits such as empathy, social cognition, and culture.

[ 110 ] [ 111 ] This theory has received strong support from studies of animal domestication where selective breeding for tameness has, in only a few generations, led to the emergence of impressive "humanlike" abilities. Tamed foxes, for example, exhibit advanced forms of social communication (following pointing gestures), pedomorphic physical features (childlike faces, floppy ears) and even rudimentary forms of theory of mind (eye contact seeking, gaze following).

[ 112 ] [ 113 ] Evidence also comes from the field of ethology (which is the study of animal behavior, focused on observing species in their natural habitat rather than in controlled laboratory settings) where it has been found that animals with a gentle and relaxed manner of interacting with each other – for example stumptailed macaques, orangutans and bonobos – have more advanced socio-cognitive abilities than those found among the more aggressive chimpanzees and baboons.

[ 114 ] It is hypothesized that these abilities derive from a selection against aggression.

[ 111 ] [ 115 ] [ 116 ] [ 117 ] On a mechanistic level, these changes are believed to be the result of a systemic downregulation of the sympathetic nervous system (the fight-or-flight reflex). Hence, tamed foxes show a reduced adrenal gland size and have an up to fivefold reduction in both basal and stress-induced blood cortisol levels.

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] Similarly, domesticated rats and guinea pigs have both reduced adrenal gland size and reduced blood corticosterone levels.

[ 120 ] [ 121 ] It seems as though the neoteny of domesticated animals significantly prolongs the immaturity of their hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal system (which is otherwise only immature for a short period when they are pups/kittens) and this opens up a larger "socialization window" during which they can learn to interact with their caretakers in a more relaxed way.

This downregulation of sympathetic nervous system reactivity is also believed to be accompanied by a compensatory increase in a number of opposing organs and systems. Although these are not as well specified, various candidates for such "organs" have been proposed: the parasympathetic system as a whole, the septal area over the amygdala, [ 110 ] the oxytocin system, [ 122 ] the endogenous opioids [ 123 ] and various forms of quiescent immobilization which antagonize the fight-or-flight reflex.

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] Sexual selection [ edit ] Main articles: Sexual selection in humans and Human mating strategies This model, which invokes sexual selection , is proposed by Geoffrey Miller who argues that human intelligence is unnecessarily sophisticated for the needs of hunter-gatherers to survive. He argues that the manifestations of intelligence such as language , music and art did not evolve because of their utilitarian value to the survival of ancient hominids. Rather, intelligence may have been a fitness indicator. Hominids would have been chosen for greater intelligence as an indicator of healthy genes and a Fisherian runaway positive feedback loop of sexual selection would have led to the evolution of human intelligence in a relatively short period.

[ 126 ] Philosopher Denis Dutton also argued that the human capacity for aesthetics evolved by sexual selection.

[ 127 ] Evolutionary biologist George C. Williams and evolutionary psychiatrist Randolph M. Nesse cite evolutionary psychologists John Tooby and Leda Cosmides as referring to the emotions as "Darwinian algorithms of the mind ", [ 128 ] while social psychologist David Buss has argued that the sex-specialized differences in the emotion of jealousy are adaptive strategies for detecting infidelity by a mating partner and anthropologists Donald E. Brown and Ward Goodenough have argued that marriage is a cultural universal that evolved to regulate sexual access to fertile women within a particular culture in response to male intrasexual competition and dominance .

[ 133 ] Citing cross-cultural research conducted by Buss, [ 134 ] [ 135 ] Miller has argued that if humans prefer altruistic mating partners that would select by mate choice for altruism directly.

[ 136 ] Additionally, Nesse and theoretical biologist Mary Jane West-Eberhard view sexual selection as a subcategory of social selection , [ 143 ] with Nesse and anthropologist Christopher Boehm arguing further that altruism in humans held fitness advantages that enabled evolutionarily extraordinary cooperativeness and the human capability of creating culture , as well as capital punishment by band societies against bullies , thieves , free-riders , and psychopaths .

[ 150 ] In many species, only males have impressive secondary sexual characteristics such as ornaments and show-off behavior, but sexual selection is also thought to be able to act on females as well in at least partially monogamous species .

[ 151 ] With complete monogamy, there is assortative mating for sexually selected traits. This means that less attractive individuals will find other less attractive individuals to mate with. If attractive traits are good fitness indicators, this means that sexual selection increases the genetic load of the offspring of unattractive individuals. Without sexual selection, an unattractive individual might find a superior mate with few deleterious mutations, and have healthy children that are likely to survive. With sexual selection, an unattractive individual is more likely to have access only to an inferior mate who is likely to pass on many deleterious mutations to their joint offspring, who are then less likely to survive.

[ 126 ] Sexual selection is often thought to be a likely explanation for other female-specific human traits, for example breasts and buttocks far larger in proportion to total body size than those found in related species of ape.

[ 126 ] It is often assumed that if breasts and buttocks of such large size were necessary for functions such as suckling infants, they would be found in other species. That human female breasts (typical mammalian breast tissue is small) [ 152 ] are found sexually attractive by many men is in agreement with sexual selection acting on human females secondary sexual characteristics.

Sexual selection for intelligence and judging ability can act on indicators of success, such as highly visible displays of wealth. Growing human brains require more nutrition than brains of related species of ape. It is possible that for females to successfully judge male intelligence, they must be intelligent themselves. This could explain why despite the absence of clear differences in intelligence between males and females on average, there are clear differences between male and female propensities to display their intelligence in ostentatious forms.

[ 126 ] Critique [ edit ] The sexual selection by the disability principle/fitness display model of the evolution of human intelligence is criticized by certain researchers for issues of timing of the costs relative to reproductive age. While sexually selected ornaments such as peacock feathers and moose antlers develop either during or after puberty, timing their costs to a sexually mature age, human brains expend large amounts of nutrients building myelin and other brain mechanisms for efficient communication between the neurons early in life. These costs early in life build facilitators that reduce the cost of neuron firing later in life, and as a result the peaks of the brain's costs and the peak of the brain's performance are timed on opposite sides of puberty with the costs peaking at a sexually immature age while performance peaks at a sexually mature age. Critical researchers argue the above shows that the cost of intelligence is a signal which reduces the chance of surviving to reproductive age, and does not signal fitness of sexually mature individuals. Since the disability principle is about selection from disabilities in sexually immature individuals, which increases the offspring's chance of survival to reproductive age, disabilities would be selected against and not for by the above mechanism. These critics argue that human intelligence evolved by natural selection citing that unlike sexual selection, natural selection have produced many traits that cost the most nutrients before puberty including immune systems and accumulation and modification for increased toxicity of poisons in the body as a protective measure against predators.

[ 153 ] [ 154 ] Intelligence as a disease-resistance sign [ edit ] The number of people with severe cognitive impairment caused by childhood viral infections like meningitis , protists like Toxoplasma and Plasmodium , and animal parasites like intestinal worms and schistosomes is estimated to be in the hundreds of millions.

[ 155 ] Even more people with moderate mental damages, such as an inability to complete difficult tasks, that are not classified as 'diseases' by medical standards, may still be considered as inferior mates by potential sexual partners.

Thus, widespread, virulent , and archaic infections are greatly involved in natural selection for cognitive abilities. People infected with parasites may have brain damage and obvious maladaptive behavior in addition to visible signs of disease. Smarter people can more skillfully learn to distinguish safe non-polluted water and food from unsafe kinds and learn to distinguish mosquito infested areas from safe areas. Additionally, they can more skillfully find and develop safe food sources and living environments. Given this situation, preference for smarter child-bearing/rearing partners increases the chance that their descendants will inherit the best resistance alleles , not only for immune system resistance to disease, but also smarter brains for learning skills in avoiding disease and selecting nutritious food. When people search for mates based on their success, wealth, reputation, disease-free body appearance, or psychological traits such as benevolence or confidence; the effect is to select for superior intelligence that results in superior disease resistance.

[ citation needed ] Ecological dominance-social competition model [ edit ] Another model describing the evolution of human intelligence is ecological dominance-social competition (EDSC), [ 156 ] explained by Mark V. Flinn, David C. Geary and Carol V. Ward based mainly on work by Richard D. Alexander . According to the model, human intelligence was able to evolve to significant levels because of the combination of increasing domination over habitat and increasing importance of social interactions. As a result, the primary selective pressure for increasing human intelligence shifted from learning to master the natural world to competition for dominance among members or groups of its own species.

As advancement, survival and reproduction within an increasing complex social structure favored ever more advanced social skills, communication of concepts through increasingly complex language patterns ensued. Since competition had shifted bit by bit from controlling "nature" to influencing other humans, it became of relevance to outmaneuver other members of the group seeking leadership or acceptance , by means of more advanced social skills. A more social and communicative person would be more easily selected.

Intelligence dependent on brain size [ edit ] Human intelligence is developed to an extreme level that is not necessarily adaptive in an evolutionary sense. Firstly, larger-headed babies are more difficult to give birth to and large brains are costly in terms of nutrient and oxygen requirements.

[ 157 ] Thus the direct adaptive benefit of human intelligence is questionable at least in modern societies, while it is difficult to study in prehistoric societies. Since 2005, scientists have been evaluating genomic data on gene variants thought to influence head size, and have found no evidence that those genes are under strong selective pressure in current human populations.

[ 158 ] The trait of head size has become generally fixed in modern human beings.

[ 159 ] While decreased brain size has strong correlation with lower intelligence in humans, some modern humans have brain sizes as small as with Homo erectus but normal intelligence (based on IQ tests) for modern humans. Increased brain size in humans may allow for greater capacity for specialized expertise.

[ 160 ] Expanded cortical regions [ edit ] The two major perspectives on primate brain evolution are the concerted and mosaic approaches.

[ 161 ] In the concerted evolution approach, cortical expansions in the brain are considered to be a by-product of a larger brain, rather than adaptive potential.

[ 161 ] Studies have supported the concerted evolution model by finding cortical expansions between macaques and marmosets are comparable to that of humans and macaques.

[ 161 ] Researchers attribute this result to the constraints on the evolutionary process of increasing brain size.

[ 161 ] In the mosaic approach, cortical expansions are attributed to their adaptive advantage for the species.

[ 162 ] Researchers have attributed hominin evolution to mosaic evolution.

[ 162 ] Simian primate brain evolution studies show that specific cortical regions associated with high-level cognition have demonstrated the greatest expansion over primate brain evolution.

[ 161 ] Sensory and motor regions have showcased limited growth.

[ 161 ] Three regions associated with complex cognition include the frontal lobe , temporal lobe , and the medial wall of the cortex.

[ 161 ] Studies demonstrate that the enlargement in these regions is disproportionately centered in the temporoparietal junction (TPJ), lateral prefrontal cortex (LPFC), and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC).

[ 161 ] The TPJ is located in the parietal lobe and is associated with morality, theory of mind , and spatial awareness .

[ 161 ] Additionally, the Wernicke's area is located in the TPJ.

[ 161 ] Studies have suggested that the region assists in language production, as well as language processing.

[ 163 ] The LPFC is commonly associated with planning and working memory functions.

[ 161 ] The Broca's area , the second major region associated with language processing, is also located in the LPFC.

[ 161 ] The ACC is associated with detecting errors, monitoring conflict, motor control, and emotion.

[ 161 ] Specifically, researchers have found that the ACC in humans is disproportionately expanded when compared to the ACC in macaques.

[ 161 ] Fossils show that although Homo sapiens' total brain volume approached modern levels as early as 300,000 years ago, parietal lobes and cerebella grew relative to total volume after this point, reaching current levels of variation at some point between the approximate dates of 100,000 and 35,000 years ago.

[ 164 ] Studies on cortical expansions in the brain have been used to examine the evolutionary basis of neurological disorders, such as Alzheimer's disease .

[ 161 ] For example, researchers associate the expanded TPJ region with Alzheimer's disease. However, other researchers found no correlation between expanded cortical regions in the human brain and the development of Alzheimer's disease.

[ 165 ] Cellular, genetic, and circuitry changes [ edit ] Human brain evolution involves cellular, genetic, and circuitry changes.

[ 166 ] On a genetic level, humans have a modified FOXP2 gene , which is associated with speech and language development.

[ 167 ] The human variant of the gene SRGAP2 , SRGAP2C , enables greater dendritic spine density which fosters greater neural connections.

[ 168 ] On a cellular level, studies demonstrate von Economo neurons (VENs) are more prevalent in humans than other primates.

[ 169 ] Studies show that VENs are associated with empathy, social awareness and self-control.

[ 169 ] Studies show that the striatum plays a role in understanding reward and pair-bond formation.

[ 170 ] On a circuitry level, humans exhibit a more complex mirror neuron system , greater connection between the two major language processing areas (Wernicke's area and Broca's area), and a vocal control circuit that connects the motor cortex and brain stem.

[ 166 ] The mirror neuron system is associated with social cognition , theory of mind, and empathy.

[ 171 ] Studies have demonstrated the presence of the mirror neuron system in both macaques in humans; However, the mirror neuron system is only activated in macaques when observing transitive movements.

[ 171 ] Group selection [ edit ] Group selection theory contends that organism characteristics that provide benefits to a group (clan, tribe, or larger population) can evolve despite individual disadvantages such as those cited above. The group benefits of intelligence (including language, the ability to communicate between individuals, the ability to teach others, and other cooperative aspects) have apparent utility in increasing the survival potential of a group.

In addition, the theory of group selection is inherently tied to Darwin's theory of natural selection. Specifically, that "group-related adaptations must be attributed to the natural selection of alternative groups of individuals and that the natural selection of alternative alleles within populations will be opposed to this development".

[ 172 ] Between-group selection can be used to explain the changes and adaptations that arise within a group of individuals. Group-related adaptations and changes are a byproduct of between-group selection as traits or characteristics that prove to be advantageous in relation to another group will become increasingly popular and disseminated within a group. In the end, increasing its overall chance of surviving a competing group.

However, this explanation cannot be applied to humans (and other species, predominantly other mammals) that live in stable, established social groupings. This is because of the social intelligence that functioning within these groups requires from the individual. Humans, while they are not the only ones, possess the cognitive and mental capacity to form systems of personal relationships and ties that extend well beyond those of the nucleus of family. The continuous process of creating, interacting, and adjusting to other individuals is a key component of many species' ecology.

These concepts can be tied to the social brain hypothesis, mentioned above. This hypothesis posits that human cognitive complexity arose as a result of the higher level of social complexity required from living in enlarged groups. These bigger groups entail a greater amount of social relations and interactions thus leading to an expanded quantity of intelligence in humans.

[ 83 ] However, this hypothesis has been under academic scrutiny in recent years and has been largely disproven. In fact, the size of a species' brain can be much better predicted by diet instead of measures of sociality as noted by the study conducted by DeCasien et al. They found that ecological factors (such as: folivory/frugivory, environment) explain a primate brain size much better than social factors (such as: group size, mating system).

[ 83 ] Nutritional status [ edit ] Early hominins dating back to pre 3.5 Ma in Africa ate primarily plant foods supplemented by insects and scavenged meat.

[ 10 ] Their diets are evidenced by their 'robust' dento-facial features of small canines, large molars, and enlarged masticatory muscles that allowed them to chew through tough plant fibers. Intelligence played a role in the acquisition of food, through the use of tool technology such as stone anvils and hammers.

[ 10 ] There is no direct evidence of the role of nutrition in the evolution of intelligence dating back to Homo erectus , contrary to dominant narratives in paleontology that link meat-eating to the appearance of modern human features such as a larger brain. However, scientists suggest that nutrition did play an important role, such as the consumption of a diverse diet including plant foods and new technologies for cooking and processing food such as fire.

[ 173 ] Diets deficient in iron , zinc , protein , iodine , B vitamins , omega 3 fatty acids , magnesium and other nutrients can result in lower intelligence [ 174 ] either in the mother during pregnancy or in the child during development. While these inputs did not have an effect on the evolution of intelligence they do govern its expression. A higher intelligence could be a signal that an individual comes from and lives in a physical and social environment where nutrition levels are high, whereas a lower intelligence could imply a child, its mother, or both, come from a physical and social environment where nutritional levels are low. Previc emphasizes the contribution of nutritional factors to elevations of dopaminergic activity in the brain, which may have been responsible for the evolution of human intelligence since dopamine is crucial to working memory, cognitive shifting , abstract, distant concepts, and other hallmarks of advanced intelligence.

[ 175 ] See also [ edit ] Behavioral modernity Cetacean intelligence Cephalopod intelligence Denisovan Human evolution Human intelligence Primate cognition Timeline of human evolution Noosphere – Philosophical concept of biosphere successor via humankind's rational activities References [ edit ] ^ Klug WS, Cummings MR, Spencer CA, Palladino MA (2012).

Concepts of Genetics (Tenth ed.). Pearson. p. 719.

ISBN 978-0-321-75435-6 .

Assuming that chimpanzees and humans last shared a common ancestor about 8-6 million years ago, the tree shows that Neanderthals and humans last shared a common ancestor about 706,000 years ago and that the isolating split between Neanderthals and human populations occurred about 370,000 years ago.

^ "Chimpanzee intelligence" .

Indiana University . 23 February 2000. Archived from the original on 17 September 2016 . Retrieved 24 March 2008 .

^ Bearzi M, Stanford CB (2007).

"Dolphins and African apes: comparisons of sympatric socio-ecology" (PDF) .

Contributions to Zoology .

76 (4): 235– 254.

doi : 10.1163/18759866-07604003 .

^ Pietschnig, Jakob; Penke, Lars; Wicherts, Jelte M.; Zeiler, Michael; Voracek, Martin (October 2015).

"Meta-analysis of associations between human brain volume and intelligence differences: How strong are they and what do they mean?" .

Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews .

57 : 411– 432.

doi : 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2015.09.017 .

ISSN 0149-7634 .

PMID 26449760 .

S2CID 23180321 .

^ Ko KH (2016).

"Origins of human intelligence: The chain of tool-making and brain evolution" (PDF) .

Anthropological Notebooks .

22 (1): 5– 22.

^ a b c d Nowzari, Hessam; Jorgensen, Michael (June 2022).

"Human Dento-Facial Evolution: Cranial Capacity, Facial Expression, Language, Oral Complications and Diseases" .

Oral .

2 (2): 163– 172.

doi : 10.3390/oral2020016 .

ISSN 2673-6373 .

^ Puech P.-F., Puech S., Cianfarani F., Albertini H. (1989).

"Tooth wear and dexterity in Homo erectus " , pp. 247–251 in Hominidae. Proceedings of the 2nd International Congress of Human Paleontology , Jaca Book (Milan: Italy) ^ Conroy, Glenn C.; Pontzer (2012).

Reconstructing Human Origins: A Modern Synthesis . Herman Pontzer (3rd ed.). New York: W.W. Norton.

ISBN 978-0-393-91289-0 .

OCLC 760290570 .

^ a b Stuart-Fox, Martin (18 April 2022).

"Major Transitions in Human Evolutionary History" .

World Futures .

79 : 29– 68.

doi : 10.1080/02604027.2021.2018646 .

ISSN 0260-4027 .

S2CID 248251299 .

^ a b c d Wynn, Thomas; Overmann, Karenleigh A; Malafouris, Lambros (2021).

"4E cognition in the Lower Palaeolithic" .

Adaptive Behavior .

29 (2): 99– 106.

doi : 10.1177/1059712320967184 .

ISSN 1059-7123 .

S2CID 228957681 .

^ a b c d e f Shook, Beth; Nelson, Katie; Aguilera, Kelsie; Braff, Lara (2019).

Explorations . Pressbooks.

ISBN 978-1-931303-62-0 .

^ Richter D, Grün R, Joannes-Boyau R, Steele TE, Amani F, Rué M, et al. (June 2017). "The age of the hominin fossils from Jebel Irhoud, Morocco, and the origins of the Middle Stone Age".

Nature .

546 (7657): 293– 296.

Bibcode : 2017Natur.546..293R .

doi : 10.1038/nature22335 .

PMID 28593967 .

S2CID 205255853 .

"Here we report the ages, determined by thermoluminescence dating, of fire-heated flint artefacts obtained from new excavations at the Middle Stone Age site of Jebel Irhoud, Morocco, which are directly associated with newly discovered remains of H. sapiens . A weighted average age places these Middle Stone Age artefacts and fossils at 315 ± 34 thousand years ago. Support is obtained through the recalculated uranium series with electron spin resonance date of 286 ± 32 thousand years ago for a tooth from the Irhoud 3 hominin mandible."; Smith TM, Tafforeau P, Reid DJ, Grün R, Eggins S, Boutakiout M, Hublin JJ (April 2007).

"Earliest evidence of modern human life history in North African early Homo sapiens " .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

104 (15): 6128– 6133.

Bibcode : 2007PNAS..104.6128S .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.0700747104 .

PMC 1828706 .

PMID 17372199 .

^ Richter D, Grün R, Joannes-Boyau R, Steele TE, Amani F, Rué M, et al. (June 2017). "The age of the hominin fossils from Jebel Irhoud, Morocco, and the origins of the Middle Stone Age".

Nature .

546 (7657): 293– 296.

Bibcode : 2017Natur.546..293R .

doi : 10.1038/nature22335 .

PMID 28593967 .

S2CID 205255853 .

Smith TM, Tafforeau P, Reid DJ, Grün R, Eggins S, Boutakiout M, Hublin JJ (April 2007).

"Earliest evidence of modern human life history in North African early Homo sapiens " .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

104 (15): 6128– 6133.

Bibcode : 2007PNAS..104.6128S .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.0700747104 .

PMC 1828706 .

PMID 17372199 .

Callaway E (7 June 2017).

"Oldest Homo sapiens fossil claim rewrites our species' history" .

Nature .

doi : 10.1038/nature.2017.22114 . Retrieved 5 July 2017 .

^ Matsuzawa, T. (2009).

Symbolic representation of number in chimpanzees . Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 19(1), pp. 92–98.

^ Cross I, Zubrow E, Cowan F (2002).

"Musical behaviours and the archaeological record: a preliminary study" (PDF) . In J. Mathieu (ed.).

Experimental Archaeology . Vol. 1035. British Archaeological Reports International Series. pp.

25– 34. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 June 2012.

^ Iriki A, Sakura O (June 2008).

"The neuroscience of primate intellectual evolution: natural selection and passive and intentional niche construction" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences .

363 (1500): 2229– 2241.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2008.2274 .

PMC 2394573 .

PMID 18426757 .

^ Brain Facts: A Primer on The Brain and Nervous System . Washington, D.C.: Society for Neuroscience. 2018. p. 51.

^ Schenker NM, Hopkins WD, Spocter MA, Garrison AR, Stimpson CD, Erwin JM, et al. (March 2010).

"Broca's area homologue in chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes): probabilistic mapping, asymmetry, and comparison to humans" .

Cerebral Cortex .

20 (3): 730– 742.

doi : 10.1093/cercor/bhp138 .

PMC 2820707 .

PMID 19620620 .

^ Kanazawa S (April 2004). "General intelligence as a domain-specific adaptation".

Psychological Review .

111 (2).

American Psychological Association : 512– 523.

doi : 10.1037/0033-295X.111.2.512 .

PMID 15065920 .

^ Kanazawa S (16 February 2010). "Why Liberals and Atheists Are More Intelligent".

Social Psychology Quarterly .

73 (1): 33– 57.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.395.4490 .

doi : 10.1177/0190272510361602 .

ISSN 0190-2725 .

S2CID 2642312 .

^ Kanazawa S (May–June 2010). "Evolutionary psychology and intelligence research".

The American Psychologist .

65 (4): 279– 289.

doi : 10.1037/a0019378 .

PMID 20455621 .

^ Borsboom D, Dolan CV (April 2006). "Why g is not an adaptation: a comment on Kanazawa (2004)".

Psychological Review .

113 (2): 433– 437.

doi : 10.1037/0033-295X.113.2.433 .

PMID 16637768 .

^ a b Cosmides L, Tooby J (1995) [1992]. "3. Cognitive Adaptations for Social Exchange". In Barkow JH , Cosmides L, Tooby J (eds.).

The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture . New York: Oxford University Press . pp.

163– 184.

ISBN 978-0195101072 .

^ a b Kaufman SB, DeYoung CG, Reis DL, Gray JR (May–June 2010).

"General intelligence predicts reasoning ability even for evolutionarily familiar content" (PDF) .

Intelligence .

39 (5): 311– 322.

doi : 10.1016/j.intell.2011.05.002 . Retrieved 16 February 2018 .

^ a b c Kaufman SB (2 July 2011).

"Is General Intelligence Compatible with Evolutionary Psychology?" .

Psychology Today . Sussex Publishers . Retrieved 16 February 2018 .

^ Wason PC (1977). "Self-contradictions". In Johnson-Laird PN , Wason PC (eds.).

Thinking: Readings in cognitive science . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521217569 .

^ St Evans JB, Newstead SE, Byrne RM (1993).

Human Reasoning: The Psychology of Deduction . Psychology Press.

ISBN 978-0-86377-313-6 .

^ Cheng PW, Holyoak KJ, Nisbett RE, Oliver LM (July 1986). "Pragmatic versus syntactic approaches to training deductive reasoning".

Cognitive Psychology .

18 (3).

Elsevier : 293– 328.

doi : 10.1016/0010-0285(86)90002-2 .

hdl : 2027.42/26121 .

PMID 3742999 .

S2CID 10376933 .

^ Cosmides L, Tooby J (2005). "20. Neurocognitive Adaptations Designed for Social Exchange". In Buss DM (ed.).

The Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology (1st ed.).

Hoboken, NJ : Wiley . pp.

584– 600.

ISBN 978-0471264033 .

^ Cosmides L, Tooby J (2016) [2005]. "25. Adaptations for Reasoning About Social Exchange". In Buss DM (ed.).

The Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology, Volume 2: Integrations (2nd ed.).

Hoboken, NJ : Wiley . pp.

625– 640.

ISBN 978-1118755808 .

^ Cosmides L, Tooby J (2005). "20. Neurocognitive Adaptations Designed for Social Exchange". In Buss DM (ed.).

The Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology (1st ed.).

Hoboken, NJ : Wiley . pp.

600– 603.

ISBN 978-0471264033 .

^ Cosmides L, Tooby J (2016) [2005]. "25. Adaptations for Reasoning About Social Exchange". In Buss DM (ed.).

The Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology, Volume 2: Integrations (2nd ed.).

Hoboken, NJ : Wiley . pp.

640– 643.

ISBN 978-1118755808 .

^ Cosmides L, Tooby J (1995) [1992]. "3. Cognitive Adaptations for Social Exchange". In Barkow JH , Cosmides L, Tooby J (eds.).

The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture . New York: Oxford University Press . pp.

184– 206.

ISBN 978-0195101072 .

^ Cosmides L, Tooby J (2005). "20. Neurocognitive Adaptations Designed for Social Exchange". In Buss DM (ed.).

The Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology (1st ed.).

Hoboken, NJ : Wiley . pp.

603– 623.

ISBN 978-0471264033 .

^ Cosmides L, Tooby J (2016) [2005]. "25. Adaptations for Reasoning About Social Exchange". In Buss DM (ed.).

The Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology, Volume 2: Integrations (2nd ed.).

Hoboken, NJ : Wiley . pp.

643– 663.

ISBN 978-1118755808 .

^ Sowell T (1994).

Race and Culture: A World View . New York: Basic Books . pp.

162– 165.

ISBN 978-0465067978 .

^ Sowell T (2013).

Intellectuals and Race . New York: Basic Books . pp.

67– 69.

ISBN 978-0465058723 .

^ Hunt EB (2011).

Human Intelligence . New York: Cambridge University Press . p. 447.

ISBN 978-0521707817 .

^ Nisbett RE, Aronson J, Dickens W, Flynn JR, Blair C, Halpern DF, Turkheimer E (2012). "Intelligence: New Findings and Theoretical Developments".

American Psychologist .

67 (3).

American Psychological Association : 130– 159.

doi : 10.1037/a0026699 .

PMID 22233090 .

^ Nisbett RE, Aronson J, Blair C, Dickens W, Flynn JR, Halpern DF, Turkheimer E (2012). "Group differences in IQ are best understood as environmental in origin".

American Psychologist .

67 (6). American Psychological Association: 503– 504.

doi : 10.1037/a0029772 .

ISSN 0003-066X .

PMID 22963427 .

^ Bird KA (2021). "No support for the hereditarian hypothesis of the Black–White achievement gap using polygenic scores and tests for divergent selection".

American Journal of Physical Anthropology .

175 (2). Wiley: 465– 476.

doi : 10.1002/ajpa.24216 .

^ Bird KA, Jackson JP, Winston AS (2024). "Confronting Scientific Racism in Psychology: Lessons from Evolutionary Biology and Genetics".

American Psychologist .

79 (4). American Psychological Association: 497– 508.

doi : 10.1037/amp0001228 .

PMID 39037836 .

^ Flynn JR (2009) [2007].

What Is Intelligence? Beyond the Flynn Effect (Expanded paperback ed.). New York: Cambridge University Press . pp.

1– 10.

ISBN 978-0521741477 .

^ a b Hunt EB (2011).

Human Intelligence . New York: Cambridge University Press . pp.

261– 270.

ISBN 978-0521707817 .

^ Flynn JR (2009) [2007].

What Is Intelligence? Beyond the Flynn Effect (Expanded paperback ed.). New York: Cambridge University Press . pp.

10– 47.

ISBN 978-0521741477 .

^ Nisbett RE (2010) [2009].

Intelligence and How to Get It: Why Schools and Cultures Count (Paperback ed.). New York: W. W. Norton & Company. pp.

39– 56.

ISBN 978-0393337693 .

^ Marks DF (2010).

"IQ Variations across Time, Race, and Nationality: An Artifact of Differences in Literacy Skills" .

Psychological Reports .

106 (3).

Sage Publishing : 643– 664.

doi : 10.2466/pr0.106.3.643-664 .

ISSN 0033-2941 .

PMID 20712152 .

^ Kaufman SB (23 August 2010).

"The Flynn Effect and IQ Disparities Among Races, Ethnicities, and Nations: Are There Common Links?" .

Psychology Today . Sussex Publishers, LLC . Retrieved 20 March 2025 .

^ Geary DC (1994).

Children's Mathematical Development: Research and Practical Applications . Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. pp.

1– 130, 261– 266.

ISBN 978-1557982582 .

^ Pinker S (1997).

How the Mind Works . New York: W. W. Norton & Company . pp.

333– 342.

ISBN 978-0393318487 .

^ Bjorklund DF , Blasi CH (2005). "29. Evolutionary Developmental Psychology". In Buss DM (ed.).

The Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology (1st ed.).

Hoboken, NJ : Wiley . pp.

842– 844.

ISBN 978-0-471-26403-3 .

^ Pinker S (2007) [1994].

The Language Instinct: How the Mind Creates Language (3rd ed.). New York: Harper Perennial . pp.

20– 34, 140– 147, 186, 265– 388, PS14.

ISBN 978-0061336461 .

^ [ 49 ] [ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] ^ Pinker S (2007) [1994].

The Language Instinct: How the Mind Creates Language (3rd ed.). New York: Harper Perennial . pp.

186– 187.

ISBN 978-0061336461 .

^ Pinker S (2011).

The Better Angels of Our Nature: Why Violence Has Declined . New York: Penguin Books. pp.

172– 174.

ISBN 978-0143122012 .

^ Pinker S (2021).

Rationality: What It Is, Why It Seems Scarce, Why It Matters . New York: Penguin Books. pp.

8– 22.

ISBN 978-0525562016 .

^ Kahneman, D (2013) [2011].

Thinking, Fast and Slow . New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. pp.

19– 105.

ISBN 978-0374533557 .

^ Pinker S (2007).

The Stuff of Thought: Language As a Window Into Human Nature . New York: Basic Books. pp.

241– 245, 435– 439.

ISBN 978-0465072699 .

^ Pinker S (2007) [1994].

The Language Instinct: How the Mind Creates Language (3rd ed.). New York: Harper Perennial .

ISBN 978-0061336461 .

^ Pinker S (1999).

Words and Rules: The Ingredients of Language . New York: Basic Books.

ISBN 978-0465072699 .

^ Pinker S (2011).

The Better Angels of Our Nature: Why Violence Has Declined . New York: Penguin Books. pp.

650– 656.

ISBN 978-0143122012 .

^ Sternberg RJ, Kaufman SB (2011). "Preface". In Sternberg RJ, Kaufman SB (eds.).

The Cambridge Handbook of Intelligence (1st ed.). New York: Cambridge University Press. p. xv.

ISBN 978-0521518062 .

^ Joseph J, Richardson K (2025). "23. The Bell Curve at 30: A Closer Look at the Within- and Between-Group IQ Genetic Evidence". In Lerner RM , Greenberg, G (eds.).

The Heredity Hoax: Challenging Flawed Genetic Theories of Human Development . New York: Routledge. pp.

433– 476.

doi : 10.4324/9781032702988 .

ISBN 978-1032699578 .

^ Hunt EB (2011). "8. The Genetic Basis of Intelligence".

Human Intelligence . New York: Cambridge University Press . pp.

203– 256.

ISBN 978-0521707817 .

^ Hunt EB (2011).

Human Intelligence . New York: Cambridge University Press . pp.

19– 20, 97– 99.

ISBN 978-0521707817 .

^ Hunt EB (2011). "4. Psychometric Theories".

Human Intelligence . New York: Cambridge University Press . pp.

79– 110.

ISBN 978-0521707817 .

^ Hunt EB (2011). "5. Taking Intelligence Beyond Psychometrics".

Human Intelligence . New York: Cambridge University Press . pp.

111– 139.

ISBN 978-0521707817 .

^ Hunt EB (2011).

Human Intelligence . New York: Cambridge University Press . pp.

21– 22, 183– 190, 203– 208.

ISBN 978-0521707817 .

^ Pinker S (1997).

How the Mind Works . New York: W. W. Norton & Company . pp.

25– 26.

ISBN 978-0393318487 .

^ Pinker S (2016) [2002].

The Blank Slate: The Modern Denial of Human Nature . New York: Penguin Books. pp.

41– 45.

ISBN 978-0142003343 .

^ Geary DC (2005). "8. Evolution of General Intelligence".

The Origin of Mind: Evolution of Brain, Cognition, and General Intelligence . Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. pp.

253– 305.

ISBN 978-1591471813 .

^ Cosmides L, Tooby J (1995) [1992]. "1. The Psychological Foundations of Culture". In Barkow JH , Cosmides L, Tooby J (eds.).

The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture . New York: Oxford University Press . pp.

49– 123.

ISBN 978-0195101072 .

^ Pinker S (1997).

How the Mind Works . New York: W. W. Norton & Company . pp.

21– 31, 60– 93, 179– 198.

ISBN 978-0393318487 .

^ Pinker S (2016) [2002].

The Blank Slate: The Modern Denial of Human Nature . New York: Penguin Books. pp.

1– 102.

ISBN 978-0142003343 .

^ a b Cosmides L, Barrett HC, Tooby J (2010).

"Adaptive specializations, social exchange, and the evolution of human intelligence" .

PNAS .

107 (2).

National Academy of Sciences : 9007– 9014.

Bibcode : 2010PNAS..107.9007C .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.0914623107 .

PMC 3024027 .

PMID 20445099 .

^ [ 25 ] [ 72 ] [ 73 ] [ 74 ] [ 75 ] ^ Cosmides L, Tooby J (2001). "8. Unraveling the Enigma of Human Intelligence: Evolutionary Psychology and the Multimodular Mind". In Sternberg RJ, Kaufman JC (eds.).

The Evolution of Intelligence . Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. pp.

145– 198.

ISBN 978-0585380858 .

^ Tooby J, Cosmides L (1989).

"Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture, Part I: Theoretical Considerations" .

Ethology and Sociobiology .

10 ( 1– 3). Elsevier: 29– 49.

doi : 10.1016/0162-3095(89)90012-5 .

^ Cosmides L, Tooby J (1995) [1992]. "1. The Psychological Foundations of Culture". In Barkow JH , Cosmides L, Tooby J (eds.).

The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture . New York: Oxford University Press . pp.

19– 49.

ISBN 978-0195101072 .

^ a b c Dunbar RI (1998).

"The social brain hypothesis" (PDF) .

Evolutionary Anthropology: Issues, News, and Reviews .

6 (5): 178– 90.

doi : 10.1002/(SICI)1520-6505(1998)6:5<178::AID-EVAN5>3.0.CO;2-8 .

S2CID 9555943 .

^ Dávid-Barrett T, Dunbar RI (August 2013).

"Processing power limits social group size: computational evidence for the cognitive costs of sociality" .

Proceedings. Biological Sciences .

280 (1765): 20131151.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2013.1151 .

PMC 3712454 .

PMID 23804623 .

^ a b Dunbar RI (2014). "The Social Brain: Psychological Underpinnings and Implications for the Structure of Organizations".

Current Directions in Psychological Science .

23 (2): 109– 114.

doi : 10.1177/0963721413517118 .

S2CID 146463887 .

^ a b c d e DeCasien AR, Williams SA, Higham JP (March 2017). "Primate brain size is predicted by diet but not sociality".

Nature Ecology & Evolution .

1 (5): 112.

Bibcode : 2017NatEE...1..112D .

doi : 10.1038/s41559-017-0112 .

PMID 28812699 .

S2CID 205564046 .

^ a b c King BJ (August 1986). "Extractive foraging and the evolution of primate intelligence".

Human Evolution .

1 (4): 361– 372.

doi : 10.1007/BF02436709 .

S2CID 83885668 .

^ Kluger, Jeffrey (16 August 2010).

"Inside The Minds of Animals" .

Time .

^ McCarty C, Killworth PD, Bernard HR, Johnsen E, Shelley G (2000).

"Comparing Two Methods for Estimating Network Size" (PDF) .

Human Organization .

60 : 28– 39.

doi : 10.17730/humo.60.1.efx5t9gjtgmga73y . Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 February 2012.

^ Bernard, H. Russell; Shelley, Gene Ann; Killworth, Peter (1987).

"How Much of a Network does the GSS and RSW Dredge Up?" (PDF) .

Social Networks .

9 : 49– 63.

doi : 10.1016/0378-8733(87)90017-7 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 22 July 2013 .

^ How the body shapes the way we think: A new view of intelligence, Rolf Pfeifer, Josh Bongard ^ Micromonsters, David Attenborough 2013 ^ Chittka L, Niven J (November 2009).

"Are bigger brains better?" .

Current Biology .

19 (21): R995 – R1008 .

Bibcode : 2009CBio...19.R995C .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2009.08.023 .

PMID 19922859 .

S2CID 7247082 .

^ Hölldobler B, Wilson E (17 November 2008).

The Superorganism: The Beauty, Elegance, and Strangeness of Insect Societies . W. W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 9780393067040 .

^ Costa J (30 September 2006).

The Other Insect Societies . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 9780674021631 .

^ Guerrieri FJ, Nehring V, Jørgensen CG, Nielsen J, Galizia CG, d'Ettorre P (July 2009).

"Ants recognize foes and not friends" .

Proceedings. Biological Sciences .

276 (1666): 2461– 2468.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2008.1860 .

PMC 2690455 .

PMID 19364750 .

^ Bos N, d'Ettorre P (2012).

"Recognition of social identity in ants" .

Frontiers in Psychology .

3 : 83.

doi : 10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00083 .

PMC 3309994 .

PMID 22461777 .

^ Seeley TD (2010).

Honeybee democracy . Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9780691147215 .

^ van Schaik CP, Isler K, Burkart JM (May 2012).

"Explaining brain size variation: from social to cultural brain" (PDF) .

Trends in Cognitive Sciences .

16 (5): 277– 284.

doi : 10.1016/j.tics.2012.04.004 .

PMID 22513173 .

S2CID 3387019 .

^ a b c Muthukrishna M, Doebeli M, Chudek M, Henrich J (November 2018). Tarnita CE (ed.).

"The Cultural Brain Hypothesis: How culture drives brain expansion, sociality, and life history" .

PLOS Computational Biology .

14 (11): e1006504.

Bibcode : 2018PLSCB..14E6504M .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006504 .

PMC 6224031 .

PMID 30408028 .

^ van Schaik CP, Burkart JM (April 2011).

"Social learning and evolution: the cultural intelligence hypothesis" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences .

366 (1567): 1008– 1016.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2010.0304 .

PMC 3049085 .

PMID 21357223 .

^ Henrich JP (2016).

The Secret of Our Success: How Culture is Driving Human Evolution, Domesticating Our Species, and Making Us Smarter . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-16685-8 .

OCLC 1096377221 .

^ Roth G, Dicke U (May 2005). "Evolution of the brain and intelligence".

Trends in Cognitive Sciences .

9 (5): 250– 257.

doi : 10.1016/j.tics.2005.03.005 .

PMID 15866152 .

S2CID 14758763 .

^ Buss DM (2015).

Handbook of evolutionary psychology, volume 2 . John Wiley & Sons, Inc. pp.

749– 769.

ISBN 9781118755853 .

^ Laland KN (1 March 1992).

"A theoretical investigation of the role of social transmission in evolution" .

Ethology and Sociobiology .

13 (2): 87– 113.

doi : 10.1016/0162-3095(92)90020-5 .

ISSN 0162-3095 .

^ Henrich J (2011).

"A cultural species: How culture drove human evolution" .

PsycEXTRA Dataset .

doi : 10.1037/e519392012-002 . Retrieved 11 February 2022 .

^ Dunbar RI (1998).

"The social brain hypothesis" .

Evolutionary Anthropology: Issues, News, and Reviews .

6 (5): 178– 190.

doi : 10.1002/(SICI)1520-6505(1998)6:5<178::AID-EVAN5>3.0.CO;2-8 .

ISSN 1520-6505 .

S2CID 9555943 .

^ a b Herrmann E, Call J, Hernàndez-Lloreda MV, Hare B, Tomasello M (September 2007). "Humans have evolved specialized skills of social cognition: the cultural intelligence hypothesis".

Science .

317 (5843): 1360– 1366.

Bibcode : 2007Sci...317.1360H .

doi : 10.1126/science.1146282 .

PMID 17823346 .

S2CID 686663 .

^ Gariépy JF, Watson KK, Du E, Xie DL, Erb J, Amasino D, Platt ML (31 March 2014).

"Social learning in humans and other animals" .

Frontiers in Neuroscience .

8 : 58.

doi : 10.3389/fnins.2014.00058 .

PMC 3982061 .

PMID 24765063 .

^ Paulus M, Hunnius S, Bekkering H (October 2013).

"Neurocognitive mechanisms underlying social learning in infancy: infants' neural processing of the effects of others' actions" .

Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience .

8 (7): 774– 779.

doi : 10.1093/scan/nss065 .

PMC 3791065 .

PMID 22689219 .

^ Forss SI, Willems E, Call J, van Schaik CP (July 2016).

"Cognitive differences between orang-utan species: a test of the cultural intelligence hypothesis" .

Scientific Reports .

6 (1): 30516.

Bibcode : 2016NatSR...630516F .

doi : 10.1038/srep30516 .

PMC 4964338 .

PMID 27466052 .

^ Moll H (1 March 2018). "The Transformative Cultural Intelligence Hypothesis: Evidence from Young Children's Problem-Solving".

Review of Philosophy and Psychology .

9 (1): 161– 175.

doi : 10.1007/s13164-017-0342-7 .

ISSN 1878-5166 .

S2CID 39117653 .

^ a b Eccles, John C. (1989). Evolution of the Brain: Creation of the Self. Foreword by Carl Popper. London: Routledge ISBN 9780415032247 .

^ a b de Waal, Frans B. M. (1989). Peacemaking among primates. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 9780674659216 .

^ Belyaev, D. K. 1984. "Foxes" pp. 211-214. In Mason I. L. ed., Evolution of Domesticated Animals . Prentice Hall Press.

ISBN 0582460468 .

^ Trut LN, Plyusnina I, Oskina IN (2004). "An experiment on fox domestication and debattable issues of evolution of the dog".

Russian Journal of Genetics .

40 (6): 644– 655.

doi : 10.1023/B:RUGE.0000033312.92773.c1 .

S2CID 19741949 .

^ "ETHOLOGY" .

www.indiana.edu . Retrieved 10 April 2019 .

^ Brothers L, Ring B, Kling A (December 1990). "Response of neurons in the macaque amygdala to complex social stimuli".

Behavioural Brain Research .

41 (3): 199– 213.

doi : 10.1016/0166-4328(90)90108-Q .

PMID 2288672 .

S2CID 4023773 .

^ Brothers L, Ring B (October 1993). "Mesial temporal neurons in the macaque monkey with responses selective for aspects of social stimuli".

Behavioural Brain Research .

57 (1): 53– 61.

doi : 10.1016/0166-4328(93)90061-T .

PMID 8292255 .

S2CID 4014644 .

^ Hare B, Wobber V, Wrangham R (2012). "The self-domestication hypothesis: evolution of bonobo psychology is due to selection against aggression".

Animal Behaviour .

83 (3): 573– 585.

doi : 10.1016/j.anbehav.2011.12.007 .

S2CID 3415520 .

^ Osadschuk, L. V. 1997. "Effects of domestication on the adrenal cortisol production of silver foxes during embryonic development ". In In L. N. Trut and L. V. Osadschuk eds., Evolutionary-Genetic and Genetic-Physiological Aspects of Fur Animal Domestication . Oslo: Scientifur.

ISSN 0105-2403 .

^ Trut L, Oskina I, Kharlamova A (March 2009).

"Animal evolution during domestication: the domesticated fox as a model" .

BioEssays .

31 (3): 349– 360.

doi : 10.1002/bies.200800070 .

PMC 2763232 .

PMID 19260016 .

^ Künzl C, Sachser N (February 1999). "The behavioral endocrinology of domestication: A comparison between the domestic guinea pig (Cavia aperea f. porcellus) and its wild ancestor, the cavy (Cavia aperea)".

Hormones and Behavior .

35 (1): 28– 37.

doi : 10.1006/hbeh.1998.1493 .

PMID 10049600 .

S2CID 33327158 .

^ Albert FW, Shchepina O, Winter C, Römpler H, Teupser D, Palme R, et al. (March 2008). "Phenotypic differences in behavior, physiology and neurochemistry between rats selected for tameness and for defensive aggression towards humans".

Hormones and Behavior .

53 (3): 413– 421.

doi : 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2007.11.010 .

PMID 18177873 .

S2CID 4609177 .

^ Carter CS (2014). "Oxytocin pathways and the evolution of human behavior".

Annual Review of Psychology .

65 : 17– 39.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-psych-010213-115110 .

PMID 24050183 .

^ Nelson EE, Panksepp J (May 1998). "Brain substrates of infant-mother attachment: contributions of opioids, oxytocin, and norepinephrine".

Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews .

22 (3): 437– 452.

doi : 10.1016/S0149-7634(97)00052-3 .

PMID 9579331 .

S2CID 14345053 .

^ Porges SW (December 2003). "Social engagement and attachment: a phylogenetic perspective".

Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences .

1008 (1): 31– 47.

Bibcode : 2003NYASA1008...31P .

doi : 10.1196/annals.1301.004 .

PMID 14998870 .

S2CID 1377353 .

^ Tsoukalas I (2018).

"Theory of Mind: Towards an Evolutionary Theory" .

Evolutionary Psychological Science .

4 (1): 38– 66.

doi : 10.1007/s40806-017-0112-x .

Pdf.

^ a b c d Miller G (2008).

The Mating Mind . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-0-8058-5749-8 .

^ Dutton D (2009).

The Art Instinct: Beauty, Pleasure, and Human Evolution . New York: Bloomsbury Press . pp.

135– 163.

ISBN 978-1596914018 .

^ Nesse R , Williams GC (1994).

Why We Get Sick: The New Science of Darwinian Medicine . New York: Vintage Books . pp.

209– 212.

ISBN 978-0679746744 .

^ Buss DM (2016) [1994].

The Evolution of Desire: Strategies of Human Mating (3rd ed.). New York: Basic Books . pp.

189– 221.

ISBN 978-0465097760 .

^ Buss DM (2011) [2000].

The Dangerous Passion: Why Jealousy Is as Necessary as Love and Sex (2nd ed.). New York: Free Press .

ISBN 978-1451673135 .

^ Brown DE (1991).

Human Universals .

Philadelphia , PA : Temple University Press . p. 80.

ISBN 978-0877228417 .

^ Pinker S (2016) [2002].

The Blank Slate: The Modern Denial of Human Nature (2nd ed.). New York: Penguin Books . p. 457.

ISBN 978-0142003343 .

^ [ 129 ] [ 130 ] [ 131 ] [ 132 ] ^ Buss DM (1989).

"Sex differences in human mate preferences: Evolutionary hypotheses tested in 37 cultures" .

Behavioral and Brain Sciences .

12 (1).

Cambridge University Press : 1– 49.

doi : 10.1017/S0140525X00023992 .

^ Buss DM (1995) [1992]. "5. Mate Preference Mechanisms: Consequences for Partner Choice and Intrasexual Competition". In Barkow JH, Cosmides L, Tooby J (eds.).

The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture . New York: Oxford University Press . pp.

253– 256.

ISBN 978-0195101072 .

^ Miller GF (2000).

The Mating Mind: How Sexual Choice Shaped the Evolution of Human Nature (1st ed.). New York: Doubleday . pp.

292– 340.

ISBN 978-0385495165 .

^ West-Eberhard MJ (1975). "The Evolution of Social Behavior by Kin Selection".

The Quarterly Review of Biology .

50 (1).

University of Chicago Press : 1– 33.

doi : 10.1086/408298 .

JSTOR 2821184 .

S2CID 14459515 .

^ West-Eberhard MJ (1979). "Sexual Selection, Social Competition, and Evolution".

Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society .

123 (4).

American Philosophical Society : 222– 34.

JSTOR 986582 .

^ West-Eberhard MJ (1983).

"Sexual Selection, Social Competition, and Speciation" .

Quarterly Review of Biology .

58 (2).

University of Chicago Press : 155– 183.

doi : 10.1086/413215 .

JSTOR 2828804 .

S2CID 54711556 .

^ Lyon BE, Montgomerie R (August 2012).

"Sexual selection is a form of social selection" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences .

367 (1600).

London , UK : Royal Society : 2266– 2273.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2012.0012 .

PMC 3391428 .

PMID 22777015 .

^ West-Eberhard MJ (October 2014). "Darwin's forgotten idea: the social essence of sexual selection".

Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews . 46 Pt 4 (4).

Elsevier : 501– 508.

doi : 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2014.06.015 .

PMID 25003806 .

S2CID 1604935 .

^ Nesse R (2019).

Good Reasons for Bad Feelings: Insights from the Frontier of Evolutionary Psychiatry .

Dutton . pp.

172– 176.

ISBN 978-1101985663 .

^ [ 137 ] [ 138 ] [ 139 ] [ 140 ] [ 141 ] [ 142 ] ^ Boehm C (September 1999). "The natural selection of altruistic traits".

Human Nature .

10 (3).

Springer Science+Business Media : 205– 252.

doi : 10.1007/s12110-999-1003-z .

PMID 26196335 .

S2CID 207392341 .

^ Boehm C (2001) [1999].

Hierarchy in the Forest: The Evolution of Egalitarian Behavior (Revised ed.).

Cambridge, MA : Harvard University Press .

ISBN 978-0674006911 .

^ Nesse RM (2007). "Runaway social selection for displays of partner value and altruism".

Biological Theory .

2 (2).

Springer Science+Business Media : 143– 55.

doi : 10.1162/biot.2007.2.2.143 .

S2CID 195097363 .

^ Nesse RM (2009). "10. Social Selection and the Origins of Culture". In Schaller M , Heine SJ , Norenzayan A, Yamagishi T, Kameda T (eds.).

Evolution, Culture, and the Human Mind . Philadelphia: Taylor & Francis . pp.

137– 50.

ISBN 978-0805859119 .

^ Boehm, C (2012).

Moral Origins: Social Selection and the Evolution of Virtue, Altruism, and Shame . New York: Basic Books .

ISBN 978-0465020485 .

^ Boehm C (2014).

"The moral consequences of social selection" .

Behaviour .

151 ( 2– 3).

Brill Publishers : 167– 183.

doi : 10.1163/1568539X-00003143 . Retrieved 7 July 2021 .

^ [ 144 ] [ 145 ] [ 146 ] [ 147 ] [ 148 ] [ 149 ] ^ Jones, Ian L.; Hunter, Fiona M. (1993). "Mutual sexual selection in a monogamous seabird".

Nature .

362 (6417): 238– 239.

Bibcode : 1993Natur.362..238J .

doi : 10.1038/362238a0 .

S2CID 4254675 .

^ "Heredity and Society". Author Ian Porter. 1972. Page 51.

^ The Evolution of Intelligence; Robert J. Sternberg, James C. Kaufman, 2013 ^ The First Idea: How Symbols, Language, and Intelligence Evolved from Our Primate Ancestors to Modern Humans; Stanley I. Greenspan, Stuart Shanker, 2009 ^ Olness K (April 2003). "Effects on brain development leading to cognitive impairment: a worldwide epidemic".

Journal of Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics .

24 (2): 120– 130.

doi : 10.1097/00004703-200304000-00009 .

PMID 12692458 .

S2CID 31999992 .

^ Flinn, M. V.; Geary, D. C.; Ward, C. V. (2005).

"Ecological dominance, social competition, and coalitionary arms races: Why humans evolved extraordinary intelligence" (PDF) .

Evolution and Human Behavior .

26 (1): 10– 46.

Bibcode : 2005EHumB..26...10F .

doi : 10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2004.08.005 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 June 2007 . Retrieved 25 November 2007 .

^ Isler K, van Schaik CP (December 2006).

"Metabolic costs of brain size evolution" .

Biology Letters .

2 (4): 557– 560.

doi : 10.1098/rsbl.2006.0538 .

PMC 1834002 .

PMID 17148287 .

^ Ossorio PN (2011).

"Chapter 9: Myth and Mystification: The Science of Race and IQ" . In Krimsky S, Sloan K (eds.).

Race and the Genetic Revolution: Science, Myth, and Culture . Columbia University Press. p. 189.

ISBN 978-0-231-52769-9 . Retrieved 31 August 2013 .

Since 2005, other researchers have evaluated the same data on MCHPI and ASPM, plus some additional data, and concluded that there is no evidence that these genes have been under natural selection in modern humans. These reanalyses undercut the idea that the particular variants found at high frequency among people of European descent somehow made Europeans better adapted for modern civilization. Additional studies have discovered that the MCHPI and ASPM variants reported in the 2005 papers do not correlate with larger (or smaller) than average head size. The genes were originally described as having to do with head size because some variants of these genes can cause microcephaly (extremely small heads that lack major portions of the brain). However, those microcephaly-causing variants were not included in the studies published in 2005. Finally, several research groups have tried and failed to show any correlation between the variants described in the 2005 papers and IQ reading abilities, or verbal abilities. (citing "Comment on 'Ongoing Adaptive Evolution of ASPM, a Brain Size Determinant in Homo sapiens ' and 'Microcephalin, a Gene Regulating Brain Size Continues to Evolve Adaptively in Humans", Science 313 (2006): 172 (a); F.Yu, S.R.Hill, S.F. Schaffner, et al., "Comment on 'Ongoing Adaptive Evolution of ASPM, a Brain Size Determinant in Homo sapiens ' ", Science 316 (2007): 370 (b). ) ^ Klug WS, Cummings MR, Spencer CA, Palladino MA (2012).

Concepts of Genetics (Tenth ed.). Pearson. p. 669.

ISBN 978-0-321-75435-6 .

h 2 values vary, but heritability tends to be low for quantitative traits that are essential to an organism's survival. Remember, this does not indicate the absence of a genetic contribution to the observed phenotypes for such traits. Instead, the low h 2 values show that natural selection has already largely optimized the genetic component of these traits during evolution.

^ Skoyles JR (1999).

"Human evolution expanded brains to increase expertise capacity, not IQ" (PDF) .

Psycoloquy .

10 (2).

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Kaas JH (23 November 2016).

Evolution of nervous systems (Second ed.). Kidlington, Oxford, United Kingdom.

ISBN 9780128040966 .

OCLC 964620094 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b Foley RA (July 2016).

"Mosaic evolution and the pattern of transitions in the hominin lineage" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences .

371 (1698): 20150244.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2015.0244 .

PMC 4920300 .

PMID 27298474 .

^ Binder JR (December 2015).

"The Wernicke area: Modern evidence and a reinterpretation" .

Neurology .

85 (24): 2170– 2175.

doi : 10.1212/WNL.0000000000002219 .

PMC 4691684 .

PMID 26567270 .

^ Neubauer, Simon; Hublin, Jean-Jacques; Gunz, Philipp (2018).

"The evolution of modern human brain shape" .

Science Advances .

4 (1): eaao5961.

Bibcode : 2018SciA....4.5961N .

doi : 10.1126/sciadv.aao5961 .

PMC 5783678 .

PMID 29376123 .

^ Fjell AM, Amlien IK, Sneve MH, Grydeland H, Tamnes CK, Chaplin TA, et al. (September 2015).

"The Roots of Alzheimer's Disease: Are High-Expanding Cortical Areas Preferentially Targeted?†" .

Cerebral Cortex .

25 (9): 2556– 2565.

doi : 10.1093/cercor/bhu055 .

PMC 6276920 .

PMID 24658616 .

^ a b Sherwood CC, Schumacher M (September 2018).

"What Makes the Human Brain Special" .

Scientific American .

^ "FOXP2 gene" .

Genetics Home Reference . Retrieved 11 April 2019 .

^ Charrier C, Joshi K, Coutinho-Budd J, Kim JE, Lambert N, de Marchena J, et al. (May 2012).

"Inhibition of SRGAP2 function by its human-specific paralogs induces neoteny during spine maturation" .

Cell .

149 (4): 923– 935.

doi : 10.1016/j.cell.2012.03.034 .

PMC 3357949 .

PMID 22559944 .

^ a b Allman JM, Tetreault NA, Hakeem AY, Manaye KF, Semendeferi K, Erwin JM, et al. (April 2011).

"The von Economo neurons in the frontoinsular and anterior cingulate cortex" .

Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences .

1225 (1): 59– 71.

Bibcode : 2011NYASA1225...59A .

doi : 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2011.06011.x .

PMC 3140770 .

PMID 21534993 .

^ Báez-Mendoza R, Schultz W (December 2013).

"The role of the striatum in social behavior" .

Frontiers in Neuroscience .

7 : 233.

doi : 10.3389/fnins.2013.00233 .

PMC 3857563 .

PMID 24339801 .

^ a b Rajmohan V, Mohandas E (January 2007).

"Mirror neuron system" .

Indian Journal of Psychiatry .

49 (1): 66– 69.

doi : 10.4103/0019-5545.31522 .

PMC 2900004 .

PMID 20640069 .

^ Williams, George C and Dawkins, R. "Group Selection".

Adaptation and Natural Selection: A Critique of Some Current Evolutionary Thought . Princeton University Press, Princeton; Oxford, 2019, pp. 92–124.

^ Barr, W. Andrew; Pobiner, Briana; Rowan, John; Du, Andrew; Faith, J. Tyler (2022).

"No sustained increase in zooarchaeological evidence for carnivory after the appearance of Homo erectus " .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

119 (5): e2115540119.

Bibcode : 2022PNAS..11915540B .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.2115540119 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 8812535 .

PMID 35074877 .

^ Hoffer A (1989). "Vitamin and Mineral Supplements Increase Intelligence".

Nutrition Health Review .

52 .

^ Previc FH (2009).

The dopaminergic mind in human evolution and history . Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-51699-0 .

Further reading [ edit ] Byrne RW (1995).

The Thinking Ape: Evolutionary origins of intelligence . Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-852188-4 .

Greenspan SI, Shanker S (2004).

The First Idea: How symbols, language, and intelligence evolved from our early primate ancestors to modern humans . Cambridge, Mass.: Da Capo Press.

ISBN 978-0-7382-0680-6 .

Skoyles J , Sagan D (2002).

Up from Dragons: The evolution of human intelligence . New York: McGraw-Hill.

ISBN 978-0-07-137825-3 .

Tobias PV (1971).

The Brain in Hominid Evolution . New York: Columbia University Press.

ISBN 978-0-231-03518-7 .

Roth G, Dicke U (May 2005). "Evolution of the brain and intelligence".

Trends in Cognitive Sciences .

9 (5): 250– 257.

doi : 10.1016/j.tics.2005.03.005 .

PMID 15866152 .

S2CID 14758763 .

Todorov A, Fiske S, Prentice DA (11 February 2011).

Social Neuroscience: Toward Understanding the Underpinnings of the Social Mind . Oxford University Press, USA.

ISBN 978-0-19-531687-2 .

v t e Evolutionary psychology History Evolutionary thought Theoretical foundations Adaptationism Cognitive revolution Cognitivism Gene selection theory Modern synthesis Criticism Evolutionary processes Adaptations Altruism Cheating Hamiltonian spite Reciprocal Baldwin effect By-products Evolutionarily stable strategy Exaptation Fitness Inclusive Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mismatch Natural selection Sexual selection Costly signaling Male / female intrasexual competition Mate choice Sexual dimorphism Social selection Species-typical behavior Areas Cognition / Emotion Affect Display Display rules Facial expression Behavioral modernity Cognitive module / modularity of mind Adaptive unconscious / Unconscious cognition Automatic and controlled processes Cognitive specialization Computational theory of mind Domain generality Domain specificity / learning Dual process theory Cognitive tradeoff hypothesis Evolution of the brain Evolution of nervous systems Fight-or-flight response Arachnophobia Basophobia Ophidiophobia Folk biology / taxonomy Folk psychology / theory of mind Intelligence Flynn effect Wason selection task Motor control / skill Multitasking Numerical cognition Number sense Approximate number system Parallel individuation system Sleep Visual perception Color vision Eye Naïve physics Culture Aesthetics Literary criticism Musicology Anthropology Biological Crime Language Origin Psychology Speech Morality Moral foundations Religion Origin Universals Development Attachment Bonding Affectional / maternal / paternal bond Caregiver deprivation Childhood attachment Cinderella effect Cognitive development Education Language acquisition Personality development Socialization Human factors / Mental health Cognitive ergonomics Computer-mediated communication Engineering psychology Human–computer interaction Media naturalness theory Neuroergonomics Depression Digital media use and mental health Hypophobia Imprinted brain hypothesis Mind-blindness Psychological effects of Internet use Rank theory of depression Schizophrenia Screen time Smartphones and pedestrian safety Social aspects of television Societal effects of cars Distracted driving Lead–crime hypothesis Mobile phones and driving safety Texting while driving Sex Activity Adult attachment Age disparity Arousal Concealed ovulation Coolidge effect Desire Fantasy Hormonal motivation Incest taboo Westermarck effect Jealousy Mate guarding Mating preferences Mating strategies Orientation Ovulatory shift hypothesis Pair bond Physical / Sexual attraction Sexuality / male / female Sexy son hypothesis Sex differences Aggression Autism Cognition Crime Division of labour Emotional intelligence Empathising–systemising theory Gender role Intelligence Memory Mental health Narcissism Neuroscience Schizophrenia Substance abuse Suicide Variability hypothesis Related subjects Academic disciplines Behavioral / evolutionary economics Behavioral epigenetics / genetics Affective / behavioral / cognitive / evolutionary neuroscience Biocultural anthropology Biolinguistics Biological psychiatry Cognitive ethology Cognitive psychology Cognitive science Comparative psychology Cross-cultural psychology Ethology Evolutionary biology Evolutionary medicine Functional psychology Neuropsychology Philosophy of mind Population genetics Primatology Sociobiology Research topics Animal / comparative cognition Animal communication Animal consciousness Animal culture Animal language Animal navigation Animal training Animal-made art Cognitive bias Emotion g factor in non-humans Great ape language Human–animal communication Number sense Primate cognition Theory of mind Tool use Cultural evolution Evolutionary epistemology Missing heritability problem Unit of selection Coevolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Fisher's principle Group selection Hologenome theory Lamarckism / acquired characteristics Population Punctuated equilibrium Recent human evolution Species Species complex Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Trivers–Willard hypothesis Theoretical positions Cultural selection theory Determinism / indeterminism Biological determinism Connectionism Cultural determinism Environmental determinism Nature versus nurture Psychological nativism Social constructionism Social determinism Standard social science model Functionalism Memetics Multilineal evolution Neo-Darwinism Neoevolutionism Sociocultural evolution Unilineal evolution Evolutionary psychologists Evolutionary psychology Psychology portal Evolutionary biology portal v t e Human evolution Taxonomy ( Hominins ) Last common ancestors Chimpanzee–human Gorilla–human Orangutan–human Gibbon–human Australopithecines Nakalipithecus Orrorin Sahelanthropus Kenyanthropus Ardipithecus A. kadabba A. ramidus Australopithecus A. afarensis A. africanus A. anamensis A. bahrelghazali A. deyiremeda A. garhi A. sediba Paranthropus P. aethiopicus P. boisei P. robustus Humans and proto-humans ( Homo ) Proto-humans H. gautengensis (?) H. habilis H. naledi H. rudolfensis (?) Homo erectus H. e. erectus H. e. georgicus H. e. lantianensis H. e. nankinensis H. e. pekinensis H. e. soloensis H. e. tautavelensis H. e. yuanmouensis Archaic humans H. antecessor Denisovans H. ergaster (?) H. floresiensis H. heidelbergensis H. longi (?) H. luzonensis H. neanderthalensis H. rhodesiensis (?) Modern humans Homo sapiens H. s. sapiens (archaic homo sapiens, anatomically modern humans) Jebel Irhoud H. s. idaltu Cro-Magnon Manot people Tam Pa Ling Red Deer Cave people Ancestors Homo habilis → Homo ergaster / Homo erectus (→ Homo antecessor ) ?

→ Homo heidelbergensis → archaic Homo sapiens → Homo sapiens Models General models Hunting Gathering Endurance running Aquatic ape Sexual selection Self-domestication Specific models Diet Cooking Expensive tissue Shore-based Drugs Drunken monkey Evolutionary models of human drug use Stoned ape theory Behavior Killer ape Cooperative eye Life history Grandmother Patriarch Topics Bipedalism Skeleton Muscles Skin color Hair Thermoregulation Speech Language Intelligence Gender roles Origin of modern humans Recent African origin Multiregional origin Archaic admixture Behavioral modernity Early migrations Recent evolution Timelines Human evolution Human prehistory Human timeline Others Theorists Books Fossils Evolutionary anthropology Paleoanthropology Human evolutionary developmental biology Category Commons Evolutionary biology Portal v t e Human intelligence topics Types Collective Emotional Intellectual Linguistic Multiple Social Spatial ( visuospatial ) Abilities , traits, and constructs Cognition Cognitive liberty Communication Creativity Fluid and crystallized intelligence g factor Intellect Intelligence quotient Knowledge Learning Memory Problem solving Reasoning Skill Thought ( abstraction ) Understanding Visual processing Models and theories Cattell–Horn–Carroll theory Fluid and crystallized intelligence Multiple-intelligences theory PASS theory Three-stratum theory Triarchic theory Areas of research Evolution of human intelligence Heritability of IQ Psychometrics Intelligence and environment / fertility / height / health / longevity / neuroscience / personality / race / sex Outline of human intelligence / thought v t e Evolutionary biology Introduction Outline Timeline of evolution History of life Index Evolution Abiogenesis Adaptation Adaptive radiation Altruism Cheating Reciprocal Baldwin effect Cladistics Coevolution Mutualism Common descent Convergence Divergence Earliest known life forms Evidence of evolution Evolutionary arms race Evolutionary pressure Exaptation Extinction Event Homology Last universal common ancestor Macroevolution Microevolution Mismatch Non-adaptive radiation Origin of life Panspermia Parallel evolution Signalling theory Handicap principle Speciation Species Species complex Taxonomy Unit of selection Gene-centered view of evolution Population genetics Artificial selection Biodiversity Evolutionarily stable strategy Fisher's principle Fitness Inclusive Gene flow Genetic drift Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mutation Population Natural selection Sexual dimorphism Sexual selection Flowering plants Fungi Mate choice Social selection Trivers–Willard hypothesis Variation Development Canalisation Evolutionary developmental biology Genetic assimilation Inversion Modularity Phenotypic plasticity Of taxa Bacteria Birds origin Brachiopods Molluscs Cephalopods Dinosaurs Fish Fungi Insects butterflies Life Mammals cats canids wolves dogs hyenas dolphins and whales horses Kangaroos primates humans lemurs sea cows Plants pollinator-mediated Reptiles Spiders Tetrapods Viruses Of organs Cell DNA Flagella Eukaryotes symbiogenesis chromosome endomembrane system mitochondria nucleus plastids In animals eye hair auditory ossicle nervous system brain Of processes Aging Death Programmed cell death Avian flight Biological complexity Cooperation Color vision in primates Emotion Empathy Ethics Eusociality Immune system Metabolism Monogamy Morality Mosaic evolution Multicellularity Sexual reproduction Gamete differentiation/sexes Life cycles/nuclear phases Mating types Meiosis Sex-determination Snake venom Tempo and modes Gradualism / Punctuated equilibrium / Saltationism Micromutation / Macromutation Uniformitarianism / Catastrophism Speciation Allopatric Anagenesis Catagenesis Cladogenesis Cospeciation Ecological Hybrid Non-ecological Parapatric Peripatric Reinforcement Sympatric History Renaissance and Enlightenment Transmutation of species David Hume Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion Charles Darwin On the Origin of Species History of paleontology Transitional fossil Blending inheritance Mendelian inheritance The eclipse of Darwinism Neo-Darwinism Modern synthesis History of molecular evolution Extended evolutionary synthesis Philosophy Darwinism Alternatives Catastrophism Lamarckism Orthogenesis Mutationism Saltationism Structuralism Spandrel Theistic Vitalism Teleology in biology Related Biogeography Ecological genetics Evolutionary medicine Group selection Cultural evolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Hologenome theory of evolution Missing heritability problem Molecular evolution Astrobiology Phylogenetics Tree Polymorphism Protocell Systematics Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Category Portal v t e Animal cognition Cognition Animal communication Animal consciousness Animal culture Animal language Great ape language Talking animal Talking bird Animal-made art Animal navigation Cognitive bias Cognitive ethology Comparative cognition Emotion Insect Mirror test Neuroethology Number sense Observational learning Primate archaeology Theory of mind Tool use sea otters Vocal learning Intelligence Bird Pigeon Cat Cephalopod Cetacean Dog Elephant Fish g factor in non-humans Primate Hominid Swarm Pain Pain in amphibians Pain in animals Pain in cephalopods Pain in crustaceans Pain in fish Pain in invertebrates Relation to brain Brain size Brain-to-body mass ratio Encephalization quotient Neuroscience and intelligence Number of neurons Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐645954cd9f‐h5p9q
Cached time: 20250815211636
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.113 seconds
Real time usage: 2.391 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14488/1000000
Revision size: 128299/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 634171/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7176/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 16/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 701277/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.306/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17956228/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1954.527      1 -total
 58.53% 1144.062      1 Template:Reflist
 26.08%  509.826     86 Template:Cite_journal
 25.83%  504.798     76 Template:Cite_book
  6.98%  136.467      1 Template:Human_timeline
  6.80%  132.955      1 Template:Graphical_timeline
  5.41%  105.649      1 Template:Annotated_link
  4.75%   92.743      1 Template:Short_description
  3.36%   65.648      6 Template:Navbox
  2.88%   56.211      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2452832:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815211636 and revision id 1306084984. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Evolution_of_human_intelligence&oldid=1306084984 " Categories : Evolution-related timelines Human evolution Intelligence Paleolithic Hidden categories: Pages using the EasyTimeline extension CS1: long volume value CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2009 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2019 Articles which contain graphical timelines This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 21:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Evolution of human intelligence 12 languages Add topic

