Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Purpose 2 Requirements of a good foundation 3 Historic types Toggle Historic types subsection 3.1 Earthfast or post in ground construction 3.2 Padstones 3.3 Stone foundations 3.4 Rubble-trench foundations 4 Gallery of shallow foundation types 5 Modern types Toggle Modern types subsection 5.1 Shallow foundations 5.2 Deep foundations 5.2.1 Monopile foundation 5.3 Floating\barge 6 Design 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Foundation (engineering) 60 languages العربية Aragonés Asturianu Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Эрзянь Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Kurdî Кыргызча Lietuvių Македонски മലയാളം Minangkabau Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Tyap Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Betawi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Lowest and supporting layer of a structure This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Foundation" engineering – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Shallow foundations of a house versus the deep foundations of a skyscraper .

Foundation with pipe fixtures coming through the sleeves In engineering, a foundation is the element of a structure which connects it to the ground or more rarely, water (as with floating structures ), transferring loads from the structure to the ground. Foundations are generally considered either shallow or deep .

[ 1 ] Foundation engineering is the application of soil mechanics and rock mechanics ( geotechnical engineering ) in the design of foundation elements of structures.

Purpose [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( January 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Foundations provide the structure's stability from the ground: To distribute the weight of the structure over a large area in order to avoid overloading the underlying soil (possibly causing unequal settlement).

To anchor the structure against natural forces including earthquakes , floods , droughts , frost heaves, tornadoes and wind.

To provide a level surface for construction.

To anchor the structure deeply into the ground, increasing its stability and preventing overloading.

To prevent lateral movements of the supported structure (in some cases).

Requirements of a good foundation [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( January 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Pouring a concrete foundation The design and the construction of a well-performing foundation must possess some basic requirements: [ 2 ] The design and the construction of the foundation is done such that it can sustain as well as transmit the dead and the imposed loads to the soil. This transfer has to be carried out without resulting in any form of settlement that can cause stability issues for the structure.

Differential settlements can be avoided by having a rigid base for the foundation. These issues are more pronounced in areas where the superimposed loads are not uniform in nature.

Based on the soil and area it is recommended to have a deeper foundation so that it can guard any form of damage or distress. These are mainly caused due to the problem of shrinkage and swelling because of temperature changes.

The location of the foundation chosen must be an area that is not affected or influenced by future works or factors.

Historic types [ edit ] The simplest foundation, a padstone.

The Ethnographic Open-Air Museum of Latvia Earthfast or post in ground construction [ edit ] Buildings and structures have a long history of being built with wood in contact with the ground.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Post in ground construction may technically have no foundation.

Timber pilings were used on soft or wet ground even below stone or masonry walls.

[ 5 ] In marine construction and bridge building a crisscross of timbers or steel beams in concrete is called grillage.

[ 6 ] Padstones [ edit ] Perhaps the simplest foundation is the padstone, a single stone which both spreads the weight on the ground and raises the timber off the ground.

[ 7 ] Staddle stones are a specific type of padstone.

Stone foundations [ edit ] Dry stone and stones laid in mortar to build foundations are common in many parts of the world. Dry laid stone foundations may have been painted with mortar after construction. Sometimes the top, visible course of stone is hewn, quarried stones.

[ 8 ] Besides using mortar, stones can also be put in a gabion .

[ 9 ] One disadvantage is that if using regular steel rebars , the gabion would last much less long than when using mortar (due to rusting). Using weathering steel rebars could reduce this disadvantage somewhat.

Rubble-trench foundations [ edit ] Main article: Rubble trench foundation Rubble trench foundations are a shallow trench filled with rubble or stones. These foundations extend below the frost line and may have a drain pipe which helps groundwater drain away. They are suitable for soils with a capacity of more than 10 tonnes/m 2 (2,000 pounds per square foot).

Gallery of shallow foundation types [ edit ] Drawing of Poteaux-en-Terre post in ground type of wall construction (this example technically called pallisade construction) in the Beauvais House in Ste Genevieve, Missouri PSM V24 D321 A primitive stilt house in Switzerland on wood pilings .

A granary on staddle stones , a type of padstone Black Eagle Dam – cross-section of construction plans for 1892 structure Davis House dry-laid stone foundation ruin, Gardiner, NY A basic type of rubble trench foundation Typical residential poured concrete foundation, except for the lack of anchor bolts . The concrete walls are supported on continuous footings. There is also a concrete slab floor. Note the standing water in the perimeter French drain trenches.

Modular building to be placed on the foundation Modern types [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( January 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Shallow foundations [ edit ] Main article: Shallow foundation Shallow foundation construction example Often called footings , are usually embedded about a meter or so into soil . One common type is the spread footing which consists of strips or pads of concrete (or other materials) which extend below the frost line and transfer the weight from walls and columns to the soil or bedrock .

Another common type of shallow foundation is the slab-on-grade foundation where the weight of the structure is transferred to the soil through a concrete slab placed at the surface. Slab-on-grade foundations can be reinforced mat slabs, which range from 25 cm to several meters thick, depending on the size of the building, or post-tensioned slabs, which are typically at least 20 cm for houses, and thicker for heavier structures.

Another way to install ready-to-build foundations that is more environmentally friendly is to use screw piles . Screw pile installations have also extended to residential applications, with many homeowners choosing a screw pile foundation over other options. Some common applications for helical pile foundations include wooden decks, fences, garden houses, pergolas, and carports.

Deep foundations [ edit ] Main article: Deep foundation Used to transfer the load of a structure down through the upper weak layer of topsoil to the stronger layer of subsoil below. There are different types of deep footings including impact driven piles, drilled shafts, caissons , screw piles , geo-piers [ clarification needed ] and earth-stabilized columns [ clarification needed ] . The naming conventions for different types of footings vary between different engineers. Historically, piles were wood , later steel , reinforced concrete , and pre-tensioned concrete .

Monopile foundation [ edit ] Main article: Monopile foundation A type of deep foundation which uses a single, generally large-diameter, structural element embedded into the earth to support all the loads (weight, wind, etc.) of a large above-surface structure.

Many monopile foundations [ 10 ] have been used in recent years for economically constructing fixed-bottom offshore wind farms in shallow-water subsea locations.

[ 11 ] For example, a single wind farm off the coast of England went online in 2008 with over 100 turbines, each mounted on a 4.74-meter-diameter monopile footing in ocean depths up to 16 meters of water.

[ 12 ] Floating\barge [ edit ] A floating foundation is one that sits on a body of water, rather than dry land. This type of foundation is used for some bridges and floating buildings.

Design [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( January 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Inadequate foundations in muddy soils below sea level caused these houses in the Netherlands to subside .

Foundations are designed to have an adequate load capacity depending on the type of subsoil/rock supporting the foundation by a geotechnical engineer , and the footing itself may be designed structurally by a structural engineer . The primary design concerns are settlement and bearing capacity . When considering settlement, total settlement and differential settlement is normally considered. Differential settlement is when one part of a foundation settles more than another part. This can cause problems to the structure which the foundation is supporting.

Expansive clay soils can also cause problems.

See also [ edit ] Underpinning Structural settlement Interference of the footings References [ edit ] ^ Terzaghi, Karl ; Peck, Ralph Brazelton ; Mesri, Gholamreza (1996), Soil mechanics in engineering practice (3rd ed.), New York: John Wiley & Sons, p. 386, ISBN 0-471-08658-4 ^ Ventura, Pierfranco (2019).

Fondazioni (in Italian). Milano: Hoepli.

ISBN 9788820386443 .

^ Crabtree, Pam J.. Medieval archaeology: an encyclopedia. New York: Garland Pub., 2001. 113.

^ Edwards, Jay Dearborn, and Nicolas Verton. A Creole lexicon architecture, landscape, people. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2004. 92.

^ Nicholson, Peter. Practical Masonry, Bricklaying and Plastering, Both Plain and Ornamental. Thomas Kelly: London. 1838. 30–31.

^ Beohar, Rakesh Ranjan. Basic Civil Engineering. 2005. 90.

ISBN 8170087937 ^ Darvill, Timothy. The concise Oxford dictionary of archaeology. 6th ed. [i.e. 2nd ed. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press, 2008. Padstone.

ISBN 0199534047 ^ Garvin, James L..

A building history of northern New England . Hanover: University Press of New England, 2001. 10. Print.

^ Stones in gabion for foundation, done in Diez Casas Para Diez Familias (10x10)'s Casa Rosenda; see Design Like You Give a Damn 2 book by Kate Stohr ^ Offshore Wind Turbine Foundations Archived 2010-02-28 at the Wayback Machine , 2009-09-09, accessed 2010-04-12.

^ Constructing a turbine foundation Archived 2011-05-21 at the Wayback Machine Horns Rev project, Elsam monopile foundation construction process, accessed 2010-04-12 ^ "Lynn & Inner Dowsing Offshore Wind Farms" . MT Højgaard. Archived from the original on 20 December 2016 . Retrieved 15 September 2016 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Foundations (architecture) .

Common examples of possible deformations of foundations arising from improper construction.

v t e Geotechnical engineering Offshore geotechnical engineering Investigation and instrumentation Field ( in situ ) Core drill Cone penetration test Geo-electrical sounding Permeability test Load test Static Dynamic Statnamic Pore pressure measurement Piezometer Well Ram sounding Rock control drilling Rotary-pressure sounding Rotary weight sounding Sample series Screw plate test Deformation monitoring Inclinometer Settlement recordings Shear vane test Simple sounding Standard penetration test Total sounding Trial pit Visible bedrock Nuclear densometer test Exploration geophysics Crosshole sonic logging Pile integrity test Wave equation analysis Laboratory testing Soil classification Atterberg limits California bearing ratio Direct shear test Hydrometer Proctor compaction test R-value Sieve analysis Triaxial shear test Oedometer test Hydraulic conductivity tests Water content tests Soil Types Clay Silt Sand Gravel Peat Loam Loess Properties Hydraulic conductivity Water content Void ratio Bulk density Thixotropy Reynolds' dilatancy Angle of repose Friction angle Cohesion Porosity Permeability Specific storage Shear strength Sensitivity Structures ( Interaction ) Natural features Topography Vegetation Terrain Topsoil Water table Bedrock Subgrade Subsoil Earthworks Shoring structures Retaining walls Gabion Ground freezing Mechanically stabilized earth Pressure grouting Slurry wall Soil nailing Tieback Land development Landfill Excavation Trench Embankment Cut Causeway Terracing Cut-and-cover Cut and fill Fill dirt Grading Land reclamation Track bed Erosion control Earth structure Expanded clay aggregate Crushed stone Geosynthetics Geotextile Geomembrane Geosynthetic clay liner Cellular confinement Infiltration Foundations Shallow Deep Mechanics Forces Effective stress Pore water pressure Lateral earth pressure Overburden pressure Preconsolidation pressure Phenomena/ problems Permafrost Frost heaving Consolidation Compaction Earthquake Response spectrum Seismic hazard Shear wave Landslide analysis Stability analysis Mitigation Classification Sliding criterion Slab stabilisation Bearing capacity * Stress distribution in soil Numerical analysis software SEEP2D STABL SVFlux SVSlope UTEXAS Plaxis Related fields Geology Geochemistry Petrology Earthquake engineering Geomorphology Soil science Hydrology Hydrogeology Biogeography Earth materials Archaeology Agricultural science Agrology v t e Rooms and spaces of a house Shared rooms Bonus room Common room Den Dining room Family room Garret Great room Home cinema Keeping room Kitchen dirty kitchen kitchenette Living room Gynaeceum harem Andron man cave Recreation room billiard room Shrine Study Sunroom Private rooms Bathroom toilet Bedroom closet Bedsit Boudoir Cabinet Nursery Spaces Atrium Balcony Breezeway Conversation pit Cubby-hole Deck Elevator dumbwaiter Entryway / Genkan Fireplace hearth Foyer Hall Hallway Inglenook Lanai Loft Loggia Overhang Patio Porch screened sleeping Ramp Secret passage Stairs / Staircase Terrace Veranda Vestibule Technical , utility and storage Attic Basement Carport Cloakroom Closet Crawl space Electrical room Equipment room Furnace room / Boiler room Garage Janitorial closet Larder Laundry room / Utility room / Storage room Mechanical room / floor Pantry Root cellar Semi-basement Storm cellar / Safe room Studio Wardrobe Wine cellar Wiring closet Workshop Great house areas Antechamber Ballroom Kitchen-related butler's pantry buttery saucery scullery spicery still room Conservatory / Orangery Courtyard Drawing room Great chamber Great hall Library Long gallery Lumber room Parlour Sauna Servants' hall Servants' quarters Smoking room Solar State room Swimming pool Turret Undercroft Other Furniture Hidden room House house plan styles types Multi-family residential Secondary suite Duplex Terraced Detached Semi-detached Townhouse Studio apartment Architectural elements Arch Balconet Baluster Belt course Bressummer Ceiling Chimney Colonnade / Portico Column Cornice / Eaves Dome Door Ell Floor Foundation Gable Gate Portal Lighting Molding Ornament Plumbing Quoins Roof shingles Roof lantern Sill plate Style list Skylight Threshold Transom Vault Wall Window Related Backyard Driveway Front yard Garden roof garden Home Home improvement Home repair Shed Tree house Category: Rooms Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐8x8gq
Cached time: 20250817102739
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.543 seconds
Real time usage: 0.729 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2376/1000000
Revision size: 12670/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 126789/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6995/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 62123/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.308/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6874856/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  562.640      1 -total
 23.29%  131.044      1 Template:Reflist
 21.65%  121.805      6 Template:Navbox
 16.68%   93.834      1 Template:Geotechnical_engineering
 14.69%   82.668      1 Template:Citation
 12.65%   71.190      5 Template:Ambox
 12.55%   70.598      2 Template:More_citations_needed
 11.55%   64.960      1 Template:Short_description
  8.92%   50.162      1 Template:Commons_category
  8.57%   48.232      1 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:693334:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817102739 and revision id 1270004077. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Foundation_(engineering)&oldid=1270004077 " Categories : Architectural elements Foundations (buildings and structures) Bridge components Hidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2024 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2020 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 17 January 2025, at 13:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Foundation (engineering) 60 languages Add topic

