Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Types of use 3 Distribution 4 Adverbs 5 Determiners 6 Adjective phrases 7 Other modifiers of nouns 8 Order 9 Comparison (degrees) 10 Restrictiveness 11 Agreement 12 Semantics 13 See also 14 Explanatory notes 15 References 16 Further reading 17 External links Toggle the table of contents Adjective 128 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dagbanli Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Эрзянь Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ქართული کٲشُر Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Lingála Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Олык марий Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Перем коми ភាសាខ្មែរ Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski Ποντιακά Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Volapük Walon 文言 Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 ꠍꠤꠟꠐꠤ Tolışi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of speech that defines a noun or pronoun An adjective ( abbreviated ADJ ) is a word that describes or defines a noun or noun phrase . Its semantic role is to change information given by the noun.

Traditionally, adjectives are considered one of the main parts of speech of the English language, although historically they were classed together with nouns .

[ 1 ] Nowadays, certain words that usually had been classified as adjectives, including the , this , my , etc., typically are classed separately, as determiners .

Examples: That's a funny idea. (Prepositive attributive ) That idea is funny . ( Predicative ) Tell me something funny . ( Postpositive attributive) The good , the bad , and the funny . ( Substantive ) Clara Oswald , completely fictional , died three times. ( Appositive ) Etymology [ edit ] See also: Part of speech § History , and Noun § History Adjective comes from Latin nōmen adjectīvum , [ 2 ] a calque of Ancient Greek : ἐπίθετον ὄνομα (surname) , romanized : epítheton ónoma , lit.

'additional noun' (whence also English epithet ).

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] In the grammatical tradition of Latin and Greek, because adjectives were inflected for gender, number, and case like nouns (a process called declension ), they were considered a type of noun. The words that are today typically called nouns were then called substantive nouns ( nōmen substantīvum ).

[ 5 ] The terms noun substantive and noun adjective were formerly used in English but are now obsolete.

[ 6 ] Types of use [ edit ] Depending on the language, an adjective can precede a corresponding noun on a prepositive basis or it can follow a corresponding noun on a postpositive basis. Structural, contextual, and style considerations can impinge on the pre-or post-position of an adjective in a given instance of its occurrence. In English, occurrences of adjectives generally can be classified into one of three categories: Within a noun phrase , a prepositive adjective is antecedent to the head noun, which it modifies attributively.

[ 7 ] For example, in "I put my happy kids into the car", happy occurs on an antecedent basis within the my happy kids noun phrase ( kids being its head), and is therefore a prepositive adjective.

Postpositive adjectives occur after the noun or pronoun they modify: within a noun phrase, immediately subsequent to the head noun or pronoun, which it modifies attributively , e.g. "The only room available cost twice what we expected"; in an adjacent appositive phrase, e.g. "My kid, happy as a clam, was already in the back seat"; or linked to the noun or pronoun via a copular , resultative , depictive or other linking mechanism, as a predicative adjective , e.g. "My kids are happy ", "I wiped the table clean " and " We danced naked in the rain" [ 7 ] (see Subject complement , Object complement ).

Nominalized adjectives , which function as nouns. One way this happens is by eliding a noun from an adjective-noun noun phrase, whose remnant thus is a nominalization . In the sentence, "I read two books to them; he preferred the sad book, but she preferred the happy", happy is a nominalized adjective, short for "happy one" or "happy book". Another way this happens is in absolute phrases like "out with the old, in with the new", where "the old" means "that which is old" or "all that is old", and similarly with "the new". In such cases, the adjective may function as a mass noun (as in the preceding example). In English, it may also function as a plural count noun denoting a collective group, as in "The meek shall inherit the Earth", where "the meek" means "those who are meek" or "all who are meek".

Distribution [ edit ] Adjectives feature as a part of speech (word class) in most languages . In some languages, the words that serve the semantic function of adjectives are categorized together with some other class, such as nouns or verbs . In the phrase a Ford car , Ford is unquestionably a noun but its function is adjectival ( noun adjunct , see below ): to modify car .

In some languages adjectives can function as nouns: for example, the Spanish phrase un rojo means ' a red [one] ' . This is also possible in English, see above . However, such nominalized adjectives mostly refer to people and are more commonly found in the plural: Reds or a Red (most commonly in the sense of ' communist ' ), the rich and the famous , the oppressed , the poorer or the poorest , or (not for people) (to venture into) the unknown , the obvious , etc., though use in the singular such as a poor (also the plural (the) poors unlike the poor ) or a gay (less so (the) gays ) is widely considered dated and generally avoided.

As for "confusion" with verbs, rather than an adjective meaning "big", a language might have a verb that means "to be big" and could then use an attributive verb construction analogous to "big-being house" to express what in English is called a "big house". Such an analysis is possible for the grammar of Standard Chinese and Korean , for example.

Different languages do not use adjectives in exactly the same situations. For example, where English uses " to be hungry " ( hungry being an adjective), Dutch , French , and Spanish use " honger hebben ", " avoir faim ", and " tener hambre " respectively (literally "to have hunger", the words for "hunger" being nouns). Similarly, where Hebrew uses the adjective זקוק ‎ ( zaqūq , roughly "in need of" or "needing"), English uses the verb "to need".

In languages that have adjectives as a word class, it is usually an open class ; that is, it is relatively common for new adjectives to be formed via such processes as derivation . However, Bantu languages are well known for having only a small closed class of adjectives, and new adjectives are not easily derived. Similarly, native Japanese adjectives ( i -adjectives) are considered a closed class (as are native verbs), although nouns (an open class) may be used in the genitive to convey some adjectival meanings, and there is also the separate open class of adjectival nouns ( na -adjectives).

Adverbs [ edit ] Many languages (including English) distinguish between adjectives, which qualify nouns and pronouns, and adverbs , which mainly modify verbs , adjectives, or other adverbs. Not all languages make this exact distinction; many (including English) have words that can function as either. For example, in English, fast is an adjective in "a fast car" (where it qualifies the noun car ) but an adverb in "he drove fast " (where it modifies the verb drove ).

In Dutch and German , adjectives and adverbs are usually identical in form and many grammarians do not make the distinction, but patterns of inflection can suggest a difference: Eine kluge neue Idee.

A clever new idea.

Eine klug ausgereifte Idee.

A cleverly developed idea.

A German word like klug ("clever(ly)") takes endings when used as an attributive adjective but not when used adverbially. Whether these are distinct parts of speech or distinct usages of the same part of speech is a question of analysis. While German linguistic terminology distinguishes adverbiale from adjektivische Formen , German refers to both as Eigenschaftswörter ("property words").

Determiners [ edit ] Main article: Determiner Linguists today distinguish determiners from adjectives, considering them to be two separate parts of speech (or lexical categories ). Determiners formerly were considered to be adjectives in some of their uses.

[ a ] Determiners function neither as nouns nor pronouns but instead characterize a nominal element within a particular context. They generally do this by indicating definiteness ( a vs.

the ), quantity ( one vs.

some vs.

many ), or another such property.

Adjective phrases [ edit ] Main article: Adjective phrase An adjective acts as the head of an adjective phrase or adjectival phrase (AP). In the simplest case, an adjective phrase consists solely of the adjective; more complex adjective phrases may contain one or more adverbs modifying the adjective (" very strong"), or one or more complements (such as "worth several dollars ", "full of toys ", or "eager to please "). In English, attributive adjective phrases that include complements typically follow the noun that they qualify ("an evildoer devoid of redeeming qualities ").

Other modifiers of nouns [ edit ] In many languages (including English) it is possible for nouns to modify other nouns. Unlike adjectives, nouns acting as modifiers (called attributive nouns or noun adjuncts ) usually are not predicative; a beautiful park is beautiful, but a car park is not "car". The modifier often indicates origin (" Virginia reel"), purpose (" work clothes"), semantic patient (" man eater") or semantic subject (" child actor"); however, it may generally indicate almost any semantic relationship. It is also common for adjectives to be derived from nouns, as in boyish , birdlike , behavioral (behavioural) , famous , manly , angelic , and so on.

In Australian Aboriginal languages , the distinction between adjectives and nouns is typically thought weak, and many of the languages only use nouns, or nouns with a limited set of adjective-deriving affixes , to modify other nouns. In languages that have a subtle adjective-noun distinction, one way to tell them apart is that a modifying adjective can come to stand in for an entire elided noun phrase, while a modifying noun cannot. For example, in Bardi , the adjective moorrooloo ' little ' in the phrase moorrooloo baawa ' little child ' can stand on its own to mean ' the little one ' , while the attributive noun aamba ' man ' in the phrase aamba baawa ' male child ' cannot stand for the whole phrase to mean ' the male one ' .

[ 8 ] In other languages, like Warlpiri , nouns and adjectives are lumped together beneath the nominal umbrella because of their shared syntactic distribution as arguments of predicates . The only thing distinguishing them is that some nominals seem to semantically denote entities (typically nouns in English) and some nominals seem to denote attributes (typically adjectives in English).

[ 9 ] Many languages have participle forms that can act as noun modifiers either alone or as the head of a phrase. Sometimes participles develop into functional usage as adjectives. Examples in English include relieved (the past participle of relieve ), used as an adjective in passive voice constructs such as "I am so relieved to see you". Other examples include spoken (the past participle of speak ) and going (the present participle of go ), which function as attribute adjectives in such phrases as "the spoken word" and "the going rate".

Other constructs that often modify nouns include prepositional phrases (as in "a rebel without a cause "), relative clauses (as in "the man who wasn't there "), and infinitive phrases (as in "a cake to die for "). Some nouns can also take complements such as content clauses (as in "the idea that I would do that "), but these are not commonly considered modifiers . For more information about possible modifiers and dependents of nouns, see Components of noun phrases .

Order [ edit ] In many languages, attributive adjectives usually occur in a specific order. In general, the adjective order in English can be summarised as: opinion, size, age or shape, colour, origin, material, purpose.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Other language authorities, like the Cambridge Dictionary , state that shape precedes rather than follows age.

[ 10 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] Determiners and postdeterminers—articles, numerals, and other limiters (e.g.

three blind mice)—come before attributive adjectives in English. Although certain combinations of determiners can appear before a noun, they are far more circumscribed than adjectives in their use—typically, only a single determiner would appear before a noun or noun phrase (including any attributive adjectives).

Opinion – limiter adjectives (e.g. a real hero, a perfect idiot) and adjectives of subjective measure (e.g.

beautiful , supportive ) or value (e.g.

good , bad , costly ) Size – adjectives denoting physical size (e.g.

tiny , big , extensive ) Age – adjectives denoting age (e.g.

young , old , new , ancient , six-year-old ) Shape or physical quality – adjectives describing more detailed physical attributes than overall size (e.g.

round , sharp , turgid , thin ) Colour – adjectives denoting colour or pattern (e.g.

white , black , pale , splotchy ) Origin – denominal adjectives denoting source (e.g.

Japanese , volcanic , extraterrestrial ) Material – denominal adjectives denoting what something is made of (e.g., plastic , metallic , wooden ) Qualifier/purpose – final limiter, which sometimes forms part of the (compound) noun (e.g., high chair, northern cabin, passenger car, book cover) This means that, in English, adjectives pertaining to size precede adjectives pertaining to age ("little old", not "old little"), which in turn generally precede adjectives pertaining to colour ("old white", not "white old"). So, one would say "One (quantity) nice (opinion) little (size) old (age) round (shape) [ or round old] white (colour) brick (material) house." When several adjectives of the same type are used together, they are ordered from general to specific, like "lovely intelligent person" or "old medieval castle".

[ 10 ] This order may be more rigid in some languages than others; in some, like Spanish, it may only be a default ( unmarked ) word order, with other orders being permissible. Other languages, such as Tagalog , follow their adjectival orders as rigidly as English.

The normal adjectival order of English may be overridden in certain circumstances, especially when one adjective is being fronted or with ablaut reduplication . For example, the usual order of adjectives in English would result in the phrase "the bad big wolf" (opinion before size), but instead, the usual phrase is "the big bad wolf".

Owing partially to borrowings from French, English has some adjectives that follow the noun as postmodifiers , called postpositive adjectives , as in time immemorial and attorney general . Adjectives may even change meaning depending on whether they precede or follow, as in proper : "They live in a proper town " (a real town, not a village) vs. "They live in the town proper (in the town itself, not in the suburbs). All adjectives can follow objects or subjects in elliptical constructions, such as "tell me something [that is] new " or "We ate the pizza [that was] cold ." Comparison (degrees) [ edit ] Main articles: Comparison (grammar) and Comparative In many languages, some adjectives are comparable and the measure of comparison is called degree . For example, a person may be "polite", but another person may be " more polite", and a third person may be the " most polite" of the three. The word "more" here modifies the adjective "polite" to indicate a comparison is being made, and "most" modifies the adjective to indicate an absolute comparison (a superlative ).

Among languages that allow adjectives to be compared, different means are used to indicate comparison. Some languages do not distinguish between comparative and superlative forms. Other languages allow adjectives to be compared but do not have a special comparative form of the adjective. In such cases, as in some Australian Aboriginal languages , case-marking, such as the ablative case , may be used to indicate one entity has more of an adjectival quality than (i.e.

from —hence ABL) another.

[ 8 ] In English, many adjectives can be inflected to comparative and superlative forms by taking the suffixes "-er" and "-est" (sometimes requiring additional letters before the suffix; see forms for far below), respectively: "great", "greater", "greatest" "deep", "deeper", "deepest" Some adjectives are irregular in this sense: "good", "better", "best" "bad", "worse", "worst" "many", "more", "most" (sometimes regarded as an adverb or determiner ) "little", "less", "least" Some adjectives can have both regular and irregular variations: "old", "older", "oldest" "far", "farther", "farthest" also "old", "elder", "eldest" "far", "further", "furthest" Another way to convey comparison is by incorporating the words "more" and "most". There is no simple rule to decide which means is correct for any given adjective, however. The general tendency is for simpler adjectives and those from Anglo-Saxon to take the suffixes, while longer adjectives and those from French , Latin , or Greek do not—but sometimes the sound of the word is the deciding factor.

Many adjectives do not naturally lend themselves to comparison. For example, some English speakers would argue that it does not make sense to say that one thing is "more ultimate" than another, or that something is "most ultimate", since the word "ultimate" is already absolute in its semantics. Such adjectives are called non-comparable or absolute . Nevertheless, native speakers will frequently play with the raised forms of adjectives of this sort. Although "pregnant" is logically non-comparable (either one is pregnant or not), one may hear a sentence like "She looks more and more pregnant each day".

Comparative and superlative forms are also occasionally used for other purposes than comparison. In English comparatives can be used to suggest that a statement is only tentative or tendential: one might say "John is more the shy-and-retiring type", where the comparative "more" is not really comparing him with other people or with other impressions of him, but rather, could be substituting for "on the whole" or "more so than not". In Italian, superlatives are frequently used to put strong emphasis on an adjective: bellissimo means "most beautiful", but is in fact more commonly heard in the sense "extremely beautiful".

Restrictiveness [ edit ] Main article: Restrictiveness Attributive adjectives and other noun modifiers may be used either restrictively (helping to identify the noun's referent, hence "restricting" its reference) or non-restrictively (helping to describe a noun). For example: "He was a lazy sort, who would avoid a difficult task and fill his working hours with easy ones." Here "difficult" is restrictive – it tells which tasks he avoids, distinguishing these from the easy ones: "Only those tasks that are difficult".

"She had the job of sorting out the mess left by her predecessor, and she performed this difficult task with great acumen." Here difficult is non-restrictive – it is already known which task it was, but the adjective describes it more fully: "The aforementioned task, which (by the way) is difficult." In some languages, such as Spanish , restrictiveness is consistently marked; for example, in Spanish la tarea difícil means "the difficult task" in the sense of "the task that is difficult" (restrictive), whereas la difícil tarea means "the difficult task" in the sense of "the task, which is difficult" (non-restrictive). In English, restrictiveness is not marked on adjectives but is marked on relative clauses (the difference between "the man who recognized me was there" and "the man, who recognized me , was there" being one of restrictiveness).

Agreement [ edit ] Main article: Agreement (linguistics) In some languages, adjectives alter their form to reflect the gender, case and number of the noun that they describe. This is called agreement or concord. Usually it takes the form of inflections at the end of the word, as in Latin : puella bon a (good girl, feminine singular nominative) puellam bon am (good girl, feminine singular accusative/object case) puer bon us (good boy, masculine singular nominative) pueri bon i (good boys, masculine plural nominative) In Celtic languages , however, initial consonant lenition marks the adjective with a feminine singular noun, as in Irish : buachaill m aith (good boy, masculine) girseach mh aith (good girl, feminine) Here, a distinction may be made between attributive and predicative usage. In English, adjectives never agree, whereas in French, they always agree. In German, they agree only when they are used attributively, and in Hungarian, they agree only when they are used predicatively: The good (Ø) boys .

The boys are good (Ø).

Les bon s garçons .

Les garçons sont bon s.

Die brav en Jungen .

Die Jungen sind brav (Ø).

A jó (Ø) fiúk.

A fiúk jó k.

Semantics [ edit ] This section needs expansion with: other aspects of adjective semantics. You can help by adding to it .

( talk ) ( August 2022 ) Semanticist Barbara Partee classifies adjectives semantically as intersective , subsective , or nonsubsective, with nonsubsective adjectives being plain nonsubsective or privative .

[ 15 ] An adjective is intersective if and only if the extension of its combination with a noun is equal to the intersection of its extension and that of the noun its modifying. For example, the adjective carnivorous is intersective, given the extension of carnivorous mammal is the intersection of the extensions of carnivorous and mammal (i.e., the set of all mammals who are carnivorous).

An adjective is subsective if and only if the extension of its combination with a noun is a subset of the extension of the noun. For example, the extension of skillful surgeon is a subset of the extension of surgeon , but it is not the intersection of that and the extension of skillful , as that would include (for example) incompetent surgeons who are skilled violinists. All intersective adjectives are subsective, but the term 'subsective' is sometimes used to refer to only those subsective adjectives which are not intersective.

An adjective is privative if and only if the extension of its combination with a noun is disjoint from the extension of the noun. For example, fake is privative because a fake cat is not a cat.

A plain nonsubsective adjective is an adjective that is not subsective or privative. For example, the word possible is this kind of adjective, as the extension of possible murderer overlaps with, but is not included in the extension of murderer (as some, but not all, possible murderers are murderers).

See also [ edit ] Flat adverb List of eponymous adjectives in English Predication (philosophy) Proper adjective Explanatory notes [ edit ] ^ In English dictionaries, which typically still do not treat determiners as their own part of speech, determiners are often recognizable by being listed both as adjectives and as pronouns.

References [ edit ] ^ Trask, R.L.

(2013).

A Dictionary of Grammatical Terms in Linguistics . Taylor & Francis. p. 188.

ISBN 978-1-134-88420-9 .

^ adjectivus . Charlton T. Lewis and Charles Short.

A Latin Dictionary on Perseus Project .

^ ἐπίθετος .

Liddell, Henry George ; Scott, Robert ; A Greek–English Lexicon at the Perseus Project ^ Mastronarde, Donald J.

Introduction to Attic Greek . University of California Press, 2013.

p. 60 .

^ McMenomy, Bruce A.

Syntactical Mechanics: A New Approach to English, Latin, and Greek . University of Oklahoma Press, 2014. p. 8.

^ Trask, R.L.

(2013).

A Dictionary of Grammatical Terms in Linguistics . Taylor & Francis. p. 188.

ISBN 978-1-134-88420-9 .

^ a b See: "Attributive and predicative adjectives" at Lexico , archived 15 May 2020.

^ a b Bowern, Claire (2013).

A grammar of Bardi . Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton.

ISBN 978-3-11-027818-7 .

OCLC 848086054 .

^ Simpson, Jane (6 December 2012).

Warlpiri Morpho-Syntax : a Lexicalist Approach . Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands.

ISBN 978-94-011-3204-6 .

OCLC 851384391 .

^ a b c Order of adjectives , British Council.

^ R.M.W. Dixon, "Where Have all the Adjectives Gone?" Studies in Language 1, no. 1 (1977): 19–80.

^ Dowling, Tim (13 September 2016).

"Order force: the old grammar rule we all obey without realising" .

The Guardian .

^ Adjectives: order (from English Grammar Today) , in the Cambridge Advanced Learner's Dictionary online ^ R. Declerck, A Comprehensive Descriptive Grammar of English (1991), p. 350: "When there are several descriptive adjectives, they normally occur in the following order: characteristic – size – shape – age – colour – [...]" ^ Partee, Barbara (1995). "Lexical semantics and compositionality". In Gleitman, Lila; Liberman, Mark; Osherson, Daniel N. (eds.).

An Invitation to Cognitive Science: Language . The MIT Press.

doi : 10.7551/mitpress/3964.003.0015 .

ISBN 978-0-262-15044-6 .

Further reading [ edit ] Dixon, R. M. W. (1977). "Where Have All the Adjectives Gone?".

Studies in Language .

1 : 19– 80.

doi : 10.1075/sl.1.1.04dix .

Dixon, R. M. W. (1993). R. E. Asher (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics (1st ed.). Pergamon Press Inc. pp.

29– 35.

ISBN 0-08-035943-4 .

Dixon, R. M. W. (1999). "Adjectives". In K. Brown & T. Miller (eds.), Concise Encyclopedia of Grammatical Categories . Amsterdam: Elsevier.

ISBN 0-08-043164-X . pp. 1–8.

Rießler, Michael (2016).

Adjective Attribution .

Language Science Press .

ISBN 9783944675657 .

Warren, Beatrice (1984).

Classifying adjectives . Gothenburg studies in English No. 56. Göteborg: Acta Universitatis Gothoburgensis.

ISBN 91-7346-133-4 .

Wierzbicka, Anna (1986). "What's in a Noun? (Or: How Do Nouns Differ in Meaning from Adjectives?)".

Studies in Language .

10 (2): 353– 389.

doi : 10.1075/sl.10.2.05wie .

External links [ edit ] Look up adjective in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Look up predicative adjective in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

List of English collateral adjectives at Wiktionary v t e Lexical categories and their features Noun Abstract / Concrete Adjectival Agent Animacy Bare Collective Countable Initial-stress-derived Mass Noun adjunct Proper Relational Strong / Weak Verbal Verb Forms Attributive Converb Finite / Nonfinite Gerund Gerundive Infinitive Participle Supine Transgressive Verbal noun Types Ambitransitive Andative / Venitive Anticausative Autocausative Auxiliary Captative Catenative Compound Copular Defective Denominal Deponent Ditransitive Dynamic Exceptional case-marking Frequentative Germanic strong Germanic weak Impersonal Inchoative Intransitive Labile Lexical Light Modal Negative Performative Phrasal Predicative Preterite-present Pure Reflexive Regular / Irregular Separable Stative Stretched Transitive Unaccusative Unergative Adjective Anti-intersective Collateral Common Demonstrative Intersective Nominalized Non-intersective Possessive Postpositive Proper Pure intersective Relative subsective Subsective Adverb Conjunctive Flat Genitive Interrogative Locative Prepositional Pronominal Relative Pronoun Bound variable Demonstrative Disjunctive Distributive Donkey Dummy Formal / Informal Gender-neutral / Gender-specific Inclusive / Exclusive Indefinite Intensive Interrogative Personal Possessive Reciprocal Reflexive Relative Resumptive Strong / Weak Subject / Object / Prepositional Adposition Casally modulated Inflected Stranded Determiner Article Demonstrative Interrogative Possessive Quantifier Particle Discourse Interrogative Modal Noun Possessive Other Classifier Measure word Complementizer Conjunction Copula Coverb Interjection Ideophone Onomatopoeia Preverb Procedure word Pro-form Pro-verb / Pro-sentence Prop-word Syntax–semantics interface Yes and no Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX v t e Adjectives of the world's languages Phonologies Orthographies Grammars Adjectives Determiners Nouns Prepositions Pronouns Verbs English German Japanese Spanish NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐sfspg
Cached time: 20250814215407
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.578 seconds
Real time usage: 0.715 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2878/1000000
Revision size: 30099/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 77349/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2688/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 72078/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.391/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 12975954/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  617.224      1 -total
 20.48%  126.422      2 Template:Reflist
 19.07%  117.715     17 Template:Lang
 16.36%  101.000      7 Template:Cite_book
 11.71%   72.264      1 Template:Lexical_categories
 11.65%   71.906      2 Template:Navbox
  9.68%   59.749      1 Template:Short_description
  8.52%   52.577      1 Template:Authority_control
  6.76%   41.719      1 Template:Expand_section
  6.44%   39.728      1 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:37512:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215407 and revision id 1291880472. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Adjective&oldid=1291880472 " Category : Adjectives Hidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2019 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles containing Dutch-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Articles to be expanded from August 2022 All articles to be expanded This page was last edited on 23 May 2025, at 23:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Adjective 128 languages Add topic

