Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 By country Toggle By country subsection 2.1 Australia 2.2 Canada 2.3 France 2.4 Germany 2.5 Greece 2.6 Iceland 2.7 India 2.8 Russia 2.9 Sweden 2.10 United Kingdom 2.11 United States 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Government agency 44 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ລາວ Magyar Македонски مصرى Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Walon ייִדיש 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Organization in a government responsible about specific functions Not to be confused with State news agency .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( September 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Government agency" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Various headquarters for United States federal government agencies along Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington, D.C.

, including the Federal Triangle , J. Edgar Hoover Building , and National Archives Building . Also visible is the United States Capitol .

A government agency or state agency , sometimes an appointed commission , is a permanent or semi-permanent organization in the machinery of government ( bureaucracy ) that is responsible for the oversight and administration of specific functions, such as an administration .

[ 1 ] There is a notable variety of agency types. Although usage differs, a government agency is normally distinct both from a department or ministry , and other types of public body established by government . The functions of an agency are normally executive in character since different types of organizations ( such as commissions ) are most often constituted in an advisory role — this distinction is often blurred in practice however, it is not allowed.

A government agency may be established by either a national government or a state government within a federal system. Agencies can be established by legislation or by executive powers. The autonomy, independence, and accountability of government agencies also vary widely.

History [ edit ] Early examples of organizations that would now be termed a government agency include the British Navy Board , responsible for ships and supplies, which was established [ 2 ] in 1546 by King Henry VIII and the British Commissioners of Bankruptcy established [ 3 ] in 1570.

From 1933, the New Deal saw growth in U.S. federal agencies, the " alphabet agencies " as they were used to deliver new programs created by legislation, such as the Federal Emergency Relief Administration .

From the 1980s, as part of New Public Management , several countries including Australia and the United Kingdom developed the use of agencies to improve efficiency in public services.

By country [ edit ] Australia [ edit ] Main article: List of Australian Government entities Canada [ edit ] Main article: Structure of the Canadian federal government France [ edit ] Administrative law in France refers to autorité administrative indépendante (AAI) or Independent Administrative Authorities. They tend to be prominent in the following areas of public policy; Economic and financial regulation Information and communication Defence of citizens' rights Independent Administrative Authorities in France may not be instructed or ordered to take specific actions by the government.

Germany [ edit ] Main article: Federal agency (Germany) Greece [ edit ] Main article: General Secretariat for Macedonia and Thrace The General Secretariat for Macedonia and Thrace ( Greek : Γενική Γραμματεία Μακεδονίας-Θράκης), previously Ministry for Macedonia and Thrace ( Greek : Υπουργείο Μακεδονίας-Θράκης) is a government agency of the Hellenic Republic that is responsible for the Greek regions of Macedonia and Thrace .

Iceland [ edit ] Main article: Government agencies in Iceland India [ edit ] See also: List of central agencies in India The term agency in India has several meanings; for example, the Cabinet and the parliament Secretariat describes itself [ 4 ] as a " nodal agency for coordination amongst the ministries of the Govt. of India". Most notably as an international feature, what appear to be independent agencies ( or apex agencies ) include some that have active roles for Ministers: such as, the National Security Council , the Medical Council of India , the Pharmacy Council of India (PCI), the Indian Council of Agricultural Research , and the NITI Aayog , which is chaired ex officio by the Prime Minister.

Russia [ edit ] Russia has had many government agencies throughout its history. The USSR had the secretive KGB .
Today, Russian government agencies such as the FSB , FSO , and the GRU use Spetsnaz or other masked operators for any missions.
Other organizations include Kremlin and presidential security.

Sweden [ edit ] Main article: Government agencies in Sweden The Government agencies in Sweden are State controlled organizations who act independently to carry out the policies of the Government of Sweden . The Ministries are relatively small and merely policy-making organizations, allowed to control agencies by policy decisions but not by direct orders. This means that while the agencies are subject to decisions made by the Government, Ministers are explicitly prohibited (so-called ban on ministerstyre ) from interfering with the day-to-day operation in an agency or the outcome in individual cases as well.

In addition to the State and its agencies, there are also local government agencies, which are extensions of municipalities and county councils .

United Kingdom [ edit ] Main article: British government departments Agencies in the United Kingdom are either executive agencies answerable to government ministers or non-departmental public bodies answerable directly to parliament or the devolved assemblies of the United Kingdom. They are also commonly known as Quangos .

Agencies can be created by enabling legislation by the Parliament of the United Kingdom , Scottish Parliament or the Welsh Parliament .

United States [ edit ] Main article: List of federal agencies in the United States The Congress and President of the United States delegate specific authority to government agencies to regulate the complex facets of the modern American federal state . Also, most of the 50 U.S. states have created similar government agencies. Each state government is similar to the national government, with all but one having a bicameral legislature.
The term "government agency" or "administrative agency" usually applies to one of the independent agencies of the United States government , which exercise some degree of independence from the President's control. Although the heads of independent agencies are often appointed by the government, they can usually be removed only for cause. The heads of independent agencies work together in groups, such as a commission, board or council. Independent agencies often function as miniature versions of the tripartite federal government with the authority to legislate (through the issuing or promulgation of regulations), to adjudicate disputes, and to enforce agency regulations. Examples of independent agencies include the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), Federal Reserve Board , U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) and the Federal Trade Commission (FTC).

A broader definition of the term "government agency" also means the United States federal executive departments that include the President's cabinet-level departments and their sub-units. Examples of these include the Department of Energy (DOE) and the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), which is a bureau of the Department of the Treasury .

Most federal agencies are created by Congress through " organic statutes ," which define the scope of their authority. Because the Constitution does not expressly mention federal agencies, some commentators have called agencies the "headless fourth branch" of the federal government. However, most independent agencies are technically part of the executive branch, while others work within the legislative branch. By enacting the Administrative Procedure Act (APA) in 1946, Congress established means to oversee agency action through uniform administrative law procedures for setting regulations and adjudicating claims. The APA also establishes judicial review of agency action.

See also [ edit ] Classification of the Functions of Government Government-owned company Outline of management Political organisation Regulatory agency Statutory authority Statutory corporation References [ edit ] ^ Anglim, Christopher.

"Learning Resources Division: Government Information Help Guide: Government Agencies" .

udc.libguides.com . Retrieved 2023-08-02 .

^ A brief history of the Royal Navy, Royal Navy Museum, accessed at [1] Archived 2006-07-15 at the Wayback Machine June 9, 2006, ^ Macleavy, J. and O. Gay (2005) The Quango Debate , House of Commons Library Research Paper 05/30, p. 8 accessed at "The Quango Debate" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2006-06-19 . Retrieved 2006-06-09 .

^ Cabinet Secretariat, Government of India at [2] , accessed June 30, 2006 Further reading [ edit ] Machinery of Government Reform: Principles and Practice in "The Organisation of Central Government Departments: A History 1964–1992", ESRC Whitehall Programme at Nuffield College , University of Oxford. (accessed October 16, 2018) External links [ edit ] Encyclopedic Dictionary of Public Administration, Agency v t e Civil service Concepts Bureaucracy Bureaucrat Drift Inertia Civil service commission Diplomat Entrance examination Government agency Merit system / Spoils system Parkinson's law Public administration Theory Public policy Public sector Public service Regulatory agency Technocracy By country/territory Australia Bangladesh Brazil Canada China Hong Kong France Germany Greece India Ireland Italy Japan Malaysia New Zealand Nigeria Pakistan Russia Singapore Sri Lanka United Kingdom Northern Ireland United States European Union Categories National civil service commissions Government occupations Civil service by country See also: Civil service reform in developing countries Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐s4ghr
Cached time: 20250812013907
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.354 seconds
Real time usage: 0.451 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 948/1000000
Revision size: 11205/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 53742/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9125/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 31833/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.237/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5927399/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  388.427      1 -total
 26.93%  104.590      1 Template:Reflist
 21.53%   83.632      2 Template:Cite_web
 20.03%   77.819      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 18.55%   72.041      1 Template:Civil_service
 17.99%   69.861      1 Template:Navbox
 15.82%   61.463      1 Template:Short_description
 12.62%   49.036      2 Template:Ambox
  9.91%   38.494      1 Template:Globalize
  8.94%   34.721      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:489674:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812013907 and revision id 1296668570. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Government_agency&oldid=1296668570 " Categories : Government agencies Independent government agencies by country Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from September 2015 Articles needing additional references from February 2010 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 21 June 2025, at 13:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Government agency 44 languages Add topic

