Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education and career 2 Contributions to theory 3 Personal life 4 Death 5 Selected publications 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Gunnar Nordström 20 languages العربية تۆرکجه Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Magyar 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Occitan Português Русский Simple English Suomi Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Finnish physicist (1881–1923) You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Finnish .

(November 2017) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Finnish Wikipedia article at [[:fi:Gunnar Nordström]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|fi|Gunnar Nordström}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Gunnar Nordström Nordström at the age of 35 Born 12 March 1881 Helsinki , Finland Died 24 December 1923 (1923-12-24) (aged 42) Helsinki, Finland Nationality Finnish Citizenship Russian, Finnish Alma mater Helsinki University of Technology (Engineer) , University of Helsinki (Master of Science, and PhD) Known for Nordström's theory of gravitation Kaluza–Klein theory Reissner–Nordström metric Scientific career Fields Physics , Mechanics Institutions Helsinki University of Technology University of Helsinki University of Göttingen University of Leiden Academic advisors Paul Ehrenfest , Walther Nernst (briefly) Gunnar Nordström (12 March 1881 – 24 December 1923) was a Finnish theoretical physicist best remembered for his theory of gravitation , which was an early competitor of general relativity . Nordström is often designated by modern writers as The Einstein of Finland due to his novel work in similar fields with similar methods to Einstein.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Education and career [ edit ] Picture taken in 1900 of three high school graduates; Gunnar Nordström is on the left.

Nordström graduated high-school from Brobergska skolan in central Helsinki 1899. At first he went on to study mechanical engineering , graduating in 1903 from the Polytechnic institute in Helsinki , later renamed Helsinki University of Technology and today a part of the Aalto University . During his studies he developed an interest for more theoretical subjects, proceeding after graduation to further study for a master's degree in natural science, mathematics and economy at the University of Helsinki (1903–1907).

[ 3 ] Nordström then moved to Göttingen , Germany, where he had been recommended to go to study physical chemistry. However, he soon lost interest in the intended field and moved to study electrodynamics, a field the University of Göttingen was renowned for at the time.

[ 1 ] He returned to Finland to complete his doctoral dissertation at the University of Helsinki in 1910, and become a docent at the university. Subsequently, he became fascinated with the very novel and soon burgeoning field of gravitation and wanted to move to the Netherlands where scientists with contributions to that fields such as Hendrik Lorentz , Paul Ehrenfest and Willem de Sitter were active. Nordström was able to move to Leiden in 1916 to work under Ehrenfest, in the midst of the First World War, due to his Russian passport. Nordström spent considerable time in Leiden where he met a Dutch physics student, Cornelia van Leeuwen, with whom he went on to have several children.

[ 3 ] After the war he declined a professorship at the University of Berlin , a post awarded instead to Max Born , in order to return to Finland in 1918 and hold at first the professorship of physics and later the professorship of mechanics at the Helsinki University of Technology .

One of the keys to Nordström's success as a scientist was his ability to learn to apply differential geometry to physics, a new approach that also would eventually lead Albert Einstein to the theory of general relativity. Few other scientists of the time in the world were able to make effective use of this new analytical tool, with the notable exception of Ernst Lindelöf .

[ 4 ] Contributions to theory [ edit ] Further information: Nordström's theory of gravitation During his time in Leiden, Nordström solved Einstein's field equations outside a spherically symmetric charged body.

[ 5 ] The solution was also found by Hans Reissner , [ 6 ] Hermann Weyl [ 7 ] and George Barker Jeffery , [ 8 ] and it is nowadays known as the Reissner–Nordström metric . Nordström maintained frequent contact with many of the other great physicists of the era, including Niels Bohr and Albert Einstein. For example, it was Bohr's contributions that helped Nordström to circumvent the Russian censorship of German post to Finland, [ 2 ] which at the time was a grand duchy in personal union with the Russian Empire.

The theory for which Nordström was arguably most famous in his own lifetime, his theory of gravitation , was for a long time considered as a competitor to Einstein's theory of general relativity , which was published in 1915, after Nordström's theory. In 1914 Nordström introduced an additional space dimension to his theory, which provided coupling to electromagnetism . This was the first of the extra dimensional theories , which later came to be known as Kaluza–Klein theory . Kaluza and Klein, whose names are commonly used today for the theory, did not publish their work until the 1920s. Some speculations as to why Nordström's contribution fell into obscurity are that his theory was partly published in Swedish and that Einstein in a later publication referenced to Kaluza alone.

[ 1 ] Today extra dimensions and theories thereof are widely researched, debated and even looked for experimentally.

Nordström's theory of gravitation was subsequently experimentally found to be inferior to Einstein's, as it did not predict the bending of light which was observed during the solar eclipse in 1919 .

[ 2 ] However, Nordström and Einstein were in friendly competition or by some measure even cooperating scientists, not rivals. This can be seen from Nordström's public admiration of Einstein's work, as demonstrated by the two occasions on which Nordström nominated Einstein for the Nobel Prize in physics for his theory of relativity.

[ 1 ] Einstein never received the Nobel prize for the theory, as the first experimental evidence presented in 1919 could at the time still be disputed and there was not yet a consensus or even general understanding in the scientific community of the complex mathematical models that Einstein, Nordström and others had developed. Nordström's scalar theory is today mainly used as a pedagogical tool when learning general relativity.

[ 9 ] Today, there is limited public knowledge of Nordström's contributions to science, even in Finland.

[ 2 ] However, after his death a number of Finnish physicists and mathematicians devoted their time to the theory of relativity and differential geometry, presumably due to the legacy he left. On the other hand, the most notable opponent of general relativity in the Finnish scientific world was Hjalmar Mellin , the previous rector of the Helsinki University of Technology where Nordström held professorship.

[ 4 ] Gunnar Nordström's letter of recommendation to the Nobel Committee for Albert Einstein Personal life [ edit ] At the outbreak of WWI , Nordström moved to the Netherlands, where he met and married his wife Cornelia van Leeuwen. They moved back to Finland in 1918.

Death [ edit ] Nordström died in December 1923, at the age of 42, from pernicious anemia . The illness was perhaps caused by exposure to radioactive substances. Nordström was known for experimenting with radioactive substances [ 1 ] and for enjoying the Finnish sauna tradition using water from a spring rich in radium .

[ 4 ] Among his publications there is one from 1913 regarding the measurement of the radioactive emancipation power of different springs and ground waters in Finland.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Selected publications [ edit ] During Nordström's career he published 34 articles and research papers in languages including German, Dutch, Finnish, and his mother-tongue Swedish. Nordström is probably the first person to write about the theory of relativity in the languages of Finland.

Die Energiegleichung für das elektromagnetische Feld bewegter Körper , 1908, Doctoral dissertation Rum och tid enligt Einstein och Minkowski , 1909, published in a series of the Finnish Society of Sciences and Letters: Öfversigt af Finska Vetenskaps-Societetens Förhandlingar Relativitätsprinzip und Gravitation , 1912, in Physikalische Zeitschrift Träge und Schwere Masse in der Relativitätsmechanik , 1913, in Annalen der Physik Über die Möglichkeit, das Elektromagnetische Feld und das Gravitationsfeld zu vereiningen , 1914, in Physikalische Zeitschrift Zur Elektrizitäts- und Gravitationstheorie , 1914, in the series Öfversigt Über eine mögliche Grundlage einer Theorie der Materie , 1915, in the series Öfversigt Een en ander over de energie van het zwaarte krachtsveld volgens de theorie van Einstein , 1918 See also [ edit ] Nordström's theory of gravitation Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f Eva Isaksson.

"Gunnar Nordström, suomalainen Einstein: painovoiman teoriaa 1910-luvulla" . Retrieved 18 November 2017 .

^ a b c d e Raimo Keskinen (1981): Gunnar Nordström 1881B1923. Arkhimedes 2/1981, s. 71B84. In Finnish, excerpt http://www.tieteessatapahtuu.fi/797/KESKINEN.pdf Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b "NORDSTRÖM Gunnar" (PDF) .

List of faculty at the university of Helsinki . Helsinki University Central.

(I have chosen to use this source when conflicting information was available in less official sources, mainly regarding graduation years) ^ a b c Totuuden nimessä: Kaksitoista merkittävää Suomen Tiedeseuran jäsentä ( In the name of truth: twelve important members of the Finnish society of science ), pages 173–176 ^ Nordström, G. (1918). " On the Energy of the Gravitational Field in Einstein's Theory ".

Verhandl. Koninkl. Ned. Akad. Wetenschap., Afdel. Natuurk., Amsterdam .

26 : 1201– 1208.

Bibcode : 1918KNAB...20.1238N .

^ Reissner, H. (1916).

" Über die Eigengravitation des elektrischen Feldes nach der Einsteinschen Theorie " .

Annalen der Physik (in German).

50 (9): 106– 120.

Bibcode : 1916AnP...355..106R .

doi : 10.1002/andp.19163550905 .

^ Weyl, H. (1917).

" Zur Gravitationstheorie " .

Annalen der Physik (in German).

54 (18): 117– 145.

Bibcode : 1917AnP...359..117W .

doi : 10.1002/andp.19173591804 .

^ Jeffery, G. B. (1921).

" The field of an electron on Einstein's theory of gravitation " .

Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A .

99 (697): 123– 134.

Bibcode : 1921RSPSA..99..123J .

doi : 10.1098/rspa.1921.0028 .

^ John D. Norton.

"and Nordström – Some Lesser Known Thought Experiments in Gravitation" (PDF) . Retrieved 18 November 2017 .

References [ edit ] Finn Ravndal (2004). "Scalar Gravitation and Extra Dimensions".

Gunnar Nordström Symposium on Theoretical Physics : 151.

arXiv : gr-qc/0405030 .

Bibcode : 2004gntp.conf..151R .

Offers some historical information regarding Nordström's contributions to physics.

External links [ edit ] Isaksson, Eva.

"Gunnar Nordström" .

(short biography) . Retrieved 5 August 2005 .

v t e Relativity Special relativity Background Principle of relativity ( Galilean relativity Galilean transformation ) Special relativity Doubly special relativity Fundamental concepts Frame of reference Speed of light Hyperbolic orthogonality Rapidity Maxwell's equations Proper length Proper time Proper acceleration Relativistic mass Formulation Lorentz transformation Textbooks Phenomena Time dilation Mass–energy equivalence (E=mc 2 ) Length contraction Relativity of simultaneity Relativistic Doppler effect Thomas precession Ladder paradox Twin paradox Terrell rotation Spacetime Light cone World line Minkowski diagram Biquaternions Minkowski space General relativity Background Introduction Mathematical formulation Fundamental concepts Equivalence principle Riemannian geometry Penrose diagram Geodesics Mach's principle Formulation ADM formalism BSSN formalism Einstein field equations Linearized gravity Post-Newtonian formalism Raychaudhuri equation Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein equation Ernst equation Phenomena Black hole Event horizon Singularity Two-body problem Gravitational waves : astronomy detectors ( LIGO and collaboration Virgo LISA Pathfinder GEO ) Hulse–Taylor binary Other tests : precession of Mercury lensing (together with Einstein cross and Einstein rings ) redshift Shapiro delay frame-dragging / geodetic effect ( Lense–Thirring precession ) pulsar timing arrays Advanced theories Brans–Dicke theory Kaluza–Klein Quantum gravity Solutions Cosmological: Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker ( Friedmann equations ) Lemaître–Tolman Kasner BKL singularity Gödel Milne Spherical: Schwarzschild ( interior Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff equation ) Reissner–Nordström Axisymmetric: Kerr ( Kerr–Newman ) Weyl−Lewis−Papapetrou Taub–NUT van Stockum dust discs Others: pp-wave Ozsváth–Schücking Alcubierre Ellis In computational physics: Numerical relativity Scientists Poincaré Lorentz Einstein Hilbert Schwarzschild de Sitter Weyl Eddington Friedmann Lemaître Milne Robertson Chandrasekhar Zwicky Wheeler Choquet-Bruhat Kerr Zel'dovich Novikov Ehlers Geroch Penrose Hawking Taylor Hulse Bondi Misner Yau Thorne Weiss others Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany Netherlands Sweden Finland Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gunnar_Nordström&oldid=1290561232 " Categories : Relativity theorists 1881 births 1923 deaths 20th-century Finnish physicists Swedish-speaking Finns People from Helsinki Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2022 Biography articles needing translation from Finnish Wikipedia Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 15 May 2025, at 15:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gunnar Nordström 20 languages Add topic

