Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Concept 2 History 3 Notable examples 4 Contemporary 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Charbagh 15 languages العربية বাংলা Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча سنڌي Slovenščina اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Four-part Islamic paradise garden layout For other uses, see Chahar Bagh .

See also: Persian Gardens , Bagh (garden) , and Paradise garden The charbagh at the Tomb of Jahangir in Lahore , Pakistan A charbagh or chaharbagh ( Persian : چهارباغ , romanized : chahārbāgh , lit.

'four gardens'; Hindi : चारबाग़ chārbāgh , Urdu : چار باغ chār bāgh , Bengali : চারবাগ ) is a Persian and Indo-Persian quadrilateral garden with a layout of four gardens traditionally separated by waterways, together representing the four gardens and four rivers of Paradise mentioned in the Quran .

[ a ] The chaharbagh may also be divided by walkways instead of flowing water.

[ 1 ] Such gardens are found in countries throughout West Asia (which includes Iran), South Asia (which includes Pakistan and India), North Africa and the former al-Andalus .

[ 2 ] A famous example of a charbagh is that of the Taj Mahal in India.

Concept [ edit ] An example of chaharbagh on Naqsh-e Jahan Square (constructed 1598–1629) in Isfahan , Iran The traditional chaharbagh has a four-part garden layout with axial waterways joining at a small square basin in the garden's centre.

History [ edit ] The chaharbagh layout originated in the paradise gardens of the Achaemenid Empire , as suggested by excavations at Pasargadae and Susa .

[ 3 ] The highly structured geometrical scheme of the chaharbagh became a powerful method for the organization and domestication of the landscape, itself a symbol of political territory.

[ 4 ] After the Muslim conquest of Persia , the chaharbagh was considered to represent the four gardens of Paradise mentioned in the Quran 's 55th Chapter (Surah), Ar-Rahman ('The Beneficient'): And for him, who fears to stand before his Lord, are two gardens. (Chapter 55: Verse 46) And beside them are two other gardens. (Chapter 55: Verse 62) The waterways were considered to represent the four rivers mentioned in a hadith : Sayhan, Jayhan, the Euphrates and the Nile .

Babur celebrates the birth of Humayun in the charbagh of Kabul .

In the 16th century, the chaharbagh layout was brought from Iran to the Indian subcontinent by the Mughal dynasty founded by Babur , who was originally from Central Asia. This tradition gave birth to the Mughal gardens , which perhaps displayed its highest form in the Taj Mahal (see below) .

Notable examples [ edit ] Charbagh at Humayun's Tomb , Delhi , India Several of the first Mughal charbagh gardens of monumental scale belonged to imperial mausoleums , such as the Bagh-e Babur at Babur's Tomb, in Kabul , Afghanistan (honoring the first Mughal emperor, Babur ); [ 5 ] the charbagh at Humayun's Tomb in Delhi , India (honoring Humayun , son of Babur); and the charbagh at the Tomb of Jahangir (honoring the fourth Mughal emperor Jahangir , son of Akbar ) in Lahore , Pakistan.

Aerial view of the charbagh of the Taj Mahal , Agra , India, showing the square basin at the intersection of four waterways The charbagh of the Taj Mahal is also the charbagh of a mausoleum, built by Mughal emperor Shah Jahan (great-great-grandson of Babur) for his favourite Indian wife Mumtaz Mahal . Unlike the other tombs, the mausoleum is not in the centre of the garden, however archaeological excavations have revealed another garden opposite indicating that historically the mausoleum was centered as in tomb garden tradition.

[ 6 ] In the charbagh of the Taj Mahal, each of the four parts contains sixteen flower beds.

View of one charbagh garden of the Shalamar Gardens , Lahore , Pakistan, displaying the typical charbagh layout Other Mughal charbagh gardens were built for leisure, without any mausoleum, such as the Shalamar Gardens (also known as the "Shahla Bagh"), in Lahore , Pakistan, which were also laid out by Shah Jahan. The Shalamar Gardens comprise two charbagh gardens separated by a gigantic pool.

Contemporary [ edit ] A charbagh is located on the roof top of the Ismaili Centre in South Kensington , London .

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Gardens portal Paradise garden Notes [ edit ] ^ The idea of the world divided into four parts is also present in the Book of Genesis (2:10).

References [ edit ] ^ Cornell, Vincent J. (2007) Voices of Islam: Voices of art, beauty, and science (volume 4 in the Voices of Islam series) Praeger, Westport, Connecticut, pp. 94–95 , ISBN 978-0-275-98735-0 ^ Begde, Prabhakar V. (1978).

Ancient and Mediaeval Town-planning in India . Sagar Publications. p. 173.

^ "Čahārbāḡ".

Encyclopædia Iranica .

^ D. Fairchild Ruggles , Islamic Gardens and Landscapes , University of Pennsylvania Press, 2008, p. 39.

^ Mughul Tomb Gardens The poetics of gardens , by Charles Willard Moore, William J. Mitchell. Published by MIT Press, 2000, p. 17.

ISBN 0-262-63153-9 ^ "Ep. 2".

Monty Don's Paradise Gardens .

BBC .

^ A Place in Paradise - radio coverage from the BBC about the charbagh garden on top of the Ismaili Centre in South Kensington Further reading [ edit ] Lehrman, Jonas Benzion (1980).

Earthly paradise: garden and courtyard in Islam . University of California Press.

ISBN 0-520-04363-4 .

Ruggles, D. Fairchild (2008).

Islamic Gardens and Landscapes . University of Pennsylvania Press.

ISBN 0-8122-4025-1 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Charbagh gardens .

https://villanews.ir/en/editorial/when-everything-starts-with-chahar-bagh Babur's Garden - video from the Asia Society, US v t e Horticulture and gardening Gardening Allotment Arboretum Butterfly Climate-friendly gardening Community Forest Foodscaping French intensive Garden Garden design computer-aided Groundskeeping Garden tool Green wall Guerrilla Historic conservation History Native Parterre Proplifting Raised bed Square foot Sustainable Xeriscaping Types of gardens Alpine Ancient Egypt Australian Back Baroque Biblical Bog Botanical Bottle Butterfly Byzantine Cactus Colonial Color Communal Garden square Community Container Cottage Dutch East Asian Chinese Suzhou Cantonese Japanese Roji Zen Korean Vietnamese English Sharawadgi Fernery Floating Flower Formal French formal landscape Renaissance Front German Greek Greenhouse Hanging Islamic Italian Renaissance Keyhole Kitchen Knot Market Mary Medieval Monastic Mughal Orchard Indonesian home garden Persian Bāgh Charbagh Paradise Physic Pleasure Prairie Pollinator Rain Rock Roman Roof Rose Sacred School Scottish Sculpture Sensory Shade Shakespeare Shrubbery Spanish Tea Therapeutic Trial Tropical Victory Walled Water Wildlife Winter Zoological Horticulture Agriculture Permaculture stock-free sustainable urban Arboriculture Bonsai Saikei Botany Companion planting Crop most valuable Cutting Flora Floriculture Canada Taiwan Hügelkultur Fruticulture Genetically modified tree Hydroculture Indigenous Intercropping Landscape architecture Olericulture Plant breeding cuttings free-flowering propagation drought tolerance hardiness Pomology Postharvest physiology Roguing Tropical Urban agriculture horticulture forestry reforestation Viticulture Monoculture Organic Biodynamic agriculture Grafting List of organic gardening and farming topics Vegan organic agriculture Plant protection Fungicide Herbicide Index of pesticide articles List of fungicides List of insecticides Pesticide Plant disease forecasting Pruning Weed control Aquamog weed remover Related articles Community orchard Features Floral design Floristry Ikebana Groundskeeping Garden centre Garden tourism List of gardens Lists of plants Perennial Plant collecting Turf management Gardening portal Category Commons WikiProject v t e Islamic architecture Styles Abbasid Anatolian Seljuk Ayyubid Chinese Fatimid Hausa Indo-Islamic Bengali Deccan Qutb Shahi Mughal Indonesian / Malaysian Ilkhanid Iranian Great Seljuk Ilkhanid Timurid Safavid Mamluk Moorish Aghlabid Almoravid Almohad Hafsid Zayyanid Ottoman Somali Sudano-Sahelian Swahili Tatar Umayyad Yemeni Elements Materials Qadad Tadelakt Arches Chahartaq Discharging arch Four-centred arch Horseshoe arch Lambrequin arch Multifoil arch Ogee arch Pointed arch Squinch Vaulting Roofs Dome ( Arabic dome / Onion dome / Persian dome / South Asian dome ) Semi-dome Tajug Chhajja Religious objects Anaza Bedug Dikka (or müezzin mahfili) Gonbad Hussainiya Imamzadeh Kiswah Loudspeakers Maqsurah Mihrab Minaret Minbar Qibla Zarih Decorations ( For overview, see Islamic ornament ) Ablaq Āina-kāri Alfiz Arabesque Banna'i Girih Girih tiles Haft-rang Islamic calligraphy Islamic geometric patterns Jali Mo'araq Mosque lamp Muqarnas Nagash painting Qashani Sebka (Darj-wa-ktaf) Shabaka Shamsa Sitara Socarrat Stucco decoration Zellij Rooms Andaruni Harem Iwan Liwan Mirador Hosh Qa’a Zenana Gardens Bagh Charbagh Islamic garden Mughal garden Paradise garden Persian gardens Reflecting pool Riad Outdoor objects Chhatri Eidgah Fina Mechouar Sebil Shadirvan Passive cooling Hypostyle Howz Jharokha Kucheh Mashrabiya Riwaq Sahn Salsabil Shabestan Shading Umbrellas Windcatcher Types Religious Congregational mosque Dar al-Muwaqqit Dargah Gongbei Jama'at Khana Külliye Kuttab (or maktab) Madrasa Maqam Maqbara Mazar Mosque Musalla Qubba Rauza Surau Sufi lodge (khanqah) Takyeh Türbe Zawiya Civilian Baradari Bazaar Caravanserai Bimaristan Ghorfa Hammam Hasht-Bihisht Kasbah Mahal Medina quarter Souq Well house Military Albarrana tower Alcázar Amsar Kasbah Ksar Qalat Ribat Resources Aga Khan Award for Architecture ArchNet Museum with No Frontiers Influences Indo-Saracenic Revival Influences on Western architecture Moorish Revival Mudéjar Part of Islamic arts • Architecture portal • Islam portal v t e Islamic art Architecture Regional styles Abbasid Ayyubid Anatolian Seljuk Chinese Fatimid Great Seljuk Hausa Indo-Islamic Bengali Bahmani and Deccan Mughal Indonesian / Malaysian Iranian Mamluk Moorish Ottoman Sudano-Sahelian Swahili Tatar Timurid Umayyad Yemeni Elements Ablaq Banna'i Iwan Jali Mashrabiya Mihrab Minaret Mocárabe Muqarnas Sitara Stucco decoration See also Decoration Arts Periods and regional styles Abbasid art Fatimid art Mudéjar Bangladeshi Persian ( Early , Qajar , Safavid ) Turkish ( Ottoman ) Carpets Gul Kilim Motifs Persian Turkish Prayer Pottery Fritware Hispano-Moresque Iznik Lustreware Mina'i ware Persian Chinese influence Textiles Batik Damask Ikat Embroidery Soumak Suzani Woodwork Khatam Minbar Other media Music Brass Damascus steel Enamelled glass Haft-rang Glass Hardstone carving Ivory carving Mo'araq Mosque lamp Stained glass Shabaka Arts of the book Miniatures Arabic Mughal Ottoman Persian Calligraphy Arabic Diwani Indo-Muslim Kufic Muhaqqaq Naskh Nastaliq Persian Sini Taliq Thuluth Tughra Other arts Muraqqa Hilya Ottoman illumination Decoration Arabesque Geometric patterns Girih ( tiles ) Zellij See also Calligraphy The garden Charbagh Mughal Ottoman Paradise Persian Museums, collections Berlin Cairo Doha Ghazni Istanbul ( Arts , Calligraphy Art ) Jerusalem ( Islamic Museum , Museum for Islamic Art, Jerusalem ) Kuala Lumpur London ( British Museum , V&A , Khalili Collection ) Los Angeles Marrakech ( Museum , Majorelle Garden ) Melbourne Paris ( Arab World Institute , Louvre ) Singapore Toronto (Aga Khan) Tripoli Exhibitions Empire of the Sultans Heaven on Earth: Art from Islamic Lands Hajj: Journey to the Heart of Islam Principles, influences Islamic Art: Mirror of the Invisible World Aniconism in Islam Indo-Saracenic Revival Islamic world contributions to Medieval Europe Influences on Western art Grotesque Moresque Mathematics and architecture Moorish Revival Mudéjar Oriental carpets in Renaissance painting Pseudo-Kufic Stilfragen Topkapı Scroll NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐9ngs9
Cached time: 20250814220213
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.459 seconds
Real time usage: 0.623 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1548/1000000
Revision size: 7448/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 121659/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1403/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 51865/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.273/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 13643703/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  471.054      1 -total
 22.46%  105.802      8 Template:Navbox
 21.04%   99.094      4 Template:Langx
 19.40%   91.390      2 Template:Reflist
 16.30%   76.791      1 Template:Horticulture_and_gardening
 12.88%   60.674      1 Template:Short_description
 10.60%   49.935      4 Template:ISBN
  9.49%   44.685      1 Template:Commons_category
  9.19%   43.311      1 Template:Sister_project
  8.94%   42.133      1 Template:Side_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3290313:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220213 and revision id 1295120023. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Charbagh&oldid=1295120023 " Categories : Persian art Persian gardens Types of garden Landscape design history Mughal architecture elements Persian words and phrases Islamic architectural elements Islamic gardens Iranian architectural elements Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Persian-language text Articles containing Hindi-language text Articles containing Urdu-language text Articles containing Bengali-language text Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 June 2025, at 20:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Charbagh 15 languages Add topic

