Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Formation 2 Geology 3 Fauna 4 History 5 Gallery 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Makhtesh Ramon 20 languages العربية Български Cebuano Čeština Deutsch Esperanto فارسی Français Hausa Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Lietuvių Norsk nynorsk Polski Русский Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 30°34′43″N 34°49′4″E ﻿ / ﻿ 30.57861°N 34.81778°E ﻿ / 30.57861; 34.81778 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Erosion cirque in the Negev Desert, Israel Makhtesh Ramon The makhtesh is 40 km long, 2–10 km wide and 500 meters deep.

Location of Maktesh Ramon Location Southern , Israel Coordinates 30°34′43″N 34°49′4″E ﻿ / ﻿ 30.57861°N 34.81778°E ﻿ / 30.57861; 34.81778 Length 40 km (25 mi) Width 2–10 km (1.2–6.2 mi) Map of Makhtesh Ramon Makhtesh Ramon ( Hebrew : מכתש רמון ; lit.

Ramon Crater/ Makhtesh ; Arabic : وادي الرمان ; lit.

The Ruman Wadi ) is a geological feature of Israel 's Negev desert. Located some 85 km south of Beersheba , the landform is the world's largest "erosion cirque" ( steephead valley or box canyon ). The formation is 40 km long, 2–10 km wide and 500 meters deep. Despite its appearance it is not an impact crater from a meteor nor a volcanic crater formed by a volcanic eruption .

The only settlement in the area is the small town of Mitzpe Ramon (מצפה רמון, "Ramon Lookout") located on the northern edge of the depression. Today the area forms Israel's largest national park , the Ramon Nature Reserve.

Formation [ edit ] A Nubian ibex on the edges of Makhtesh Ramon Hundreds of millions of years ago, the Negev was covered by the Tethys ocean . Slowly, it started to recede northwards, leaving behind a hump-shaped hill. The hump was slowly flattened by water and climatic forces. Approximately 5 mya , the Arava Rift Valley was formed, with rivers changing their courses, carving out the inside of the crater which was a softer rock than that overlying. The crater bottom continued to deepen at a much faster rate than the surrounding walls, which gradually increased in height. As the crater deepened, more layers of ancient rock were exposed, with rocks at the bottom of the crater being up to 200 million years old. Today, the crater is 500 metres deep, with the deepest point being Ein Saharonim [ he ] ( Saharonim Spring ). This spring serves as the sole natural water source within the crater, supporting a significant portion of its wildlife population, including onagers and ibex .

Geology [ edit ] Makhtesh Ramon contains a diversity of rocks including clay hills known for their red and yellow colors and forms. Mountains rise at the borders of the crater: Har Ramon (Mt. Ramon) at the southern end, Har Ardon [ he ] (Mt. Ardon) at the north-eastern end, and two table mountains— Har Marpek (Mt. Marpek - "Elbow"), and Har Katum (Mt. Katum - "Cropped")—along the southern wall. The hills to the north-eastern edge of the makhtesh were once entirely covered by spiral ammonite fossils, ranging from the size of snails to that of tractor wheels although these have mainly been extracted so only smaller fossils can be found here today.

Giv'at Ga'ash, a black hill in the north of the makhtesh, was once an active volcano which erupted thousands of years ago and caused it to be covered in lava which quickly cooled in the open air, converting it into basalt .

Limestone covered by basalt can also be found in smaller black hills in the southern part of the makhtesh, including Karnei Ramon.

Shen Ramon ( Ramon's Tooth ) is a rock made of magma which hardened whilst underground. It later rose up through cracks in the Earth's surface, and today stands in striking contrast with the nearby creamy coloured southern wall of the crater, as a black sharp-edged rock. In the centre of the makhtesh is HaMinsara ( The Carpentry Shop ), a low hill made up of columnar jointed sandstone —polygonal prismatic columns of quartzite . The pteriidan bivalve Family Ramonalinidae is found in early Middle Triassic rocks of Makhtesh Ramon and was named after this feature. Nahal Ardon in the east of the makhtesh contains several vertical dikes . Occasional geodes of celestine can be found next to some of them.

[ 1 ] Fauna [ edit ] A Nubian ibex on the edges of Makhtesh Ramon The Asiatic wild ass has been reintroduced to Makhtesh Ramon. In 1995 the population had increased to 40 adults in the area. The animals are hybrids of two subspecies of the Asian Wild Ass, derived from the Turkmenian kulan ( E. h. kulan ) and the Persian onager ( E. h. onager ). The original subspecies, the Syrian wild ass ( E. h. hemippus ), is extinct.

[ 2 ] Other larger mammals of the area include Nubian ibex , Dorcas gazelles , striped hyenas , Arabian wolves , caracals , golden jackals , and reintroduced Arabian oryx .

[ 3 ] Historically, the area was home to Arabian leopards . However, they are likely extirpated in Israel.

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] Wadi Raman in the 1944 Survey of Palestine map The ruins of a large prehistoric stone structure known as Khan Saharonim [ he ] are found in the makhtesh, as it lies along the ancient Incense Route , a trade route used by the Nabataeans 2,000 years ago. These ruins acted as a way station for the traders and their animals ( khan is the Arabic word for a caravanserai ) as they proceeded further westward to the Mediterranean seaport city of Gaza .

Located atop the northern cliff of the crater, one can find Metzad Mahmal , the remnants of a stronghold employed by the Nabataeans and the Romans to safeguard the Incense Route. The site was excavated by several archaeologists, and declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 2005.

Wide panorama of the Makhtesh Ramon crater, Israel Gallery [ edit ] Camel Hill, Mitzpe Ramon , Makhtesh Ramon Mount Ardon View of Makhtesh Ramon from its west The cliff Cloud gliding ( radiation fog falling in a katabatic wind ) into Makhtesh Ramon Dry Drimia maritima (Urginea maritima) at the northern edge of the makhtesh Rock formation ( dike ) Ha-Minsara (The Sawmill): "baked" sandstone turned into hard quartzite Sandy rectangular and hexagonal prisms at the centre of Makhtesh Ramon – Ha-Minsara (The Sawmill) An ammonite in the Ammonite Wall Ammonite Wall (Tamar Formation, Cenomanian ) Sandstone color bands The remnants of Mezad Mahmal on the Incense Route between Petra and Avdat .

See also [ edit ] Makhtesh HaMakhtesh HaGadol HaMakhtesh HaKatan Erosion Geology of Israel Nature reserves in Israel Negev Desert Mitzpe Ramon Geotourism References [ edit ] ^ Michael Anenburg; Or M. Bialik; Yevgeny Vapnik; Hazel J. Chapman; Gilad Antler; Yaron Katzir; Mike J. Bickle (2014). "The origin of celestine–quartz–calcite geodes associated with a basaltic dyke, Makhtesh Ramon, Israel".

Geological Magazine .

151 (5): 798– 815.

Bibcode : 2014GeoM..151..798A .

doi : 10.1017/S0016756813000800 .

^ David Saltz David, Mary Rowen, Daniel I. Rubenstein: The Effect of Space-Use Patterns of Reintroduced Asiatic Wild Ass on Effective Population Size.

Conservation Biology, Vol. 14, No. 6, 2000 ^ "Makhtesh Ramon Visitors Center" .

Israel Nature and Parks Authority . Retrieved 2023-03-25 .

^ Stein, A.B., Athreya, V., Gerngross, P., Balme, G., Henschel, P., Karanth, U., Miquelle, D., Rostro-Garcia, S., Kamler, J.F., Laguardia, A., Khorozyan, I. & Ghoddousi, A. 2020.

Panthera pardus (amended version of 2019 assessment).

The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species 2020: e.T15954A163991139.

doi : 10.2305/IUCN.UK.2020-1.RLTS.T15954A163991139.en . Accessed on 25 March 2023.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Makhtesh Ramon .

Ramon Crater on Google Maps Ramon Crater Detailed trail and hiking info. from Tourism, trips and travel in Israel Makhtesh Ramon's Visitors Center , at the Israel Nature and Parks Authority 's website.

Mazor, Emanuel and Krasnov, Boris, editors "The Makhteshim Country - a Laboratory of Nature". Pensoft Publishers, Sofia, 2001, ISBN 954-642-135-9 , 411 pages v t e Nature reserves of Israel Jerusalem District Adullam Avshalom Cave Ein Hemed HaMasrek Lifta Nahal Sorek Har HaTayasim Te'omim Cave Northern District Acre Achziv Islands Nahal Gamal Nahal Kziv Nahal Yehiam Rosh HaNikra Golan Gamla 1 Hasbani River 1 Hermon 1 Yehudiya Forest 1 Nahal Hermon 1 Jezreel Alonei Abba Balfouria Gilboa Iris Hurshat Zakum Mount Gilboa Mount Tabor Nahal Tavor Shimron Kinneret Ein Nun Mount Arbel Nahal Yavne'el Safed Nahal Amud Nahal Ayun Nahal Betzet Nahal Dishon Ein Avazim Ein Elah Ein Te'oh Hula Valley Hurshat Tal Kerem Ben Zimra Mount Meron Pa'ar Cave Shamir-Nahal Rachum Tel Anafa Tel Dan Haifa District Ein Afek Alonei Yitzhak Dor Beach and Ma'agan Michael Islands Ein Nymphit Gador Mount Carmel Nahal Taninim Tel Shikmona Central District Bnei Zion Bitan Aharon Hadasim Horvat 'Ethri Neot Kedumim Nahal Poleg Palmachim Beach Tel Yitzhak Udim Southern District Ashkelon Brekhat Zmorot Kurkar Gvar'am Nitzanim Dunes Mevo Ashdod Yam Shikma Beersheba Nahal Abuv Coral Beach Ein Gedi HaMakhtesh HaGadol HaMakhtesh HaKatan Makhtesh Ramon Timna Valley Yotvata Hai-Bar Eshkol Be'eri Badlands Judea and Samaria Area Alonei Shmuel 2 Einot Tzukim 2 Um Tzafa Forest 2 Nahal Og 2 Located in the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights 1 and West Bank .

2 Authority control databases International VIAF FAST National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Makhtesh_Ramon&oldid=1301091757 " Categories : Erosion landforms Landforms of Israel National parks of Israel Protected areas of Southern District (Israel) World Heritage Sites in Israel Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Arabic-language text Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 01:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Makhtesh Ramon 20 languages Add topic

