Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Summary and themes 2 Influence 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Cosmic View Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1957 book by Kees Boeke Cosmic View: The Universe in 40 Jumps Author Kees Boeke Language Dutch (original) Genre Non-fiction, Educational Publication date 1957 Publication place Netherlands Cosmic View: The Universe in 40 Jumps is a 1957 book by Dutch educator Kees Boeke that combines writing and graphics to explore many levels of size and structure, from the astronomically vast to the atomically tiny. The book begins with a photograph of a Dutch girl sitting outside a school and holding a cat. The text backs up from the original photo, with graphics that include more and more of the vast reaches of space in which the girl is located. It then narrows in on the original picture, with graphics that show ever smaller areas until the nucleus of a sodium atom is reached. Boeke writes commentary on each graphic, along with introductory and concluding notes.

Summary and themes [ edit ] In his introduction Boeke says the work originated with a school project at his Werkplaats Children's Community in Bilthoven . The idea was to draw pictures that would include ever-growing areas of space, to show how the Earth is located in an unfathomably enormous universe . Boeke then writes that he realized the reverse process—creating graphics of tinier and tinier bits of reality—would reveal a world "as full of marvels" as the most gigantic reaches of outer space.

The result is a voyage outward and inward from the familiar human scale . The ordinary photograph of a schoolgirl and a cat proves to be the starting point for an insightful visit to levels of reality that can only be imagined, and about which little may be known. In his conclusion Boeke speculates that the imaginary voyage depicted may help "just a little" to make mankind realize the enormousness of the cosmic powers that the human race has begun to master.

Boeke injected some humor into the book. He puts a blue whale into his graphics, incongruously lying alongside the girl and her cat, to give an idea of relative sizes. In his voyage into the smaller realms of reality, he includes an Anopheles mosquito that looks like a creature from a fifties science fiction film.

Influence [ edit ] Boeke's book attracted much attention and was included in Mortimer Adler 's Gateway to the Great Books (1963) series. Many of the graphics are impressive realizations of the differences in size that lie hidden from our normal view. The graphics that show ever greater areas of the Earth, for instance, are interesting precursors to the satellite photos now available on the Internet .

Boeke's essay/book is recognized in the credits of three short documentary films: Cosmic Zoom (1968) produced by the National Film Board of Canada Powers of Ten (1968, re-released 1977) by Charles and Ray Eames The IMAX film Cosmic Voyage (1996) produced for the Smithsonian Institution 's National Air and Space Museum .

It is also the basis of the interactive iOS app Cosmic Eye (2012), whose developer has also made a three-minute video from it, also called Cosmic Eye (2012, re-released 2018).

See also [ edit ] Cosmic Zoom Earth's location in the universe References [ edit ] Gateway to the Great Books , edited by Robert Maynard Hutchins and Mortimer Adler, Encyclopædia Britannica Inc. 1963, volume 8, pp. 597–644 External links [ edit ] Online edition of Cosmic View "Cosmic Eye" app webpage Video "Images worth spreading: Cosmic Eye (iPad, iPhone, iPod)" v t e Location of Earth Included Earth → Solar System → Local Interstellar Cloud → Local Bubble → Gould Belt → Orion Arm → Milky Way → Milky Way subgroup → Local Group → Local Sheet → Virgo Supercluster → Laniakea Supercluster → Local Hole → Observable universe → Universe Each arrow ( → ) may be read as "within" or "part of".

Related Cosmic View (1957 book) To the Moon and Beyond (1964 film) Cosmic Zoom (1968 film) Powers of Ten (1968 and 1977 films) Cosmic Voyage (1996 documentary) Cosmic Eye (2012) Center of the universe Order of magnitude Pisces–Cetus Supercluster Complex Astronomy portal Space portal v t e Orders of magnitude Quantity Acceleration Angular momentum Area Bit rate Charge Computing Current Data Density Energy / Energy density Entropy Force Frequency Illuminance Length Luminance Magnetic moment Magnetic field Mass Molarity Numbers Power Pressure Probability Radiation Sound pressure Specific heat capacity Speed Temperature Torque Time Voltage Volume See also Back-of-the-envelope calculation Fermi problem Powers of 10 and decades 10th 100th 1000000th Metric (SI) prefix Macroscopic scale Microscopic scale Related Astronomical system of units Earth's location in the Universe Cosmic View (1957 book) To the Moon and Beyond (1964 film) Cosmic Zoom (1968 film) Powers of Ten (1968 and 1977 films) Cosmic Voyage (1996 documentary) The Scale of the Universe (2010) Cosmic Eye (2012) Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cosmic_View&oldid=1224790302 " Categories : 1957 books 1957 essays Orders of magnitude Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Books with missing cover This page was last edited on 20 May 2024, at 13:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cosmic View Add languages Add topic

