Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Adrien Baillet 10 languages Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Italiano مصرى Nederlands Português Slovenščina Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French scholar and critic (1649–1706) Adrien Baillet Adrien Baillet, gravure, postuum (1715) Born ( 1649-06-13 ) 13 June 1649 Neuville, France Died 21 January 1706 (1706-01-21) (aged 56) Occupation(s) Scholar, critic, biographer Academic work Notable works Jugemens des savans sur les principaux ouvrages des auteurs Adrien Baillet (13 June 1649 – 21 January 1706) was a French scholar and critic. He is now best known as a biographer of René Descartes .

Life [ edit ] He was born in the village of Neuville near Beauvais , in Picardy . His parents could only afford to send him to a small school in the village, but he picked up some Latin from the friars of a neighbouring convent, who brought him under the notice of the bishop of Beauvais . By his kindness Baillet received a thorough education at the theological seminary, and was afterwards appointed to a post as teacher in the college of Beauvais. In 1676 he was ordained priest and was presented to a small vicarage.

[ 1 ] He accepted in 1680 the appointment of librarian to François-Chrétien de Lamoignon , advocate-general to the parlement of Paris . He made a catalogue raisonné (in 35 vols.) of its library, all written with his own hand.

[ 1 ] The remainder of his life was spent in incessant, unremitting labour; so keen was his devotion to study that he allowed himself only five hours a day for rest.

[ 1 ] With regard to René Descartes, he is popularly said to have recorded in his biography the three dreams [ 2 ] leading up to the Cartesian Cogito .

Works [ edit ] Of his numerous works the following are the most conspicuous: Histoire de Hollande depuis la trève de ióop Jusqu’d 1690 (4 vols. 1693), a continuation of Grotius , and published under the name of La Neuville Les Vies des saints (4 vols. 1701) Des Satires personnelles , traité historique et critique de celles qui portent le litre d’Anti (2 vols. 1689) La vie de monsieur Descartes (2 vols. 1691; modern edition in one volume: La vie de monsieur Descartes , Paris: Éditions des Malassis, 2012) La vie de mr. Des-Cartes. Réduite en abregé (1692; modern edition: Vie de Monsieur Descartes , Paris, La Table Ronde, 1992) Auteurs déguisés sous des noms étrangers, empruntes, &c.

(1690) Jugemens des savans sur les principaux ouvrages des auteurs (9 vols. 1685—1686).

The last is the most celebrated and useful of all his works. At the time of his death he was engaged on a Dictionnaire universelle ecclésiastique . The praise bestowed on the Jansenists in the Jugemens des savans brought down on Baillet the hatred of the Jesuits , and his Vie des saints , in which he brought his critical mind to bear on the question of miracles, caused some scandal. His Vie de Descartes is a mine of information on the philosopher and his work, derived from numerous unimpeachable authorities.

[ 1 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Baillet, Adrien ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 3 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 219.

The article contains this footnote: See the edition by M. de la Monnoye of the Jugemens des savans (Amsterdam, 4 vols. 1722), which contains the Anti-Baillet of Gilles Ménage , and an Abrégé de la vie de Mr Baillet .

^ La vie de monsieur Descartes , vol. I, pp. 81-86.

External links [ edit ] Works by or about Adrien Baillet at the Internet Archive "Adrien Baillet" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . 1913.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Portugal Netherlands Latvia Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Adrien_Baillet&oldid=1287172121 " Categories : 1649 births 1706 deaths 17th-century French writers 17th-century French male writers French classical scholars French literary critics French male non-fiction writers Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles with Internet Archive links Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica articles with no significant updates This page was last edited on 24 April 2025, at 13:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Adrien Baillet 10 languages Add topic

