Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 Second World War 2.2 Postwar 3 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 3.1 Early works 3.2 Philosophy and modes of experience 3.3 Post-war essays 3.4 On Human Conduct and Oakeshott's political theory 3.5 Philosophy of history 3.6 Other works 4 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 4.1 Posthumous 5 Notes 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Michael Oakeshott 24 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Svenska Українська Yorùbá 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English philosopher (1901–1990) Michael Oakeshott Oakeshott in the 1960s Born Michael Joseph Oakeshott ( 1901-12-11 ) 11 December 1901 Chelsfield , London , England Died 19 December 1990 (1990-12-19) (aged 89) Acton , England Education Alma mater Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy British philosophy School British idealism [ 1 ] Liberal conservatism [ 2 ] Main interests History of philosophy Intellectual history History of political thought Philosophy of religion Philosophy of history Philosophy of politics Notable ideas Adverbial conditions This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United Kingdom Ideologies Burkean Cameronism Muscular liberalism Civic Compassionate Euroscepticism Green Liberal Classical Thatcherism Neo One-nation Powellism Progressive Toryism High Red Social Ultra Principles Anglo-Saxonism British unionism Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Familialism Imperialism Loyalism Moral absolutism Victorian Nationalism British English Northern Irish Scottish Welsh Ordered liberty Protectionism Royalism Social hierarchy Social market economy Sovereignty State church Tradition History Cavalier Stuart Restoration Tories Jacobitism 1794 Treason Trials Old Whigs Corn Laws Oxford Movement Young England Neo-Jacobite Revival New Right Wets and dries Brexit Intellectuals Bagehot Belloc Biggar Blond Burke Butterfield Carlyle Chesterton Clark Coleridge Conquest Dalrymple Dawson Eliot Elton Ferguson Filmer Galton Gibbon Gray Haldane Hayek Hulme Hume Johnson (Paul) Johnson (Samuel) Kipling Kedourie Laslett Lawrence Ludovici More Newman Oakeshott (Michael) Parvini Ruskin Scott Scruton Southey Stephen Trueman Unwin Waugh Williamson Wordsworth Politicians Anderson Badenoch Baldwin Balfour Braverman Burke Butler Cameron Canning Cazalet Chamberlain Churchill Clarke Disraeli Goldsmith Gove Hannan Hayes Hogg Howard Jenrick Johnson (Boris) Joseph Leigh Liverpool Lowe Macmillan Major May Peel Pitt Powell Rees-Mogg Salisbury Thatcher Whittle Willetts Commentators Amis Benjamin Bowden Burton Clarkson Cohen Forsyth (Frederick) Goodwin Hanbury-Tracy Hitchens Johnson (Paul) Kisin Liddle Lunn Moore Morgan Murray Nelson Oakeshott (Isabel) O'Sullivan Pearce Perry Roberts Smith Starkey Sullivan Turner Watson Welch West Worsthorne Young Literature Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) " Tamworth Manifesto " (1834) On Heroes (1841) Coningsby (1844) Sybil (1845) Latter-Day Pamphlets (1850) Culture and Anarchy (1867–68) Orthodoxy (1908) The Servile State (1912) " Tradition and the Individual Talent " (1919) The Whig Interpretation of History (1931) The Abolition of Man (1943) The Left Was Never Right (1945) " Rivers of Blood " (1968) The Abolition of Britain (1999) Our Culture, What's Left of It (2005) The Rage Against God (2010) The Great Degeneration (2013) How to Be a Conservative (2014) Conservatism (2017) The Strange Death of Europe (2017) Parties Active Alliance EPP: European People's Party UK Christian Party Christian Peoples Alliance Conservative and Unionist Party Common Sense Group Conservative Future (Defunct) Young Conservatives Democratic Unionist Party Heritage Party Reform UK Social Democratic Party (UK, 1990–present) Traditional Unionist Voice UK Independence Party Ulster Unionist Party Workers Party of Britain Defunct For Britain Movement Tories Veterans and People's Party Activists Booth-Smith Bowden Forsyth (James) Goldsmith Hitchens Keen-Minshull Littlewood Marshall Montgomerie Murray Payne Shawcross Stroud Sullivan Worsthorne Organisations 55 Tufton Street Centre for Policy Studies IEA LGB Alliance Migration Watch UK Policy Exchange Bright Blue Blue Collar Conservativism Conservative Democratic Alliance (Defunct) Conservative Philosophy Group Cornerstone Group CSC European Research Group The Freedom Association Henry Jackson Society London Swinton Circle Monday Club (Defunct) NATCON One Nation Conservatives Orange Order Oxford University Conservative Association Right Book Club (Defunct) Revolutionary Conservative Caucus (Defunct) Social Affairs Unit (Defunct) Tory Reform Group Traditional Britain Group Turning Point UK Western Goals Institute (Defunct) Media Anti-Jacobin Review (Defunct) Catholic Herald ConservativeHome The Critic Daily Express Sunday Express Daily Mail The Daily Sceptic The Daily Telegraph Evening Standard GB News Guido Fawkes The Mail on Sunday The Salisbury Review The Spectator The Sun The Sun on Sunday The Sunday Telegraph The Sunday Times Talk The Times UnHerd Related Anglo-Catholicism Antidisestablishmentarianism Blue Labour Cambridge Analytica " Constructive conservatism " List of British conservatives Merry England O'Sullivan's first law Philosophy of Thomas Carlyle Politics of the United Kingdom Liberalism Libertarianism Socialism Public schools in the UK Remigration Conservatism portal United Kingdom portal v t e Michael Joseph Oakeshott [ a ] (11 December 1901 – 19 December 1990) was an English philosopher. He is known for his contributions to the philosophies of history , religion , aesthetics , education , and law .

[ 3 ] Early life and education [ edit ] Oakeshott was born in Chelsfield , London, on 11 December 1901, the son of Joseph Francis Oakeshott , a civil servant with the Inland Revenue , [ 4 ] and member of the Fabian Society , [ 5 ] and Frances Maude, daughter of George Thistle Hellicar, a well-off Islington silk-merchant.

[ 4 ] His sister Violet married economist and social reformer Gilbert Slater .

[ 6 ] His uncle Harold's first wife was women's rights activist Grace Oakeshott , [ 7 ] though there is no evidence that Michael knew her.

[ citation needed ] He attended St George's School, Harpenden , a new co-educational and 'progressive' boarding school from 1912 to 1920. He enjoyed his schooldays, and the Headmaster, the Rev. Cecil Grant, a disciple of Maria Montessori , later became a friend.

[ citation needed ] In 1920, Oakeshott matriculated with a Scholarship at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge , where he read history, taking the Political Science options in both parts of the Tripos , the University of Cambridge 's degree examinations. He graduated in 1923 with a first-class degree, subsequently promoted to MA (Cantab) , and was elected a Fellow of Caius in 1925.

As a University of Cambridge student, he admired the British idealist philosophers J. M. E. McTaggart and John Grote , and the medieval historian Zachary Nugent Brooke . He said that McTaggart's introductory lectures were the only formal philosophical training he ever received. The historian Herbert Butterfield was a contemporary, friend and fellow member of the Junior Historians society.

[ citation needed ] After graduation in 1923, Oakeshott pursued theology and German literature in a summer course at the universities of Marburg and Tübingen , and again in 1925. In between, he taught literature for a year as Senior English Master at King Edward VII Grammar School, Lytham , while simultaneously writing his fellowship dissertation, which he said was a 'dry run' for his first book, Experience and its Modes .

Career [ edit ] Oakeshott was dismayed by the political extremism that occurred in Europe during the 1930s, and his surviving lectures from this period reveal a dislike of Nazism and Marxism .

[ 8 ] He is said to have been the first at Cambridge to lecture on Marx . At the suggestion of Sir Ernest Barker , who sought to see Oakeshott succeed to his own chair of political science at the University of Cambridge , he produced an anthology, with commentary, The Social and Political Doctrines of Contemporary Europe , published in 1939. For all its muddle and incoherence, as Oakeshott saw it, he found representative democracy the least unsatisfactory, in part because "the imposition of a universal plan of life on a society is at once stupid and immoral." Second World War [ edit ] Oakeshott joined the British Army in 1940, before being conscripted under the National Service Act . He volunteered for the virtually suicidal Special Operations Executive (SOE), where the average life expectancy was about six weeks, and was interviewed by Hugh Trevor-Roper , who felt that he was "too unmistakably English" to conduct covert operations on the Continent.

[ 9 ] Oakeshott saw active service in Europe with the battlefield intelligence unit Phantom , a semi-freelance quasi-Signals organisation which also had connections with the Special Air Service (SAS). Though always at the front, the unit was seldom directly involved in any actual fighting. Oakeshott's military competence did not go unnoticed, and he ended the war as Adjutant of Phantom's 'B' Squadron and an acting major .

Postwar [ edit ] In 1945, Oakeshott was demobilised and returned to the University of Cambridge . In 1949, he left Cambridge for Nuffield College, Oxford , but after only two years, in 1951, he was appointed Professor of Political Science at the London School of Economics (LSE), succeeding the leftist Harold Laski , an appointment noted by the popular press. Oakeshott was deeply unsympathetic to the student activism at LSE during the late 1960s , and highly critical of what he saw as the authorities' insufficiently robust response. He retired from the LSE in 1969, but continued teaching and conducting seminars until 1980.

In his retirement, he retreated to live quietly in a country cottage in Langton Matravers in Dorset with his third wife. He was twice divorced and had numerous affairs, many of them with wives of his students, colleagues and friends, and even with his son Simon's girlfriend.

[ 10 ] He also had a son out of wedlock, whom he abandoned together with the mother when the child was two, and whom he did not meet again for nearly twenty years. Oakeshott's most famous lover was Iris Murdoch .

[ 11 ] Oakeshott lived long enough to experience increasing recognition, although he has become much more widely written about since his death. Oakeshott declined an offer to be made a Companion of Honour , for which he was proposed by Margaret Thatcher .

[ 12 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Early works [ edit ] Oakeshott's early work, some of which has been published posthumously as What is History? and Other Essays (2004) and The Concept of a Philosophical Jurisprudence (2007), shows that he was more interested in the philosophical problems that derived from his historical studies than he was in the history, even though he was officially a historian. Some of his very early essays are on religion (of a Christian 'modernist' kind), though after his first marital break-up ( c.

1934 ) he published no more on the topic except for a couple of pages in his magnum opus , titled On Human Conduct . However, his posthumously published and voluminous Notebooks (1919-) show a lifelong preoccupation with religion and questions of mortality. In his youth he had considered taking Holy Orders, but later inclined towards a non-specific Romantic mysticism .

Philosophy and modes of experience [ edit ] Oakeshott published his first book in 1933, Experience and its Modes , when he was thirty-one. He acknowledged the influence of Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel and F. H. Bradley ; [ 13 ] commentators also noticed resemblances between this work and the ideas of thinkers such as R. G. Collingwood [ 14 ] and Georg Simmel .

[ 15 ] The book argued that our experience is usually modal, in the sense that we almost always have a governing perspective on the world, be it practical or theoretical. One may take various theoretical approaches to the world: natural science , history and practice, for example, are quite separate, immiscible modes of experience. It is a mistake, he declared, to treat history on the model of the sciences, or to read into it one's current practical concerns.

Philosophy, however, is not a mode. At this stage of his career Oakeshott understood philosophy as the world seen, in Spinoza's phrase, sub specie aeternitatis , literally "under the aspect of eternity ", free from presuppositions, whereas science and history and the practical mode rely on certain assumptions. Later (there is disagreement about exactly when) Oakeshott adopted a pluralistic view of the various modes of experience, with philosophy just one voice among others, though it retained its self-critical character.

According to Oakeshott, the dominating principles of scientific and historical thought are quantity (the world sub specie quantitatis ) and pastness (the world sub specie praeteritorum ) respectively. Oakeshott distinguished the academic perspective on the past from the practical, in which the past is seen in terms of its relevance to our present and future. His insistence on the autonomy of history places him close to Collingwood , who also argued for the autonomy of historical knowledge.

The practical world view (the world sub specie voluntatis ) presupposes the ideas of will and value. It is only in terms of these that practical action, for example in politics, economics, and ethics , makes sense. Because all action is conditioned by presuppositions, Oakeshott saw any attempt to change the world as reliant upon a scale of values, which themselves presuppose a context in which this is preferable to that . Even the conservative disposition to maintain the status quo (so long as the latter is tolerable) relies upon managing inevitable change, a point he later elaborated in his essay "On Being Conservative".

Post-war essays [ edit ] Part of a series on Conservatism Variants Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Libertarian Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Balance of power Class collaboration Collective identity Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family as a state model Family values Fundamentalism Gender roles Complementarianism Essentialism Historism Honour Imperialism Law and order Loyalty Maternalism Monarchism Royalism Moral absolutism Natalism Nationalism Nativism Natural law Norms Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organised religion State Orthodoxy Patriarchy Patriarchalism Patriotism Peace through strength Property rights Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Sovereignty Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Johnson Hume Burke More Maistre Bonald Chateaubriand Czartoryski Coleridge Karamzin Savigny Carlyle Ranke Newman Tocqueville Dostoevsky Taine Le Bon Nordau Belloc Iorga Chesterton Spengler Jabotinsky Ilyin Savarkar Schmitt Eliot Mannheim Jünger Evola Strauss Röpke Gadamer Freyre Voegelin Oakeshott Burnham Lefebvre Qutb Kuehnelt-Leddihn Gómez Dávila Kirk Solzhenitsyn Koselleck Mishima Buckley Sowell Mansfield Scruton Hoppe Dugin Peterson Politicians Adams Pitt Canning Metternich Disraeli Bismarck Salisbury Dmowski Mannerheim Baldwin Maurras Horthy Metaxas Churchill Adenauer De Gasperi Chiang Salazar De Gaulle Dollfuss Franco Khomeini Reagan Powell Pinochet Marcos Park Smith Reza Shah Suharto Lee Zia Vajpayee Thatcher Kohl Fujimori Trump Bush Kaczyński Netanyahu Modi Putin Erdoğan Abe Sarkozy Bolsonaro Yoon Orbán Milei Meloni Bukele Religion Christian democracy Christian right Confucianism Clericalism Hindutva Islamism Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Theravada Buddhism Traditionalist Catholicism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Personal variants Berlusconism Bukelism Cameronism Chiangism Erdoğanism Francoism Fujimorism Gaullism Janismo Kaczyzm Maurrassisme Mellismo Metaxism Powellism Pinochetism Putinism Qutbism Khomeinism Reaganism Sarkozysm Thatcherism Trumpism Ziaism National variants Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Belize Brazil Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Cuba Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Guatemala Hungary Iceland India Iran Israel Italy Japan Luxembourg Malaysia Mexico Netherlands New Zealand Norway Pakistan Panama Peru Poland Russia Serbia Singapore Sweden Switzerland South Korea Taiwan Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Toryism United States Related ideologies Agrarianism Black conservatism In US Conservative feminism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Conservative socialism Corporatism Hispanic conservatism In US LGBTQ conservatism Ordoliberalism Para-fascism Related topics Anti-communism White Terror Anti-gender movement Anti-immigration Catholic social teaching Conservative wave NatCon Radical right Europe US Right realism Right-wing politics Alt Authoritarianism Centre Dictatorship Far New Small-c conservative Conservatism portal Politics portal v t e During this period, Oakeshott published what became his best known work during his lifetime, the collection entitled Rationalism in Politics and Other Essays (1962), and notable for its elegance of style. Some of his near- polemics against the direction that Britain was taking, in particular towards socialism , gained Oakeshott a reputation as a traditionalist conservative, sceptical about rationalism and rigid ideologies .

Bernard Crick described him as a "lonely nihilist ".

[ 16 ] Oakeshott's opposition to political utopianism is summed up in his analogy (possibly borrowed from a pamphlet by the 17th-century statesman George Savile, 1st Marquess of Halifax , The Character of a Trimmer ) of a ship of state that has "neither starting-place nor appointed destination...[and where] the enterprise is to keep afloat on an even keel".

[ 17 ] He was a severe critic of E. H. Carr , the Cambridge historian of Soviet Russia , claiming that Carr was fatally uncritical of the Bolshevik regime and took some of its propaganda at face value.

[ 18 ] On Human Conduct and Oakeshott's political theory [ edit ] In his essay "On Being Conservative " (1956) [ 19 ] Oakeshott characterised conservatism as a disposition rather than a political stance: "To be conservative ... is to prefer the familiar to the unknown, to prefer the tried to the untried, fact to mystery, the actual to the possible, the limited to the unbounded, the near to the distant, the sufficient to the superabundant, the convenient to the perfect, present laughter to utopian bliss." Oakeshott's political philosophy , as advanced in On Human Conduct (1975), is free of any recognisable party politics . The book's first part ("On the Theoretical Understanding of Human Conduct") develops a theory of human action as the exercise of intelligent agency in activities such as wanting and choosing, the second ("On the Civil Condition") discusses the formal conditions of association appropriate to such intelligent agents, described as "civil" or legal association, and the third ("On the Character of a Modern European State") examines how far this understanding of human association has affected politics and political ideas in post-Renaissance European history .

Oakeshott suggests that there had been two major modes or understandings of political organization. In the first, which he calls "enterprise association" (or universitas ), the state is (illegitimately) understood as imposing some universal purpose ( profit , salvation , progress, racial domination) on its subjects. (As its name indicates, enterprise association is perfectly appropriate to the management of enterprises ; however, except in emergencies such as war, where all resources must be commandeered into the pursuit of victory, the state is not an enterprise, properly so called.) By contrast, "civil association" (or societas ) is primarily a legal relationship in which laws impose obligatory conditions of action but do not require the associates to choose one action rather than another. (Compare Robert Nozick on 'side-constraints'.) The complex, technical and often rebarbative style of On Human Conduct found few readers, and its initial reception was mostly one of bafflement.  Oakeshott, who rarely responded to critics, replied sardonically in Political Theory to some of the contributions made in a symposium on the book in the same journal.

[ 20 ] In his posthumously published The Politics of Faith and the Politics of Scepticism Oakeshott describes enterprise associations and civil associations in different terms. In politics, an enterprise association is based on a fundamental faith in human ability to ascertain and grasp some universal good (leading to the Politics of Faith), and civil association is based on a fundamental scepticism about human ability to either ascertain or achieve this good (leading to the Politics of Scepticism). Oakeshott considers power (especially technological power) as a necessary prerequisite for the Politics of Faith, because it allows people to believe that they can achieve something great and to implement the policies necessary to achieve their goal. The Politics of Scepticism, on the other hand, rests on the idea that government should concern itself with preventing bad things from happening, rather than enabling ambiguously good events. Oakeshott was presumably dissatisfied with this book, which, like much of what he wrote, he never published. It was evidently written well before On Human Conduct .

In the latter book Oakeshott employs the analogy of the adverb to describe the kind of restraint that law involves. Laws prescribe "adverbial conditions": they condition our actions, but they do not determine their substantive chosen ends. For example, the law against murder is not a law against killing as such, but only a law against killing "murderously". Or, to choose a more trivial example, the law does not dictate that I have a car, but if I do, I must drive it on the same side of the road as everybody else. This contrasts with the rules of enterprise associations, in which the actions required by the management are made compulsory for all.

Philosophy of history [ edit ] In the final work that Oakeshott published in his lifetime, On History (1983), he returned to the idea that history is a distinct mode of experience, but this time building on the theory of action developed in On Human Conduct . Much of On History had emerged from Oakeshott's post-retirement graduate seminars at LSE, and had been written at the same time as On Human Conduct , in the early 1970s.

During the mid-1960s Oakeshott declared an admiration for Wilhelm Dilthey , one of the pioneers of hermeneutics .

On History can be interpreted as an essentially neo-Kantian enterprise of working out the conditions of the possibility of historical knowledge, work that Dilthey had begun.

The first three essays set out the distinction between the present of historical experience and the present of practical experience, as well as the concepts of historical situation, historical event, and what is meant by change in history.

On History includes an essay on jurisprudence ("The Rule of Law"). It also includes a retelling of The Tower of Babel in a modern setting [ 21 ] in which Oakeshott expresses disdain for human willingness to sacrifice individuality, culture, and quality of life for grand collective projects. He attributes this behaviour to fascination with novelty, persistent dissatisfaction, greed, and lack of self-reflection.

[ 22 ] Other works [ edit ] Oakeshott's other works included a reader, already mentioned, on The Social and Political Doctrines of Contemporary Europe . It consisted of selected texts illustrating the main doctrines of liberalism , national socialism , fascism , communism , and Roman Catholicism (1939). He edited Thomas Hobbes 's Leviathan (1946), with an introduction that has been recognised as a significant contribution to the literature by some later scholars. Several of Oakeshott's writings on Hobbes were collected and published in 1975 as Hobbes on Civil Association .

With his Cambridge colleague Guy Thompson Griffith , Oakeshott wrote A Guide to the Classics, or How to Pick The Derby Winner (1936), a guide to the principles of successful betting on horse racing . This was his only published non-academic work.

Oakeshott was the author of well over 150 essays and reviews, most of which have now been republished.

Just before he died Oakeshott approved two edited collections of his works, The Voice of Liberal Learning (1989), a collection of his essays on education, and a second, revised and expanded edition of Rationalism in Politics (1991). Posthumous collections of his writings include Morality and Politics in Modern Europe (1993), a lecture series he gave at Harvard in 1958; Religion, Politics, and the Moral Life (1993), essays mostly from his early and middle periods; and The Politics of Faith and the Politics of Scepticism (1996), an already-mentioned manuscript from the 1950s contemporary with much of Rationalism in Politics but written in a more considered tone.

The bulk of his papers are now in the Oakeshott Archive at the London School of Economics . Further volumes of posthumous writings are in preparation, as is a biography, and a series of monographs devoted to his work were published during the first decade of the 21st century, and continue to be produced.

Bibliography [ edit ] 1933.

Experience and Its Modes .

Cambridge University Press 1936.

A Guide to the Classics, or, How to Pick the Derby Winner . With G.T. Griffith. London: Faber and Faber 1939.

The Social and Political Doctrines of Contemporary Europe . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1941.

The Social and Political Doctrines of Contemporary Europe , 2nd edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1942.

The Social and Political Doctrines of Contemporary Europe with five additional prefaces by F.A. Ogg. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1947.

A New Guide to the Derby: How to Pick the Winner . With G.T. Griffith. London: Faber and Faber 1955.

La Idea de Gobierno en la Europa Moderna . Madrid: Ateneo 1959.

The voice of poetry in the conversation of mankind: an essay . Cambridge: Bowes & Bowes 1962.

Rationalism in Politics and Other Essays . London: Methuen (Expanded edition – 1991, by Liberty Fund) 1966.

Rationalismus in der Politik . (trans. K. Streifthau) Neuwied und Berlin: Luchterhard 1975.

On Human Conduct . Oxford: Oxford University Press 1975.

Hobbes on Civil Association . Oxford: Basil Blackwell 1983.

On History and Other Essays . Basil Blackwell 1985.

La Condotta Umana . Bologna: Società Editrice il Mulino 1989.

The Voice of Liberal Learning . New Haven and London: Yale University Press Posthumous [ edit ] 1991.

Rationalism in Politics and Other Essays . Indianapolis: Liberty Press 1993.

Morality and Politics in Modern Europe . New Haven: Yale University Press 1993.

Religion, Politics, and the Moral Life . New Haven: Yale University Press 1996.

The Politics of Faith and the Politics of Skepticism . New Haven: Yale University Press 2000.

Zuversicht und Skepsis: Zwei Prinzipien neuzeitlicher Politik . (trans. C. Goldmann). Berlin: Fest 2004.

What Is History? And Other Essays . Thorverton: Imprint Academic 2006.

Lectures in the History of Political Thought . Thorverton: Imprint Academic 2007.

The Concept of a Philosophical Jurisprudence: Essays and Reviews 1926–51 . Thorverton: Imprint Academic 2008.

The Vocabulary of a Modern European State: Essays and Reviews 1952–88 . Thorverton: Imprint Academic 2010.

Early Political Writings 1925–30 . Thorverton: Imprint Academic Notes [ edit ] ^ / ˈ oʊ k ʃ ɒ t / References [ edit ] ^ Michael Oakeshott (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy) ^ Mark Garnett (ed.), Conservative Moments: Reading Conservative Texts , Bloomsbury Academic, 2018, ch. 9 .

^ Fuller, T. (1991) 'The Work of Michael Oakeshott', Political Theory , Vol. 19 No. 3.

^ a b Paul Franco, Leslie Marsh, A Companion to Michael Oakeshott , pp. 16 ^ "AIM25 collection description" .

www.aim25.ac.uk . Archived from the original on 21 March 2017.

^ Bonfiglioli, Margaret; Munson, James, eds. (2014).

Full of Hope and Fear: The Great War Letters of an Oxford Family . Oxford University Press. pp.

xxxiii– xxxiv.

ISBN 9780198707172 .

^ Robson, Jocelyn (16 June 2016).

Radical Reformers and Respectable Rebels: How the Two Lives of Grace Oakeshott Defined an Era . Palgrave Macmillan. p. xvii.

ISBN 978-1-137-31184-9 .

^ See M. Oakeshott, Review of H. Levy and others, Aspects of Dialectical Materialism , in Cambridge Review , 56 (1934–5), pp. 108–9 ^ Gray, John.

"Last of the Idealists" .

Literary Review . Archived from the original on 17 July 2014 . Retrieved 23 July 2014 .

^ Paul Franco, Leslie Marsh, A Companion to Michael Oakeshott , pp. 31 ^ Paul Franco, Michael Oakeshott: An Introduction , pp. 22 ^ "A Letter from Margaret Thatcher" .

www.michael-oakeshott-association.org . Archived from the original on 26 May 2008 . Retrieved 4 December 2016 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ Oakeshott, Experience and Its Modes , p. 6 ^ Paul Franco, Michael Oakeshott: An Introduction , pp. 45–46 ^ Efraim Podoksik, 'Ethics and the Conduct of Life in the old Georg Simmel and the young Michael Oakeshott', Simmel Studies 17(2), 2007, pp. 197–221 ^ Bernard Crick, 'The World of Michael Oakeshott: Or the Lonely Nihilist', Encounter , 20 (June 1963), pp. 65–74 ^ Oakeshott, Michael.

Rationalism in Politics . London: Methuen, 1962: p. 127; [1] ^ M. Oakeshott, Review of E. H. Carr, The New Society , in Times Literary Supplement (12 October 1951); 'Mr Carr's First Volume', Cambridge Journal , vol. 4 (1950-1), pp. 344-52 ^ Rationalism in Politics and Other Essays (London: Methuen,1962), pp. 168–96 ^ M. Oakeshott, "On Misunderstanding Human Conduct: A Reply to My Critics," Political Theory , 4 (1976), pp. 353–67.

^ Reprinted as Oakeshott, Michael (1989).

"The Tower of Babel" . In Clarke, S.G.; Simpson, E. (eds.).

Anti-Theory in Ethics and Moral Conservatism . SUNY Series in Ethical Theory. State University of New York Press. p. 185ff.

ISBN 978-0-88706-912-3 . Retrieved 25 May 2018 .

^ Corey, E.C. (2006).

Michael Oakeshott on Religion, Aesthetics, and Politics . Eric Voegelin Institute series in political philosophy.

University of Missouri Press . p.

129 -131.

ISBN 978-0-8262-6517-3 .

Further reading [ edit ] Corey Abel & Timothy Fuller, eds.

The Intellectual Legacy of Michael Oakeshott (Imprint Academic, 2005, ISBN 1-84540-009-7 ) Corey Abel, ed, The Meanings of Michael Oakeshott's Conservatism (Imprint Academic, 2010, ISBN 978-1845402181 ) Gene Callahan (2012).

Oakeshott on Rome and America . Charlottesville, VA: Exeter: Imprint Academic. p. 227.

ISBN 978-1845403133 .

OCLC 800863300 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) Wendell John Coats, Jr., Michael Oakeshott as a Philosopher of the Creative and Other Essays (Imprint Academic, 2019, ISBN 978-1845409937 ) Wendell John Coats, Jr. & Chor-Yung Cheung, The Poetic Character of Human Activity: Collected Essays on the Thought of Michael Oakeshott (Lexington Books, 2012, ISBN 978-0739171615 ) Elizabeth Campbell Corey, Michael Oakeshott on Religion, Aesthetics, and Politics ( University of Missouri Press , 2006, ISBN 978-0826216403 ) Paul Franco , Michael Oakeshott: An Introduction (Yale, 2004, ISBN 0-300-10404-9 ) Paul Franco & Leslie Marsh, eds, A Companion to Michael Oakeshott (Penn State University Press, 2012) ISBN 978-0271054070 .

OCLC 793497138 Robert Grant, Oakeshott (The Claridge Press, 1990).

W. H. Greenleaf , Oakeshott's Philosophical Politics (Longmans, 1966).

Alexandre Guilherme and W. John Morgan, 'Michael Oakeshott (1901-1990)-dialogue as conversation'. Chapter 8 in Philosophy, Dialogue, and Education: Nine modern European philosophers , Routledge, London and New York, pp. 127–139.

ISBN 978-1-138-83149-0 .

Till Kinzel, Michael Oakeshott. Philosoph der Politik (Perspektiven, 9) (Antaios, 2007, ISBN 978-3935063098 ) Terry Nardin , The Philosophy of Michael Oakeshott (Penn State, 2001, ISBN 0-271-02156-X ) Efraim Podoksik, In Defence of Modernity: Vision and Philosophy in Michael Oakeshott (Imprint Academic, 2003, ISBN 0-907845-66-5 ) Efraim Podoksik, ed, The Cambridge Companion to Oakeshott ( Cambridge University Press , 2012) ISBN 978-0521764674 .

OCLC 770694299 Andrew Sullivan , Intimations Pursued: The Voice of Practice in the Conversation of Michael Oakeshott (Imprint Academic, 2007) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Michael Oakeshott .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Michael Oakeshott .

Michael Oakeshott Association The Michael Oakeshott Bibliography Michael Oakeshott, "Rationalism in Politics" .

Cambridge Journal, Volume I, 1947 (broken link – go through your State or Provincial library's subscription service) Catalogue of the Oakeshott papers at the Archives Division of the London School of Economics .

Works by or about Michael Oakeshott at the Internet Archive v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e Conservatism Schools by region International Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Asia China Chiangism Confucianism Neo New Dai Jitao Thought Neoauthoritarianism Iran Khomeinism Monarchist Principlist Israel Fundamentalist Jewish Kahanism Zionism Neo Religious Revisionist Japan Minzoku Neo Nippon Kaigi Shōwa Statism State Shinto South Korea Ilminism New Right Turkey Democratic Erdoğanism Neo-Ottomanism Other Bangladesh Hong Kong India Malaysia Pakistan Ziaism Singapore Taiwan Chiangism Europe France Action Française Bonapartism Gaullism Integral nationalism Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Sarkozysm Ultra-royalism Germany Agrarian Hegelian Historical School Neue Rechte Ordoliberalism Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Revolutionary Young Ritter School Romanticism State Socialism Völkisch Italy Berlusconism Historical Right Italian school of elitism Neo-Bourbonism Sanfedismo Poland Golden Liberty Kaczyzm Monarchist National Democracy Sarmatism Russia Duginism Eurasianism Monarchist Black-hundredism Tsarism Putinism Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Spain Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism National Catholicism Integrism Mellismo Maurism Neocatholicism Noucentisme United Kingdom Cameronism Civic Compassionate Muscular liberalism Jacobitism Neo-Jacobite Revival Neo One-nationism Powellism Thatcherism Toryism High Red Social Other Austria Belgium Rexism Denmark Finland Georgia Monarchist Greece Metaxism Populist Hungary Iceland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Miguelist Integralismo Lusitano Romania Monarchist Serbia Monarchist Sweden Switzerland Ukraine Latin America Argentina Federal Peronism Maurrasismo Menemism Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Brazil Bolsonarism Coronelism Integralism Janismo Monarchist Patrianovism Populism Chile Gremialismo Pinochetism Other Belize Colombia Rojismo Uribism Cuba Guatemala Mexico Cristero Panama Peru Fujimorism Odriismo Uruguay Herrerism Riverism Ruralismo Venezuela Perezjimenismo North America Canada Populism Trumpism Clerico-nationalism Social Toryism Blue Red Pink United States Compassionate Libertarian Fusionism Paleo Tea Party Movement Neo Old Right Paleo Reaganism Social Traditionalist Trumpism Oceania Australia Centre Right National Right New Zealand Philosophy Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Class collaboration Consociationalism Clericalism Collective identity Confessionalism Cultural assimilation Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family values Fundamentalism Gender role Complementarianism Honour Imperialism Loyalty Monarchism Royalist Natural law Natural Order Norms Conventions Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organized religion Orthodoxy Patriotism Nationalism Personalism Philosophical realism Moral realism Private property Protectionism Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Solidarity Sovereignty State religion Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Bainville Barruel Belloc Bonald Buckley Jr.

Burke Burnham Carlyle Chateaubriand Chesterton Coleridge Comte Cortés Dávila Dostoevsky Eliot Evola Fardid Gentz Haller Hitchens Hume Iorga Johnson Jünger Karamzin Kirk Kuehnelt-Leddihn La Mennais Le Bon Le Play Leontiev Lewis Maistre Mansfield Maurras Menéndez More Müller Newman Nisbet Novalis Oakeshott Corrêa de Oliveira Peterson Ranke Renan Rivarol Röpke Santayana Savigny Schlegel Schmitt Scruton Solzhenitsyn Sowell Spann Spengler Stahl Strauss Taine Tocqueville Uvarov Voegelin Politics Organisations European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party Identity and Democracy International Democrat Union International Monarchist League Muslim Brotherhood Tradition, Family, Property Politicians Abe Adams Adenauer Andreotti Berlusconi Bismarck Bolsonaro GW Bush Canning Chiang Churchill Diefenbaker Disraeli Dmowski Dollfuss Erdoğan Franco Fujimori de Gaulle Harper Horthy John Paul II Kaczyński Khamenei Khomeini Kohl Le Pen Lee Macdonald Mannerheim Marcos Maurras Menzies Metaxas Metternich Mobutu Modi Netanyahu Orbán Park Pérez Jiménez Pinochet Pitt Powell Prat de la Riba Putin Reagan Salazar Salisbury Smith Stolypin Suharto Thatcher Trujillo Trump Vajpayee de Valera Zia Zemmour Religion Christian democracy Christian politics Theonomy Christian right Theoconservatism Confucianism Hindutva Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Islamism Islamic economics Theravada Buddhist economics Traditionalist Catholicism Catholic social teaching Distributism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Historical background Ancien régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related Ideologies Agrarianism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Corporatism Localism Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Black conservatism United States Desecularization Postsecularism Conservative feminism Conservative wave Counter-revolutionary Elite theory Ethnopluralism Hispanic and Latino conservatism in the United States LGBTQ conservatism Neo-feudalism Neo-medievalism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Para-fascism Political Evangelicalism in Latin America Political theology Radical right Europe United States Reactionary Neo- Right realism Right-wing politics Authoritarianism New European Small-c conservatives Conservatism portal Politics portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.eqiad.main‐7f67d69dcb‐6fcdb
Cached time: 20250817050920
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.374 seconds
Real time usage: 1.704 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7781/1000000
Revision size: 30797/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 263234/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 14556/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 124225/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.767/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 26542440/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1226.389      1 -total
 16.92%  207.517      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 14.21%  174.292     20 Template:Lang
 13.30%  163.053      1 Template:Conservatism_UK
 13.02%  159.725      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 12.56%  154.073      2 Template:Reflist
  8.31%  101.927      3 Template:Cite_web
  7.14%   87.586      1 Template:Short_description
  5.32%   65.207     67 Template:Smaller
  4.98%   61.098      1 Template:Social_and_political_philosophy Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:389912:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817050920 and revision id 1304917000. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Michael_Oakeshott&oldid=1304917000 " Categories : 1901 births 1990 deaths 20th-century English philosophers 20th-century English essayists 20th-century English historians Academics of the London School of Economics Alumni of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge Conservatism Critics of Marxism English essayists English male non-fiction writers English political philosophers Fellows of Nuffield College, Oxford Fellows of the British Academy Historians of political thought Hobbes scholars Idealists British lecturers Liberal conservatism People educated at St George's School, Harpenden People from Bromley British philosophers of art British philosophers of culture British philosophers of education Philosophers of history British philosophers of law British philosophers of religion British philosophy academics British Army personnel of World War II Hidden categories: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2021 Use British English from August 2012 Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2011 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text CS1 maint: publisher location Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Internet Archive links Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 23:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Michael Oakeshott 24 languages Add topic

