Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Theopneustos 2 Evangelical viewpoint Toggle Evangelical viewpoint subsection 2.1 Criticism 3 Lutheran and Reformed viewpoint 4 Catholic viewpoint 5 Liberal Christian viewpoint 6 Neo-orthodox viewpoint 7 Other viewpoints 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Biblical inspiration 28 languages العربية Български Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Interlingua Italiano Қазақша Kiswahili Malagasy مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Doctrine in Christian theology Rembrandt 's The Evangelist Matthew Inspired by an Angel (1661) Biblical inspiration is the doctrine in Christian theology that the human writers and canonizers of the Bible were led by God with the result that their writings may be designated in some sense the word of God .

[ 1 ] This belief is traditionally associated with concepts of the biblical infallibility and the internal consistency of the Bible .

[ 2 ] Theopneustos [ edit ] Part of a series on the Bible Canons and books Tanakh Torah Nevi'im Ketuvim Old Testament (OT) New Testament (NT) Deuterocanon Antilegomena Chapters and verses Apocrypha Jewish OT NT Authorship and development Authorship Dating Hebrew canon Old Testament canon New Testament canon Composition of the Torah Mosaic authorship Pauline epistles Petrine epistles Johannine works Translations and manuscripts Dead Sea Scrolls Masoretic Text Samaritan Pentateuch Targumim Septuagint Peshitta Vetus Latina Vulgate Gothic Bible Luther Bible English Bibles by language Biblical studies Archeology Artifacts Dating Historicity Internal consistency People Places Names Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia Rahlfs' Septuagint Novum Testamentum Graece Documentary hypothesis Synoptic problem NT textual categories Biblical criticism Historical Textual Source Form Redaction Canonical Interpretation Hermeneutics Pesher Midrash Pardes Allegorical interpretation Historical-grammatical method Inspiration Literalism Alcohol Conspiracy theory Ethics Capital punishment Homosexuality Humor Incest Muhammad Prophecy Rape Serpents Sex Slavery Violence Warfare Women Perspectives Gnostic Islamic Quranic Inerrancy Infallibility Criticism of the Bible Biblical authority Outline of Bible-related topics Bible portal v t e At 2 Tim 3:16 (NRSV), it is written: "All scripture is inspired by God [ theopneustos ] and is useful for teaching".

[ 3 ] When Jerome translated the Greek text of the Bible into the language of the Vulgate , he translated the Greek theopneustos (θεόπνευστος [ 4 ] ) of 2 Timothy 3:16 as divinitus inspirata ("divinely breathed into").

[ 5 ] Some modern English translations opt for "God-breathed" ( NIV ) or "breathed out by God" ( ESV ). The -tos ending in the Greek theopneustos also designates a passive construct whereby the subject God is breathing out the object ( scripture ).

Theologian C. H. Dodd suggests that it is "probably to be rendered" as: "Every inspired Scripture is also useful".

[ 6 ] Daniel B. Wallace states that numerous scholars believe that the proper translation should be: "Every inspired scripture is also profitable". Wallace, however, criticises this translation; he proposes the translation "every scripture is inspired and profitable".

[ 7 ] Evangelical viewpoint [ edit ] Evangelicals view the Bible as superintended by the Holy Spirit , preserving the writers' works from error without eliminating their specific concerns, situation, or style.

[ 8 ] This divine involvement, they say, allowed the biblical writers to communicate without corrupting God 's own message both to the immediate recipients of the writings and to those who would come after. Some Evangelicals have labelled the conservative or traditional view as "verbal, plenary inspiration of the original manuscripts ", by which they mean that each word (not just the overarching ideas or concepts) was meaningfully chosen under the superintendence of God.

[ 9 ] Evangelicals acknowledge the existence of textual variations between biblical accounts of apparently identical events and speeches. They see these as complementary, not contradictory, and explain them as the differing viewpoints of different writers. For instance, the Gospel of Matthew was intended to communicate the Gospel to Jews , the Gospel of Luke to Greeks, and the Gospel of Mark to Romans. Evangelical apologists such as John W. Haley in his book Alleged Discrepancies in the Bible [ 10 ] and Norman Geisler in When Critics Ask [ 11 ] have proposed answers to hundreds of claimed contradictions. Some discrepancies are accounted for by changes from the master manuscripts (which are alleged to contain very nearly the original text and) that these alterations were introduced as copies were made (maybe of copies themselves), either deliberately or accidentally.

Three basic approaches to inspiration are often described when the evangelical approach to scripture is discussed: [ 12 ] : 239 Verbal plenary inspiration: This view gives a greater role to the human writers of the Bible while maintaining a belief that God preserved the integrity of the words of the Bible. The effect of inspiration was to move the writers so as to produce the words God wanted.

[ 12 ] In this view the human writers' "individual backgrounds, personal traits, and literary styles were authentically theirs, but had been providentially prepared by God for use as his instrument in producing Scripture".

[ 13 ] However, the theory nuances that "God so mysteriously superintended the process that every word written was also the exact word he wanted to be written—free from all error".

[ 14 ] Verbal dictation theory : The dictation theory claims that God dictated the books of the Bible word by word, suggesting the writers were no more than tools used to communicate God's precisely intended message.

[ 12 ] Dynamic inspiration: The thoughts contained in the Bible are inspired, but the words used were left to the individual writers.

[ 12 ] This suggests the underlying message of the Scriptures are inspired, while the exact wording is dynamic .

Partial inspiration: the Bible is infallible in matters of faith and practice/morals, yet it could have errors in history or science (e.g. the Big Bang could be true, and the Genesis creation account is more allegorical than historical).

[ 15 ] Intuition theory: The authors of the Scriptures were merely wise men, so the Bible is inspired by human insight.

[ 15 ] Theories seeing only parts of the Bible as inspired ("partial inspiration") [ 16 ] meet with insistent emphasis on plenary inspiration on the part of its proponents.

Criticism [ edit ] The New American Commentary by T.D. Lea and H.P. Griffen says "[n]o respected Evangelicals maintain that God dictated the words of Scripture".

[ 12 ] By this, Lea & Griffen were referring to the entirety of the Scriptures, i.e. every single word in the Bible. Lea & Griffen meant that they advocated verbal plenary inspiration as fact, instead of the verbal dictation theory.

The Evangelical position was criticized as being circular by Catholic Answers . They claimed that the Bible can only be used to prove doctrines of biblical inspiration if the doctrine is assumed to begin with.

[ 17 ] Some defenders of the evangelical doctrine such as B. B. Warfield and Charles Hodge , however, moved away from a circular argument and "committed themselves to the legitimacy of external verification" to inductively prove the doctrine, though they placed some restrictions on the evidences that could be considered.

[ 18 ] Lutheran and Reformed viewpoint [ edit ] The Apology of the Augsburg Confession identifies Holy Scripture with the Word of God [ 19 ] and calls the Holy Spirit the author of the Bible.

[ 20 ] Article 3 (entitled 'Of the Written Word of God') of the Belgic Confession , a Reformed confession of faith, states "We confess that this Word of God was not sent nor delivered by the will of man, but that holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost , as the apostle Peter saith ( 2 Peter 1:21 ). And that afterwards God, from a special care which He has for us and our salvation, commanded His servants, the prophets and apostles, to commit His revealed Word to writing; and He Himself wrote with His own finger the two tables of the law. Therefore we call such writings holy and divine Scriptures." [ 21 ] Here a consensus with Lutheranism is apparent, namely, that Scripture is conceived of as being the 'Word of God' by virtue of its principal author, the Holy Spirit, which used human authors as instruments to write Scripture without superseding their humanity.

According to Frederic Farrar , Martin Luther did not understand inspiration to mean that the scriptures were dictated in a purely mechanical manner. Instead, Luther "held that they were not dictated by the Holy Spirit, but that His illumination produced in the minds of their writers the knowledge of salvation, so that divine truth had been expressed in human form, and the knowledge of God had become a personal possession of man. The actual writing was a human not a supernatural act".

[ 22 ] John Calvin also rejected the verbal dictation theory.

[ 23 ] Luther asserted that "He [the pious Christian] should not doubt that however simple they [the Scriptures] may seem, these are the very words, deeds, judgments, and history of the high majesty and wisdom of God; for this is the Scripture 
which makes fools out of all the wise".

[ 24 ] The doctrine of sola scriptura was one of the central teachings during the Protestant Reformation . It teaches that the Bible is the final authority for moral, spiritual, and for some, civil matters. As Luther said, "The true rule is this: God's Word shall establish articles of faith, and no one else, not even an angel can do so".

[ 25 ] Catholic viewpoint [ edit ] Hildegard of Bingen receiving divine inspiration (illustration in the Rupertsberger Codex, c. 1180) The Catechism of the Catholic Church alleges that the Bible's human writers were "consigned to writing whatever he wanted written, and no more".

[ 26 ] The Catechism also claims that the Bible "without error teach that truth which God , for the sake of our salvation , wished to see confided to the Sacred Scriptures".

[ 27 ] The Catholic Church holds the Bible as inspired by God, but that it does not view God as the direct author of the Bible, in the sense that he does not put a 'ready-made' book in the mind of the inspired person.

[ 28 ] Pope Benedict XVI gave the following explanation in 2007: [ 29 ] The Scripture emerged from within the heart of a living subject — the pilgrim people of God — and lives within this same subject. [...] [T]he individual author or group of authors [...] are not autonomous [...] they form part of [...] the "people of God," [...] the deeper "author" of the Scriptures. [...] [L]ikewise, this people [...] knows that it is led, and spoken to, by God himself, who — through men and their humanity — is at the deepest level the one speaking.

The Catholic view of biblical inspiration stems from the belief in the historical authenticity of the foundation of an infallible Church , and Jesus' grant of teaching authority to that church through his Apostles . Because the Catholic Church designated the biblical canon through its tradition, its authority to identify the inspired books is accepted, rather than any self-contained or inherent claims of the Scriptures themselves.

[ 17 ] [ 30 ] [ 28 ] Liberal Christian viewpoint [ edit ] The typical view within Liberal Christianity and Progressive Christianity rejects the idea that the Bible is divinely inspired [ citation needed ] . Some advocates of higher criticism who espouse this view even go so far as to regard the Bible as purely a product of human invention. However, most form critics , such as Rudolf Bultmann (1884–1976) and Walter Brueggemann (1933–2025 ), still regard the Bible as a sacred text , just not a text that communicates the unaltered word of God.

[ 31 ] Neo-orthodox viewpoint [ edit ] Emil Brunner (1889–1966) was one of the primary advocates of Neo-orthodoxy . He wrote: "[T]he Christian Church believes the Bible to be the Word of God", and that "Christian faith is Bible faith".

[ 32 ] He also wrote: "Yes, God has made known the secret of His will through the Prophets and Apostles in the Holy Scriptures".

[ 33 ] Brunner rhetorically asked, "Is the whole Bible God's Word then?"; Brunner answered, "Yes, insofar as it speaks of that which is 'here' in Christ".

[ 34 ] Brunner's illustration, relying on the name of the label His Master's Voice , was: "If you buy a phonograph record you are told that you will hear the Master Caruso . Is that true? Of course! But really his voice? Certainly! And yet—there are some noises made by the machine which are not the Master's voice". Brunner adds: "[T]he Bible[...] makes the real Master's voice audible,—really his voice, his words, what he wants to say". Brunner ultimately concludes: "Only a fool listens to the incidental noises when he might listen to his Master's voice!".

[ 35 ] Other viewpoints [ edit ] A 2011 Gallup survey reports, "A 49% plurality of Americans say the Bible is the inspired word of God but that it should not be taken literally , consistently the most common view in Gallup's nearly 40-year history of this question".

[ 36 ] See also [ edit ] Bible portal Biblical inerrancy Biblical infallibility Clarity of Scripture Internal consistency of the Bible General revelation Progressive revelation (Christianity) Thought inspiration Verbum Domini – apostolic exhortation of the Pope Benedict XVI References [ edit ] ^ Metzger, Bruce Manning; Coogan, Michael David (20 December 2001).

The Oxford Guide to Ideas & Issues of the Bible . Oxford University Press, USA. pp. 216–.

ISBN 978-0-19-514917-3 .

^ Gerhard Maier: Biblische Hermeneutik (= TVG Monographien und Studienbücher.

Band 355). 7. Auflage. R. Brockhaus, Wuppertal 2011, ISBN 978-3-417-29355-5, S. 94.

^ "2 Timothy 3:16 – New Revised Standard Version Updated Edition" .

Bible Gateway .

^ "2 Timothy 3:16 Interlinear: every Writing is God-breathed, and profitable for teaching, for conviction, for setting aright, for instruction that is in righteousness" .

www.biblehub.com . Retrieved 2023-03-06 .

^ "Read the Bible text :: academic-bible.com" .

www.academic-bible.com . Retrieved 2023-03-06 .

^ Dodd, Charles Harold (1986) [1929].

The Authority of the Bible . Library of constructive theology. London: Harper and Brothers. p. 15.

ISBN 0-00-625195-1 .

OCLC 559048103 .

^ Daniel B. Wallace (1996).

"Part I: Syntax of Nouns and Nominals — Adjectives III. – The Relation of Adjective to Noun – 4. Some Exegetically and Theologically Significant Passages" .

Greek Grammar Beyond the Basics: An Exegetical Syntax of the New Testament . Grand Rapids, Michigan: Zondervan. pp.

313– 314.

ISBN 0-310-21895-0 .

Many scholars feel that the translation should be: 'Every inspired scripture is also profitable.' This is probably not the best translation, however ^ Ryrie, C.C. (1972).

A survey of Bible doctrines . Chicago IL: Moody.

^ Young, Edward Joseph (1957).

Thy Word Is Truth . Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans. p. 27.

^ Haley, John W (1874).

Alleged Discrepancies of the Bible . W.F. Draper.

^ Geisler, Norman (1992).

When Critics Ask . Wheaton IL: Victor Books. p. 604.

ISBN 0896936988 .

^ a b c d e Lea, Thomas Dale; Griffin, Hayne Preston Jr. (1992).

The New American Commentary (1, 2 Timothy, Titus) . Vol. 34. Nashville TN: Broadman & Holman Publishers.

ISBN 0805401342 .

^ Myers, A.C. (1987). "Inspiration".

Eerdmans Dictionary of the Bible . Grand Rapids MI: Eerdmans. p. 27.

^ Plummer, Robert L. (2010).

40 questions about interpreting the Bible . Grand Rapids MI: Kregel Publications. p. 32.

ISBN 978-0-8254-3498-3 .

OCLC 435422984 .

^ a b Huffman, Justin (July 18, 2017).

"The Inspiration of Scripture" .

Baptist Bible Hour . Archived from the original on September 25, 2017 . Retrieved December 18, 2017 .

^ For example: Elwell, Walter A.

, ed. (1984). "Verbal Inspiration".

Evangelical Dictionary of Theology . Baker Reference Library (2 ed.). Grand Rapids MI: Baker Academic (published 2001). p. 1242.

ISBN 9780801020759 . Retrieved 2017-08-29 .

The spirit of the Renaissance, developments in philology and textual criticism, the emergence of ideas of the partial inspiration of the Bible in some quarters, and the initial expression of philosophical views that would find their culmination in the Enlightenment - all helped to stimulate theological reflection. And the refinement of plenary and then verbal inspiration were among the consequences.

^ a b Brom, Robert Henry; Carr, Bernadeane; Keating, Karl, eds. (August 10, 2004).

"[Tract] Proving Inspiration" . Catholic Answers [Magazine]. When Brom was Bishop of San Diego, he gave his official imprimatur to this tract. Before she retired from being Director of the Diocesan Institute, Ms. Carr gave her official nihil obstat to this tract. Keating was the founder of the Catholic group behind this magazine. Any anonymous author can submit a piece.

^ Coleman, Richard J. (January 1975).

"Biblical Inerrancy: Are We Going Anywhere?" .

Theology Today .

31 (4): 295– 303.

doi : 10.1177/004057367503100404 .

OCLC 60620600 .

S2CID 170389190 . Archived from the original on 2002-05-03 . Retrieved 2008-07-01 .

^ "God's Word, or Holy Scripture" is a phrase in the Apology of the Augsburg Confession, Art. II: "Of Original Sin" ^ "the Scripture of the Holy Ghost".

Apology to the Augsburg Confession, Greeting, ¶ 9 ^ The Three Forms of Unity . Moscow, Idaho: Canon Press. 2021. p. 2.

ISBN 9781954887176 .

^ Farrar, F. W.

(1886).

History of interpretation . London: Macmillan and Co. p.

339 .

^ Farrar, F. W.

(1886).

History of interpretation . London: Macmillan and Co. p.

345 .

^ Hannah, John D. (1984).

Inerrancy and the Church (PDF) . The University of Michigan: Moody Publishers. p. 113.

ISBN 9780802403278 .

^ Martin Luther, Smalcald Articles II, 15.

^ "Inspiration and Truth of Sacred Scripture, § 106" .

The Vatican . 4 Nov 2003 [1993].

^ "Inspiration and Truth of Sacred Scripture, §107" .

The Vatican . 4 Nov 2003 [1993].

^ a b Durand, Alfred (1910).

"Inspiration of the Bible" .

The Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ Ratzinger, Joseph (2007).

Jesus of Nazareth . Translated by A. J. Walker. London: Bloomsbury. p. xx.

^ "Scripture and Tradition" .

Catholic Answers . 19 November 2018.

^ Walter Brueggemann; William Carl Placher; Brian K. Blount (2002).

Struggling with Scripture . Westminster John Knox Press. pp. 7–.

ISBN 978-0-664-22485-1 .

^ Brunner, Emil (1936).

Our Faith . Chapter 2. Is the Bible the word of God?. p. 7.

^ Brunner, Emil (1936).

Our Faith . Chapter 2. Is the Bible the word of God?. p. 8.

^ Brunner, Emil (1936).

Our Faith . Chapter 2. Is the Bible the word of God?. p. 9.

^ Brunner, Emil (1936).

Our Faith . Chapter 2. Is the Bible the word of God?. p. 10.

^ Jones, Jeffrey M. (July 8, 2011).

"In U.S., 3 in 10 Say They Take the Bible Literally" .

Gallup .

Further reading [ edit ] Chafer, Lewis Sperry (1993) [1947].

"Inspiration" .

Systematic Theology . Grand Rapids: Kregel. pp.

61– 88.

ISBN 978-0-8254-2340-6 .

"The Authority & Inspiration of the Scriptures" by B. B. Warfield "God-Inspired Scripture" by B. B. Warfield The Inspiration Of Scripture by Loraine Boettner The Divine Inspiration of the Bible by Arthur Pink "The Protestant Rule of Faith" , chapter 6 of the introduction from Charles Hodge 's Systematic Theology , which argues for the traditional doctrine over and against the Modernist doctrine.

Bibliography for and on-line articles about inspiration Scholarly articles on Biblical Inspiration from the Wisconsin Lutheran Seminary Library Catholic Encyclopedia, Modernism v t e Christian theology Systematic Scripture Inspiration Preservation Canonics Biblical studies Exegesis Law and Gospel Hermeneutics God Attributes Paterology Christology Pneumatology Theocentricism Theology proper Immutability Impassibility Perichoresis Social trinitarianism Trinity Father Son ( Hypostatic union Jesus Logos Christocentric Incarnation Resurrection Ascension ) Holy Spirit Cosmology Creation Angels Angelic hierarchy Humanity Fallen angels Satan Theodicy Soteriology Absolution Adoption Assurance Atonement Baptism Calling Conditional security Conversion Divinization Election Eternal life extra Ecclesiam nulla salus Faith Forgiveness Glorification Grace Irresistible Prevenient Imputation Justification Means of grace Monergism Mortification Ordo salutis Perseverance Predestination Recapitulation Reconciliation Redemption Regeneration Repentance Resurrection Salvation Sanctification Synergism Theosis Union with Christ Worship Blessing Hamartiology Adam Anthropology The Fall Incurvatus in se Occasion of sin Original sin Sin Theodicy Total depravity Ecclesiology Church Free National Sacrament Confession Eucharist Missiology Polity ( Congregational Episcopal Presbyterian ) Bishop Historical Minister Synod Conciliarity Koinonia Full communion Church discipline Shunning Eschatology Historicism Idealism Dispensationalism Futurism Preterism Millenarianism ( Pre- / Post- / A-millennialism ) Adventism Antichrist Apocalypse Apocalypticism Covenant / New Covenant theology End times Four last things Heaven Hell Last Judgment Millennialism New Jerusalem Rapture Second Coming Soul sleep Tribulation War in Heaven Historical History of Christian theology Orthodoxy Calvinist–Arminian debate Apostolic Age Canon Patristics Caesaropapism Semipelagianism Iconoclasm Scholasticism Thomism Conciliarism Renaissance Reformation Counter-Reformation Pietism Great Awakenings Practical Apologetics Biblical law Education Ethics Homiletics Liturgics Missiology Moral Pastoral Polemics Political Public By tradition Catholic Church Absolution Apostolic succession Assumption of Mary Dogmatic Christian humanism Traditionalism Ecumenical Councils Filioque Immaculate Conception Indulgences Infant baptism Josephology Liturgy Mariology Mass Modernism Natural law Papal infallibility Priesthood Purgatory Quartodecimanism Real presence Sacerdotalism Sacrament Sainthood Scotism Thomism Transubstantiation Ultramontanism Veneration Eastern Orthodox Church Apophatic theology Cataphatic theology Economy Essence–energies Gnomic will Metousiosis Phronema Phyletism Proskynesis Sobornost Symphonia Tabor Light Theoria Theosis Theotokos Oriental Orthodoxy Miaphysitism Monophysitism Monoenergism Monothelitism Aphthartodocetism Protestantism General Adiaphora Christian views on the Old Covenant Covenant theology Dispensationalism Supersessionism Evangelicalism Evangelical theology Five solae ( Sola fide Sola gratia Sola scriptura Soli Deo gloria Solus Christus ) Fundamentalism Protestant ecclesiology Priesthood of all believers Church covenant Protestant Soteriology Assurance Conditional election Conditional preservation of the saints Prevenient grace Total depravity Unlimited atonement Anglican Anglo-Catholicism Branch theory Broad church Center church High church Low church Baptist Believer's baptism Immersion baptism Separation of church and state Lutheran Confessional Lutheranism Evangelical Catholic Haugean Loci Theologici Lutheran orthodoxy Lutheran scholasticism Neo-Lutheranism Pietism Theology of the Cross Two kingdoms Pentecostal Baptism with the Holy Spirit Faith healing Glossolalia Prosperity theology Reformed (Calvinist) Christian reconstructionism TULIP Lordship salvation Predestination Wesleyan Christian perfection Imparted righteousness Second work of grace Wesleyan Quadrilateral Other Adventism Anabaptism Arminianism Free Grace Messianic Judaism Restorationism See also Attributes of God in Christianity Christian universalism Divine mercy Grace in Christianity Love of God in Christianity Love of God Omnibenevolence Omnipotence Omnipresence Omniscience Problem of evil Problem of Hell Sacred mysteries Unlimited atonement Lists of Christian theologians Outline of Christian theology Christianity portal v t e Christianity Index Outline Glossary Prophets People Lists of Christians By country Bible (Scriptures) Canon Old Testament New Testament Foundations Church Creed Gospel New Covenant Christian tradition Worship History ( timeline ) ( spread ) Early Christianity Jesus in Christianity Chronology Nativity Baptism Ministry Sermon on the Mount Parables Miracles Great Commandment Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Ascension Apostles Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Great Church Ante-Nicene period Late antiquity Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Ephesus Chalcedon State church of the Roman Empire Christian biblical canon Middle Ages Monasticism Papal States East–West Schism Investiture Controversy Crusades Age of Discovery Modern era Auto-da-fé Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Relations with Islam Influences Denominations ( list , members ) Western Catholic Old Catholic Independent Catholic ( Palmarian ) Protestant Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Charismatic Evangelical Holiness Lutheran Methodist Pentecostal Quakers Reformed Western Rite Orthodoxy Eastern Eastern Orthodox Church Oriental Orthodox (Miaphysite) Church of the East (Nestorian) Eastern Catholic Restorationist Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saint movement Iglesia ni Cristo Theology Ablution Angel Born again Christology Divine apathy Ecclesiology Four marks Body of Christ One true church People of God Canon law Faith Fall of man Forbidden fruit Garden of Eden Final Judgement God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Good works Heaven Hell Holy water Hygiene Kingdom of God Liturgy Catholic Eastern Catholic Eastern Orthodox Protestant Love of Christ of God Mariology Theotokos Mission Monasticism Mortification Catholic Of the flesh New Covenant Nicene Creed Old Covenant Views Original sin Penance Prayer Repentance Sacraments Baptism Eucharist Marriage Confirmation Penance Anointing of the Sick Holy orders Saints Salvation Satan Sin Eternal sin Mortal sin Sins that cry to Heaven for Vengeance Seven deadly sins Venial sin Tradition Values Vice Works of mercy Worship Philosophy Natural law Ethics Science Evolution Politics Social mortgage Universal destination of goods Views on poverty and wealth Option for the poor Worldview Other features Culture Alcohol Architecture Architecture of cathedrals and great churches Art Jesus Mary Trinity God the Father Holy Spirit Atonement Christmas Church buildings Lists of cathedrals Crucifix Cupio dissolvi Evangelism Catechesis Catechism Catholic priest Folk Christianity Open-air Pastor Fallen woman Magdalene asylum Flag Flagellant Forgiveness Literature Marriage Catholic Music Chant Choir Gospel Hymn Introit Pop Psalm Requiem Mythology Pilgrimage Popular piety Redemptive suffering Role in civilization Self-flagellation Sign of the cross Symbolism Movements Crusading movement Anarchism Charismatic Democracy Evangelism Mission Environmentalism Existentialism Fundamentalism Liberation Left / Right Mysticism Pacifism Prosperity Supremacy Terrorism Traditionalist Catholicism Cooperation Christendom Ecumenism Charta Oecumenica World Council of Churches World Evangelical Alliance Nondenominationalism Related ... and Islam ... and other religions ... and violence ... as an ethnicity Anti-Christian sentiment Christian universalism Criticism Jesus Cultural Christians Good and evil Great Apostasy Martyrs Miracle Nominal Christian Persecution Religious views on love Role of Christianity in civilization Christianization Cultural Christians Spread Unlimited atonement Views on homosexuality Christianity portal Category v t e Revelation General topics Apparitional experience Biblical inspiration Direct revelation General revelation versus Special revelation Neo-revelationism Private revelation Interior locution Different views Completed revelation versus Continuous revelation Progressive revelation (Baháʼí) Progressive revelation (Christianity) Revelation in Mormonism See also Dispensationalism Template:Private revelation in the Catholic Church Template:Apparitions approved by the Catholic Church Religion Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐2kk62
Cached time: 20250814221306
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.654 seconds
Real time usage: 0.775 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3138/1000000
Revision size: 24739/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 225725/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1357/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 177238/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.396/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18467233/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  588.225      1 -total
 39.80%  234.123      1 Template:Reflist
 26.50%  155.874     21 Template:Cite_book
 16.17%   95.119      1 Template:Christianity_footer
 14.61%   85.927      1 Template:Bible_sidebar
 12.81%   75.378      1 Template:Lang
  9.95%   58.556      5 Template:Navbox
  8.69%   51.114      1 Template:Short_description
  7.70%   45.267      1 Template:Christian_theology
  6.65%   39.143      9 Template:Cite_web Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1741409:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814221306 and revision id 1299395479. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Biblical_inspiration&oldid=1299395479 " Categories : Christian theology of the Bible Christian terminology Evangelical theology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 Articles containing Tagalog-language text This page was last edited on 8 July 2025, at 04:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Biblical inspiration 28 languages Add topic

