Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Types Toggle Types subsection 2.1 Defined benefit pension plans 2.2 Individual annuity 2.2.1 Deferred annuity 2.2.2 Immediate annuity 2.2.3 Fixed and variable annuity 2.2.4 Guaranteed annuity 2.2.5 Joint annuity 2.2.6 Impaired life annuity 3 Valuation 4 Annuities by region Toggle Annuities by region subsection 4.1 United States 4.2 United Kingdom 4.3 Internationally 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Life annuity 8 languages Azərbaycanca Dansk Deutsch فارسی Français Italiano Lietuvių Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Annuity (financial contracts) ) Series of payments at fixed intervals This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Life annuity" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) See also: Pension A life annuity is an annuity , or series of payments at fixed intervals, paid while the purchaser (or annuitant) is alive. The majority of life annuities are insurance products sold or issued by life insurance companies. However, substantial case law indicates that annuity products are not necessarily insurance products.

[ 1 ] Annuities can be purchased to provide an income during retirement, or originate from a structured settlement of a personal injury lawsuit . Life annuities may be sold in exchange for the immediate payment of a lump sum (single-payment annuity) or a series of regular payments (flexible payment annuity), prior to the onset of the annuity.

The payment stream from the issuer to the annuitant has an unknown duration based principally upon the date of death of the annuitant. At this point the contract will terminate and the remainder of the fund accumulated is forfeited unless there are other annuitants or beneficiaries in the contract. Thus a life annuity is a form of longevity insurance , where the uncertainty of an individual's lifespan is transferred from the individual to the insurer, which reduces its own uncertainty by pooling many clients.

History [ edit ] The instrument's evolution has been long and continues as part of actuarial science .

[ 2 ] Ulpian is credited with generating an actuarial life annuity table between AD 211 and 222.

[ 3 ] Medieval German and Dutch cities and monasteries raised money by the sale of life annuities, and it was recognized that pricing them was difficult.

[ 4 ] The early practice for selling this instrument did not consider the age of the nominee, thereby raising interesting concerns.

[ 5 ] These concerns got the attention of several prominent mathematicians [ 6 ] over the years, such as Huygens , Bernoulli , de Moivre and others: [ 5 ] even Gauss and Laplace had an interest in matters pertaining to this instrument.

[ 7 ] It seems that Johan de Witt was the first writer to compute the value of a life annuity as the sum of expected discounted future payments, while Halley used the first mortality table drawn from experience for that calculation. Meanwhile, the Paris Hôtel-Dieu offered some fairly priced annuities that roughly fit the Deparcieux table discounted at 5%.

[ 8 ] Continuing practice is an everyday occurrence with well-known theory founded on robust mathematics, as witnessed by the hundreds of millions worldwide who receive regular remuneration via pension or the like. The modern approach to resolving the difficult problems related to a larger scope for this instrument applies many advanced mathematical approaches, such as stochastic methods, game theory, and other tools of financial mathematics .

Types [ edit ] Defined benefit pension plans [ edit ] Defined benefit pension plans are a form of life annuity typically provided by employers or governments (such as Social Security in the United States). The size of payouts is usually determined based on the employee's years of service, age and salary.

Individual annuity [ edit ] Individual annuities are insurance products marketed to individual consumers. With the complex selection of options available, consumers can find it difficult to decide rationally on the right type of annuity product for their circumstances.

[ 9 ] Deferred annuity [ edit ] There are two phases for a deferred annuity: the accumulation or deferral phase in which the customer deposits (or pays premiums) and accumulates money into an account; the distribution or annuitization phase in which the insurance company makes income payments until the death of the annuitants named in the contract Deferred annuities grow capital by investment in the accumulation phase (or deferral phase) and make payments during the distribution phase. A single premium deferred annuity (SPDA) allows a single deposit or premium at the issue of the annuity with only investment growth during the accumulation phase. A flexible premium deferred annuity (FPDA) allows additional payments or premiums following the initial premium during the accumulation phase.

The phases of an annuity can be combined in the fusion of a retirement savings and retirement payment plan: the annuitant makes regular contributions to the annuity until a certain date and then receives regular payments from it until death. Sometimes there is a life insurance component added so that if the annuitant dies before annuity payments begin, a beneficiary gets either a lump sum or annuity payments.

Immediate annuity [ edit ] An annuity with only a distribution phase is an immediate annuity, single premium immediate annuity (SPIA), payout annuity , or income annuity . Such a contract is purchased with a single payment and makes payments until the death of the annuitant(s).

Fixed and variable annuity [ edit ] Annuities that make payments in fixed amounts or in amounts that increase by a fixed percentage are called fixed annuities. Variable annuities, by contrast, pay amounts that vary according to the investment performance of a specified set of investments, typically bond and equity mutual funds .

Variable annuities are used for many different objectives. One common objective is deferral of the recognition of taxable gains. Money deposited in a variable annuity grows on a tax-deferred basis, so that taxes on investment gains are not due until a withdrawal is made. Variable annuities offer a variety of funds ("subaccounts") from various money managers . This gives investors the ability to move between subaccounts without incurring additional fees or sales charges.

Variable annuities have been criticized for their high commissions, contingent deferred sale charges, tax deferred growth, high taxes on profits, and high annual costs. Sales abuses became so prevalent that in November 2007, the Securities and Exchange Commission approved FINRA Rule 2821 [ 10 ] requiring brokers to determine specific suitability criteria when recommending the purchase or exchange (but not the surrender) of deferred variable annuities.

Guaranteed annuity [ edit ] A pure life annuity ceases to make payments on the death of the annuitant. A guaranteed annuity or life and certain annuity , makes payments for at least a certain number of years (the "period certain"); if the annuitant outlives the specified period certain, annuity payments then continue until the annuitant's death, and if the annuitant dies before the expiration of the period certain, the annuitant's estate or beneficiary is entitled to collect the remaining payments certain. The tradeoff between the pure life annuity and the life-with-period-certain annuity is that in exchange for the reduced risk of loss, the annuity payments for the latter will be smaller.

Joint annuity [ edit ] Joint-life and joint-survivor annuities make payments until the death of one or both of the annuitants respectively. For example, an annuity may be structured to make payments to a married couple, such payments ceasing on the death of the second spouse. In joint-survivor annuities, sometimes the instrument reduces the payments to the second annuitant after death of the first.

Impaired life annuity [ edit ] There has also been a significant growth in the development of enhanced or impaired annuities . These involve improving the terms offered due to a medical diagnosis which is severe enough to reduce life expectancy. A process of medical underwriting is involved and the range of qualifying conditions has increased substantially in recent years. Both conventional annuities and Purchase Life Annuities can qualify for impaired terms.

Valuation [ edit ] See also: Actuarial present value § Life annuity Valuation is the calculation of economic value or worth. Valuation of an annuity is calculated as the actuarial present value of the annuity, which is dependent on the probability of the annuitant living to each future payment period, as well as the interest rate and timing of future payments.

Life tables provide the probabilities of survival necessary for such calculations.

Annuities by region [ edit ] United States [ edit ] Further information: Annuity (US financial products) United Kingdom [ edit ] In the United Kingdom conversion of pension income into an annuity was compulsory by the age of 75 until new legislation was introduced by the coalition government in April 2011.

[ 11 ] The new rules allow individuals to delay the decision to purchase an annuity indefinitely.

In the UK there are a large market of annuities of different types. The most common are those where the source of the funds required to buy the annuity is from a pension scheme. Examples of these types of annuity, often referred to as a Compulsory Purchase Annuity, are conventional annuities, with profit annuities and unit linked, or "third way" annuities. Annuities purchased from savings (i.e. not from a pension scheme) are referred to as Purchase Life Annuities and Immediate Vesting Annuities. In October 2009, the International Longevity Centre-UK published a report on Purchased Life Annuities (Time to Annuitise). 
In the UK it has become common for life companies to base their annuity rates on an individual's location. Legal & General were the first company to do this in 2007.

[ 12 ] Internationally [ edit ] Some countries developed more options of value for this type of instrument than others. However, a 2005 study reported that some of the risks related to longevity are poorly managed "practically everywhere" due to governments backing away from defined benefit promises and insurance companies being reluctant to sell genuine life annuities because of fears that life expectancy will go up.

[ 9 ] Longevity insurance is now becoming more common in the UK and the U.S. (see Future of annuities, below) while Chile, in comparison to the U.S., has had a very large life annuity market for 20 years.

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Annuity (European financial arrangements)#Life annuity Certificate of life Tontine Life estate References [ edit ] ^ "S. E. C. v. VARIABLE ANNUITY CO" .

FindLaw .

^ "Laboratory of Actuarial Mathematics" . Act.ku.dk . Retrieved 2012-12-10 .

^ Hald, Anders (2005).

A History of Probability and Statistics and Their Applications before 1750 . John Wiley & Sons. p. 608.

^ J. Franklin, The Science of Conjecture: Evidence and Probability Before Pascal (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2001), 269-272.

^ a b " From Commercial Arithmetic to Life Annuities: The Early History of Financial Economics, 1478-1776 Archived 2012-02-06 at the Wayback Machine " Geoffrey Poitras, Simon Fraser University ^ Seminar Series on Quantitative Finance The Fields Institute ^ Stephen Hawking God Created the Integers: The Mathematical Breakthroughs That Changed History , Running Press, 2005 ISBN 0-7624-1922-9 ^ Pierre-Charles Pradier, « Les bénéfices terrestres de la charité. Les rentes viagères des Hôpitaux parisiens 1660-1690 » Histoire & mesure (décembre 2011, à paraître).

^ a b Longevity Insurance: A Missing Market Adam Creighton, et al. University of New South Wales AU ^ " "FINRA Publishes Guidance, Text for New Rule Governing Deferred Variable Annuity Transactions" Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, Inc, November 6, 2007 ^ " "Finance Bill to scrap compulsory annuity age" Archived 2011-11-14 at the Wayback Machine Banking Times, December 10, 2010 ^ Cannon, Edmund; Ian Tonks (2008).

Annuity Markets . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 260.

ISBN 978-0-19-921699-4 .

^ " NCPA: Baby Boom Retirement Could Cause Annuity Market Explosion Archived 2007-09-28 at the Wayback Machine " Insurance Newsnet, 12/9/2004 External links [ edit ] Math and spreadsheet for purchase and deferral decision Variable Annuities Interview- Legal Perspective NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐9pm59
Cached time: 20250812020607
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.204 seconds
Real time usage: 0.283 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 725/1000000
Revision size: 13857/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 17586/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 525/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 9/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 24643/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.125/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4468473/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  251.478      1 -total
 44.13%  110.979      1 Template:Reflist
 27.46%   69.044      2 Template:Cite_web
 23.81%   59.884      1 Template:Short_description
 21.51%   54.090      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 19.62%   49.336      1 Template:Ambox
 13.16%   33.086      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.88%   17.291      2 Template:See_also
  6.48%   16.298      3 Template:Main_other
  5.81%   14.606      1 Template:SDcat Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:8928339:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812020607 and revision id 1295710546. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Life_annuity&oldid=1295710546 " Categories : Retirement Annuities Actuarial science Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2025 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 15 June 2025, at 11:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Life annuity 8 languages Add topic

