Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Types Toggle Types subsection 2.1 Rally 2.2 Compilation 2.3 Cascade 2.4 Crossword 3 See also Toggle See also subsection 3.1 Puzzle hunts that have metapuzzles 3.2 Puzzle games that have metapuzzles 3.3 Puzzle books that have metapuzzles 3.4 Websites that have metapuzzles 4 References Toggle the table of contents Metapuzzle 1 language Српски / srpski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of puzzle Part of a series on Puzzles Types Guessing Riddle Situation Logic Dissection Induction Logic grid Self-reference Mechanical Combination Construction Disentanglement Lock Go problems Folding Stick Tiling Tour Sliding Chess Maze ( Logic maze ) Word and Number Crossword Sudoku Puzzle video games Mazes Metapuzzles Topics Brain teaser Dilemma Joke Optical illusion Packing problems Paradox Problem solving Puzzlehunt Syllogism Tale Lists Impossible puzzles Maze video games Nikoli puzzle types Puzzle video games Puzzle topics v t e A metapuzzle , also known as a meta-puzzle or meta , is a puzzle that uses the solutions to a set of puzzles to create or provide data for a final puzzle.

[ 1 ] Overview [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( July 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) An example Jumble -style word puzzle, where solving four anagrams allows the solver to then solve a fifth, using the circled letters of the previous answers Game designer Cliff Johnson defines a meta-puzzle as "a collection of puzzles that, when solved, each give a piece of a master puzzle." [ 2 ] A metapuzzle is a puzzle that unites several puzzles that feed into it. For example, five puzzles that had the answers BLACK, HAMMER, FROST, KNIFE, and UNION would lead to the metapuzzle answer JACK, which combines with all of those words to make new words and phrases.

A "meta-meta" can exist in larger sets of puzzles, uniting several metapuzzles. So if that metapuzzle answer JACK was alongside three metapuzzles with the answers TEN, QUEEN, and ACE, the meta-meta answer would be KING, the remaining card in an ace high straight.

Metapuzzles are frequently found in puzzle hunts .

The structure of a metapuzzle often makes it possible to guess, with a greater or lesser degree of certainty, the solutions to the puzzles that feed into it without solving them. This technique is called backsolving . For instance, in the above example, after solving the puzzles whose answers were BLACK, HAMMER, FROST, and KNIFE, and the metapuzzle answer JACK, a backsolver might, instead of solving the fifth puzzle, correctly guess UNION as its answer simply based on the knowledge that it must form a word or phrase with JACK. Backsolving is not infallible; the same backsolver might incorrectly guess SPRING-HEELED as the answer just as easily as correctly guessing UNION.

Types [ edit ] Rally [ edit ] In a rally metapuzzle, individual puzzles are checkpoints in a race or maze; solving the puzzle unlocks the location of the next puzzle.

[ 1 ] Compilation [ edit ] In a compilation metapuzzle, the answers to puzzles unite as components used to solve a final puzzle. This form of puzzle is particularly inclined towards backsolving , where some of the component puzzle answers are used to solve the final metapuzzle, and the metapuzzle's solution is used to solve the remaining component puzzles.

[ 1 ] Cascade [ edit ] A cascade is a metapuzzle where the solution to one puzzle becomes the basis for the next puzzle. For instance, a cryptogram might produce clues for a crossword puzzle, and the crossword's solution might form a word search .

[ 1 ] Crossword [ edit ] Main article: Crossword § Metapuzzles Crossword metapuzzles are crosswords that, when correctly solved, provide the basis for a second puzzle. Crosswords with metapuzzle components started to grow in popularity in the 2010s, after Matt Gaffney began making crossword metapuzzles in 2008.

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Puzzle hunts that have metapuzzles [ edit ] MIT Mystery Hunt Microsoft Puzzle Hunt Microsoft Puzzle Safari College Puzzle Challenge PEA Puzzle Hunt [ 4 ] VTHunt [ 5 ] Puzzle games that have metapuzzles [ edit ] The Fool's Errand 3 in Three System's Twilight The Fool and His Money Baba Is You Puzzle books that have metapuzzles [ edit ] The Librarian's Almanaq The Maze of Games The Year of Puzzles Websites that have metapuzzles [ edit ] Some Puzzles by Mark Halpin Planetarium References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Selinker, Mike ; Snyder, Thomas (2013). "Puzzles within Puzzles".

Puzzle Craft .

Puzzlewright Press .

ISBN 9781402779244 .

^ Johnson, Cliff (November 2003).

"Questions asked by Martin Mathers from Paragon Publishing" .

www.thefoolsgold.com (Interview). Interviewed by Martin Mathers. Archived from the original on 2005-03-10.

^ Kassel, Matthew (2015-11-23).

"Chasing The 'Aha' Moment: The Rise of the Meta Puzzle" .

Observer . Retrieved 2022-07-10 .

^ "About the Hunt" .

PEA Puzzle Hunt . Retrieved 2023-03-18 .

^ "VT Hunt" .

VT Hunt . Retrieved 2024-03-23 .

This puzzle/logic game -related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Metapuzzle&oldid=1215176244 " Categories : Puzzle hunts Puzzle video games Game stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2022 All articles needing additional references All stub articles This page was last edited on 23 March 2024, at 16:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Metapuzzle 1 language Add topic

