Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Bankruptcy 2 Legal estate in land 3 Equitable estates 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Estate (law) 24 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Euskara Français 한국어 Íslenska Italiano Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Shqip Simple English Suomi Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Value of a person's assets minus their liabilities This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Estate" law – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Property law Part of the common law series Types Personal property Community property Real property Unowned property Acquisition Gift Adverse possession Deed Conquest Discovery Accession Lost, mislaid, and abandoned property Treasure trove Bailment License Alienation Estates in land Allodial title Fee simple Fee tail Life estate Defeasible estate Future interest remainder Concurrent estate Leasehold estate Condominiums Real estate Land tenure Conveyancing Bona fide purchaser Torrens title Strata title Deeds registration Estoppel by deed Quitclaim deed Mortgage Equitable conversion Action to quiet title Escheat Future use control Restraint on alienation Rule against perpetuities Rule in Shelley's Case Doctrine of worthier title Nonpossessory interest Lien Easement Profit Usufruct Covenant Equitable servitude Related topics Fixtures Waste Partition Practicing without a license Property rights Mineral rights Water rights prior appropriation riparian Lateral and subjacent support Assignment Nemo dat Quicquid plantatur Conflict of property laws Blackacre Security deposit Other common law areas Contract law Tort law Wills , trusts and estates Criminal law Evidence Higher category: Law and Common law v t e In common law , an estate is a living or deceased person's net worth . It is the sum of a person's assets , meaning their the legal rights, interests, and entitlements to property of any kind, minus all their liabilities at a given time. The issue is of special legal significance on a question of bankruptcy and death of the person. (See inheritance .) Depending on the particular context, the term is also used in reference to an estate in land or of a particular kind of property (such as real estate or personal estate ). The term is also used to refer to the sum of a person's assets only.

The equivalent in civil law legal systems is patrimony .

Bankruptcy [ edit ] Under United States bankruptcy law , a person's estate consists of all assets or property of any kind available for distribution to creditors.

[ 1 ] However, some assets are recognized as exempt to allow a person significant resources to restart their financial life. In the United States , asset exemptions depend on various factors, including state and federal law.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] The estate (or assets) of a bankrupt person is administered by a trustee in bankruptcy .  The legal position in all common law countries is similar in this respect.

Legal estate in land [ edit ] Main article: Estate in land In land law , the term "estate" is a remnant of the English feudal system , which created a complex hierarchy of estates and interests in land. The allodial or fee simple interest is the most complete ownership that one can have of property in the common law system. An estate can be an estate for years, an estate at will, a life estate (extinguishing at the death of the holder), an estate pur autre vie (a life interest for the life of another person) or a fee tail estate (to the heirs of one's body) or some more limited kind of heir (e.g. to heirs male of one's body).

Fee simple estates may be either fee simple absolute or defeasible ( i.e. subject to future conditions ) like fee simple determinable and fee simple subject to condition subsequent; this is the complex system of future interests (q.v.) which allows concepts of trusts and estates to elide into actuarial science through the use of life contingencies.

Estate in land can also be divided into estates of inheritance and other estates that are not of inheritance.  The fee simple estate and the fee tail estate are estates of inheritance; they pass to the owner's heirs by operation of law , either without restrictions (in the case of fee simple), or with restrictions (in the case of fee tail).  The estate for years and the life estate are estates not of inheritance; the owner owns nothing after the term of years has passed, and cannot pass on anything to his or her heirs.

Legal estates and interests are called rights "in rem", and said to be "good against the world".

Equitable estates [ edit ] Superimposed on the legal estate and interests in land, English courts created " equitable interests " over the same legal interests. These obligations are called trusts which will be enforceable in a court . A trustee is the person who holds the legal title to property, while the beneficiary is said to have an equitable interest in the property.

See also [ edit ] Estate tax Estate tax in the United States Estate planning Literary executor References [ edit ] ^ Bankruptcy Code 11 U.S.C.

§ 541 .

^ Fay, Scott; Hurst, Erik; White, Michele J. (June 2002). "The Household Bankruptcy Decision".

The American Economic Review .

92 (3): 706– 718.

doi : 10.1257/00028280260136327 .

JSTOR 3083362 .

^ "Chapter 7 - Bankruptcy Basics" .

United States Courts . Retrieved 20 September 2017 .

^ "11 U.S. Code § 522 - Exemptions" .

Legal Information Institute . Cornell Law School . Retrieved 20 September 2017 .

Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Estate_(law)&oldid=1305390493 " Categories : Inheritance Real property law Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2013 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 20:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Estate (law) 24 languages Add topic

