Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life Toggle Life subsection 1.1 Early life and education 1.2 Joining the Reform of Teresa of Ávila 1.3 Height of Carmelite tensions 1.4 Foundations, imprisonment, torture and death 2 Veneration 3 Literary works Toggle Literary works subsection 3.1 Editions of his works 4 Intellectual influences Toggle Intellectual influences subsection 4.1 Scripture 4.2 Pseudo-Dionysius 4.3 Medieval mystics 4.4 Secular Spanish poetry 4.5 Islamic influence 5 Books 6 See also 7 References 8 Sources 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents John of the Cross 58 languages العربية Aragonés Asturianu Aymar aru Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית Kabɩyɛ Kiswahili Latina Lietuvių Magyar Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Spanish Catholic priest and Christian mystic (1542–1591) This article is about the Spanish mystic and saint. For the national personification of the Philippines, see Juan dela Cruz .

In this Spanish name , the first or paternal surname is de Yepes and the second or maternal family name is Álvarez .

Saint John of the Cross OCD Saint John of the Cross, by Zurbarán Priest, Mystic, Doctor of the Church Born Juan de Yepes y Álvarez ( 1542-06-24 ) 24 June 1542 [ 1 ] Fontiveros , Ávila , Crown of Castile , Spanish monarchy Died 14 December 1591 (1591-12-14) (aged 49) Úbeda , Kingdom of Jaén , Crown of Castile, Spanish monarchy Venerated in Catholic Church [ 2 ] Anglican Communion [ 3 ] Lutheranism [ 4 ] Beatified 25 January 1675, Rome by Pope Clement X Canonized 27 December 1726, Rome by Pope Benedict XIII Major shrine Tomb of Saint John of the Cross, Segovia , Spain Feast 14 December Attributes Carmelite habit , cross , crucifix , book, quill Patronage Spanish poets, [ 5 ] mystics and contemplatives [ 6 ] Influences Likely Thomas Aquinas , Duns Scotus , Guillaume Durand , Teresa of Ávila [ 2 ] (possibly Pseudo-Dionysius , Meister Eckhart , Ramon Llull , John of Ruysbroeck , Henry Suso , Johannes Tauler ) Influenced Thérèse de Lisieux Edith Stein T.S. Eliot Thomas Merton Jacques Maritain Hans Urs von Balthasar Dorothy Day Daniel Berrigan Philip Berrigan Georges Bataille Salvador Dalí John Paul II Major works Spiritual Canticle Dark Night of the Soul Ascent of Mount Carmel St. John of the Cross OCD (Spanish: Juan de la Cruz ; Latin : Ioannes a Cruce ; né Juan de Yepes y Álvarez ; 24 June 1542 – 14 December 1591) was a Spanish Roman Catholic priest , mystic , and Carmelite friar of Converso ancestry.

[ 2 ] He is a major figure of the Counter-Reformation in Spain, and he is one of the 38 Doctors of the Church .

John of the Cross is known for his writings. He was mentored by and corresponded with the older Carmelite nun Teresa of Ávila . Both his poetry and his studies on the development of the soul , particularly his Noche Obscura , are considered the summit of mystical Christian literature and among the greatest works of all Spanish literature . He was canonized by Pope Benedict XIII in 1726. In 1926, he was declared a Doctor of the Church by Pope Pius XI , and is also known as the "mystical doctor".

[ 2 ] Life [ edit ] Early life and education [ edit ] Statues in Fontiveros of John of the Cross, erected in 1928 by popular subscription by the townspeople Part of a series on Christian mysticism Theology and philosophy Apophatic Ascetical Cataphatic Catholic spirituality Hellenistic Mystical theology Neoplatonic Henosis Practices Monasticism Monasticism New Silence Asceticism Mendicant Spiritual direction Meditation Meditation Lectio Divina Invoking of Mystic Saints Active asceticism Contemplation Hesychasm Jesus Prayer Quietism Stages of Christian perfection Hesychia Divinization Catharsis Theosis Kenosis Spiritual dryness Religious ecstasy Passive asceticism Abstinence Esoteric Charismatic Esoteric People (by era or century) Antiquity Ancient African Origen Thomasines Gregory of Nyssa Pseudo-Dionysius Desert Fathers Paul of Thebes Anthony the Great Arsenius the Great Poemen Macarius of Egypt Moses the Black Syncletica Athanasius John Chrysostom Hilarion John Cassian 11th · 12th Bernard of Clairvaux Guigo II Hildegard of Bingen Symeon the New Theologian Saint Sava of Serbia 13th · 14th Dominican Dominic de Guzmán Franciscan Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Bonaventure Jacopone da Todi Angela of Foligno English Richard Rolle Walter Hilton Julian of Norwich Margery Kempe Flemish Beatrice of Nazareth Lutgardis Hadewijch John van Ruysbroeck German Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Henry Suso Female Beatrice of Nazareth Bridget of Sweden Catherine of Siena Mechthild of Magdeburg Marguerite Porete 15th · 16th Spanish Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Others Catherine of Genoa 17th · 18th French Margaret Mary Alacoque Pierre de Bérulle Jean-Jacques Olier Louis de Montfort Charles de Condren John Eudes John of St. Samson Others Mary of Jesus of Ágreda Anne Catherine Emmerich Veronica Giuliani Francis de Sales 19th Dina Bélanger Catherine Labouré Mélanie Calvat Maximin Giraud Bernadette Soubirous Conchita de Armida Luisa Piccarreta Mary of the Divine Heart Thérèse of Lisieux Gemma Galgani 20th Padre Pio Therese Neumann Marthe Robin Alexandrina of Balazar Faustina Kowalska Sister Lúcia of Fátima Edgar Cayce Simone Weil Alfred Delp Thomas Merton Charles de Foucauld Edvige Carboni Elena Aiello Contemporary papal views Aspects of meditation ( Orationis Formas , 1989) Reflection on the New Age (2003) Literature and media Lingua ignota Ordo Virtutum Scivias Ascent of Mount Carmel Dark Night of the Soul Spiritual Canticle Way of Perfection Book of the First Monks The Interior Castle Abbey of the Holy Ghost A Dialogue of Comfort against Tribulation From Willow Creek to Sacred Heart The Glories of Mary The Imitation of Christ The Ladder of Divine Ascent Philokalia Revelations of Divine Love The Story of a Soul Theologia Germanica Devotio Moderna Fatima in Lucia's Own Words Calls from the Message of Fatima The Miracle of Our Lady of Fatima Sol de Fátima The Cloud of Unknowing On the Consolation of Philosophy The Mirror of Simple Souls Sister Catherine Treatise Tractatus de Purgatorio Sancti Patricii The Vision of Adamnán Divine Comedy Inferno Purgatorio Paradiso Fatima v t e He was born Juan de Yepes y Álvarez at Fontiveros , Old Castile , into a " New Christian " family of Converso origins (descendants of Iberian Jewish converts to Roman Catholicism ) in Fontiveros, near Ávila , a town of around 2,000 people.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] His father, Gonzalo, was an accountant to richer relatives who were silk merchants. In 1529 Gonzalo married John's mother, Catalina, an orphan of humble origins; he was rejected by his family and forced to work with his wife as a weaver.

[ 10 ] John's father died in 1545, when John was around three years old.

[ 11 ] Two years later, John's older brother, Luis, died, probably from malnourishment due to the family's poverty. John's mother Catalina moved with John and his surviving brother Francisco, first to Arévalo in 1548, and then in 1551 to Medina del Campo , where she was able to find work.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] In Medina, John entered a school for 160 [ 14 ] poor children, mostly orphans, to receive a basic education, mainly in Christian doctrine. They were given some food, clothing, and lodging. While there, he was chosen to serve as an altar boy at a nearby convent of Augustinian nuns.

[ 12 ] Growing up, John worked at a hospital and studied the humanities at a Jesuit school from 1559 to 1563. The Society of Jesus was at that time a new organization, having been founded only a few years earlier by the Spaniard St.

Ignatius of Loyola . In 1563 he entered the Carmelite Order, adopting the name John of St. Matthias .

[ 15 ] [ 12 ] In 1564, he made his first vows and enrolled in Salamanca University , where he studied theology and philosophy.

[ 16 ] There he met Fray Luis de León , who taught biblical studies ( Exegesis , Hebrew , and Aramaic ) at the university.

Joining the Reform of Teresa of Ávila [ edit ] Statues representing John of the Cross and Teresa of Ávila in Beas de Segura , Spain John was ordained as a priest in 1567. He subsequently considered joining the strict Carthusian Order, which appealed to him because of its practice of solitary and silent contemplation. His journey from Salamanca to Medina del Campo , probably in September 1567, became pivotal.

[ 17 ] In Medina he met the influential Carmelite nun Teresa of Ávila . She was in Medina to found the second of her new convents.

[ 18 ] She told him about her reform projects for the Order, which sought to restore the purity of the Carmelite Order by reverting to the observance of its "Primitive Rule" of 1209, which had been relaxed by Pope Eugene IV in 1432.

Under the Rule, much of the day and night was to be divided between the recitation of the Liturgy of the Hours , study and devotional reading, the celebration of Mass, and periods of solitude. In the case of friars, time was to be spent evangelizing the population around the monastery.

[ 19 ] There was to be total abstinence from meat and a lengthy period of fasting from the Feast of the Exaltation of the Cross (14 September) until Easter. There were to be long periods of silence, especially between Compline and Prime . Simpler, coarser, and shorter habits were to be adopted.

[ 20 ] There was also an injunction against wearing covered shoes (also previously mitigated in 1432). That particular observance distinguished the " discalced ", i.e., barefoot, followers of Teresa from traditional Carmelites, and they would be formally recognized as the separate Order of Discalced Carmelites in 1580.

Teresa asked John to delay his entry into the Carthusian order and to follow her. Having spent a final year studying in Salamanca, in August 1568 John traveled with Teresa from Medina to Valladolid , where Teresa intended to found another convent. After a spell at Teresa's side in Valladolid, learning more about the new form of Carmelite life, John left Valladolid in October 1568 accompanied by Fray Antonio de Jesús de Heredia [ es ; fr ] , intending to found a new monastery for Carmelite friars — the first to follow Teresa's principles. They were given the use of a derelict house at Duruelo , which had been donated to Teresa. On 28 November 1568, the monastery was established, [ 21 ] and on that same day, John changed his name to "John of the Cross." Soon after, in June 1570, the friars moved to the nearby town of Mancera de Abajo , midway between Ávila and Salamanca. John moved from the first community to set up a new community at Pastrana in October 1570, and then another community at Alcalá de Henares , as a house for the academic training of the friars. In 1572 he arrived in Ávila, at Teresa's invitation. She had been appointed prioress of the Convent of the Incarnation there in 1571.

[ 22 ] John became the spiritual director and confessor of Teresa and the other 130 nuns there, as well as for a wide range of laypeople in the city.

[ 12 ] In 1574, John accompanied Teresa for the foundation of a new religious community in Segovia , returning to Ávila after staying there a week. Aside from the one trip, John seems to have remained in Ávila between 1572 and 1577.

[ 23 ] Drawing of the crucifixion by John of the Cross Some time between 1574 and 1577, while praying in a loft overlooking the sanctuary in the Monastery of the Incarnation in Ávila, John had a vision of the crucified Christ , which led him to create his drawing of Christ "from above". In 1641, this drawing was placed in a small monstrance and kept in Ávila. This same drawing inspired the artist Salvador Dalí 's 1951 work Christ of Saint John of the Cross .

[ 24 ] Height of Carmelite tensions [ edit ] The years 1575–77 saw a great increase in tensions among Spanish Carmelite friars over the reforms of Teresa and John. Since 1566 the reforms had been overseen by Canonical Visitors from the Dominican Order , with one appointed to Castile and a second to Andalusia . The Visitors had substantial powers: they could move members of religious communities from one house to another or from one province to the next. They could assist religious superiors in the discharge of their office, and could delegate superiors between the Dominican or Carmelite orders. In Castile, the Visitor was Pedro Fernández, who prudently balanced the interests of the Discalced Carmelites with those of the nuns and friars who did not desire reform.

[ 25 ] In Andalusia to the south, the Visitor was Francisco Vargas, and tensions rose due to his clear preference for the Discalced friars. Vargas asked them to make foundations in various cities, in contradiction to the express orders from the Carmelite Prior General to curb expansion in Andalusia. As a result, a General Chapter of the Carmelite Order was convened at Piacenza in Italy in May 1576, out of concern that events in Spain were getting out of hand. It concluded by ordering the total suppression of the Discalced houses.

[ 26 ] That measure was not immediately enforced.

King Philip II of Spain was supportive of Teresa's reforms, and so was not immediately willing to grant the necessary permission to enforce the ordinance. The Discalced friars also found support from the papal nuncio to Spain, Nicolò Ormaneto [ it ] , Bishop of Padua , who still had ultimate power to visit and reform religious orders. When asked by the Discalced friars to intervene, Nuncio Ormaneto replaced Vargas as Visitor of the Carmelites in Andalusia with Jerónimo Gracián , a priest from the University of Alcalá , who was in fact a Discalced Carmelite friar himself.

[ 12 ] The nuncio's protection helped John avoid problems for a time. In January 1576, John was detained in Medina del Campo by traditional Carmelite friars, but through the nuncio's intervention, he was soon released.

[ 12 ] When Ormaneto died on 18 June 1577, John was left without protection, and the friars opposing his reforms regained the upper hand.

[ citation needed ] Foundations, imprisonment, torture and death [ edit ] El Greco 's landscape of Toledo depicts the priory in which John was held captive, just below the old alcázar (fort) and perched on the banks of the Tajo on high cliffs.

On the night of 2 December 1577, a group of Carmelites opposed to reform broke into John's dwelling in Ávila and took him prisoner. John had received an order from superiors, opposed to reform, to leave Ávila and return to his original house. John had refused on the basis that his reform work had been approved by the papal nuncio to Spain, a higher authority than these superiors.

[ 27 ] The Carmelites therefore took John captive. John was taken from Ávila to the Carmelite monastery in Toledo , at that time the order's leading monastery in Castile, with a community of 40 friars.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] John was brought before a court of friars, accused of disobeying the ordinances of Piacenza. Despite his argument that he had not disobeyed the ordinances, he was sentenced to a term of imprisonment. He was jailed in a monastery where he was kept under a brutal regime that included public lashings before the community at least weekly, and severe isolation in a tiny stifling cell measuring barely 10 by 6 feet (3.0 by 1.8 m). Except when rarely permitted an oil lamp, he had to stand on a bench to read his breviary by the light through the hole into the adjoining room. He had no change of clothing and a penitential diet of water, bread and scraps of salt fish.

[ 30 ] During his imprisonment, he composed a great part of his most famous poem, Spiritual Canticle , as well as a few shorter poems. The paper was passed to him by the friar who guarded his cell.

[ 31 ] He managed to escape eight months later, on 15 August 1578, through a small window in a room adjoining his cell. (He had managed to pry open the hinges of the cell door earlier that day.) [ citation needed ] After being nursed back to health, first by Teresa's nuns in Toledo , and then during six weeks at the Hospital of Santa Cruz, John continued with the reforms. In October 1578 he joined a meeting at Almodóvar del Campo of reform supporters, better known as the Discalced Carmelites.

[ 32 ] There, in part as a result of the opposition faced from other Carmelites, they decided to request from the Pope their formal separation from the rest of the Carmelite order.

[ 12 ] At that meeting John was appointed superior of El Calvario, an isolated monastery of around thirty friars in the mountains about 6 miles (9.7 km) away [ 33 ] from Beas in Andalusia. During that time he befriended the nun Ana de Jesús , superior of the Discalced nuns at Beas, through his visits to the town every Saturday. While at El Calvario he composed the first version of his commentary on his poem The Spiritual Canticle , possibly at the request of the nuns in Beas.

[ citation needed ] In 1579 he moved to Baeza , a town of around 50,000 people, to serve as rector of a new college, the Colegio de San Basilio, for Discalced friars in Andalusia. It opened on 13 June 1579. He remained in post until 1582, spending much of his time as a spiritual director to the friars and townspeople.

[ citation needed ] 1580 was a significant year in the resolution of disputes between the Carmelites. On 22 June, Pope Gregory XIII signed a decree, entitled Pia Consideratione , which authorised the separation of the old (later "calced") and the newly reformed, "Discalced" Carmelites. The Dominican friar Juan Velázquez de las Cuevas was appointed to oversee the decision. At the first General Chapter of the Discalced Carmelites, in Alcalá de Henares on 3 March 1581, John of the Cross was elected one of the "Definitors" of the community, and wrote a constitution for them. By the time of the Provincial Chapter at Alcalá in 1581, there were 22 houses, some 300 friars and 200 nuns among the Discalced Carmelites.

[ 34 ] Saint John of the Cross' shrine and reliquary, Convent of Carmelite Friars, Segovia Reliquary of John of the Cross in Úbeda, Spain In November 1581, John was sent by Teresa to help Ana de Jesús to found a convent in Granada . Arriving in January 1582, she set up a convent, while John stayed in the monastery of Los Mártires, near the Alhambra, becoming its prior in March 1582.

[ 35 ] While there, he learned of Teresa's death in October of that year.

[ citation needed ] In February 1585, John travelled to Málaga where he established a convent for Discalced nuns. In May 1585, at the General Chapter of the Discalced Carmelites in Lisbon , John was elected Vicar Provincial of Andalusia, a post which required him to travel frequently, making annual visitations to the houses of friars and nuns in Andalusia. During this time he founded seven new monasteries in the region, and is estimated to have travelled around 25,000 km.

[ 36 ] In June 1588, he was elected third Councillor to the Vicar General for the Discalced Carmelites, Father Nicolas Doria. To fulfill this role, he had to return to Segovia in Castile, where he also took on the role of prior of the monastery. After disagreeing in 1590–1 with some of Doria's remodelling of the leadership of the Discalced Carmelite Order, John was removed from his post in Segovia, and sent by Doria in June 1591 to an isolated monastery in Andalusia called La Peñuela. There he fell ill, and travelled to the monastery at Úbeda for treatment. His condition worsened, however, and he died there of erysipelas on 14 December 1591.

[ 12 ] Veneration [ edit ] The morning after John's death huge numbers of townspeople in Úbeda entered the monastery to view his body; in the crush, many were able to take home bits of his habit. He was initially buried at Úbeda, but, at the request of the monastery in Segovia, his body was secretly moved there in 1593. The people of Úbeda, however, unhappy at this change, sent a representative to petition the pope to move the body back to its original resting place. Pope Clement VIII, impressed by the petition, issued a Brief on 15 October 1596 ordering the return of the body to Úbeda. Eventually, in a compromise, the superiors of the Discalced Carmelites decided that the monastery at Úbeda would receive one leg and one arm of the corpse from Segovia (the monastery at Úbeda had already kept one leg in 1593, and the other arm had been removed as the corpse passed through Madrid in 1593, to form a relic there). A hand and a leg remain visible in a reliquary at the Oratory of San Juan de la Cruz in Úbeda, a monastery built in 1627 though connected to the original Discalced monastery in the town founded in 1587.

[ 37 ] The head and torso were retained by the monastery at Segovia. They were venerated until 1647, when on orders from Rome designed to prevent the veneration of remains without official approval, the remains were buried in the ground. In the 1930s they were disinterred, and are now sited in a side chapel in a marble case above a special altar.

[ 37 ] Proceedings to beatify John began between 1614 and 1616. He was eventually beatified in 1675 by Pope Clement X , and was canonized by Benedict XIII in 1726. When his feast day was added to the General Roman Calendar in 1738, it was assigned to 24 November, since his date of death was impeded by the then-existing octave of the Feast of the Immaculate Conception .

[ 38 ] This obstacle was removed in 1955 and in 1969 Pope Paul VI moved it to the dies natalis (birthday to heaven) of John, 14 December.

[ 39 ] The Church of England and the Episcopal Church honor him on the same date.

[ 40 ] [ 3 ] In 1926, he was declared a Doctor of the Church by Pope Pius XI after the definitive consultation of Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange OP , professor of philosophy and theology at the Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas , Angelicum in Rome.

[ 41 ] Literary works [ edit ] The Ascent of Mount Carmel, as depicted in the first edition of 1618 by Diego de Astor.

[ 42 ] John of the Cross is considered one of the foremost poets in Spanish. Although his complete poems add up to fewer than 2,500 verses, two of them, the Spiritual Canticle and the Dark Night of the Soul , are widely considered masterpieces of Spanish poetry, both for their formal style and their rich symbolism and imagery. His theological works often consist of commentaries on the poems. All the works were written between 1578 and his death in 1591.

[ citation needed ] The Spiritual Canticle is an eclogue in which the bride, representing the soul , searches for the bridegroom, representing Jesus Christ , and is anxious at having lost him. Both are filled with joy upon reuniting. It can be seen as a free-form Spanish version of the Song of Songs at a time when vernacular translations of the Bible were forbidden. The first 31 stanzas of the poem were composed in 1578 while John was imprisoned in Toledo. After his escape it was read by the nuns at Beas, who made copies of the stanzas. Over the following years, John added further lines. Today, two versions exist: one with 39 stanzas and one with 40 with some of the stanzas ordered differently. The first redaction of the commentary on the poem was written in 1584, at the request of Madre Ana de Jesús, when she was prioress of the Discalced Carmelite nuns in Granada. A second edition, which contains more detail, was written in 1585–6.

[ 12 ] The Dark Night , from which the phrase Dark Night of the Soul takes its name, narrates the journey of the soul from its bodily home to union with God. It happens during the "dark", which represents the hardships and difficulties met in detachment from the world and reaching the light of the union with the Creator. There are several steps during the state of darkness, which are described in successive stanzas. The main idea behind the poem is the painful experience required to attain spiritual maturity and union with God. The poem was likely written in 1578 or 1579. In 1584–5, John wrote a commentary on the first two stanzas and on the first line of the third stanza.

[ 12 ] The Ascent of Mount Carmel is a more systematic study of the ascetical endeavour of a soul seeking perfect union with God and the mystical events encountered along the way. Although it begins as a commentary on The Dark Night , after the first two stanzas of the poem, it rapidly diverts into a full treatise. It was composed some time between 1581 and 1585.

[ 43 ] A four-stanza work, Living Flame of Love , describes a greater intimacy , as the soul responds to God's love. It was written in a first version at Granada between 1585 and 1586, apparently in two weeks, and in a mostly identical second version at La Peñuela in 1591.

[ 44 ] These, together with his Dichos de Luz y Amor or "Sayings of Light and Love" along with Teresa's own writings, are the most important mystical works in Spanish, and have deeply influenced later spiritual writers across the world. They include: T. S. Eliot , Thérèse de Lisieux , Edith Stein (Teresa Benedicta of the Cross) and Thomas Merton . John is said to have also influenced philosophers ( Jacques Maritain ), theologians ( Hans Urs von Balthasar ), pacifists ( Dorothy Day , Daniel Berrigan and Philip Berrigan ) and artists ( Salvador Dalí ).

Pope John Paul II wrote his theological dissertation on the mystical theology of John of the Cross.

[ citation needed ] Editions of his works [ edit ] His writings were first published in 1618 by Diego de Salablanca. The numerical divisions in the work, still used by modern editions of the text, were introduced by Salablanca (they were not in John's original writings) to help make the work more manageable for the reader.

[ 12 ] This edition does not contain the Spiritual Canticle , however, and also omits or adapts certain passages, perhaps for fear of falling foul of the Inquisition.

[ 45 ] The Spiritual Canticle was first included in the 1630 edition, produced by Fray Jeronimo de San José, at Madrid. This edition was largely followed by later editors, although editions in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries gradually included a few more poems and letters.

[ 46 ] The first French edition was published in Paris in 1622, [ 47 ] and the first Castilian edition in 1627 in Brussels.

[ 45 ] A critical edition of John's works in English was published by E. Allison Peers in 1935.

[ 48 ] Intellectual influences [ edit ] The influences on John's writing are subject to an ongoing debate. It is widely acknowledged that at Salamanca university there would have existed a range of intellectual positions. In John's time they included the influences of Thomas Aquinas , of Scotus and of Durandus .

[ 49 ] It is often assumed that John would have absorbed the thought of Aquinas, to explain the scholastic framework of his writings.

[ citation needed ] However, the belief that John was taught at both the Carmelite College of San Andrès and at the University of Salamanca has been challenged.

[ 50 ] Bezares calls into question whether John even studied theology at the University of Salamanca. The philosophy courses John probably took in logic, natural and moral philosophy, can be reconstructed, but Bezares argues that John in fact abandoned his studies at Salamanca in 1568 to join Teresa, rather than graduating.

[ 51 ] In the first biography of John, published in 1628, it is claimed, on the basis of information from John's fellow students, that he in 1567 made a special study of mystical writers, in particular of Pseudo-Dionysius and Pope Gregory I .

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] There is little consensus from John's early years or potential influences.

[ citation needed ] Scripture [ edit ] John was influenced heavily by the Bible. Scriptural images are common in both his poems and prose. In total, there are 1,583 explicit and 115 implicit quotations from the Bible in his works.

[ 54 ] The influence of the Song of Songs on John's Spiritual Canticle has often been noted, both in terms of the structure of the poem, with its dialogue between two lovers, the account of their difficulties in meeting each other and the "offstage chorus" that comments on the action, and also in terms of the imagery, for example, of pomegranates, wine cellar, turtle dove and lilies, which echoes that of the Song of Songs.

[ 54 ] In addition, John shows at occasional points the influence of the Divine Office . This demonstrates how John, steeped in the language and rituals of the Church, drew at times on the phrases and language here.

[ 55 ] Pseudo-Dionysius [ edit ] It has rarely been disputed that the overall structure of John's mystical theology, and his language of the union of the soul with God, is influenced by the Pseudo-Dionysian tradition.

[ 56 ] However, it has not been clear whether John might have had direct access to the writings of Pseudo-Dionysius , or whether this influence may have been mediated through various later authors.

[ citation needed ] Medieval mystics [ edit ] It is widely acknowledged that John may have been influenced by the writings of other medieval mystics, though there is debate about the exact thought which may have influenced him, and about how he might have been exposed to their ideas.

[ citation needed ] The possibility of influence by the so-called " Rhineland mystics " such as Meister Eckhart , Johannes Tauler , Henry Suso and John of Ruysbroeck has also been mooted by many authors.

[ 57 ] Secular Spanish poetry [ edit ] A strong argument can also be made for contemporary Spanish literary influences on John. This case was first made in detail by Dámaso Alonso, who believed that as well as drawing from scripture, John was transforming non-religious, profane themes, derived from popular songs ( romanceros ) into religious poetry.

[ 58 ] Islamic influence [ edit ] A controversial theory on the origins of John's mystical imagery is that he may have been influenced by Islamic sources. This was first proposed in detail by Miguel Asín Palacios and has been most recently put forward by the Puerto Rican scholar Luce López-Baralt .

[ 59 ] Arguing that John was influenced by Islamic sources on the peninsula, she traces Islamic antecedents of the images of the "dark night", the "solitary bird" of the Spiritual Canticle , wine and mystical intoxication (the Spiritual Canticle ), lamps of fire (the Living Flame ). However, Peter Tyler concludes, there "are sufficient Christian medieval antecedents for many of the metaphors John employs to suggest we should look for Christian sources rather than Muslim sources." [ 60 ] As José Nieto indicates, in trying to locate a link between Spanish Christian mysticism and Islamic mysticism, it might make more sense to refer to the common Neo-Platonic tradition and mystical experiences of both, rather than seek direct influence.

[ 61 ] Books [ edit ] John of the Cross, Dark Night of the Soul , London, 2012. limovia.net ISBN 978-1-78336-005-5 John of the Cross, Ascent of Mount Carmel , London, 2012. limovia.net ISBN 978-1-78336-009-3 John of the Cross, Spiritual Canticle of the Soul and the Bridegroom Christ , London, 2012. limovia.net ISBN 978-1-78336-014-7 The Dark Night: A Masterpiece in the Literature of Mysticism (Translated and Edited by E. Allison Peers), Doubleday , 1959.

ISBN 978-0-385-02930-8 The Poems of Saint John of the Cross (English Versions and Introduction by Willis Barnstone ), Indiana University Press , 1968, revised 2nd ed.

New Directions , 1972.

ISBN 0-8112-0449-9 The Dark Night, St. John of the Cross (Translated by Mirabai Starr), Riverhead Books , New York, 2002, ISBN 1-57322-974-1 Poems of St John of The Cross (Translated and Introduction by Kathleen Jones ), Burns and Oates , Tunbridge Wells, Kent, UK, 1993, ISBN 0-86012-210-7 The Collected Works of St John of the Cross (Eds. K. Kavanaugh and O. Rodriguez), Institute of Carmelite Studies, Washington DC, revised edition, 1991, ISBN 0-935216-14-6 St. John of the Cross: His Prophetic Mysticism in Sixteenth-Century Spain by Cristobal Serran-Pagan See also [ edit ] Biography portal Poetry portal Saints portal Spain portal A lo divino Book of the First Monks Byzantine Discalced Carmelites Calendar of saints (Church of England) Carmelite Rule of St. Albert Christian meditation Constitutions of the Carmelite Order List of Catholic saints Miguel Asín Palacios Saint John of the Cross, patron saint archive Saint Raphael Kalinowski , the first friar to be canonized (in 1991 by Pope John Paul II ) in the Order of Discalced Carmelites since Saint John of the Cross Spanish Renaissance literature Secular Order of Discalced Carmelites The world, the flesh, and the devil References [ edit ] ^ "St. John of the Cross" .

Britannica . Retrieved 4 August 2020 .

^ a b c d Pombo, Elena L. (2022). "San Juan de La Cruz". In Soriano, Antonio H.; Vallina, Emiliano F. (eds.).

Los Santos En La Universidad de Salamanca . CRI-Critical (in Spanish).

Salamanca : Ediciones Universidad de Salamanca . pp.

141– 161.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctv34dm7gf.14 .

ISBN 978-84-1311-693-8 .

^ a b Lesser Feasts and Fasts 2018 . Church Publishing, Inc. 17 December 2019.

ISBN 978-1-64065-235-4 .

^ "Notable Lutheran Saints" .

Resurrectionpeople.org . Archived from the original on 16 May 2019 . Retrieved 16 July 2019 .

^ In 1952, the Spanish National Ministry for Education named him the Patron Saint of Spanish poets. The same ministry repeatedly authorized and approved the inclusion of John's writings among the canon of Spanish writers.

^ "St. John of the Cross" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 30 June 2024 .

^ Rodriguez, Jose Vincente (1991).

God Speaks in the Night. The Life, Times, and Teaching of St. John of the Cross' . Washington, DC: ICS Publications. p. 3.

^ Thompson 2002 , p. 27.

^ Roth, Norman.

Conversos, Inquisition, and the Expulsion of the Jews from Spain , Madison, WI: The University of Wisconsin Press, 1995, pp. 157, 369 ^ Tillyer 1984 , p. 4.

^ Gerald Brenan, St John of the Cross: His Life and Poetry (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1973), p. 4 ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Kavanaugh, Kieran (1991). "General Introduction: Biographical Sketch". In Kieran Kavanaugh (ed.).

The Collected Works of St John of the Cross . Washington: ICS Publications. pp.

9– 27.

ISBN 0-935216-14-6 .

^ Matthew, Iain (1995).

The Impact of God, Soundings from St John of the Cross . Hodder & Stoughton. p. 3.

ISBN 0-340-61257-6 .

^ Thompson 2002 , p. 31.

^ Kavanaugh (1991) names the date as 24 February. However, E. Allison Peers (1943), p. 13, points out that although the Feast Day of St. Matthias is often assumed to be the date, Father Silverio proposes a date in August or September for John's postulancy.

^ He entered Salamanca University probably between 21 May and October. See E. Allison Peers, Spirit of Flame: A Study of St John of the Cross (London: SCM Press, 1943), p. 13 ^ E. Allison Peers (1943, p. 16) suggests that the journey was to visit a nearby Carthusian monastery; Richard P. Hardy, The Life of St John of the Cross: Search for Nothing (London: DLT, 1982), p. 24, argues that the reason was for John to say his first mass ^ E. Allison Peers, Spirit of Flame: A Study of St John of the Cross (London: SCM Press, 1943), p. 16 ^ Tillyer 1984 , p. 8.

^ Hardy 1982 , p. 27.

^ The monastery contained three men, according to E. Allison Peers (1943), p. 27; or five, according to Richard P. Hardy, The Life of St John of the Cross: Search for Nothing (London: DLT, 1982), p. 35.

^ The month generally given is May.

Edgar Allison Peers , Complete Works Vol. I (1943, xxvi), agreeing with P. Silverio , thinks it must have been substantially later than this, though certainly before 27 September.

^ Hardy 1982 , p. 56.

^ "Discover the crucifix drawn by St. John of the Cross after a mystical vision" .

Aleteia — Catholic Spirituality, Lifestyle, World News, and Culture . 22 September 2017 . Retrieved 11 May 2021 .

^ He is possibly the same Pedro Fernández who became the Bishop of Ávila in 1581. He who appointed Teresa as prioress in Ávila in 1571, while also maintaining good relations with the Carmelite Prior Provincial of Castile.

^ Kavanaugh (1991) states that this was all the Discalced houses founded in Andalusia. E. Allison Peers, Complete Works , Vol. I, p. xxvii (1943) states that this was all the Discalced monasteries but two.

^ Bennedict Zimmermann.

"Ascent of Mt. Carmel, introductory essay THE DEVELOPMENT OF MYSTICISM IN THE CARMELITE ORDER" . Thomas Baker and Internet Archive . Retrieved 11 December 2009 .

|pages = 10,11 ^ Thompson 2002 , p. 48. Thompson points out that many earlier biographers have stated the number of friars at Toledo to be 80, but this is simply taken from Crisogono's Spanish biography. Alain Cugno (1982) gives the number of friars as 800 — which Thompson assumes this must be a misprint. However, as Thompson details, the actual number of friars has been reconstructed from comparing various extant documents that in 1576, 42 friars belonged to the house, with only about 23 of them resident, the remainder being absent for various reasons. This is done by J. Carlos Vuzeute Mendoza, 'La prisión de San Juan de la Cruz: El convent del Carmen de Toledo en 1577 y 1578', A. García Simón, ed, Actas del congreso internacional sanjuanista , 3 vols. (Valladolid: Junta de Castilla y León, 1993) II, pp. 427–436 ^ Peter Tyler, St John of the Cross (New York: Continuum, 2000), p. 28. The reference to the El Greco painting is also taken from here. The priory no longer exists, having been destroyed in 1936 — it is now the Toledo Municipal car park.

^ Tillyer 1984 , p. 10.

^ Dark night of the soul . Translation by Mirabai Starr.

ISBN 1-57322-974-1 p. 8.

^ Peter Tyler, St John of the Cross (New York: Continuum, 2000), p. 33. The Hospital still exists, and is today a municipal art gallery in Toledo.

^ Thompson 2002 , p. 117.

^ Thompson 2002 , p. 119.

^ Hardy 1982 , p. 90.

^ Thompson 2002 , p. 122. This would have been largely by foot or by mule, given the strict rules which governed the way in which Discalced friars were permitted to travel.

^ a b Hardy 1982 , pp. 113–130.

^ Calendarium Romanum (Libreria Editrice Vaticana, 1969), p. 110 ^ Calendarium Romanum (Libreria Editrice Vaticana, 1969), p. 146 ^ "The Calendar" .

The Church of England . Retrieved 10 April 2021 .

^ "Garrigou-Lagrange . Il tomista d'assalto" .

www.avvenire.it . 15 February 2014 . Retrieved 17 February 2014 .

^ Eric Truman Dicken, The Crucible of Love , (1963), pp. 238–242, points out that this image is neither a true representation of John's thought, nor is it true to the image drawn by John himself of the 'Mount'. This latter image was first published in 1929, from a 1759 copy of the original (now lost) almost certainly drawn by John himself. It is the 1618 image, though, which was influential on later depictions of the 'Mount', such as in the 1748 Venice edition and 1858 Genoa editions of John's work.

^ Kavanaugh, The Collected Works of St John of the Cross , 34.

^ Kavanaugh, The Collected Works of St John of the Cross , 634.

^ a b John of the Cross, Saint (1991).

The collected works of Saint John of the Cross . Kieran Kavanaugh, Otilio Rodriguez (Revised ed.). Washington, D.C.: ICS Publications. p. 33.

ISBN 0-935216-15-4 .

OCLC 22909281 .

^ The Complete Works of Saint John of the Cross . Translated and edited by E. Allison Peers, from the critical edition of Silverio de Santa Teresa. 3 vols. (Westminster, MD: Newman Press, 1943). Vol. I, pp. l–lxxvi ^ Hernández, Gloria Maité (2021).

Savoring God : comparative theopoetics . New York, NY, United States of America. p. 184.

ISBN 978-0-19-090739-6 .

OCLC 1240828756 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Merchant, Hoshang (7 July 2016), "St John of the Cross: Poems of Roy Campbell" , Secret Writings of Hoshang Merchant , Oxford University Press, pp.

23– 29, doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199465965.003.0004 , ISBN 978-0-19-946596-5 , retrieved 1 June 2022 ^ Crisogono (1958), pp. 33–35.

^ By L. Rodríguez-San Pedro Bezares, 'La Formación Universitaria de Juan de la Cruz', Actas del Congreso Internacional Sanjuanista (Valladolid, 1993).

^ Bezares, p. 19.

^ The 1628 biography of John is by Quiroga. The information is from Crisogono (1958), p. 38.

^ Eulogio Pacho (1969), pp. 56–59; Steven Payne, John of the Cross and the Cognitive Value of Mysticism: An Analysis of Sanjuanist Teaching and its Philosophical Implications for Contemporary Discussions of Mystical Experience (1990), p. 14, n. 7).

^ a b Tyler, Peter (2010).

St John of the Cross . New York: Continuum.

p. 116.

^ This occurs in the Living Flame at 1.16 and 2.3. See John Sullivan, 'Night and Light: the Poet John of the Cross and the Exultet of the Easter Liturgy', Ephemerides Carmeliticae , 30:1 (1979), pp. 52–68.

^ John mentions Dionysius explicitly four times—S2.8.6; N2.5.3; CB14-15.16; Ll3-3.49. Luis Girón-Negrón, "Dionysian Thought in Sixteenth-Century Spanish Mystical Theology", Modern Theology , 24(4), (2008), p. 699.

^ However, there is little precise agreement on which particular mystics may have been influential.

Jean Orcibal , S Jean de la Croix et les mystiques Rheno-Flamands (Desclee-Brouwer, Presence du Carmel, no. 6); Crisogono (1929), I, 17, believed that John was influenced more by German mysticism, than perhaps by Gregory of Nyssa , Pseudo-Dionysius , Augustine of Hippo , Bernard of Clairvaux , the School of Saint Victor and The Imitation of Christ .

^ Dámaso Alonso, La poesía de San Juan de la Cruz (Madrid, 1942).

^ Luce Lopez Baralt, Juan de la Cruz y el Islam (1990).

^ Peter Tyler, St John of the Cross (2010), pp. 138–142.

^ José Nieto, Mystic, Rebel, Saint: A Study of St. John of the Cross (Geneva, 1979).

Sources [ edit ] Hardy, Richard P. (1982).

The life of St. John of the Cross : Search for nothing . London: Darton, Longman and Todd.

ISBN 0-232-51760-6 .

OCLC 59149193 .

Thompson, Colin P. (2002).

St. John of the Cross : songs in the night . London: SPCK.

Tillyer, Desmond (1984).

Union with God: The Teaching of St John of the Cross . London & Oxford: Mowbray.

ISBN 9780264669342 .

Further reading [ edit ] Howells, E. "Spanish Mysticism and Religious Renewal: Ignatius of Loyola, Teresa of Ávila, and John of the Cross (16th Century, Spain)", in Julia A. Lamm, ed., Blackwell Companion to Christian Mysticism , (Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2012) Kavanaugh, K.

John of the Cross: doctor of light and love (2000) Matthew, Iain.

The Impact of God, Soundings from St John of the Cross (Hodder & Stoughton, 1995) Payne, Stephen.

John of the Cross and the Cognitive Value of Mysticism (1990) Stein, Edith , The Science of the Cross (translated by Josephine Koeppel, OCD The Collected Works of Edith Stein , Vol. 6, ICS Publications, 2011) Williams, Rowan .

The wound of knowledge: Christian spirituality from the New Testament to St. John of the Cross (1990) Wojtyła, K.

Faith According to St. John of the Cross (1981) "St. John of the Cross: His Prophetic Mysticism in Sixteenth-Century Spain" by Prof Cristobal Serran-Pagan External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Juan de la Cruz .

Wikiquote has quotations related to John of the Cross .

English Wikisource has original works by or about: John of the Cross John of the Cross on Catholic Encyclopedia The Metaphysics of Mysticism: The Mystical Philosophy of Saint John of the Cross Biography of Saint John of the Cross Works by Saint John of the Cross at Christian Classics Ethereal Library Works by or about John of the Cross at the Internet Archive Works by John of the Cross at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Thomas Merton on Saint John of the Cross Lectio divina and Saint John of the Cross The Life and Miracles of St. John of the Cross, Doctor and Confessor of the Church Verse-translation of The Dark Night of the Soul at Poems Found in Translation v t e John of the Cross Works Ascent of Mount Carmel Dark Night of the Soul Spiritual Canticle Miscellaneous Discalced Carmelites Fontiveros Christ of Saint John of the Cross (painting) Links to related articles v t e Carmelites A list of all the congregations, notable members, priories, churches, and convents of the Order of the Brothers of the Blessed Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel (Carmelites) General Attributes Elijah Elisha Saint Joseph Saint Joachim Saint Anne Albert of Jerusalem Rule of Saint Albert Book of the First Monks Scapular of Our Lady of Mount Carmel Our Lady of Mount Carmel Mount Carmel Flos Carmeli Sabbatine Privilege Orders and groups Discalced Carmelites (also known as Teresian Carmelites) Monks of the Most Blessed Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel Hermits of the Most Blessed Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel Carmelites of Mary Immaculate Carmelites of the Holy Face (Palmarian) Tertiary Third Order of Carmelites Secular Order of Discalced Carmelites Liturgy Rite of the Holy Sepulchre Spiritual classics The Interior Castle Way of Perfection Dark Night of the Soul Ascent of Mount Carmel The Living Flame of Love The Practice of the Presence of God Members of the Carmelite Order Beatified Carmelites Francesco Lippi John Soreth Jane of Toulouse Bartolomeo Fanti Baptist Spagnoli of Mantua Maria Crocifissa Curcio Anne of Saint Bartholomew Candelaria of San José Francisco Palau Giovanna Scopelli Kuriakose Elias Chavara Angelo Agostini Mazzinghi Françoise d'Amboise Teresa Maria Manetti Elia of Saint Clement María Guggiari Echeverría María López de Rivas Martínez Marie-Eugène de l'Enfant-Jésus Congregations of sisters Carmelite Sisters of Charity Carmelite Sisters for the Aged and Infirm Carmelite Sisters of the Most Sacred Heart of Los Angeles Sisters of the Apostolic Carmel Carmelite Daughters of the Divine Heart of Jesus Sisters of the Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel Carmelite Sister of the Divine Providence Carmelite Missionaries Sister of Saint Therese of Child Jesus Carmelite Sister of Mother Candelaria Corpus Christi Carmelites Institute of Our Lady of Carmel Congregation Of Our Lady Of Mount Carmel Carmelite Sisters of Our Lady Carmelite pope Pope Telesphorus Carmelite bishops Inácio de São Caetano Robert Mascall Pierre de Casa Filippo Iannone Carmelite cardinals Girolamo Maria Gotti Joaquín Lluch y Garriga Adeodato Giovanni Piazza Anders Arborelius Carmelite martyrs Angelus of Jerusalem Luigi Rabatà Teresa of St. Augustine & Companions Marie-Geneviève Meunier Redemptus of the Cross Denis of the Nativity Hilary Januszewski Teresa Benedicta of The Cross Isidore Bakanja Jacques Retouret Alfons Maria Mazurek Elvira Moragas Cantarero María Pilar de San Francisco de Borja María Ángeles de San José Teresa del Niño Jesús y de San Juan de la Cruz Angel Prat i Hostench and 16 companions Titus Brandsma Carmelite saints Pope Telesphorus Cyril of Constantinople Simon Stock Nuno Álvares Pereira Andrew Corsini Peter Thomas Albert of Trapani Euphrasia Eluvathingal George Preca Kuriakose Elias Chavara Carmelite mystics & doctors of the church John of the Cross Teresa of Ávila Thérèse of Lisieux Mary of Jesus Crucified Serafina of God Maria Petyt Mary Magdalene de' Pazzi Teresa of the Andes John of St. Samson Catalina de Balmaseda y San Martín Ana de Jesús Elizabeth of the Trinity Archangela Girlani Maria Candida of the Eucharist Marianna Fontanella Marie of St Peter Marie of the Incarnation Anna Maria Redi Venerable Carmelites Ana de Jesús Veronica of the Passion Thérèse of Saint Augustine Mariana of the Purification María Luisa Josefa Margaret of the Blessed Sacrament Fulton Sheen Teofilo Camomot Lúcia de Jesus Rosa dos Santos of Fátima Carmelite Servants of God Catalina de Balmaseda y San Martín Camille de Soyécourt Mary of Saint Peter Maria Francesca of the Holy Spirit Giovanni Antonio Guadagni Raffaele Rossi Anastasio Ballestrero Louise de La Vallière Anne Worsley Margaret Mostyn Agnes Mariam de la Croix Jessica Powers Ann Teresa Mathews Catharine Burton Natividad Zialcita Tadea de San Joaquín Josefina Constantino Carmelite brothers Lawrence of the Resurrection Brother John of Saint Samson Carmelite scholars Arnold Bostius Ludovicus a S. Carolo Robert Bale Guido Terrena William Beckley William Gregory Juan Bautista de Lezana John Baconthorpe Carmelite theologians Gerard of Bologna John Bamptomn Thomas Netter Henri de Saint-Ignace John Bate Thomas á Jesu Philip of the Blessed Trinity Franciscus Bonae Spei Pedro Cornejo de Pedrosa William Badby John Beston Carmelite tertiaries Maria Crocifissa Curcio Maria de Dominici Teresa of St. Rose of Lima Kuriakose Elias Chavara Filippo Lippi Carmelite churches, convents, and monasteries Carmelite churches Whitefriar Street Carmelite Church St. Joseph's Carmelite Church, Berkeley Road Church of Our Lady Victorious Santa Maria del Carmine, Florence Annunciation Church, Mdina Santa Maria del Carmine Monastery of The Holy Spirit, Sheffield Carmelite convents Aylesford Priory Carmelite basilica Santa Maria del Carmine, Naples San Martino ai Monti San Martino, Bologna Basilica-Sanctuary of Maria Santissima Annunziata Carmelite monasteries Convento de San José (Ávila) Berdychiv Carmelite Monastery Muhraqa Carmelite Monastery Stella Maris Monastery Carmelite Monastery Church of the Annunciation Monastery of Mary, Mother of Grace Marylake Carmelite Monastery Monastery of The Holy Spirit, Sheffield Döbling Carmelite Monastery Carmelite education Colleges and universities Whitefriars College Carmelite Institute of Britain and Ireland Pontifical universities Teresianum Institutum Carmelitanum Catholicism portal v t e Saints of the Catholic Church Dicastery for the Causes of Saints Stages of canonization : Servant of God → Venerable → Blessed → Saint Virgin Mary Mother of God (Theotokos) Immaculate Conception Perpetual virginity Assumption Marian apparition Titles of Mary Joseph (husband) Apostles Andrew Barnabas Bartholomew James of Alphaeus James the Great John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Archangels Gabriel Michael in the Catholic Church Raphael Confessors Anatolius Anthony of Kiev Athanasius the Confessor Chariton the Confessor Dominic Edward the Confessor Francis of Assisi Francis Borgia Homobonus John Henry Newman Lazarus Zographos Louis Bertrand Martin de Porres Martin of Tours Maximus the Confessor Michael of Synnada Paphnutius the Confessor Paul I of Constantinople Peter Claver Salonius Sergius of Radonezh Theophanes the Confessor Pio of Pietrelcina Disciples Apollos Mary of Bethany Mary Magdalene Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Doctors of the Church Gregory the Great Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Jerome John Chrysostom Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Athanasius of Alexandria Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem John of Damascus Bede the Venerable Ephrem the Syrian Thomas Aquinas Bonaventure Anselm of Canterbury Isidore of Seville Peter Chrysologus Leo the Great Peter Damian Bernard of Clairvaux Hilary of Poitiers Alphonsus Liguori Francis de Sales Peter Canisius John of the Cross Robert Bellarmine Albertus Magnus Anthony of Padua Lawrence of Brindisi Teresa of Ávila Catherine of Siena Thérèse of Lisieux John of Ávila Hildegard of Bingen Gregory of Narek Irenaeus John Henry Newman Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Church Fathers Alexander of Alexandria Alexander of Jerusalem Ambrose of Milan Anatolius Athanasius of Alexandria Augustine of Hippo Caesarius of Arles Caius Cappadocian Fathers Clement of Alexandria Clement of Rome Cyprian of Carthage Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem Damasus I Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Dionysius of Alexandria Dionysius of Corinth Dionysius Ephrem the Syrian Epiphanius of Salamis Fulgentius of Ruspe Gregory the Great Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Hilary of Poitiers Hippolytus of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Irenaeus of Lyons Isidore of Seville Jerome of Stridonium John Chrysostom John of Damascus Maximus the Confessor Melito of Sardis Quadratus of Athens Papias of Hierapolis Peter Chrysologus Polycarp of Smyrna Theophilus of Antioch Victorinus of Pettau Vincent of Lérins Zephyrinus Martyrs Abda and Abdisho Boris and Gleb Charles de Foucauld Canadian Martyrs Carthusian Martyrs Child Martyrs of Tlaxcala Christina of Persia Dominguito del Val Devasahayam Pillai Dismas the Good Thief Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Four Crowned Martyrs Gerard of Csanád Great Martyr The Holy Innocents Irish Martyrs John Fisher Korean Martyrs Lorenzo Ruiz Martyrs of Lübeck Luigi Versiglia Martyrology Martyrs of Albania Martyrs of Algeria Martyrs of Cajonos Martyrs of Compiègne Martyrs of Drina Martyrs of China Martyrs of Gorkum Martyrs of Japan 21 Martyrs of Libya Martyrs of La Rioja Martyrs of Damascus Martyrs of Laos Martyrs of Natal Martyrs of Otranto Martyrs of Prague Martyrs of Sandomierz Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Martyrs of Zenta Maximilian Kolbe Óscar Romero Pedro Calungsod Perpetua and Felicity Peter Chanel Pietro Parenzo Philomena Saints of the Cristero War Stephen Teresa Benedicta of the Cross Titus Brandsma 17 Thomasian Martyrs Thomas Becket Thomas More Three Martyrs of Chimbote Ulma Family Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs Valentine of Rome Victor and Corona Zanitas and Lazarus of Persia Missionaries Ansgar Augustine of Canterbury Boniface Cyril and Methodius Damien of Molokai Evermode of Ratzeburg Francis Xavier François de Laval Gregory the Illuminator Junípero Serra Nino of Georgia Patrick of Ireland Remigius Sava of Serbia Patriarchs Adam Abel Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Joseph (father of Jesus) David Noah Solomon Matriarchs Popes Adeodatus I Adeodatus II Adrian III Agapetus I Agatho Alexander I Anacletus Anastasius I Anicetus Anterus Benedict II Boniface I Boniface IV Caius Callixtus I Celestine I Celestine V Clement I Cornelius Damasus I Dionysius Eleuterus Eugene I Eusebius Eutychian Evaristus Fabian Felix I Felix III Felix IV Gelasius I Gregory I Gregory II Gregory III Gregory VII Hilarius Hormisdas Hyginus Innocent I John I John XXIII John Paul II Julius I Leo I Leo II Leo III Leo IV Leo IX Linus Lucius I Marcellinus Marcellus I Mark Martin I Miltiades Nicholas I Paschal I Paul I Paul VI Peter Pius I Pius V Pius X Pontian Sergius I Silverius Simplicius Siricius Sixtus I Sixtus II Sixtus III Soter Stephen I Stephen IV Sylvester I Symmachus Telesphorus Urban I Victor I Vitalian Zachary Zephyrinus Zosimus Prophets Agabus Amos Anna Baruch ben Neriah David Elijah Ezekiel Habakkuk Haggai Hosea Isaiah Jeremiah Job Joel John the Baptist Jonah Judas Barsabbas Malachi Melchizedek Micah Moses Nahum Obadiah Samuel Seven Maccabees and their mother Simeon Zechariah (prophet) Zechariah (NT) Zephaniah Virgins Agatha of Sicily Agnes of Rome Angela of the Cross Æthelthryth Bernadette Soubirous Catherine of Bologna Brigid of Kildare Catherine Labouré Catherine of Siena Cecilia Clare of Assisi Eulalia of Mérida Euphemia Faustina Kowalska Faustina and Liberata of Como Genevieve Hiltrude of Liessies Joan of Arc Josephine Bakhita Kateri Tekakwitha Lucy of Syracuse Maria Goretti María de las Maravillas de Jesús Narcisa de Jesús Patricia of Naples Rosalia Rose of Lima Teresa of the Andes Teresa of Calcutta Trasilla and Emiliana Ubaldesca Taccini See also Calendar of saints Four Holy Marshals Fourteen Holy Helpers Martyr of charity Military saints Athleta Christi Miles Christianus Church Militant Seven Champions Venerated couples Virtuous pagan Catholic Church portal Saints portal v t e History of the Catholic Church General History of the Catholic Church By country or region Ecclesiastical history Timeline Papacy Papal primacy Catholic ecumenical councils First seven Catholic Bible Biblical canon Vulgate Crusading movement History of the Roman Curia Religious institutes Christian monasticism Catholic culture Art Role in civilization Vatican City Papal States Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Early Church (30–325/476) Origins and Apostolic Age (30–100) Jesus Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Holy Spirit Mary John the Baptist Apostles in the New Testament Commissioning Peter John Paul Stephen Council of Jerusalem Split with Judaism New Testament Background Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period (100–325) Persecution Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Pope Clement I Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Canon Tertullian Origen Late antiquity (313–476) Great Church (180–451) Roman state church (380–451) Constantine the Great Christianity Arian controversy Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran Old St. Peter's Basilica First Council of Nicaea Pope Sylvester I First Council of Constantinople Biblical canon Jerome Vulgate Council of Ephesus Council of Chalcedon Early Middle Ages Benedict of Nursia Monasticism Second Council of Constantinople Pope Gregory I Gregorian chant Third Council of Constantinople Saint Boniface Byzantine Iconoclasm Second Council of Nicaea Charlemagne Pope Leo III Fourth Council of Constantinople East–West Schism High Middle Ages Pope Urban II Investiture Controversy Clash against the empire Crusades Universities Scholasticism First Council of the Lateran Second Council of the Lateran Third Council of the Lateran Pope Innocent III Latin Empire Francis of Assisi Fourth Council of the Lateran Inquisition First Council of Lyon Second Council of Lyon Bernard of Clairvaux Late Middle Ages Thomas Aquinas Pope Boniface VIII Western Schism Avignon Papacy Pope Clement V Council of Vienne Knights Templar Catherine of Siena Pope Alexander VI Age of Discovery Protestant Reformation Counter-Reformation Protestant Reformation Catholic Counter-Reformation Exsurge Domine Dissolution of the monasteries Council of Trent Thomas More Pope Leo X Society of Jesus Ignatius of Loyola Francis Xavier Pope Pius V Tridentine Mass Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Peter Canisius Philip Neri Robert Bellarmine European wars of religion Thirty Years' War Baroque period to the French Revolution Pope Innocent XI Pope Benedict XIV Suppression of the Society of Jesus Age of Enlightenment Anti-clericalism Pope Pius VI Shimabara Rebellion Edict of Nantes Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution 19th century Pope Pius VII Pope Pius IX United States Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary Our Lady of La Salette Our Lady of Lourdes First Vatican Council Papal infallibility Pope Leo XIII Mary of the Divine Heart Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart Rerum novarum 20th century Pope Pius X Our Lady of Fátima Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII Pope Pius XII Pope Pius XII 1942 consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary Lateran Treaty Nazi Germany Mit brennender Sorge Pope John XXIII Pacem in terris Second Vatican Council Ecumenism Judaism Pope Paul VI ( coronation ) Pope John Paul I Mother Teresa USSR Pope John Paul II HIV/AIDS World Youth Day 1995 21st century Sexual abuse scandal Islam World Youth Day 2000 2002 2005 2008 2011 2013 2016 2019 2023 Pope Benedict XVI Pope Francis Laudato si' Patriarch Kirill COVID-19 pandemic Pope Leo XIV Vatican City portal Catholicism portal v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece 2 Korea 2 3 Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Academics CiNii Artists ULAN MusicBrainz People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC RISM Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐jr7ts
Cached time: 20250817052253
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.441 seconds
Real time usage: 1.797 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8452/1000000
Revision size: 48395/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 488814/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 127400/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 224423/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.817/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 29092986/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1360.426      1 -total
 12.01%  163.384      1 Template:Reflist
 11.87%  161.497      3 Template:Sister_project
 11.86%  161.386      1 Template:Infobox_saint
 11.75%  159.845      3 Template:Side_box
 11.60%  157.852      1 Template:Infobox
  9.26%  125.951      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  7.94%  108.060      2 Template:Langx
  7.72%  104.977      1 Template:Navboxes
  7.47%  101.662      1 Template:Commons_category Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:44582:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817052253 and revision id 1303871113. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_of_the_Cross&oldid=1303871113 " Categories : 1542 births 1591 deaths 16th-century Christian mystics 16th-century Christian saints 16th-century Spanish male writers 16th-century Spanish Roman Catholic priests 16th-century Spanish Roman Catholic theologians Anglican saints Spanish Baroque writers Beatifications by Pope Clement X Canonizations by Pope Benedict XIII Carmelite mystics Carmelite saints Carmelite spirituality Catholic spirituality Counter-Reformation Deaths from streptococcus infection Discalced Carmelites Doctors of the Church Founders of Catholic religious communities Incorrupt saints Lutheran saints People from the Province of Ávila Poet priests Roman Catholic mystics Spanish Catholic poets Spanish Christian mystics Spanish escapees Spanish hermits Spanish people of Jewish descent Spanish Roman Catholic saints Spanish Roman Catholic writers Spanish spiritual writers University of Salamanca alumni Monastery prisoners Hidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2021 Pages using Template:Post-nominals with customized linking Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2020 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 14:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents John of the Cross 58 languages Add topic

