Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early years 2 "The Man of Ghent" 3 Minister of King Louis Philippe 4 The second Soult government 5 1848 Revolution 6 Later life Toggle Later life subsection 6.1 Learned societies 6.2 Protestant Consistory 7 Death and legacy 8 Works 9 See also 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Sources 10.2 Citations 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents François Guizot 47 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Latina Lëtzebuergesch Magyar Македонски مصرى مازِرونی Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina کوردی Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Українська Yorùbá 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French historian, orator and statesman (1787–1874) François Guizot Portrait by Jehan Georges Vibert , after an 1837 original by Paul Delaroche Prime Minister of France In office 18 September 1847 – 23 February 1848 Monarch Louis Philippe I Preceded by Jean-de-Dieu Soult Succeeded by Jacques-Charles Dupont Minister of Foreign Affairs In office 29 October 1840 – 23 February 1848 Prime Minister Jean-de-Dieu Soult Preceded by Adolphe Thiers Succeeded by Alphonse de Lamartine Minister of Public Education In office 6 September 1836 – 15 April 1837 Monarch Louis Philippe I Prime Minister Louis-Mathieu Molé Preceded by Joseph Pelet de la Lozère Succeeded by Narcisse-Achille de Salvandy In office 18 November 1834 – 22 February 1836 Monarch Louis Philippe I Prime Minister Édouard Mortier Victor de Broglie Preceded by Jean-Baptiste Teste Succeeded by Joseph Pelet de la Lozère In office 11 October 1832 – 10 November 1834 Monarch Louis Philippe I Prime Minister Jean-de-Dieu Soult Preceded by Amédée Girod de l'Ain Succeeded by Jean-Baptiste Teste Minister of Interior In office 1 August 1830 – 2 November 1830 Prime Minister Jacques Laffitte Preceded by Victor de Broglie Succeeded by Camille de Montalivet Member of the Chamber of Deputies for Calvados In office 23 June 1830 – 23 February 1848 Preceded by Louis Nicolas Vauquelin Succeeded by Jean-Charles Besnard Constituency Lisieux Personal details Born François Pierre Guillaume Guizot ( 1787-10-04 ) 4 October 1787 Nîmes , France Died 12 September 1874 (1874-09-12) (aged 86) Saint-Ouen-le-Pin , France Political party Doctrinaire (1814–1830) Party of Resistance (1830–1848) Party of Order (1848–1852) Spouse(s) Pauline de Meulan (1812–1827) Élisa Dillon (1828–1833) Children François (1819–1837) Henriette (1829–1908) Pauline (1831–1874) Guillaume (1833–1892) Alma mater University of Geneva Profession Historian , teacher Signature François Pierre Guillaume Guizot ( French: [fʁɑ̃swa pjɛʁ ɡijom ɡizo] ; 4 October 1787 – 12 September 1874) was a French historian , orator and statesman . Guizot was a dominant figure in French politics between the Revolution of 1830 and the Revolution of 1848 .

A conservative liberal [ 1 ] [ 2 ] who opposed the attempt by King Charles X to usurp legislative power, he worked to sustain a constitutional monarchy following the July Revolution of 1830. He then served the "citizen king" Louis Philippe I , as Minister of Education 1832–37, ambassador to London 1840, Foreign Minister 1840–1847, and finally Prime Minister of France from 19 September 1847 to 23 February 1848.

Guizot's influence was critical in expanding public education, which under his ministry saw the creation of primary schools in every French commune. As a leader of the " Doctrinaires ", committed to supporting the policies of Louis Phillipe and limitations on further expansion of the political franchise, he earned the hatred of more left-leaning liberals and republicans through his unswerving support for restricting suffrage to propertied men and supposedly advised those who wanted the vote to "enrich yourselves" (enrichissez-vous) through hard work and thrift.

As Prime Minister, it was Guizot's ban on the political meetings (called the campagne des banquets or the Paris Banquets, which were held by moderate liberals who wanted a larger extension of the franchise) [ 3 ] of an increasingly vigorous opposition in January 1848 that catalyzed the revolution that toppled Louis Philippe in February and saw the establishment of the French Second Republic . He is mentioned in the famous opening paragraph of the Communist Manifesto ("a spectre is haunting Europe...") as a representative of the more liberal faction of the counter-revolutionary forces of Old Europe, contrasted with that of the more reactionary forces, Klemens von Metternich . Marx and Engels published that book just days before Guizot's overthrow in the 1848 Revolution.

Early years [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "François Guizot" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Guizot was born at Nîmes to a bourgeois Protestant family.

[ 4 ] On 8 April 1794, when François Guizot was 6, his father was executed on the scaffold at Nîmes during the Reign of Terror .

[ 5 ] From then on, the boy's mother was completely responsible for his upbringing.

Driven from Nîmes by the Revolution , Madame Guizot and her son went to Geneva , where he was educated. In spite of her decided Calvinistic opinions, the theories of Jean-Jacques Rousseau influenced Madame Guizot. A strong Liberal , she even adopted the notion inculcated in Emile that every man ought to learn a manual trade or craft. Guizot learnt carpentry, and succeeded in making a table with his own hands, which is still preserved.

[ citation needed ] In 1805, he arrived in Paris and he entered at the age eighteen as tutor into the family of M. Stapfer, formerly Swiss minister in France. He soon began to write in a journal edited by Jean-Baptiste-Antoine Suard , the Publiciste . This connection introduced him to the literary society of Paris .

In October 1809, aged twenty-two, he wrote a series review of François-René de Chateaubriand 's Martyrs , which won Chateaubriand's approbation and thanks, and he continued to contribute largely to the periodical press. At Suard's he had made the acquaintance of Pauline de Meulan (born 2 November 1773 [ 6 ] ), a contributor to Suard's journal.

Her contributions were interrupted by illness, but immediately resumed and continued by an unknown hand. It was discovered that François Guizot had substituted for her. In 1812 Mademoiselle de Meulan married Guizot. She died in 1827. (An only son, François, born in 1819, died in 1837 of consumption.) In 1828 Guizot married Elisa Dillon, niece of his first wife, and also an author. She died in 1833, leaving two daughters, Henriette (1829–1908), a co-author with her father and prolific writer herself, and Pauline (1831–1874) and a son, Guillaume (1833–1892), who attained some reputation as a scholar and writer. François Guizot and historian François Mignet invented the concept of the bourgeois revolution .

[ 7 ] On 15 June 1837, Guizot sat next to the Princess Lieven at a dinner given by the Duc de Broglie. After twenty years as Russian Ambassadress to London, she had separated from her husband and sought refuge in Paris, where from 1835 she had held an increasingly influential salon occasionally attended by Guizot.  She had sympathised with him over his son's death earlier in 1837. From 15 June, they formed a close and loving friendship, exchanging over 5000 letters. He was present at her death in Paris in 1856. Her role in supporting and influencing his aims in aristocratic, political and diplomatic circles was considerable, aided by her retaining many contacts in England and her brother being Chief of Secret Police in Russia and a confidant of the Tsar.

[ 8 ] During the First French Empire , Guizot, entirely devoted to literary pursuits, published a collection of French synonyms (1809), an essay on the fine arts (1811), and a translation of Edward Gibbon 's The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire , with additional notes, in 1812. These works recommended him to the notice of Louis-Marcelin de Fontanes , grand-master of the University of France , who selected Guizot for the chair of modern history at the Sorbonne in 1812.

He delivered his first lecture (reprinted in his Memoirs ) on 11 December of that year. He omitted the customary compliment to the all-powerful emperor, in spite of the hints given him by his patron, but the course which followed marks the beginning of the great revival of historical research in France in the 19th century. He had now acquired a considerable position in Paris society, and the friendship of Royer-Collard and leading members of the liberal party, including the young duc de Broglie .

Absent from Paris at the moment of the fall of Napoleon in 1814, he was at once selected, on the recommendation of Royer-Collard, to serve the government of King Louis XVIII , in the capacity of secretary-general of the ministry of the interior, under the abbé de Montesquiou. Upon the return of Napoleon from Elba he immediately resigned, on 25 March 1815, and returned to his literary pursuits.

"The Man of Ghent" [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "François Guizot" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) After the Hundred Days , he returned to Ghent , where he saw Louis XVIII, and in the name of the liberal party pointed out that a frank adoption of a liberal policy could alone secure the duration of the restored monarchy – advice which was ill-received by the king's confidential advisers.

This visit to Ghent was brought up by political opponents in later years as unpatriotic. "The Man of Ghent" was one of the terms of insult frequently used against him in the days of his power. The reproach appears to be wholly unfounded. He was acting not to preserve the failing empire, but to establish a liberal monarchy and to combat the reactionary ultra-royalists.

On the second restoration , Guizot was appointed secretary-general of the ministry of justice under de Barbé-Marbois , but resigned with his chief in 1816. In 1819 he was one of the founders of the Liberal journal Le Courrier français . Again in 1819 he was appointed general director of communes and departments in the ministry of the interior, but lost his office with the fall of Decazes in February 1820.

During these years Guizot was one of the leaders of the Doctrinaires , a small party strongly attached to the charter and the crown, and advocating a policy which has become associated (especially by Émile Faguet ) with the name of Guizot, that of the juste milieu , a middle path between absolutism and popular government.

Adhering to the great principles of liberty and toleration, they were sternly opposed to the anarchical traditions of the Revolution. They hoped to subdue the elements of anarchy through the power of a limited constitution based on the suffrage of the middle class and promoted by the literary talents of the time. They were opposed alike to the democratic spirit of the age, to the military traditions of the empire, and to the bigotry and absolutism of the court. The Doctrinaires fell out of influence following the July Revolution in 1830.

In 1820, when the reaction was at its height after the murder of the Duc de Berry , and the fall of the ministry of the duc Decazes, Guizot was deprived of his offices, and in 1822 even his course of lectures were interdicted.

During the succeeding years he played an important part among the leaders of the liberal opposition to the government of Charles X , although he had not yet entered parliament, and this was also the time of his greatest literary activity.

In 1822, he published his lectures on representative government ( Histoire des origines du gouvernement représentatif, 1821–1822 , 2 vols.; Eng. trans. 1852); also a work on capital punishment for political offences and several important political pamphlets. From 1822 to 1830 he published two important collections of historical sources, the memoirs of the history of England in 26 volumes, and the memoirs of the history of France in 31 volumes, a revised translation, of Shakespeare , and a volume of essays on the history of France. Written from his own pen during this period was the first part of his Histoire de la révolution d'Angleterre depuis Charles I à Charles II (2 vols., 1826–1827; Eng. trans., 2 vols., Oxford, 1838), which he resumed and completed during his exile in England after 1848.

The Martignac administration restored Guizot in 1828 to his professor's chair and to the council of state. During his time at the University of Paris his lectures earned him a reputation as a historian of note. These lectures formed the basis of his general Histoire de la civilisation en Europe (1828; Eng. trans. by William Hazlitt , 3 vols., 1846), and of his Histoire de la civilisation en France (4 vols., 1830).

In January 1830 he was elected by the town of Lisieux to the Chamber of Deputies , and he retained that seat during the whole of his political life.  Guizot delivered an address in March 1830 calling for greater political freedom in the Chamber of Deputies. The motion passed 221 against 181. Charles X responded by dissolving the Chamber and called for new elections which only strengthened opposition to the throne.

On his return to Paris from Nîmes on 27 July, the fall of Charles X was already imminent. Guizot was called upon by his friends Casimir Perier , Jacques Laffitte , Villemain and Dupin to draw up the protest of the liberal deputies against the royal ordinances of July, while he applied himself with them to control the revolutionary character of the late contest. Personally, Guizot was always of opinion that it was a great misfortune for the cause of parliamentary government in France that the infatuation and ineptitude of Charles X and Prince Polignac rendered a change in the hereditary line of succession inevitable.

Once convinced that it was inevitable, he became one of the most ardent supporters of Louis Philippe. In August 1830 Guizot was made minister of the interior, but resigned in November. He had now joined the ranks of the moderate liberals, and for the next eighteen years was a determined foe of democracy, the unyielding champion of "a monarchy limited by a limited number of bourgeois." Minister of King Louis Philippe [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "François Guizot" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) François Guizot accepts the charter from Louis-Philippe , the "Citizen-King".

In 1831 Casimir Périer formed a more vigorous and compact administration, terminated in May 1832 by his death; the summer of that year was marked by a formidable republican rising in Paris, and it was not until 11 October 1832 that a stable government was formed, in which Marshal Soult was first minister, Victor, 3rd duc de Broglie took the foreign office, Adolphe Thiers the home department, and Guizot the department of public instruction.

Guizot, however, was already unpopular with the more advanced liberal party. He remained unpopular all his life. Yet never were his great abilities more useful to his country than while he filled this office of secondary rank but of primary importance in the department of public instruction. The duties it imposed on him were entirely congenial to his literary tastes, and he was master of the subjects they concerned. He applied himself in the first instance to carry the law of 28 June 1833, which established and organized primary education in France.

[ 9 ] The branch of the Institute of France known as the Académie des Sciences Morales et Politiques , which had been suppressed by Napoleon, was revived by Guizot. Some of the old members of this learned body – Talleyrand , Sieyès , Roederer and Lakanal – again took their seats there, and a host of more recent celebrities were added by election for the free discussion of the great problems of political and social science. The Société de l'histoire de France was founded for the publication of historical works, and a vast publication of medieval chronicles and diplomatic papers was undertaken at the expense of the state.

The July Monarchy was threatened in 1839 by Louis-Mathieu Molé , who had formed an intermediate government. Guizot and the leaders of the left centre and the left, Thiers  and Odilon Barrot worked together to stop Molé. Victory was secured at the expense of principle, and Guizot's attack on the government gave rise to a crisis and a republican insurrection. None of the three leaders of that alliance took ministerial office, and Guizot was not sorry to accept the post of ambassador in London, which withdrew him for a time from parliamentary contests. This was in the spring of 1840, and Thiers succeeded shortly afterwards to the ministry of foreign affairs.

Guizot was received with distinction by Queen Victoria and by London society. His literary works were highly esteemed, and he was sincerely attached to the alliance of the two nations and the cause of peace. He also secured the return of Napoleon's ashes to France at the insistence of Thiers.

As he himself remarked, he was a stranger to England and a novice in diplomacy; the embroiled state of the Syrian War question, on which the French government had separated itself from the joint policy of Europe, and possibly the absence of entire confidence between the ambassador and the minister of foreign affairs, placed him in an embarrassing and even false position. The warnings he transmitted to Thiers were not believed. The treaty of 15 July was signed without his knowledge and executed against his advice. For some weeks Europe seemed to be on the brink of war, until the king ended the crisis by refusing his assent to the military preparations of Thiers, and by summoning Guizot from London to form a ministry and to aid his Majesty in what he termed " ma lutte tenace contre l'anarchie ." The second Soult government [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "François Guizot" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Blue plaque, 21 Pelham Crescent, London SW7 Guizot's house whilst refugee in London 1848-49, 21 Pelham Crescent, London SW7 Thus began, under dark and adverse circumstances, on 29 October 1840, the important administration in which Guizot remained the master-spirit for nearly eight years. He himself took the office of minister for foreign affairs, and upon the retirement of Marshal Soult , he became prime minister. His first care was the maintenance of peace and the restoration of amicable relations with the other powers of Europe. His success gave unity and strength to the moderate liberal party, who now felt that they had a great leader at their head.

During Guizot's tenure as foreign minister, he and Lord Aberdeen , the foreign secretary to Sir Robert Peel , carried on well, and thus they secured France and Britain in the entente cordiale . Part of the formation of the entente came about when Guizot secured the transfer of Napoleon's ashes from St. Helena to the French government.

[ 10 ] The opposition in France denounced Guizot's foreign policy as basely subservient to England. He replied in terms of unmeasured contempt: "You may raise the pile of calumny as high as you will; you will never reach the height of my disdain! ( Vous n'arriverez jamais a la hauteur de mon dédain!

") In 1845 British and French troops fought side by side for the first time in the Anglo-French blockade of the Río de la Plata .

The fall of Peel's government in 1846 changed these intimate relations; and the return of Palmerston to the foreign office led Guizot to believe that he was again exposed to the passionate rivalry of the British cabinet. A friendly understanding had been established between the two courts with reference to the future marriage of the young queen of Spain . The language of Lord Palmerston and the conduct of Sir Henry Bulwer (afterwards Lord Dalling) at Madrid led Guizot to believe that this understanding was broken, provoking the Affair of the Spanish Marriages after Guizot came to believe that Britain intended to place a Coburg on the throne of Spain.

Determined to resist any such intrigue, Guizot and the king plunged headlong into a counter-intrigue, wholly inconsistent with their previous engagements to Britain and fatal to the happiness of the queen of Spain. By their influence she was urged into a marriage with a despicable offset of the house of Bourbon , and her sister was at the same time married to the youngest son of the French king, in direct violation of Louis Philippe's promises. This transaction, although it was hailed at the time as a triumph of the policy of France, was in truth as fatal to the monarch as it was discreditable to the minister. It was accomplished by a mixture of secrecy and violence.

[ citation needed ] It was defended by subterfuges. Its immediate effect was to destroy the Anglo-French alliance, and to throw Guizot into closer relations with the reactionary policy of Metternich and the Northern courts.

His first object as prime minister was to unite and discipline the moderate liberal party, which had been broken up by previous dissensions and ministerial changes. In this he entirely succeeded by his courage and eloquence as a parliamentary leader, and by the use of all those means of influence which France supplied to a dominant minister. No one ever doubted the purity and disinterestedness of Guizot's own conduct. He despised money; he lived and died poor; and though he encouraged the fever of money-getting in the French nation, his own habits retained their primitive simplicity. But he did not disdain to use in others the baser passions from which he was himself free. Some of his instruments were mean; he employed them to deal with meanness after its kind.

In 1846, the opposition accused the government of buying the votes of the electorate. Guizot acknowledged that corruption happened but the government could not really prevent it. Non-voters exaggerated the occurrences of corruption to point to their need for enfranchisement. Guizot utterly failed to satisfy the demand for expansion of suffrage.

[ 11 ] Some scholars point out that corruption, while certainly present, did not have a large effect on the voting records of those in the Chamber of Deputies.

[ 12 ] The strength of Guizot's oration was his straightforward style of speaking. He was essentially a ministerial speaker, far more powerful in defence than in opposition. Nor was he less a master of parliamentary tactics and of those sudden changes and movements in debate which, as in a battle, sometimes change the fortune of the day. His confidence in himself, and in the majority of the chamber which he had moulded to his will, was unbounded; and long success and the habit of authority led him to forget that in a country like France there was a people outside the chamber elected by a small constituency, to which the minister and the king himself were held responsible.

Guizot's view of politics was essentially historical and philosophical. His tastes and his acquirements gave him little insight into the practical business of administrative government. Of finance he knew nothing; trade and commerce were strange to him; military and naval affairs were unfamiliar to him; all these subjects he dealt with by second hand through his friends, Pierre Sylvain Dumon (1797–1870), Charles Marie Tanneguy, Comte Duchâttel (1803–1867), or Marshal Bugeaud . The consequence was that few measures of practical improvement were carried by his administration. Still less did the government lend an ear to the cry for parliamentary reform.

On this subject the king's prejudices were insurmountable, and his ministers had the weakness to give way to them. It was impossible to defend a system which confined the suffrage to 200,000 citizens and returned a chamber of whom half were placemen. Nothing would have been easier than to strengthen the moderate liberal party by attaching the suffrage to the possession of land in France, but blank resistance was the sole answer of the government to the moderate demands of the opposition. Warning after warning was addressed to them in vain by friends and by foes alike, and they remained profoundly unconscious of their danger till the moment when it overwhelmed them.

1848 Revolution [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "François Guizot" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Main article: French Revolution of 1848 Portrait by Nadar , c.

1857 In the afternoon of 23 February 1848, King Louis-Philippe summoned Guizot from the chamber, which was then sitting, and informed him that considering the situation in Paris and elsewhere in the country during the Banquet agitation for electoral reform, and the alarm and division of opinion in the royal family, led him to doubt whether he could retain Guizot as his prime minister. Guizot instantly resigned, returning to the chamber only to announce that the administration was at an end and that the king had sent for Louis-Mathieu Molé .

Molé failed in the attempt to form a government, and between midnight and one in the morning Guizot, who had according to his custom retired early to rest, was again sent for to the Tuileries . The king asked his advice. "We are no longer the ministers of your Majesty," replied Guizot; "it rests with others to decide on the course to be pursued. But one thing appears to be evident: this street riot must be put down; these barricades must be taken; and for this purpose my opinion is that Marshal Bugeaud should be invested with full power, and ordered to take the necessary military measures, and as your Majesty has at this moment no minister, I am ready to draw up and countersign such an order." The marshal, who was present, undertook the task, saying, "I have never been beaten yet, and I shall not begin to-morrow. The barricades shall be carried before dawn." Adolphe Thiers and Barrot decided to withdraw the troops. Guizot found a safe refuge in Paris for some days in the lodging of a humble miniature painter whom he had befriended, and shortly afterwards escaped across the Belgian frontier and from there to London, where he arrived on 3 March. His mother and daughters had preceded him, and he was speedily installed in a modest habitation in Pelham Crescent, Brompton .

The society of England, though many people disapproved of much of his recent policy, received the fallen statesman with as much distinction and respect as they had shown the king's ambassador in 1840. A professorship at Oxford was spoken of, which he was unable to accept. He stayed in England about a year, devoting himself again to history. Back in Paris in 1850, Guizot published two more volumes on the English revolution -- Pourquoi la Révolution d'Angleterre a-t-elle reussi?

and Discours sur l'histoire, de la Révolution d'Angleterre . In February 1850 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels co-wrote a critical assessment of this two-volume history.

[ 13 ] Later life [ edit ] After having resigned as Prime Minister of France, he left politics. He was aware that the link between himself and public life was broken forever, and he never made the slightest attempt to renew it. The greater part of the year he spent at his residence at Val Richer, a former cistercian monastery near Lisieux in Normandy, which had been sold at the time of the first Revolution . His two daughters married two descendants of the patrician family De Witt of Amsterdam , not be confused with the illustrious Dordrecht family De Witt of former Grand Pensionary Johan de Witt . Both where so congenial in faith and manners to the Huguenots of France, kept his house. One of his sons-in-law farmed the estate. Guizot devoted his later years with undiminished energy to literary labour, which was in fact his chief means of subsistence.

In 1854, Guizot published his Histoire de la république d'Angleterre et de Cromwell (2 vols., 1854), then his Histoire du protectorat de Cromwell et du rétablissement des Stuarts (2 vols., 1856).  He also published an essay on Peel , and amid many essays on religion, during the ten years 1858–1868, appeared the extensive Mémoires pour servir à l'histoire de mon temps , in nine volumes. His speeches were included in 1863 in his Histoire parlementaire de la France (5 vols. of parliamentary speeches, 1863).

As his grandchildren grew up around him, he began to teach them French history. From these lessons sprang his last work, the Histoire de France racontée à mes petits enfants . The history came down to 1789, and was continued to 1870 by his daughter Madame Guizot de Witt from her father's notes.

Learned societies [ edit ] Two institutions may be said even under the Second Empire to have retained their freedom: the Institut de France and the Protestant Consistory . In both of these Guizot continued to the last to take an active part. He was a member of three of the five academies into which the Institute of France is divided. The Academy of Moral and Political Science owed its restoration to him, and he became in 1832 one of its first associates. The Academy of Inscriptions and Belles Lettres elected him in 1833 as the successor to Dacier . In 1836, he was selected as a member of the Académie Française , the highest literary distinction of the country. In these learned bodies Guizot continued for nearly forty years to take a lively interest and to exercise a powerful influence. He was a keen advocate of their independence. His voice had the greatest weight in the choice of new candidates; the younger generation of French writers never looked in vain to him for encouragement, and his constant aim was to maintain the dignity and purity of the profession of letters. In 1842, he was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences , and a foreign honorary member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1855.

[ 14 ] Protestant Consistory [ edit ] In the consistory of the Protestant church in Paris Guizot exercised a similar influence. His early education and his experience of life conspired to strengthen the convictions of a religious temperament. He remained throughout his life a firm believer in the truths of revelation, and a volume of Meditations on the Christian Religion was one of his latest works. But though he adhered inflexibly to the church of his fathers and combated the rationalist tendencies of the age, which seemed to threaten it with destruction, he retained not a tinge of the intolerance or asperity of the Calvinistic creed. He respected in the Church of Rome the faith of the majority of his countrymen, and the writings of the great Catholic prelates, Bossuet and Bourdaloue , were as familiar and as dear to him as those of his own persuasion, and were commonly used by him in the daily exercises of family worship.

Death and legacy [ edit ] Down to the summer of 1874 Guizot's mental vigour and activity were unimpaired. He died peacefully, and is said to have recited verses of Pierre Corneille and texts from the Bible on his death-bed.

During the 1820s, Guizot was among the darlings of the European liberal intelligentsia. His historical works such as Histoire générale de la civilisation en Europe (1828) and Histoire de la civilisation en France (1830) were widely admired by thinkers including John Stuart Mill ("I have dinned into people's ears that Guizot is a great thinker and writer"), Johann Wolfgang von Goethe ("Guizot is a man after my own heart...He possesses deep knowledge, combined with an enlightened liberality"), Charles Sainte-Beuve ("this astonishing man about whom one could say so many things"), and Alexis de Tocqueville .

[ 15 ] In 1840, he was elected as a member to the American Philosophical Society .

[ 16 ] Guizot's later resolute opposition to universal suffrage has led his critics to argue that he was a conservative or even reactionary.

[ 17 ] However, it is more accurate to describe Guizot as a proponent of the juste milieu or political centrism that defended representative government against absolutism and the excesses of democracy.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] His doctrine of the sovereignty of reason was intended as a liberal strategy to divide and limit sovereignty, and to consolidate the constitutional gains of the Charter of 1814 .

[ 17 ] He likewise called for the abolition of capital punishment.

[ 19 ] His ideas influenced subsequent liberal reformers throughout Europe such as József Eötvös in Hungary, Johan Rudolph Thorbecke in the Netherlands, and José Ortega y Gasset in Spain.

[ 15 ] In recent years, the scholarship of Pierre Rosanvallon , Larry Siedentop , Ivo Mosley and Aurelian Crăiuțu has renewed interest in Guizot's political thought and the Doctrinaires more generally.

Works [ edit ] Dictionnaire des synonymes de la langue française , 1809.

De l’état des beaux-arts en France , 1810.

Annales de l’éducation , 1811–1815, 6 vol.

Vie des poètes français du siècle de Louis XIV , 1813.

Quelques idées sur la liberté de la presse , 1814.

Du gouvernement représentatif de l’état actuel de la France , 1816.

Essai sur l’état actuel de l’instruction publique en France , 1817.

Du gouvernement de la France depuis la Restauration. Des conspirations et de la justice politique , 1820.

Des moyens de gouvernement et d’opposition dans l’état actuel de la France. Du gouvernement de la France et du ministère actuel. Histoire du gouvernement représentatif en Europe , 1821, 2 vol.

De la souveraineté , 1822.

De la peine de mort en matière politique , 1822.

Essai sur l’histoire de France du Ve s. au Xe s.

, 1823.

Histoire de Charles Ier , 1827, 2 vol.

Histoire générale de la civilisation en Europe , 1828. 2e édition Langlet et Cie, 1838.

Histoire de la civilisation en France , 1830, 4 vol.

Le presbytère au bord de la mer , 1831.

Rome et ses papes , 1832.

Le ministère de la réforme et le parlement réformé , 1833.

Essais sur l’histoire de France , 1836.

Monk, étude historique , 1837.

De la religion dans les sociétés modernes , 1838.

Vie, correspondance et écrits de Washington , 1839–1840.

Washington , 1841.

Madame de Rumfort , 1842.

Des conspirations et de la justice politiques , 1845.

Des moyens de gouvernement et d’opposition dans l’état actuel de la France , 1846.

Histoire de la révolution d'Angleterre depuis l'avènement de Charles Ier jusqu'à sa mort , 1846.

M. Guizot et ses amis. De la démocratie en France , 1849.

Pourquoi la révolution d’Angleterre a-t-elle réussi ? Discours sur l’histoire de la révolution d’Angleterre , 1850.

Études biographiques sur la révolution d’Angleterre. Études sur les beaux-arts en général , 1851.

Shakespeare et son temps.

Corneille et son temps , 1852.

Abélard et Héloïse , 1853.

Édouard III et les bourgeois de Calais , 1854.

Histoire de la république d’Angleterre , 1855, 2 vol., Sir Robert Peel.

Histoire du protectorat de Cromwell et du rétablissement des Stuarts , 1856, 2 vol.

Mémoires pour servir à l’histoire de mon temps , 1858–1867, 8 vol.

L’Amour dans le mariage , 1860.

L’Église et la société chrétienne en 1861 , Discours académique, 1861.

Un projet de mariage royal , 1862.

Histoire parlementaire de France, recueil de discours, , 1863, 5 vol. Trois générations.

Méditations sur l’essence de la religion chrétienne , 1864.

Guillaume le Conquérant , 1865.

Méditations sur l’état actuel de la religion chrétienne , 1866.

La France et la Prusse responsables devant l’Europe , 1868.

Méditations sur la religion chrétienne dans ses rapports avec l’état actuel des sociétés et des esprits. Mélanges biographiques et littéraires , 1868.

Mélanges politiques et historiques , 1869.

L'Histoire de France : depuis les temps les plus reculés jusqu'en 1789. Racontée à mes petits-enfants , 1870–1875, 5 vol.

Le duc de Broglie , 1872.

Les vies de quatre grands chrétiens français , 1873.

L'Histoire d'Angleterre : depuis les temps les plus reculés jusqu'à l'avènement de la reine Victoria. Racontée à mes petits-enfants , 1877-1878, 2 vol.

See also [ edit ] Aide-toi, le ciel t'aidera Le Globe Comité des travaux historiques et scientifiques References [ edit ] Sources [ edit ] Unless noted with a footnote below, this article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed (1911). See External links for full citation.

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. The 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica , in turn, gives the following references: Guizot's own Mémoires pour servir à l'histoire de mon temps (8 vols., 1858–1861) Lettres de M. Guizot à sa famille et à ses amis (1884) Charles Augustin Sainte-Beuve , Causeries du lundi (vol. 1., 1857) and Nouveaux Lundis (vols. i. and ix., 1863–1872) E Scherer , Etudes critiques sur la littérature contemporaine (vol. iv., 1873) Mme de Witt , Guizot dans sa famille (1880) Jules Simon , Thiers, Guizot et Rémusat (1885); E Faguet , Politiques et moralistes au XIX e siècle (1891) A Bardoux , Guizot (1894) in the series of " Les Grands Ecrivains français " [ 20 ] Maurice Guizot, Les Années de retraite de M. Guizot (1901) For a long list of books and articles on Guizot in periodicals see HP Thième , Guide bibliographique de la littérature française de 1800–1906 (s.c. Guizot, Paris, 1907).

For a notice of his first wife see Charles Augustin Sainte-Beuve , Portraits de femmes (1884), and Ch. de Rémusat , Critiques et études littéraires (vol. ii., 1847).

Wood, Ian (2013).

The Modern Origins of the Early Middle Ages . Oxford University Press.

Price, Munro (2007).

The Perilous Crown: France Between Revolutions, 1814–1848 . Macmillan. p. 263.

Citations [ edit ] ^ Raymond, Gino (2008).

Historical Dictionary of France . Scarecrow Press. p.

179 .

ISBN 9780810850958 .

^ Moggach, Douglas; Leduc Browne, Paul (2000).

The Social Question and the Democratic Revolution: Marx and the Legacy of 1848 . University of Ottawa Press. p. 73.

^ George Fasel. Europe in Upheaval: 1848. Chicago: Rand MacNally. Chapter 2. 1971.

^ Wood 2013 , p. 94.

^ Price 2007 , p. 263.

^ Colburn's New Monthly Magazine by E.W. Allen, 1828, pg. 174 ^ Price, Roger (6 February 2014).

A Concise History of France (Third ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 99.

ISBN 978-1-107-01782-5 .

^ Madeleine Bingham , Princess Lieven – Russian intriguer, Hamish Hamilton 1982, p. 209 et seq, pen portrait p. 211 ^ Montalbo, Adrien (11 September 2020).

"Schools without a law: Primary education in France from the Revolution to the Guizot Law" .

Explorations in Economic History .

79 101364.

doi : 10.1016/j.eeh.2020.101364 .

ISSN 0014-4983 .

S2CID 213436754 .

^ Stanley Mellon. "The July Monarchy and the Napoleonic Myth" ^ Woodward, E.L. (1963).

Three Studies in European Conservatism: Metternich: Guizot: The Catholic Church in the Nineteenth Century . Archon Books.

^ Patrick and Trevor Higonnet. "Class, Corruption, and Politics in the French Chamber of Deputies, 1846–1848"], JSTOR 286176 Accessed 31 July 2022.

^ Collected Works of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels: Volume 10 , (International Publishers: New York, 1978) pp. 251–256.

^ "Book of Members, 1780–2010: Chapter G" (PDF) . American Academy of Arts and Sciences . Retrieved 13 September 2016 .

^ a b Crăiuțu, Aurelian (2003).

Liberalism Under Siege: The Political Thought of the French Doctrinaires . Lexington Books. pp.

43– 44.

^ "APS Member History" .

search.amphilsoc.org . Retrieved 9 April 2021 .

^ a b c Crăiuțu, Aurelian (2003).

Liberalism Under Siege: The Political Thought of the French Doctrinaires . Lexington Books. pp.

136– 7.

^ Starzinger, Vincent E. (1991).

The Politics of the Center: The Juste Milieu in Theory and Practice, France and England, 1815–1848 . Transaction Publishers. pp.

136– 137.

^ Dunn, Susan (2008).

The Deaths of Louis XVI: Regicide and the French Political Imagination . Princeton University Press. p. 112.

^ The EB1911 article for François Guizot has the error "G Bardoux" instead of the correct "A Bardoux".

Further reading [ edit ] “François-Pierre-Guillaume Guizot.” Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences 10 (1874): 511–13.

[1] .

Crăiuțu, Aurelian.

Liberalism Under Siege: The Political Thought of the French Doctrinaires (2003).

Drolet, Michael. “CARRYING THE BANNER OF THE BOURGEOISIE: DEMOCRACY, SELF AND THE PHILOSOPHICAL FOUNDATIONS TO FRANÇOIS GUIZOT’S HISTORICAL AND POLITICAL THOUGHT.” History of Political Thought 32, no. 4 (2011): 645–90.

[2] .

Johnson, Douglas.

Guizot: Aspects of French History, 1787–1874 (1963).

Richter, Melvin. "Tocqueville and Guizot on democracy: From a type of society to a political regime." History of European Ideas 30.1 (2004): 61–82.

Siedentop, Larry (1979). "Two Liberal Traditions".

The Idea of Freedom: Essays in Honour of Isaiah Berlin . Oxford University Press.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to François Guizot .

Official website on François Guizot at http://www.guizot.com/en/ . Website created on the initiative of François Guizot's descendants and the François Guizot Association. Contains unpublished archives.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Reeve, Henry ; Shotwell, James Thomson (1911). " Guizot, François Pierre Guillaume ". In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 12 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

705– 709.

Works by François Guizot at Project Gutenberg Works by or about François Guizot at the Internet Archive Works by François Guizot at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) "The History of the Origins of Representative Government in Europe" Condition of the July Monarchy, 1830–1848 at the Modern History Sourcebook.

Political offices Preceded by Comte de Guernon-Ranville French Minister of Public Instruction 31 July – 1 August 1830 Succeeded by Baron Bignon Preceded by Duc de Broglie French Minister of the Interior 1 August – 2 November 1830 Succeeded by Comte de Montalivet Preceded by Baron Girod de l'Ain French Minister of Public Instruction 11 October 1832 – 10 November 1834 Succeeded by Jean-Baptiste Teste Preceded by Jean-Baptiste Teste French Minister of Public Instruction 18 November 1834 – 22 February 1836 Succeeded by Comte Pelet de la Lozère Preceded by Comte Pelet de la Lozère French Minister of Public Instruction 6 September 1836 – 15 April 1837 Succeeded by Narcisse Achille de Salvandy Preceded by Adolphe Thiers French Minister of Foreign Affairs 29 October 1840 – 23 February 1848 Succeeded by Alphonse de Lamartine Preceded by Nicolas Jean de Dieu Soult Prime Minister of France 19 September 1847 – 23 February 1848 Succeeded by Louis-Mathieu Molé v t e Académie française seat 40 Daniel de Priézac (1639) Michel Le Clerc (1662) Jacques de Tourreil (1692) Jean-Roland Malet (1714) Jean-François Boyer (1736) Nicolas Thyrel de Boismont (1755) Claude-Carloman de Rulhière (1787) Pierre Jean Georges Cabanis (1803) Antoine Destutt de Tracy (1808) François Guizot (1836) Jean-Baptiste Dumas (1875) Joseph Bertrand (1884) Marcellin Berthelot (1900) Francis Charmes (1908) Jules Cambon (1918) Marie-Jean-Lucien Lacaze (1936) Jacques Chastenet (1956) Georges Dumézil (1978) Pierre-Jean Rémy (1988) Xavier Darcos (2013) v t e Heads of government of France Restoration Talleyrand Richelieu Dessolles Decazes Richelieu Villèle Martignac Polignac July Monarchy V. de Broglie Laffitte Perier Soult Gérard Maret Mortier V. de Broglie Thiers Molé Soult Thiers Soult Guizot Molé Second Republic Dupont de l'Eure Arago Cavaignac Barrot Hautpoul Faucher Second Empire Ollivier Cousin-Montauban Government of National Defense Trochu Third Republic Dufaure A. de Broglie Cissey Buffet Dufaure Simon A. de Broglie Rochebouët Dufaure Waddington Freycinet Ferry Gambetta Freycinet Duclerc Fallières Ferry Brisson Freycinet Goblet Rouvier Floquet Tirard Freycinet Loubet Ribot Dupuy Casimir-Perier Dupuy Ribot Bourgeois Méline Brisson Dupuy Waldeck-Rousseau Combes Rouvier Sarrien Clemenceau Briand Monis Caillaux Poincaré Briand Barthou Doumergue Ribot Viviani Briand Ribot Painlevé Clemenceau Millerand Leygues Briand Poincaré François-Marsal Herriot Painlevé Briand Herriot Poincaré Briand Tardieu Chautemps Tardieu Steeg Laval Tardieu Herriot Paul-Boncour Daladier Sarraut Chautemps Daladier Doumergue Flandin Bouisson Laval Sarraut Blum Chautemps Blum Daladier Reynaud Pétain Vichy France Pétain Laval Flandin Darlan Laval Provisional Government De Gaulle Gouin Bidault Blum Fourth Republic Ramadier Schuman Marie Schuman Queuille Bidault Queuille Pleven Queuille Pleven Faure Pinay Mayer Laniel Mendès France Faure Mollet Bourgès-Maunoury Gaillard Pflimlin De Gaulle Fifth Republic De Gaulle Debré Pompidou Couve de Murville Chaban-Delmas Messmer Chirac Barre Mauroy Fabius Chirac Rocard Cresson Bérégovoy Balladur Juppé Jospin Raffarin Villepin Fillon Ayrault Valls Cazeneuve Philippe Castex Borne Attal Barnier Bayrou Related Chief minister of France (pre-Revolution) Deputy Prime Minister (defunct) v t e Paris Municipal Commission Ministry of 1830 (31 July 1830 to 1 August 1830) Commissioners Jacques Laffitte Casimir Pierre Périer Georges Mouton Auguste de Schonen Pierre-François Audry de Puyraveau François Mauguin Justice Jacques-Charles Dupont de l'Eure Finance Joseph Dominique, baron Louis Navy Henri de Rigny Foreign Affairs Louis Pierre Édouard, Baron Bignon Public Education François Guizot Interior and Public Works Casimir Pierre Périer War Étienne Maurice Gérard Preceded by: Ministry of Casimir de Rochechouart de Mortemart − Followed by French Provisional Ministry of 1830 v t e French Provisional Ministry of 1830 (1 August 1830 to 11 August 1830) Interior François Guizot Justice Jacques-Charles Dupont de l'Eure Foreign Affairs Jean-Baptiste Jourdan War Étienne Maurice Gérard Finance Joseph Dominique, baron Louis Navy Henri de Rigny Public Education Louis Pierre Édouard, Baron Bignon v t e First ministry of Louis-Philippe (11 August 1830 to 2 November 1830) Head of state: King Louis Philippe I Interior François Guizot Justice Jacques-Charles Dupont de l'Eure Foreign Affairs Louis-Mathieu Molé War Étienne Maurice Gérard Finance Joseph Dominique, baron Louis Navy and Colonies Horace François Sébastiani Public Education, Religious Affairs Victor de Broglie Ministers without portfolio Casimir Pierre Périer Jacques Laffitte André Marie Jean Jacques Dupin Louis Pierre Édouard, Baron Bignon v t e First cabinet of Nicolas Jean-de-Dieu Soult (11 October 1832 to 18 July 1834) Head of state: King Louis Philippe I President of the council Nicolas Jean-de-Dieu Soult Nicolas Jean-de-Dieu Soult War Nicolas Jean-de-Dieu Soult Interior Adolphe Thiers Antoine Maurice Apollinaire d'Argout Adolphe Thiers Justice Félix Barthe Jean-Charles Persil Foreign Affairs Victor de Broglie Henri de Rigny Finance Georges Humann Navy and Colonies Henri de Rigny Albin Roussin Louis Léon Jacob Public Education and Religious Affairs François Guizot Commerce and Public Works Antoine d'Argout Adolphe Thiers Commerce Tanneguy Duchâtel v t e Cabinet of Étienne Maurice, comte Gérard (18 July 1834 to 10 November 1834) Head of state: King Louis Philippe I President of the council Étienne Maurice Gérard Étienne Maurice Gérard War Étienne Maurice Gérard Interior Adolphe Thiers Justice and Religious Affairs Jean-Charles Persil Foreign Affairs Henri de Rigny Finance Georges Humann Navy and Colonies Louis Léon Jacob Public Education François Guizot Commerce Tanneguy Duchâtel v t e Cabinet of Édouard Adolphe Mortier (18 November 1834 to 12 March 1835) Head of state: King Louis Philippe I President of the council Édouard Mortier, duc de Trévise Édouard Mortier, duc de Trévise War Édouard Mortier, duc de Trévise Interior Adolphe Thiers Justice and Religious Affairs Jean-Charles Persil Foreign Affairs Henri de Rigny Finance Georges Humann Navy and Colonies Guy-Victor Duperré Public Education François Guizot Commerce Tanneguy Duchâtel v t e Cabinet of Victor de Broglie (12 March 1835 to 22 February 1836) Head of state: King Louis Philippe I President of the council Victor de Broglie Victor de Broglie Foreign Affairs Victor de Broglie Interior Adolphe Thiers Adrien de Gasparin (Sub-Secretary of State) Justice Jean-Charles Persil War Henri de Rigny (interim) Nicolas Joseph Maison Finance Georges Humann Antoine Maurice Apollinaire d'Argout Navy and Colonies Guy-Victor Duperré Public Education François Guizot Commerce Tanneguy Duchâtel v t e First cabinet of Louis Mathieu Molé (6 September 1836 to 15 April 1837) Head of state: King Louis Philippe I President of the council Louis-Mathieu Molé Louis-Mathieu Molé War Simon, général-baron Bernard Justice Jean-Charles Persil Foreign Affairs Louis-Mathieu Molé Interior Adrien de Gasparin Charles de Rémusat (Sub-secretary of State) Finance Tanneguy Duchâtel Navy and Colonies Claude du Campe de Rosamel Public Education François Guizot Commerce Tanneguy Duchâtel Public Works, Agriculture and Commerce Nicolas Martin du Nord v t e Third cabinet of Nicolas Jean-de-Dieu Soult (29 October 1840 to 19 September 1847) Head of state: King Louis Philippe I President of the council Nicolas Soult Nicolas Soult War Nicolas Soult Alexandre Moline de Saint-Yon Camille Trézel François Martineau des Chenez (Undersecretary of State) Interior Tanneguy Duchâtel Antoine François Passy (Undersecretary of State) Justice and Religious Affairs Nicolas Martin du Nord Michel Pierre Alexis Hébert Foreign Affairs François Guizot Finance Georges Humann Jean Lacave-Laplagne Pierre Sylvain Dumon Navy and Colonies Guy-Victor Duperré Albin Roussin Ange de Mackau Louis Napoléon Lannes Jean Jubelin (Undersecretary of State) Public Education Abel-François Villemain Narcisse-Achille de Salvandy Public Works Jean-Baptiste Teste Pierre Sylvain Dumon Hippolyte Paul Jayr Agriculture and Commerce Laurent Cunin-Gridaine v t e Cabinet of François-Pierre Guizot (19 September 1847 to 24 February 1848) Head of state: King Louis Philippe I President of the Council and Minister of Foreign Affairs François Guizot François Guizot Interior Tanneguy Duchâtel , sub-secretary of state Antoine François Passy Justice and Religious Affairs Michel Hébert War Camille Alphonse Trézel , sub-secretary of state Pierre Magne Finance Pierre Sylvain Dumon Navy and Colonies Louis Napoléon Lannes , sub-secretary of state Jean Jubelin Public Education Narcisse-Achille de Salvandy Public Works Hippolyte Paul Jayr Agriculture and Commerce Laurent Cunin-Gridaine v t e Foreign ministers of France Ancien Régime Revol Villeroy A. J. Richelieu Sillery R. Phélypeaux Bouthillier Chavigny Brienne Lionne Pomponne Croissy Torcy Huxelles Dubois Morville Chauvelin Chaillou Noailles Argenson Puisieulx Saint-Contest Rouillé Bernis É. Choiseul C. Choiseul É. Choiseul L. Phélypeaux Aiguillon Bertin Vergennes Montmorin Vauguyon Montmorin Lessart Dumouriez Naillac Chambonas Dubouchage Sainte-Croix First Republic Lebrun-Tondu Deforgues Goujon Herman Delacroix Talleyrand Reinhard Talleyrand First Empire Talleyrand Champagny Bassano Caulaincourt First Restoration Laforest Talleyrand Hundred Days Caulaincourt Bignon Second Restoration Talleyrand A. E. Richelieu Dessolles Pasquier M. Montmorency Chateaubriand Damas La Ferronays Montmorency-Laval Portalis Polignac Mortemart July Monarchy Bignon Jourdan Molé Maison Sébastiani V. Broglie Rigny Bresson Rigny V. Broglie Thiers Molé Montebello Soult Thiers Guizot Second Republic Lamartine Bastide Bedeau Bastide Drouyn de Lhuys Tocqueville Rayneval La Hitte Drouyn de Lhuys Brénier Baroche Turgot Drouyn de Lhuys Second Empire Drouyn de Lhuys Walewski Baroche Thouvenel Drouyn de Lhuys La Valette Moustier La Valette La Tour Auvergne Daru Ollivier Gramont La Tour d'Auvergne Third Republic Favre Rémusat A. Broglie Decazes Banneville Waddington Freycinet Barthélemy-Saint-Hilaire Gambetta Freycinet Duclerc Fallières Challemel-Lacour Ferry Freycinet Flourens Goblet Spuller Ribot Develle Casimir-Perier Hanotaux Berthelot Bourgeois Hanotaux Delcassé Rouvier Bourgeois Pichon Cruppi Selves Poincaré Jonnart Pichon Doumergue Bourgeois Viviani Doumergue Delcassé Viviani Briand Ribot Barthou Pichon Millerand Leygues Briand Poincaré Lefebvre Herriot Briand Herriot Briand Laval Tardieu Herriot Paul-Boncour Daladier Barthou Laval Flandin Delbos Paul-Boncour Bonnet Daladier Reynaud Daladier Reynaud Baudouin Vichy France Baudouin Laval Flandin Darlan Laval Provisional Government Bidault Blum Fourth Republic Bidault Schuman Bidault Mendès France Faure Pinay Pineau Pleven Couve de Murville Fifth Republic Couve de Murville Debré Schumann Bettencourt Jobert Sauvagnargues Guiringaud François-Poncet Cheysson Dumas Raimond Dumas Juppé Charette Védrine Villepin Barnier Douste-Blazy Kouchner Alliot-Marie Juppé Fabius Ayrault Le Drian Colonna Séjourné Barrot Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN FID People Sycomore Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC 2 Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=François_Guizot&oldid=1306571890 " Categories : 1787 births 1874 deaths People from Nîmes French Calvinist and Reformed Christians Politicians from Occitania (administrative region) Doctrinaires Orléanists Prime ministers of France French interior ministers Government ministers of France Members of the Chamber of Deputies of the Bourbon Restoration Members of the 1st Chamber of Deputies of the July Monarchy Members of the 2nd Chamber of Deputies of the July Monarchy Members of the 3rd Chamber of Deputies of the July Monarchy Members of the 4th Chamber of Deputies of the July Monarchy Members of the 5th Chamber of Deputies of the July Monarchy Members of the 6th Chamber of Deputies of the July Monarchy Members of the 7th Chamber of Deputies of the July Monarchy People of the Dominican War of Independence French people of the Revolutions of 1848 Historians of the French Revolution 19th-century French historians Founders of Sciences Po Academic staff of the University of Paris Members of the Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres Members of the Académie Française Members of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Knights of the Golden Fleece of Spain Recipients of the Pour le Mérite (civil class) International members of the American Philosophical Society Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2020 Pages with French IPA Articles needing additional references from July 2022 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2022 Articles containing French-language text Articles with unsourced statements from July 2012 Commons category link is on Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 14:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents François Guizot 47 languages Add topic

