Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Invention of sewing machine and career 3 Involvement in inventing the zipper 4 Adult life and legacy 5 Genealogy 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Elias Howe 36 languages العربية Asturianu Башҡортса Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa Malagasy مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Português Română Русский Simple English Ślůnski Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Winaray Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American inventor (1819–1867) This article is about the inventor of the sewing machine. For the music publisher and his company, see Elias Howe Company .

Elias Howe Born Elias Howe Jr.

( 1819-07-09 ) July 9, 1819 Spencer , Massachusetts Died October 3, 1867 (1867-10-03) (aged 48) Brooklyn, New York Nationality American Education apprenticed as mechanic and machinist Spouse(s) Elizabeth Jennings Ames (m. 1841; d. 1850) Rose Halladay (d. 1890) Children Jane Robinson Howe, Simon Ames Howe, Julia Maria Howe Parent(s) Elias Howe and Polly (Bemis) Howe Engineering career Discipline Mechanical Engineering Projects Sewing machine Significant advance Lockstitch loop method Awards Gold Medal, Paris Exposition of 1867, Légion d'honneur (France) Elias Howe Jr.

( / h aʊ / ; July 9, 1819 – October 3, 1867) was an American inventor best known for his creation of the modern lockstitch sewing machine .

Early life [ edit ] Elias Howe Jr. was born on July 9, 1819, to Dr. Elias Howe Sr (1792–1867) and Polly (Bemis) Howe (1791–1871) in Spencer , Massachusetts . Howe spent his childhood and early adult years in Massachusetts, where he apprenticed in a textile factory in Lowell beginning in 1835. After mill closings due to the Panic of 1837 , he moved to Cambridge, Massachusetts , to work as a mechanic with carding machinery, apprenticing along with his cousin Nathaniel P. Banks . In the beginning of 1838, he apprenticed in the shop of Ari Davis, a master mechanic in Cambridge who specialized in the manufacture and repair of chronometers and other precision instruments.

[ 1 ] It was in the employ of Davis that Howe seized upon the idea of the sewing machine.

He married Elizabeth Jennings Ames, daughter of Simon Ames and Jane B. Ames, on March 3, 1841, in Cambridge.

[ 2 ] They had three children: Jane Robinson Howe (1842–1912), Simon Ames Howe (1844–1883), and Julia Maria Howe (1846–1869). He then married Rose Halladay.

Invention of sewing machine and career [ edit ] Howe's sewing machine Howe was not the first to conceive of the idea of a sewing machine. Many other people had formulated the idea of such a machine before him, one as early as 1790, and some had even patented their designs and produced working machines, in one case at least 80 of them.

[ 3 ] However, Howe originated significant refinements to the design concepts of his predecessors, and on September 10, 1846, he was awarded the first United States patent ( U.S. patent 4,750 ) for a sewing machine using a lockstitch design. His machine contained the three essential features common to most modern machines: a needle with the eye at the point, a shuttle operating beneath the cloth to form the lock stitch, and an automatic feed.

A possibly apocryphal account of how he came up with the idea for placing the eye of the needle at the point is recorded in a family history of his mother's family: He almost beggared himself before he discovered where the eye of the needle of the sewing machine should be located. It is probable that there are very few people who know how it came about. His original idea was to follow the model of the ordinary needle, and have the eye at the heel. It never occurred to him that it should be placed near the point, and he might have failed altogether if he had not dreamed he was building a sewing machine for a savage king in a strange country. Just as in his actual working experience, he was perplexed about the needle's eye. He thought the king gave him twenty-four hours in which to complete the machine and make it sew.  If not finished in that time death was to be the punishment. Howe worked and worked, and puzzled, and finally gave it up. Then he thought he was taken out to be executed. He noticed that the warriors carried spears that were pierced near the head. Instantly came the solution of the difficulty, and while the inventor was begging for time, he awoke. It was 4 o'clock in the morning. He jumped out of bed, ran to his workshop, and by 9, a needle with an eye at the point had been crudely modeled. After that it was easy. That is the true story of an important incident in the invention of the sewing machine.

[ 4 ] Despite securing his patent, Howe had considerable difficulty finding investors in the United States to finance production of his invention, so his elder brother Amasa Bemis Howe traveled to England in October 1846 to seek financing. Amasa was able to sell his first machine for £250 to William Thomas of Cheapside , London , who owned a factory for the manufacture of corsets, umbrellas and valises. Elias and his family joined Amasa in London in 1848, but after business disputes with Thomas and failing health of his wife, Howe returned nearly penniless to the United States. His wife Elizabeth, who preceded Elias back to the United States, died in Cambridge, Massachusetts shortly after his return in 1849.

[ 5 ] Despite his efforts to sell his machine, other entrepreneurs began manufacturing sewing machines. Howe was forced to defend his patent in a court case that lasted from 1849 to 1854 because he found that Isaac Singer with cooperation from Walter Hunt had perfected a facsimile of his machine and was selling it with the same lockstitch that Howe had invented and patented. He won the dispute and earned considerable royalties from Singer and others for sales of his invention.

[ 6 ] Howe contributed much of the money he earned to providing equipment for the 17th Connecticut Volunteer Infantry of the Union Army during the Civil War , in which Howe served as a private in Company D. Due to his faltering health he performed light duty, often seen walking with the aid of his shillelagh , and took on the position of Regimental Postmaster, serving out his time riding to and from Baltimore with war news. He'd enlisted August 14, 1862, and then mustered out July 19, 1865.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Involvement in inventing the zipper [ edit ] Howe received a patent in 1851 for an "Automatic, Continuous Clothing Closure". Perhaps because of the success of his sewing machine, he did not try to seriously market it, missing recognition he might otherwise have received.

[ 9 ] Adult life and legacy [ edit ] Howe commemorative, 1940 issue Between 1854 and 1871/72, Elias's older brother, Amasa Bemis Howe (died in 1868), and later his son Benjamin Porter Howe, owned and operated a factory in New York City, producing sewing machines under the name of the Howe Sewing Machine Co ., which won a gold medal at the London Exhibition of 1862. Between 1865 and 1867, Elias himself established The Howe Machine Co . in Bridgeport, Connecticut, that was operated by Elias's sons-in-law, the Stockwell Brothers, until about 1886. Elias Howe's sewing machine won a gold medal at the Paris Exhibition of 1867, [ 1 ] and that same year he was awarded the Légion d'honneur by Napoleon III for his invention.

[ 10 ] In 1873, Benjamin P. Howe sold the Howe Sewing Machine Co. factory and name to the Howe Machine Co., which merged the two companies.

Elias Howe died at age 48, on October 3, 1867, of gout and a massive blood clot. He was buried in Green-Wood Cemetery in Brooklyn, New York . His second wife, Rose Halladay, who died on October 10, 1890, is buried with him. Both Singer and Howe were multi-millionaires.

[ 11 ] Howe's father died two months later on December 28, 1867, one day after his 75th birthday.

Howe was commemorated with a 5-cent stamp in the Famous American Inventors series issued October 14, 1940.

[ 12 ] The 1965 Beatles movie Help!

is dedicated to his memory.

[ 13 ] In 2004 he was inducted into the United States National Inventors Hall of Fame .

[ 1 ] Genealogy [ edit ] Howe was a descendant of John Howe (1602–1680) who arrived in Massachusetts Bay Colony in 1630 from Brinklow , Warwickshire, England, and settled in Sudbury, Massachusetts .

[ citation needed ] Howe was also a descendant of Edmund Rice , another early immigrant to Massachusetts Bay Colony.

[ 2 ] [ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Biography portal Daniel Davis Jr.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c "Elias Howe" . National Inventors Hall of Fame . Retrieved July 7, 2020 .

^ a b Edmund Rice (1638) Association, 2009. Descendants of Edmund Rice: The First Nine Generations. (CD-ROM) ^ "A Brief History of the Sewing Machine" . ISMACS International . Retrieved May 22, 2010 .

^ Draper, Thomas Waln-Morgan (1900).

The Bemis History and Genealogy: Being an Account, in Greater Part, of the Descendants of Joseph Bemis of Watertown, Massachusetts . San Francisco, Cal. [The Stanley-Taylor co., printer]. p. 160.

^ "Elias Howe Obituary" . New York Times, October 5, 1867. October 5, 1867 . Retrieved November 8, 2009 .

^ "The Sewing Machine" (PDF) .

^ "Muster roll, Company D, 17th Connecticut Volunteer Infantry Regiment" . Seventeenth Connecticut Volunteer Infantry homepage. Archived from the original on July 20, 2008 . Retrieved November 9, 2009 .

^ "Pro Patria: Civil War monument of Connecticut" . Archived from the original on October 16, 2007.

^ "Zipper History" . AnsunMultitech. Archived from the original on July 8, 2012 . Retrieved June 22, 2012 .

^ "French Legion of Honor Recipients" . NNDB-Biographic Data Base . Retrieved November 9, 2009 .

^ Elias Howe, 19th Century Scientific American Online Archived March 20, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ " 5-cent Howe ", Arago: people, postage & the post, Smithsonian National Postal Museum, viewed September 28, 2014.

^ "Elias Howe, Sewing Machine Inventor, Gets a Little Help From the Beatles" . July 10, 2017.

^ "Who was Edmund Rice?" . The Edmund Rice (1638) Association, Inc . Retrieved November 8, 2009 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Elias Howe .

Elias Howe at Find a Grave Iles, George (1912), Leading American Inventors , New York: Henry Holt and Company, pp.

338– 369 Elias Howe Biography by Alex I. Askaroff "Howe, Elias" .

Appletons' Cyclopædia of American Biography . 1892.

"Howe, Elias" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.

v t e Sewing Techniques Basting Cut Darning Ease Embellishment Fabric tube turning Floating canvas Gather Godet Gore Gusset Heirloom sewing Pleat Shirring Stitches ( list ) Backstitch Bar tack Blanket Blind stitch Buttonhole Catch stitch Chain stitch Coverstitch Cross-stitch Embroidery stitch Hemstitch Lockstitch Overlock Pad stitch Pick stitch Rantering Running Sashiko Stoating Tack Topstitch Zigzag Seams Neckline Felled seam Princess seams Seam allowance Style line Notions Trim Bias tape Collar stay Elastic Galloon Grommet/eyelet Interfacing Passementerie Piping Ruffle Rickrack Self-fabric Soutache Twill tape Wrights Closures Buckle Button Buttonhole Frog Hook-and-eye Hook-and-loop fastener Shank Snap Zipper Materials Grain/bias Selvage Textile/fabric Thread Yarn Tools Bobbin Dress form Needlecase Needle threader Pattern notcher Pin Pincushion Pinking shears Scissors Seam ripper Sewing gauge Sewing needle Stitching awl Tailor's ham Tape measure Thimble Tracing paper Tracing wheel Trades Suppliers Cloth merchant Draper Dressmaker Haberdasher Mercer Silkwoman Tailor Manufacturers Patterns Butterick Burda Clothkits McCall's Simplicity Machines ( list ) Barthélemy Thimonnier Bernina Brother Elias Howe Elna Feiyue Frister & Rossmann Janome Jones Juki Merrow New Home Pfaff Sewmor Singer Tape edge machine Viking/Husqvarna White Media related to Sewing at Wikimedia Commons Clothing portal Glossary of terms v t e Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees John Adams John Quincy Adams Jane Addams Louis Agassiz Susan B. Anthony John James Audubon George Bancroft Clara Barton Henry Ward Beecher Alexander Graham Bell Daniel Boone Edwin Booth Louis Brandeis Phillips Brooks William Cullen Bryant Luther Burbank Andrew Carnegie George Washington Carver William Ellery Channing Rufus Choate Henry Clay Grover Cleveland James Fenimore Cooper Peter Cooper Charlotte Cushman James Buchanan Eads Thomas Alva Edison Jonathan Edwards Ralph Waldo Emerson David Farragut Stephen Foster Benjamin Franklin Robert Fulton Josiah W. Gibbs William C. Gorgas Ulysses S. Grant Asa Gray Alexander Hamilton Nathaniel Hawthorne Joseph Henry Patrick Henry Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr.

Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.

Mark Hopkins Elias Howe Washington Irving Andrew Jackson Thomas J. Jackson Thomas Jefferson John Paul Jones James Kent Sidney Lanier Robert E. Lee Abraham Lincoln Henry Wadsworth Longfellow James Russell Lowell Mary Lyon Edward MacDowell James Madison Horace Mann John Marshall Matthew Fontaine Maury Albert A. Michelson Maria Mitchell James Monroe Samuel F. B. Morse William T. G. Morton John Lothrop Motley Simon Newcomb Thomas Paine Alice Freeman Palmer Francis Parkman George Peabody William Penn Edgar Allan Poe Walter Reed Franklin D. Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Augustus Saint-Gaudens William Tecumseh Sherman John Philip Sousa Joseph Story Harriet Beecher Stowe Gilbert Stuart Sylvanus Thayer Henry David Thoreau Mark Twain Lillian Wald Booker T. Washington George Washington Daniel Webster George Westinghouse James McNeill Whistler Walt Whitman Eli Whitney John Greenleaf Whittier Emma Willard Frances Willard Roger Williams Woodrow Wilson Orville Wright Wilbur Wright Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Artists Musée d'Orsay Photographers' Identities People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Elias_Howe&oldid=1303799216 " Categories : 1819 births 1867 deaths 19th-century American inventors American mechanical engineers People from Spencer, Massachusetts People of Connecticut in the American Civil War Burials at Green-Wood Cemetery Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees Engineers from Bridgeport, Connecticut Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from July 2020 Pages using infobox person with multiple spouses Pages using infobox person with multiple parents Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2020 Commons category link from Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 03:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Elias Howe 36 languages Add topic

