Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Opposition to arborescence 2 Approximate characteristics 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Rhizome (philosophy) 18 languages العربية Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophical model of the connections present in an assemblage This article is about a philosophical term. For its use in botany (i.e. arboraceous), see Woody plant .

A rhizome is a concept in post-structuralism describing an assemblage that allows connections between any of its constituent elements, regardless of any predefined ordering, structure, or entry point.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] It is a central concept in the work of French Theorists Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari , who use the term frequently in their development of schizoanalysis .

Deleuze and Guattari use the terms " rhizome " and "rhizomatic" (from Ancient Greek ῥίζωμα , rhízōma , "mass of roots") to describe a network that "connects any point to any other point".

[ 3 ] The term is first introduced in Deleuze and Guattari's 1975 book Kafka: Toward a Minor Literature to suggest that Kafka's work is not bound by linear narrative structure, and can be entered into at any point to map out connections with other points.

[ 1 ] [ 4 ] The term is heavily expanded upon in Deleuze and Guattari's 1980 work A Thousand Plateaus , where it is used to refer to networks that establish "connections between semiotic chains, organizations of power, and circumstances relative to the arts, sciences and social struggles." [ 3 ] Opposition to arborescence [ edit ] An illustration of rhizome in opposition to arborescence from a 2006 exhibition of works inspired by A Thousand Plateaus at the Doris McCarthy Gallery. The red structure in the image is a tree, which presupposes a linear ordering over its elements that emanates from the root. The green structure in the image is a rhizome, which ceaselessly establishes connections across branches in the tree, without regard for the predefined order.

[ 5 ] Arborescent ( French : arborescent ) refers to the shape and structure of a tree. In A Thousand Plateaus , the concept of rhizome is introduced through a botanical metaphor, which contrasts the rhizomatic character of underground root systems to the natural hierarchical ordering present in trees .

[ 4 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Deleuze and Guattari extend this metaphor beyond botanical trees to the realm of abstract and linguistic trees.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Approximate characteristics [ edit ] In A Thousand Plateaus , Deleuze and Guattari write that "The rhizome itself assumes very diverse forms... but we get the feeling that we will convince no one unless we enumerate certain approximate characteristics." [ 3 ] These approximate characteristics are: "1 and 2. Principles of connection and heterogeneity: any point of a rhizome can be connected to anything other, and must be. This is very different from the tree or root, which plots a point, fixes an order" "3. Principle of multiplicity : it is only when the multiple is effectively treated as a substantive, "multiplicity," that it ceases to have any relation to the One as subject or object" "4. Principle of asignifying rupture: against the oversignifying breaks separating structures or cutting across a single structure. A rhizome may be broken, shattered at a given spot, but it will start up again on one of its old lines, or on new lines" "5 and 6. Principle of cartography and decalcomania : a rhizome is not amenable to any structural or generative model. It is a stranger to any idea of genetic axis or deep structure." See also [ edit ] Contextualism Bricolage Deleuze and Guattari Heterarchy Minority (philosophy) Multiplicity (philosophy) Mutualism Perspectivism Plane of immanence Graph (abstract data type) Arborescence (graph theory) Tree (graph theory) Digital infinity Intertwingularity References [ edit ] ^ a b Young, Eugene; Genosko, Gary; Watson, Janell (2013-12-05).

The Deleuze and Guattari Dicationary . Bloomsbury Academic. pp. 171, 262.

ISBN 978-0826442765 .

^ a b c Adkins, Brent (2015).

Deleuze and Guattari's A Thousand Plateaus: A Critical Introduction and Guide . Edinburgh University Press. pp. 23, 76.

ISBN 9780748686469 .

^ a b c d e f Deleuze, Gilles; Guattari, Félix (1987) [1980].

A Thousand Plateaus . Translated by Massumi, Brian. University of Minnesota Press. pp. 5, 7.

ISBN 0-8166-1402-4 .

^ a b Stivale, Charles (2005).

Gilles Deleuze: Key Concepts . McGill-Queen's University Press. pp. 150, 52.

ISBN 9781844652884 .

^ "Introduction: Rhizome · Happy Sleepy" .

Happy Sleepy . Retrieved 2024-12-21 .

v t e Gilles Deleuze – Félix Guattari Concepts and theories Affect Arborescent Assemblage Body without organs Desiring-production Deterritorialization Difference Erewhon Event Haecceity Immanent evaluation Individuation Line of flight Minority Molar configuration Multiplicity Plane of immanence Reterritorialization Rhizome Schizoanalysis Societies of control Socius Subjectification Transcendental empiricism Univocity of being Virtual Works by Deleuze and Guattari Capitalism and Schizophrenia Anti-Oedipus A Thousand Plateaus Kafka: Toward a Minor Literature Rhizome Nomadology: The War Machine What Is Philosophy?

Works by Deleuze Empiricism and Subjectivity Nietzsche and Philosophy Kant's Critical Philosophy Proust and Signs Nietzsche Bergsonism Masochism: Coldness and Cruelty Difference and Repetition Expressionism in Philosophy: Spinoza The Logic of Sense Spinoza: Practical Philosophy The Intellectuals and Power: A Discussion Between Gilles Deleuze and Michel Foucault Dialogues Superpositions Francis Bacon: The Logic of Sensation Cinema 1: The Movement Image Cinema 2: The Time-Image Foucault The Fold: Leibniz and the Baroque Périclès et Verdi: La philosophie de Francois Châtelet Negotiations Essays Critical and Clinical Bartleby, la formula della creazione Pure Immanence: Essays on a Life Desert Islands and Other Texts 1953-1974 Two Regimes of Madness Works by Guattari Psychanalyse et transversalité Molecular Revolution Desire and Revolution L'inconscient machinique. Essais de Schizoanalyse L’intervention institutionnelle Les années d'hiver Pratique de l'institutionnel et politique Communists Like Us Molecular Revolution in Brazil The Three Ecologies Cartographies schizoanalytiques Chaosmose Chaosophy Soft Subversions The Guattari Reader The Anti-Oedipus Papers Chaos and Complexity Related topics L'Abécédaire de Gilles Deleuze La Borde Clinic Deleuze and Guattari A New Philosophy of Society: Assemblage Theory and Social Complexity Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rhizome_(philosophy)&oldid=1291466103 " Categories : Social networks Social theories Literary concepts Philosophical analogies Postmodern theory Félix Guattari Gilles Deleuze Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 21 May 2025, at 11:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rhizome (philosophy) 18 languages Add topic

