Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 United States 2 Northwest Pacific 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Tropical cyclone engineering Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sub-discipline of civil engineering This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( September 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( May 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Tropical cyclone engineering , or hurricane engineering , is a specialist sub-discipline of civil engineering that encompasses planning, analysis, design, response, and recovery of civil engineering systems and infrastructure for hurricane hazards. Hurricane engineering is a relatively new and emerging discipline within the field of civil engineering. It is an integration of many recognized branches of engineering, such as structural engineering , wind engineering , coastal engineering , and forensic engineering , with other recognized sciences and planning functions such as, climatology , oceanography , architecture , emergency management and preparedness, hazard mitigation, and hazard vulnerability analysis. Hurricane engineering aims to minimize risks to human safety, the natural and built environment, and business processes.

United States [ edit ] As a result of the tremendous threats to life safety and economic disruptions caused by the 2004 and 2005 hurricane seasons, governmental organizations, such as the United States National Science Foundation , have recognized the need to better understand hurricane threats and further establish this discipline. In September 2006, the National Science Board released recommendations to the United States Congress calling for major new investments in hurricane science and engineering.

Accredited university engineering programs, such as the Louisiana State University civil engineering department and University of Notre Dame Department of Civil Engineering and Geological Sciences, are establishing programs to better understand these catastrophic storms and their interaction with the environment. The LSU Hurricane Center has begun to offer hurricane engineering courses with the focus of educating students on the unique threats caused by hurricanes.

The past two decades have witnessed exponential growth in damage due to hurricanes and the situation continues to deteriorate. The most vulnerable areas, coastal counties along the Gulf and Atlantic seaboards, are experiencing greater population growth and development than anyplace else in the country. If the trend of rapidly increasing losses caused by hurricanes is to be reversed, a whole new philosophy of understanding, planning, and preparedness is required. The Hurricane Engineering curriculum is the result of a multidisciplinary project aimed at giving engineering students a comprehensive understanding of the hazards associated with hurricanes: Extreme winds Windborne debris Storm surges River flooding Rain-induced landslides Northwest Pacific [ edit ] In the Northwest Pacific, where the term for strong tropical cyclones is typhoon , the concept of typhoon engineering , which is very similar to Hurricane Engineering, is being proposed.

References [ edit ] Levitan, M. L. (2005), "Hurricane Engineering: A New Curriculum for a Planet at Risk," Proceedings of the 2005 Structures Congress , American Society of Civil Engineers Structural Engineering Institute, ISBN 0-7844-0753-3 Pacheco, B. M., and Aquino, R. E. R. (2005), "DMAPS Looking Forward: Call for 'Typhoon Engineers,'" Proceedings of the 2005 PICE National Convention , Philippine Institute of Civil Engineers {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) External links [ edit ] NSF Hurricane Engineering and Science Recommendations American Society of Civil Engineers: papers and articles about hurricane analysis, response and mitigation LSU Hurricane Engineering curriculum development This article about or related to tropical cyclones is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tropical_cyclone_engineering&oldid=1176483687 " Categories : Environmental engineering Tropical cyclone stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from September 2017 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with limited geographic scope from May 2008 CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list All stub articles This page was last edited on 22 September 2023, at 00:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tropical cyclone engineering Add languages Add topic

