Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Green qualities 2 Assessment 3 Health benefits of greening Toggle Health benefits of greening subsection 3.1 Health benefits of greening in schools 3.1.1 Greening schoolyards 3.1.2 Green roofs 3.1.3 Gardens 3.2 Greenery office 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Greening 15 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Deutsch Español فارسی 한국어 Հայերեն ಕನ್ನಡ Nederlands 日本語 Русский Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Process of incorporating more environmentally friendly behaviors or systems For other uses, see Greening (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Greening" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Greening is the process of transforming living environments, and also artifacts such as a space, a lifestyle or a brand image , into a more environmentally friendly version (i.e. 'greening your home' or 'greening your office').  The act of greening generally involves incorporating more environmentally friendly systems into one's environment, such as the home , work place, and general lifestyle.

[ 1 ] Facade greening with various supporting climbing plants on climbing aids Greening is also a general term for the appropriate selection and planting of plants on, in, or next to buildings and in public parks . The goal of greening is usually a combination of environmental benefits and improving the visual design of surfaces, for example, a green wall or green roof , as well as the creation of green spaces. This usually requires technical measures such as earthworks or supporting climbing plants. Furthermore, permanent care and irrigation is usually necessary to maintain the greened environment. In some areas there are normative requirements for the planning and execution of the greening, for example roadsides greening. In soil bioengineering , plants with technical functions may be needed.

Measures such as the recultivation of heaps, plantations as part of a compensatory measure or, in tiller forestry , the planting of vegetation are distinguished from greening. In professional parlance, the sowing or planting of agricultural crops is also referred to as crop growing or occasionally as field cultivation. The term sowing is used for lawns .

The greening of deserts is a particularly difficult task. If it is sustainable, it is the most effective measure for the economic development of arid areas, decreases global warming , and also improves the local climate . The state of Israel in Negev has long been a pioneer in this field. A project between 1991 and 2011 and supported by, among others, the forests of German states provided 450,000 trees for the desert city of Beersheba . Another major reforestation (greening) project is China's Green Wall , which aims to reduce the increasing devastation of entire regions in the north and west of the People's Republic of China .

Green qualities [ edit ] These "green" qualities include, but are not limited to: reduced toxicity re-usability energy efficiency responsible packaging and labelling recycled content intelligent design responsible manufacturing techniques reduction of personal environmental hazards alleviating heat island effect Assessment [ edit ] Environmentally friendly companies such as Green Home have developed a rigorous approval policy that allows consumers to qualify each product based upon these criteria as they apply to specific product categories.

[ 2 ] Health benefits of greening [ edit ] Exposure to greening initiatives has proven to achieve great health benefits for people of all ages.

[ 3 ] Greening can alleviate stressors of an urban environment, providing more opportunities to experience tranquility, reduce noise, and induce cooling effects.

[ 4 ] Exposure to greening initiatives can benefit both physical and mental health and can lead to more environmental awareness. Greening includes habitat restoration, planting trees, food gardening and naturalization.

[ 5 ] Health benefits of greening in schools [ edit ] Children have been a particular focus in this area of research due to the increasingly limited access to green spaces and nature.

[ 5 ] In urban areas, parents or guardians may favor playing indoors versus outdoors based on the perception of safety and concerns.

[ 6 ] For example, families who live farther away from green spaces are more likely to push for indoor activities because of close proximity to busy roads or construction sites. On average, children in the United States spend about 1,000 hours a year in school.

[ 7 ] Therefore, schools are an excellent tool for greening initiatives that involve children in urban spaces.

The Florida Riffin Ridley School garden (Brookline, Massachusetts) Habitat restoration, gardening, naturalization and rewilding efforts in schools provide children with the opportunity to connect with nature. In a study conducted in Finland, researchers found that adding green to the school yard increased passion for outdoor activity as well as creativity and spontaneity in 3 to 5 year old children.

[ 5 ] In Barcelona, Spain, school greening initiatives provided more opportunities for children to spend time outside and reduced inequities in residential access.

[ 6 ] In current efforts to limit exposure to COVID-19 and contact between individuals, school yards have become an even more important tool to promote social learning and education.

[ 8 ] Benefits of greening initiatives include electricity cost savings due to cooling technology of greening, improving the environment, providing healthy educational space, and more learning opportunities. It can help alleviate the stressors associated with urban climates and benefit both mental and physical health of children.

Greening schoolyards [ edit ] Schools increase the total green space by adding green oases in yards and replacing pavement with vegetation. In Paris, schools have adopted this intervention as a cooling program for schools. Chicago’s Department of Water Management and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago implemented a greening initiative called The Space to Grow.

[ 9 ] Though the purpose of this initiative was to control flooding and stormwater, schools successfully replaced asphalt with green space because of generous program funding by the city.

Green roofs [ edit ] Installing green roofs on schools is an alternative way of increasing green space access for children, especially in urban areas. The United States is currently seeing efforts by political figures to increase awareness and funding in greening. For example, U.S Rep. Nydia M, Velazquez (D-NY) introduced a bill that would allocate $500 million federal funds to plan, install and maintain green roofs at public schools in New York City.

[ 10 ] It would be overseen by the U.S. Department of Energy through a grant program. Green roofs can prove to be beneficial to urban environments. As an urban green space, green roofs can help combat the Urban heat island effect (UHI) .

[ 11 ] Gardens [ edit ] Gardens are a unique greening initiative, whether the goal is to grow vegetables, fruit or flowers. For example, in Brookline, Massachusetts, United States, the Florida Riffin Ridley School has a vegetable garden that is maintained by teachers, students and parents. A garden intervention may positively influence children’s food preference, increase intake of fruits and vegetables, and increase physical activity.

[ 12 ] Greenery office [ edit ] Plants can be added to offices and workspaces to aid in focus, reduce stress levels, increase creativity, improve air quality , and provide aesthetic appeal.

See also [ edit ] Alley § Green and revitalized alleys Afforestation Biophilic design Greenwashing Community Greens Environmental justice Environmental planning Green retrofit Sustainable refurbishment Green Spaces References [ edit ] ^ Zhu, Zaichun; Piao, Shilong; Myneni, Ranga B.; Huang, Mengtian; Zeng, Zhenzhong; Canadell, Josep G.; Ciais, Philippe; Sitch, Stephen; Friedlingstein, Pierre; Arneth, Almut; Cao, Chunxiang (2016).

"Greening of the Earth and its drivers" .

Nature Climate Change .

6 (8): 791– 795.

Bibcode : 2016NatCC...6..791Z .

doi : 10.1038/nclimate3004 .

hdl : 10871/22651 .

ISSN 1758-678X .

S2CID 7980894 .

^ "Green Home Product Approval Policy" . Archived from the original on 2012-01-25 . Retrieved 2012-02-20 .

^ Schantz P. 2022. Can nature really affect our health? A short review of studies. I: Why Cities Need Large Parks – Large Parks in Large Cities, (ed. R. Murray), London: Routledge ^ "Cities' Answer to Sprawl? Go Wild" .

Bloomberg.com . 2021-10-22 . Retrieved 2021-11-04 .

^ a b c Puhakka, Riikka; Rantala, Outi; Roslund, Marja I.; Rajaniemi, Juho; Laitinen, Olli H.; Sinkkonen, Aki; the ADELE Research Group (2019).

"Greening of Daycare Yards with Biodiverse Materials Affords Well-Being, Play and Environmental Relationships" .

International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health .

16 (16): 2948.

doi : 10.3390/ijerph16162948 .

PMC 6719197 .

PMID 31426345 .

^ a b Baró, Francesc; Camacho, David A.; Pérez Del Pulgar, Carmen; Triguero-Mas, Margarita; Anguelovski, Isabelle (2021-04-01).

"School greening: Right or privilege? Examining urban nature within and around primary schools through an equity lens" .

Landscape and Urban Planning .

208 : 104019.

Bibcode : 2021LUrbP.20804019B .

doi : 10.1016/j.landurbplan.2020.104019 .

ISSN 0169-2046 .

S2CID 233062367 .

^ "4.3 School Hours: Is There Enough Time To Learn? | ED100" .

ed100.org . Retrieved 2021-11-04 .

^ "COVID-19 has highlighted the inadequate, and unequal, access to high quality green spaces | Bristol Health Partners" .

www.bristolhealthpartners.org.uk . Archived from the original on 2021-11-04 . Retrieved 2021-11-04 .

^ Flax, Leah; Korthals Altes, Renet; Kupers, Roland; Mons, Brett (2020).

"Greening schoolyards - An urban resilience perspective" .

Cities .

106 : 102890.

doi : 10.1016/j.cities.2020.102890 .

ISSN 0264-2751 .

S2CID 224859794 .

^ Compost, Long Island.

"Green Roofs & Public Schools: A Post-COVID-19 Recovery Plan for NYC" . Retrieved 2021-12-04 .

^ Semeraro, Teodoro; Scarano, Aurelia; Buccolieri, Riccardo; Santino, Angelo; Aarrevaara, Eeva (2021-01-22).

"Planning of Urban Green Spaces: An Ecological Perspective on Human Benefits" .

Land .

10 (2): 105.

Bibcode : 2021Land...10..105S .

doi : 10.3390/land10020105 .

ISSN 2073-445X .

^ Ohly, Heather; Gentry, Sarah; Wigglesworth, Rachel; Bethel, Alison; Lovell, Rebecca; Garside, Ruth (2016).

"A systematic review of the health and well-being impacts of school gardening: synthesis of quantitative and qualitative evidence" .

BMC Public Health .

16 (1): 286.

doi : 10.1186/s12889-016-2941-0 .

ISSN 1471-2458 .

PMC 4807565 .

PMID 27015672 .

v t e Environmentalism Outline of environmentalism Key topics Climate justice Ecological crisis Environmental conflict Environmental movement History List of environmental conflicts Organizations Environmental studies Human impact on the environment Disciplines Communication Ecology Education Ethics Health History Humanities Law Philosophy Politics Psychology Religion Science Social science Sociology Views Philosophical Political ecology Environmental philosophy Biocentrism Deep ecology Earth jurisprudence Ecocentrism Resacralization of nature Social ecology Political Bioconservatism Bright green environmentalism Disinvestment Eco-capitalism Ecofascism Ecofeminism Eco-nationalism Eco-socialism Eco-terrorism Ecomodernism Free-market environmentalism Green anarchism Green conservatism Green left Green liberalism Green libertarianism Green politics Green syndicalism War on coal Religious Ecotheology Christianity Evangelical Islam Judaism Stewardship (theology) Opposition Anti-environmentalism Environmental skepticism List of environmental killings Biophilia hypothesis Environmentalism of the poor Environmental stewardship Hardline Nature conservation Radical environmentalism Offshoots Anti-fracking movement Anti-nuclear movement Car-free movement Climate movement Conservation movement Cultural environmentalism Degrowth Earth Optimism Eco-anxiety Ecological grief Environmental defender Environmental justice Ethical banking Ethical consumerism Flight shame Impact investing Product stewardship Slow movement Sustainability organization Goals Circular economy Climate action Climate change mitigation Conservation community Ecological civilization Environmental personhood Environmental protection Environmental policy Environmental, social, and corporate governance Environmentally friendly Greening Green economy Greenwashing Natural resource management Environmental resource management Rights of nature Short-haul flight ban Smoke abatement Sustainability Vegetarianism Protests Tree sitting By country Albania Australia Brazil Rio Grande do Sul China Anti-incinerator movement India Chipko movement Israel New Zealand Philippines South Africa Switzerland United Kingdom United States In culture Art Books Ecofiction Conspicuous conservation Film list festivals horror Journalism The Lord of the Rings Music Ecomusicology Motorsport Sculpture Surfing Tourism Eco hotel Publications Environmentalists Environmentalist Environmental defender Water protector Notable people Sunderlal Bahuguna Murray Bookchin David Brower Rachel Carson Jacques Cousteau Ng Cho-nam Tim Flannery Al Gore Aldo Leopold Wangari Maathai Seyyed Hossein Nasr Chico Mendes John Muir Theodore Roosevelt Shōzō Tanaka Greta Thunberg Related topics Barriers to pro-environmental behaviour Business ethics Land ethic Lifeboat ethics Tragedy of the commons Environment portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Greening&oldid=1279326509 " Categories : Sustainable architecture Environmental planning Roof gardens Gardening Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2014 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 7 March 2025, at 21:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Greening 15 languages Add topic

