Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History and scope 2 Relationship to taxonomy 3 Accepted names 4 See also Toggle See also subsection 4.1 General 4.2 Botany 5 References 6 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Botanical nomenclature 12 languages العربية Català Čeština Esperanto فارسی Français Nederlands Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scientific naming of algae, fungi and plants For terminology used in describing plants, see Glossary of plant morphology .

Botanical nomenclature is the formal, scientific naming of plants. It is related to, but distinct from taxonomy .

Plant taxonomy is concerned with grouping and classifying plants; botanical nomenclature then provides names for the results of this process. The starting point for modern botanical nomenclature is Linnaeus ' Species Plantarum of 1753. Botanical nomenclature is governed by the International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants ( ICNafp ), which replaces the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature ( ICBN ).

Fossil plants are also covered by the code of nomenclature.

Within the limits set by that code there is another set of rules, the International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP) which applies to plant cultivars that have been deliberately altered or selected by humans (see cultigen ).

Botanical nomenclature is independent of other systems of nomenclature, for example zoological nomenclature . This implies that animals can have the same generic names as plants (e.g. there is a genus Iris in plants and a genus Iris in animals). It also allows them to follow slightly different rules, e.g. animals can have the same genus and species name, e.g.

Pica pica , but the ICNafp does not allow this.

History and scope [ edit ] Botanical nomenclature has a long history, going back beyond the period when Latin was the scientific language throughout Europe, to Theophrastus (c. 370–287 BC), Dioscorides (c. 40 – 90 AD) and other Greek writers. Many of these works have come down to us in Latin translations. The principal Latin writer on botany was Pliny the Elder (23–79 AD). From Mediaeval times, Latin became the universal scientific language ( lingua franca ) in Europe. Most written plant knowledge was the property of monks, particularly Benedictine , and the purpose of those early herbals was primarily medicinal rather than plant science per se . It would require the invention of the printing press (1450) to make such information more widely available.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Leonhart Fuchs , a German physician and botanist, is often considered the originator of Latin names for the rapidly increasing number of plants known to science. For instance he coined the name Digitalis in his De Historia Stirpium Commentarii Insignes (1542).

A key event was Linnaeus’ adoption of binomial names for plant species in his Species Plantarum (1753).

[ 4 ] In the nineteenth century it became increasingly clear that there was a need for rules to govern scientific nomenclature, and initiatives were taken to refine the  body of laws initiated by Linnaeus. These were published in successively more sophisticated editions. For plants, key dates are 1867 ( lois de Candolle) and 1906 ( International Rules of Botanical Nomenclature , 'Vienna Rules'). The most recent is the Shenzhen Code , adopted in 2018.

Another development was the insight into the delimitation of the concept of 'plant'. Gradually more and more groups of organisms are being recognised as being independent of plants. Nevertheless, the formal names of most of these organisms are governed by the (ICN), even today. Some protists that do not fit easily into either plant or animal categories are treated under either or both of the ICN and the ICZN . A separate Code was adopted to govern the nomenclature of Bacteria, the International Code of Nomenclature of Bacteria .

Relationship to taxonomy [ edit ] Botanical nomenclature is closely linked to plant taxonomy, and botanical nomenclature serves plant taxonomy, but nevertheless botanical nomenclature is separate from plant taxonomy. Botanical nomenclature is merely the body of rules prescribing which name applies to that taxon (see correct name ) and if a new name may (or must) be coined.

Plant taxonomy is an empirical science, a science that determines what constitutes a particular taxon (taxonomic grouping, plural: taxa): e.g. "What plants belong to this species?" and "What species belong to this genus?". The definition of the limits of a taxon is called its ' circumscription '. For a particular taxon, if two taxonomists agree exactly on its circumscription, rank and position (i.e. the higher rank in which it is included) then there is only one name which can apply under the ICN .

[ 5 ] Where they differ in opinion on any of these issues, one and the same plant may be placed in taxa with different names. As an example, consider Siehe's Glory-of-the-Snow, Chionodoxa siehei : Flowers of Chionodoxa siehei , which can also be called Scilla siehei , or included in Chionodoxa forbesii or in Scilla forbesii Taxonomists can disagree as to whether two groups of plants are sufficiently distinct to be put into one species or not. Thus Chionodoxa siehei and Chionodoxa forbesii have been treated as a single species by some taxonomists or as two species by others.

[ 6 ] If treated as one species, the earlier published name must be used, [ 7 ] so plants previously called Chionodoxa siehei become Chionodoxa forbesii .

Taxonomists can disagree as to whether two genera are sufficiently distinct to be kept separate or not. While agreeing that the genus Chionodoxa is closely related to the genus Scilla , nevertheless the bulb specialist Brian Mathew considers that their differences warrant maintaining separate genera.

[ 6 ] Others disagree, and would refer to Chionodoxa siehei as Scilla siehei . The earliest published genus name must be used when genera are merged; [ 7 ] in this case Scilla was published earlier and is used (not Chionodoxa ).

Taxonomists can disagree as to the limits of families. When the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group (APG) first published its classification of the flowering plants in 1998, Chionodoxa siehei would have been placed in the family Hyacinthaceae.

[ 8 ] In the 2009 revision of their classification, the APG no longer recognize the Hyacinthaceae as a separate family, merging it into a greatly enlarged family Asparagaceae .

[ 9 ] Thus Chionodoxa siehei moves from the Hyacinthaceae to the Asparagaceae.

Taxonomists can disagree as to the rank of a taxon. Rather than allow the Hyacinthaceae to disappear altogether, Chase et al. suggested that it be treated as a subfamily within the Asparagaceae.

[ 10 ] The ICN requires family names to end with "-aceae" and subfamily names to end with "-oideae".

[ 11 ] Thus a possible name for the Hyacinthaceae when treated as a subfamily would be 'Hyacinthoideae'. However, the name Scilloideae had already been published in 1835 as the name for a subfamily containing the genus Scilla , so this name has priority and must be used.

[ 10 ] Hence for those taxonomists who accept  the APG system of 2009, Chionodoxa siehei can be placed in the subfamily Scilloideae of the family Asparagaceae. However, a taxonomist is perfectly free to continue to argue that Hyacinthaceae should be maintained as a separate family from the other families which were merged into the Asparagaceae.

In summary, if a plant has different names or is placed in differently named taxa: If the confusion is purely nomenclatural, i.e. it concerns what to call a taxon which has the same circumscription, rank and position, the ICN provides rules to settle the differences, typically by prescribing that the earliest published name must be used, although names can be conserved .

If the confusion is taxonomic, i.e. taxonomists differ in opinion on the circumscription, rank or position of taxa, then only more scientific research can settle the differences, and even then only sometimes .

Accepted names [ edit ] Various botanical databases such as Plants of the World Online and World Flora Online make determinations as to whether a name is accepted , e.g. accepted species. If a name is not accepted, it may be because the name is a synonym for a name that is already accepted, and is listed as such. Another term is ambiguous to denote a name that is not accepted because its separate existence cannot be reliably determined.

See also [ edit ] General [ edit ] Scientific classification Binomial nomenclature Nomenclature Codes Botany [ edit ] Botanical name International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants Correct name (botany) Author citation (botany) Hybrid name (botany) International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants International Plant Names Index : lists names of published seed plants and ferns International Association for Plant Taxonomy Paleobotany References [ edit ] ^ Stearn 1992 .

^ Stearn 2002 .

^ Pavord 2005 .

^ Barkworth, M. (2004), Botanical Nomenclature (Nomenclature, Names, and Taxonomy) , University of Utah, archived from the original on 2011-07-20 , retrieved 2011-02-20 ^ McNeill et al. 2012, Principle IV [ full citation needed ] ^ a b Dashwood, Melanie & Mathew, Brian (2005), Hyacinthaceae – little blue bulbs (RHS Plant Trials and Awards, Bulletin Number 11) , Royal Horticultural Society, archived from the original on 6 August 2011 , retrieved 19 February 2011 , p. 5 ^ a b McNeill et al. 2012, Principle III ^ Angiosperm Phylogeny Group (1998), "An ordinal classification for the families of flowering plants" (PDF) , Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden , 85 (4): 531– 553, doi : 10.2307/2992015 , JSTOR 2992015 , archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-06-08 , retrieved 2011-02-19 ^ Angiosperm Phylogeny Group III (2009), "An update of the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group classification for the orders and families of flowering plants: APG III", Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society , 161 (2): 105– 121, doi : 10.1111/j.1095-8339.2009.00996.x , hdl : 10654/18083 ^ a b Chase, M.W.; Reveal, J.L. & Fay, M.F. (2009), "A subfamilial classification for the expanded asparagalean families Amaryllidaceae, Asparagaceae and Xanthorrhoeaceae", Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society , 161 (2): 132– 136, doi : 10.1111/j.1095-8339.2009.00999.x ^ McNeill et al. 2012, Article 19.1 Bibliography [ edit ] Pavord, Anna (2005).

The naming of names the search for order in the world of plants . New York: Bloomsbury.

ISBN 9781596919655 . Retrieved 18 February 2015 .

Stearn, William T.

(1992) [1966].

Botanical Latin : history, grammar, syntax, terminology and vocabulary (4 ed.). Portland, Or.: Timber Press.

ISBN 9780881923216 . Retrieved 19 February 2015 .

Stearn, William T.

(2002) [1992].

Stearn's dictionary of plant names for gardeners : a handbook on the origin and meaning of the botanical names of some cultivated plants . Portland, Or.: Timber Press.

ISBN 978-0881925562 . Retrieved 19 February 2015 .

Bernhardt, Peter (2008).

Gods and goddesses in the garden : Greco-Roman mythology and the scientific names of plants . New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press.

ISBN 9780813542669 . Retrieved 19 February 2015 .

Morgan, Michelle (October 2005).

"Botanical Latin: The Poetry of Herb Names" (PDF) .

Number 89 . MediHerb. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 September 2012 . Retrieved 19 February 2015 .

Fuchs, Leonhart (1642).

De Historia Stirpium Commentarii Insignes . Basileae: In officina Isingriniana . Retrieved 20 February 2015 .

v t e Botany History Outline Subdisciplines Archaeobotany Astrobotany Bryology Dendrology Ethnobotany Paleobotany Phycology Phytochemistry Phytogeography Geobotany Plant anatomy Plant ecology Plant intelligence Plant pathology Plant physiology Plant groups Algae Archaeplastida Bryophyte Non-vascular plants Vascular plants Fern Lycophyte Spermatophytes Gymnosperm Angiosperm Plant anatomy Plant morphology ( glossary ) Plant cells Cell wall Phragmoplast Plastid Plasmodesma Vacuole Tissues Cork Ground tissue Mesophyll Meristem Storage organs Vascular tissue Vascular bundle Wood Vegetative Bulb Root Rhizoid Rhizome Shoot Bud Leaf Cataphyll Petiole Sessility Stem Reproductive (incl. Flower) Archegonium Antheridium Androecium Pollen Stamen Anther Filament Staminode Tapetum Flower Aestivation Flower development Floral diagram Floral formula Floral symmetry Whorl Fruit Anatomy Berry Capsule Nut Pyrena Seed Dispersal Endosperm Gametophyte Gynandrium Gynoecium Carpel Ovary Locule Ovule Stigma Style Hypanthium (Floral cup) Inflorescence Bract Pedicellate Raceme Umbel Perianth Tepal Petal Sepal Plant embryo Receptacle Sporophyll Sporophyte Surface structures Cuticle Epicuticular wax Epidermis Nectar Stoma Thorns, spines, and prickles Trichome Plant physiology Materials Aleurone Apical dominance Bulk flow Cellulose Nutrition Photosynthesis Chlorophyll Phytomelanin Plant hormones Respiration Gas Exchange Cellular respiration Sap Starch Sugar Transpiration Turgor pressure Plant growth and habit Habit Cushion plants Rosettes Shrubs Prostrate shrubs Subshrubs Succulent plants Trees Vines Lianas Herbaceous plants Secondary growth Woody plants Reproduction Evolution Ecology Alternation of generations Double fertilization Evolutionary development Evolutionary history timeline Flora Germination Pollination Artificial Pollinators Pollen tube Self Sporangium Microsporangia Microspore Megasporangium Megaspore Spore Plant taxonomy Biological classification Botanical nomenclature Botanical name Correct name Author citation International Code of Nomenclature (ICN) ICN for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP) Cultivated plant taxonomy Citrus taxonomy Cultigen Cultivar Group Grex History of plant systematics Herbarium International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT) Plant taxonomy systems Taxonomic rank Practice Agronomy Floriculture Forestry Horticulture Phytochemical Lists Related Botanical terms Botanists by author abbreviation Botanical expeditions Individual trees Oldest trees Superlative trees Tallest trees Plants Category v t e Carl Linnaeus Published works Linnaeus bibliography Systema Naturae (1735) Fundamenta Botanica (1736) Bibliotheca Botanica (1736) Musa Cliffortiana (1736) Critica Botanica (1737) Flora Lapponica (1737) Genera Plantarum (1737) Hortus Cliffortianus (1737) Classes Plantarum (1738) Flora Svecica (1745) Fauna Svecica (1746) Philosophia Botanica (1751) Species Plantarum (1753) Centuria Insectorum (1763) Mantissa Plantarum Altera (1771) Systema Vegetabilium (1774) General Taxonomy (biology) Linnaean Herbarium Linnaean taxonomy (Linnaean classification) Botanical nomenclature Zoological nomenclature Binomial nomenclature Taxa named by Linnaeus Natural history History of biology History of botany Scientific racism Apostles of Linnaeus Adam Afzelius Andreas Berlin Johan Peter Falk Peter Forsskål Pehr Kalm Pehr Löfling Pehr Osbeck Daniel Rolander Göran Rothman Daniel Solander Anders Sparrman Carl Peter Thunberg Related people Family ( Carl Linnaeus the Younger (son) Elisabeth Christina von Linné (daughter)) Students of Linnaeus Gaspard Bauhin Johann Bauhin Peter Artedi Herman Boerhaave Johannes Burman George Clifford III Recognitions Expedition Linné Linnaea Linnaean Garden ( including the Linnaeus Museum ) Linnaeite Linnaemya Linnaemyini 7412 Linnaeus Linnaeus Arboretum Linnaeus University Linnaeus's Hammarby Linné (crater) Linnéa Linnean Medal Linnean Society of London Swedish Linnaeus Society Linnean Society of New South Wales Linnean Tercentenary Medal Linneus, Maine Linneus, Missouri Category Wikiquote Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Botanical_nomenclature&oldid=1292693951 " Category : Botanical nomenclature Hidden categories: All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from January 2024 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 May 2025, at 09:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Botanical nomenclature 12 languages Add topic

