Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 By school of thought Toggle By school of thought subsection 1.1 Marxism–Leninism 1.2 Trotskyism 1.3 Marxist humanism 2 References 3 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Marxist ethics 2 languages Español Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Doctrine of morality and ethics based on Marxist philosophy Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Marxist ethics is a doctrine of morality and ethics that is based on, or derived from, Marxist philosophy . Marx did not directly write about ethical issues and has often been portrayed by subsequent Marxists as a descriptive philosopher rather than a moralist .

[ 1 ] Despite this, many Marxist theoreticians have sought to develop often conflicting systems of normative ethics based around the principles of historical and dialectical materialism , and Marx's analysis of the capitalist mode of production .

By school of thought [ edit ] Main article: Marxist schools of thought Marxism–Leninism [ edit ] The official Soviet interpretation of Marx's writings, Marxism–Leninism , holds that morality, like other forms of ideology , is of a class character and is manifested in people's behavior in different ways throughout different historical conditions in accordance with the interests of what classes or social strata a person occupies.

[ 2 ] : 47 The main methodological principles of Marxist-Leninist ethics are materialism and dialectics . Marxist–Leninist ethics is materialist: the ideals, standards and virtues prevailing in society are interpreted as a reflection of actually existing interpersonal (value) relations, an expression of interests and requirements of social groups and classes. Morality is not reduced to an ethical ideology that has isolated itself from the world and lays claim to absolute value. Marxist ethics describes morality as a property of one's behavior conditioned by social and historical existence as those moral values that bring together (or force apart) living individuals.

Marxist–Leninist ethics is dialectical: it maintains that like morality as a whole, each of its manifestations, each standard, and virtue, is in perpetual motion, emerging, developing, disappearing, passing from one qualitative state to another. Torn out of the concrete historical process, morality in general simply does not exist. Each type of morality is socially and historically conditioned—this is the fundamental tenet of Marxist ethics. The objective core of morality conveys the character of definite social relations —relations of ownership of the means of production , the interaction of the various classes and social groups and the forms of distribution and exchange. It follows from this that morality has class content. If the nature of social bonds determines the essence of morality (and in a class society these bonds manifest themselves, first and foremost, in the relations between classes), then the morality reflecting them has a class stamp.

Any conception of human rights , to the Marxist-Leninist, are viewed as conceptual constructs granted to the individual by the emergent ideology of the collective. As a result, the Soviet state's treatment of human rights was very different from conceptions prevalent in the West . The state was considered to be the source of human rights , conditionally granted to the individual, whereas Western law claimed the opposite.

[ 3 ] Therefore, the Soviet legal system regarded law as an arm of politics and courts as agencies of the government.

[ 4 ] Extensive extra-judiciary powers were given to the Soviet secret police agencies and in practice, there was virtually no separation of powers .

Trotskyism [ edit ] A means can be justified only by its end. But the end in turn needs to be justified. From the Marxist point of view, which expresses the historical interests of the proletariat, the end is justified if it leads to increasing the power of man over nature and to the abolition of the power of man over man.

—Trotsky's writings on "The Dialectical Interdependence of Ends and Means".

[ 5 ] In 1938, Trotsky had written “ Their Morals and Ours ” which consisted of ethical polemics in response to criticisms around his actions concerning the Kronstadt rebellion and wider questions posed around the perceived, “ amoral ” methods of the Bolsheviks. Critics believed these methods seemed to emulate the Jesuit maxim that the “ ends justifies the means ”. Trotsky argued that Marxism situated the foundation of morality as a product of society to serve social interests rather than “eternal moral truths” proclaimed by institutional religions.

[ 6 ] On the other hand, he regarded it as farcical to assert that an end could justify any criminal means and viewed this to be a distorted representation of the Jesuit maxim. Instead, Trotsky believed that the means and ends frequently “exchanged places” as when democracy is sought by the working class as an instrument to actualize socialism. He also viewed revolution to be deducible from the laws of the development and primarily the class struggle but this did not mean all means are permissible.

[ 7 ] Marxist humanism [ edit ] In contrast, adherents of Marxist humanism consider Marxism to be a normative philosophy grounded in a moral sentiment of secular humanism . They reject the positivistic interpretation of Marxism as an objective social science and instead see it as an ideological product of class interest in itself with a motivated goal of human emancipation and reconciliation from alienation . Marxist humanists derive many of the philosophical foundations that they use to orient the human subject's relation to history from the Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 , which were not published until 1932, well after the canonization of Marx's works by Soviet authorities. These texts provide a critique of capitalism on the basis of its alienating properties from a static conception of human essence . Many humanists also emphasize Marx's doctrine of the unity of theory and practice , and therefore reject the mechanistic determinism of Soviet Marxism, providing a space for human agency in the development of history, and viewing socialist revolution as the "realization of philosophy ". For Marxist humanists, Marx articulates a concept of species-being (Gattungswesen), according to which Man's essential nature is that of a free producer, engaging in labor to reproduce his own conditions of life. In capitalist society, and in prior economic arrangements, the freedom of the individual is hindered by wage-labor and emasculating relations of production that can only be overcome by participation in class struggle and eventually, revolution . For humanists, history is the process by which Man acquires more and more control of blind natural forces and produces a humanized natural environment, thus externalizing his inner essence for one another. In a classless society, therefore, ethics thus lose their class-relative nature and broad interests become unified amongst all human beings, therefore producing an ideologically homogenous system of ethics that contributes to maximize human thriving through the principle of reciprocity , as is the immaterial purpose of material liberation.

References [ edit ] ^ "ethics - Marx | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 2022-06-02 .

^ "What is What? A Concise Dictionary of Social and Political Terms." Translated from the Russian by Margaret Webley. Compiled by Sofia Kholod. Moscow: Progress Publishers , 1988, ISBN 5-01-000448-8 .

^ Lambelet, Doriane. "The Contradiction Between Soviet and American Human Rights Doctrine: Reconciliation Through Perestroika and Pragmatism." 7 Boston University International Law Journal . 1989. pp. 61–62.

^ Richard Pipes Russia Under the Bolshevik Regime , Vintage books, Random House Inc., New York, 1995, ISBN 0-394-50242-6 , pages 402–403 ^ Knei-Paz, Baruch (1978).

The social and political thought of Leon Trotsky . Oxford [Eng.]: Clarendon Press. p. 559.

ISBN 978-0-19-827233-5 .

^ Knei-Paz, Baruch (1978).

The social and political thought of Leon Trotsky . Oxford [Eng.]: Clarendon Press. pp.

556– 560.

ISBN 978-0-19-827233-5 .

^ Knei-Paz, Baruch (1978).

The social and political thought of Leon Trotsky . Oxford [Eng.]: Clarendon Press. pp.

556– 560.

ISBN 978-0-19-827233-5 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Howard Selsam .

Socialism and Ethics . New York: International Publishers . 1943.

Howard Selsam .

Ethics and Progress: New Values in a Revolutionary World . New York: International Publishers. 1965.

Ethics . Ed. by A.I. Titarenko. Translated from the Russian by Natalia Belskaya. Moscow: Progress Publishers , 1989, ISBN 5-01-001098-4 .

Galina Kirilenko and Lydia Korshunova.

What Is Personality?

Moscow: Progress Publishers . 1989.

A Dictionary of Ethics . Moscow: Progress Publishers. 1990.

Wikiquote has quotations related to Marxist ethics .

v t e Marxism–Leninism Concepts Administrative-command system Aggravation of class struggle under socialism Anti-imperialism Anti-fascism Anti-revisionism Central planning Soviet-type economic planning Commanding heights of the economy Developed socialism Dialectical logic Dialectical materialism Foco Labour aristocracy Marxist–Leninist atheism Partiinost' People's democracy People's democratic revolution Popular front Proletarian internationalism Self-criticism Social fascism Socialism in one country Socialist patriotism Soviet Theory of the productive forces Third Period Wars of national liberation State forms People's democratic state National democratic state Socialist state State of socialist orientation Socialist state of the whole people Class system Dictatorship of the proletariat People's democratic dictatorship Political system Party Central committee General Secretary of the Communist Party Politburo Secretariat Vanguardism State Permanent organ of the supreme state organ of power Special committees of the supreme state organ of power Supreme executive and administrative organ Supreme state organ of power Leading role of the party Transmission belt Unified power Unified state apparatus Hybrid Civilian control of the military Collective leadership Cult of personality Democratic centralism Variants Cuban ( Fidelismo Guevarism ) Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche ( Songun Kimilsungism–Kimjongilism Kimjongunism ) Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism ( Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Naxalism Prachanda Path Mao-spontex Islamic Maoism Pantherism ( Intercommunalism ) New Synthesis Mulelism ) Kaysone Phomvihane Thought National Pol Potism African ( Sankarism Machelism Nkrumaism ) Socialism with Chinese characteristics ( Dengism Three Represents Scientific Outlook on Development Xi Jinping Thought ) Stalinism ( Neo-Stalinism ) People's Multiparty Democracy American ( Bill of Rights socialism Browderism Marcyism New Communism ) Dubčekism Zachariadism Brezhnevism Taistoism Titoism ( Đilasism Rankovićism ) People Joseph Stalin Mao Zedong John Maclean James Connolly Ernst Thälmann Khorloogiin Choibalsan Ehmetjan Qasim José Díaz Maurice Thorez Palmiro Togliatti Dolores Ibárruri Harry Pollitt Rajani Palme Dutt Ho Chi Minh Võ Nguyên Giáp Earl Browder Nikita Khrushchev Walter Ulbricht Josip Broz Tito Mátyás Rákosi Lazar Kaganovich Georgi Dimitrov Bolesław Bierut Willie Gallacher Valko Chervenkov Klement Gottwald Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej Enver Hoxha Kaysone Phomvihane Khalid Bakdash Leonid Brezhnev Deng Xiaoping Pol Pot Nikos Zachariadis Che Guevara Fidel Castro Agostinho Neto Mengistu Haile Mariam Kim Il Sung Chin Peng Sanzō Nosaka Nicolae Ceaușescu Gustáv Husák János Kádár Maurice Bishop Erich Honecker Władysław Gomułka Samora Machel Thomas Sankara Mathieu Kérékou Siad Barre Nur Muhammad Taraki Alfonso Cano Pushpa Kamal Dahal Rohana Wijeweera Abimael Guzmán Gus Hall Gennady Zyuganov Xi Jinping Theoretical works Foundations of Leninism Dialectical and Historical Materialism The History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) Britain's Road to Socialism Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR A Critique of Soviet Economics Fundamentals of Marxism–Leninism Guerrilla Warfare History Soviet Union ( 1927–1953 1953–1964 1964–1982 1982–1991 ) Great Break Collectivization in the Soviet Union Industrialization in the Soviet Union Great Purge Spanish Civil War Great Patriotic War Greek Civil War Cold War Eastern Bloc Chinese Communist Revolution China ( 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present ) Tito–Stalin split Korean War De-Stalinization Warsaw Pact Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution Non-Aligned Movement Vietnam War Albanian–Soviet split Sino-Soviet split Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Great Leap Forward Portuguese Colonial War Black Power movement Nicaraguan Revolution Cultural Revolution Prague Spring Naxalite insurgency New People's Army rebellion Maoist insurgency in Turkey Sino-Albanian split Internal conflict in Peru Nepalese Civil War Revolutions of 1989 By country Afghanistan Albania Angola Benin Bulgaria Cambodia ( Democratic Kampuchea People's Republic of Kampuchea ) China Congo Cuba Czechoslovakia ( Czechia Slovakia ) East Germany Ethiopia Grenada Hungary Laos Mongolia Mozambique North Korea Poland Romania Somalia Soviet Union ( Armenia Azerbaijan Byelarus Estonia Georgia Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lithuania Moldova Russia Tajikistan Turkmenistan Ukraine Uzbekistan ) Vietnam Yemen Yugoslavia ( Bosnia and Herzegovina Croatia Macedonia Montenegro Serbia Slovenia ) Organizations Albanian Party of Labour Comecon Comintern Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Brazil Communist Party of Cuba Communist Party of India Communist Party of India (Marxist) Communist Party of Kampuchea Communist Party of the Philippines Communist Party of the Russian Federation Communist Party of the Soviet Union Communist Party of Vietnam Communist Party of Malaya Indochinese Communist Party Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party Lao People's Revolutionary Party Nepal Communist Party Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine Sandinista National Liberation Front Shining Path ( Militarized Communist Party of Peru ) Workers' Party of Korea Portuguese Communist Party Related topics Bolshevism Leninism Trotskyism See also All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Anti-communism ( Mass killings ) Cold War Crimes against humanity under Marxist–Leninist regimes ( Mass killings ) Criticism of Marxist–Leninist party rule MAGA Communism Marxist schools of thought National Bolshevism Nazi-Maoism New class Post-Marxism–Leninism Red fascism Red Scare ( Second ) Second World State capitalism State socialism State ideology of China State ideology of the Soviet Union Third-Worldism Totalitarianism Socialism portal Communism portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Marxist_ethics&oldid=1282306155 " Category : Marxism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 March 2025, at 16:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Marxist ethics 2 languages Add topic

