Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Family 3 Mythology Toggle Mythology subsection 3.1 Titanomachy 3.2 Messenger of the gods 3.3 Trojan War 3.4 Other myths 4 Worship Toggle Worship subsection 4.1 Cult 4.2 Epithets 5 Representation 6 Genealogy 7 In the sciences 8 In music 9 Gallery 10 See also 11 Notes 12 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 12.1 Ancient sources 12.2 Modern sources 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Iris (mythology) 56 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar مازِرونی Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย ᏣᎳᎩ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Greek goddess of rainbows Several terms  redirect here. For other uses, see Iris (disambiguation) .

Iris Goddess of the Rainbow Gaetano Matteo Monti , Iris as goddess of the rainbow (1841, marble) at Kunsthistorisches Museum in Vienna , Austria .

Abode Mount Olympus Symbol Rainbow , caduceus , pitcher Genealogy Parents Thaumas and Electra Siblings Arke , Harpies , Hydaspes Consort Zephyrus Offspring Pothos [ 1 ] Part of a series on Ancient Greek religion Origins Ancient Greek religion Mycenaean Greece , Mycenaean religion and Mycenaean deities Minoan Civilization , Minoan religion Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece , Hellenistic religion Sacred places Sacred islands Delos Ithaca Naxos Kythira Samothrace Crete Lemnos Sacred mountains Mount Lykaion Mount Ida (Turkey) Mount Ida (Crete) Mount Olympus Mount Kyllini Mount Othrys Sanctuaries Aornum Delphi Didyma Dion Dodona Eleusis Olympia Other Cave of Zeus Troy Deities Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Chthonic deities Hades Persephone Erinyes Gaia Hecate Iacchus Melinoë Triptolemus Trophonius Lesser deities Alpheus Amphitrite Asclepius Boreas Circe Cybele Deimos Eileithyia Enyo Eos Eris Eros Harmonia Hebe Hecate Helios Heracles Iris Leto Maia Metis Nemesis Nereus Nike Nyx Pan Persephone Phobos Priapus Proteus Rhea Scamander Selene Thanatos Themis Thetis Triton Zephyrus Concepts Worldview Greek mythology Orphic Egg Underworld and afterlife Miasma Daimon Ages of Man , Golden Age , Heroic Age Divine and reality Apeiron Monism Polytheism Pantheism Form of the Good Theory of forms Mind Anamnesis Ataraxia Apatheia Episteme Epoche Eudaimonia Katalepsis Logos Nous Phronesis Soul Anima mundi Metempsychosis Henosis Plato's theory of soul Ethics Agape Arete Asebeia Eusebeia Hubris Xenia Ethic of Reciprocity Delphic maxims Adiaphora Kathekon Oikeiosis Mysteries Eleusinian Mysteries Orphism Dionysian Mysteries Practices Worship Agalma Dithyramb Paean Orgion Hiera Orgas Hero Cult Oracle and Pythia Sacrifices and offerings Holokaustos Libation Votive offering Animal Sacrifice Temples and holy sites Temple Temenos Priesthood and religious service Hiereia Meditation and charity Eusebeia Meditation Euergetism Rites of passage Amphidromia Marriage Funeral Rites Festivals Thesmophoria Dionysia Daphnephoria Anthesteria Arrephoria Kronia Genesia Elaphebolia Pyanopsia Khalkeia Haloa Halieia Thargelia Monthly festivals Noumenia Religious games Panathenaia Herakleia Panhellenic Games Olympic Games Nemean Games Pythian Games Isthmian Games Philosophy Pythagoreanism Neopythagoreanism Platonism Middle Platonism Neoplatonism Philosophers Ancient Hesiod Homer Pherecydes of Syros Pythagoras Xenophanes Parmenides Empedocles Socrates Plato Aratus Plutarch Plotinus Iamblichus Julian (emperor) Texts Argonautica Bibliotheca Corpus Hermeticum Delphic maxims Derveni papyrus Dionysiaca Epic Cycle Homeric Hymns Iliad Odyssey Orphic Hymns Theogony Works and Days Other topics Pilgrimage sites Calendar Decline of Greco-Roman polytheism Julian restoration Modern Restoration Religion portal Ancient Greece portal v t e In ancient Greek religion and mythology , Iris ( / ˈ aɪ r ɪ s / ; EYE -riss ; Ancient Greek : Ἶρις , romanized : Îris , lit.

'rainbow,' [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Ancient Greek : [îːris] ) is a daughter of the gods Thaumas and Electra , [ 4 ] the personification of the rainbow and messenger of the gods, a servant to the Olympians and especially Queen Hera .

[ 5 ] Iris appears in several stories carrying messages from and to the gods or running errands but has no unique mythology of her own. Similarly, very little to none of a historical cult and worship of Iris is attested in surviving records, with only a few traces surviving from the island of Delos . In ancient art, Iris is depicted as a winged young woman carrying a caduceus , the symbol of the messengers, and a pitcher of water for the gods. Iris was traditionally seen as the consort of Zephyrus , the god of the west wind and one of the four Anemoi , by whom she is the mother of Pothos in some versions.

[ 1 ] Etymology [ edit ] The ancient Greek noun Ἶρις means both the rainbow [ 2 ] and the halo of the Moon .

[ 6 ] An inscription from Corinth provides evidence for an original form Ϝῖρις ( Wîris ) with a digamma that was eventually dropped.

[ 6 ] The noun seems to be of pre-Greek origin.

[ 7 ] A Proto-Indo-European pre-form *uh 2 i-r-i- has been suggested as well, although Beekes finds it 'hard to motivate.' [ 6 ] Family [ edit ] According to Hesiod 's Theogony , Iris is the daughter of Thaumas and the Oceanid Electra and the sister of the Harpies : Arke and Ocypete .

[ 8 ] During the Titanomachy , Iris was the messenger of the Olympian gods while her sister Arke betrayed the Olympians and became the messenger of the gods' enemy, the Titans . She is the goddess of the rainbow. She also serves nectar to the goddesses and gods to drink.

Zephyrus , who is the god of the west wind, is often said to be her consort. Together they had a son named Pothos , [ 9 ] or alternatively they were the parents of Eros , [ 10 ] the god of love, according to sixth century BC Greek lyric poet Alcaeus , though Eros is usually said to be the son of Ares and Aphrodite . According to the Dionysiaca of Nonnus , Iris' brother is Hydaspes .

[ 11 ] She is also known as one of the goddesses of the sea and the sky. Iris links the gods to humanity . She travels with the speed of wind from one end of the world to the other [ 12 ] and into the depths of the sea and the underworld .

Mythology [ edit ] Titanomachy [ edit ] Winged female figure holding a caduceus: Iris (messenger of the gods) or Nike (Victory) Iris is said to travel on the rainbow while carrying messages from the gods to mortals. In some records, Iris is a sister to fellow messenger goddess Arke ("swift", "quick"); both sisters originally sided with the Olympian gods during the Titanomachy, but Arke eventually flew out of the company of Olympians to join the Titans as their own messenger goddess, so the two sisters found each other on opposite camps during the battle.

[ 13 ] After the war was won by the Olympian leader Zeus and his allies, Zeus punished Arke by tearing her wings from her and in time gave them as a gift to the Nereid Thetis at her wedding to Peleus , who in turn gave them to her son, Achilles , who wore them on his feet.

[ 13 ] Achilles was sometimes known as podarkes (feet like [the wings of] Arke). Podarces was also the original name of Priam , the king of Troy .

[ 14 ] Iris on the other hand maintained her position as the messenger of the gods alongside Hermes; often Iris served specifically as Hera's personal messenger and servant.

Messenger of the gods [ edit ] Iris stands behind the seated Juno (right) in a Pompeii fresco Following her daughter Persephone 's abduction by Hades , the goddess of agriculture Demeter withdrew to her temple in Eleusis and made the earth barren, causing a great famine that killed off mortals, and as a result sacrifices to the gods ceased.

Zeus then sent Iris to Demeter, calling her to join the other gods and lift her curse; but as her daughter was not returned, Demeter was not persuaded.

[ 15 ] In one narrative, after Leto and her children pleaded with Zeus to release Prometheus from his torment, Zeus relented, and sent Iris to order Heracles to free the unfortunate Prometheus.

[ 16 ] After Ceyx drowned in a shipwreck, Hera made Iris convey her orders to Hypnos , the god of sleep. Iris flew and found him in his cave, and informed him that Hera wished for Ceyx's wife, Alcyone, to be informed of her loved one's death in her dreams. After delivering Hera's command, Iris left immediately, not standing to be near Hypnos for too long, for his powers took hold of her, and made her dizzy and sleepy.

[ 17 ] In Aristophanes 's comedy The Birds , the titular birds build a city in the sky and plan to supplant the Olympian gods. Iris, as the messenger, goes to meet them, but she is ridiculed, insulted, and threatened with rape by their leader Pisetaerus, an elderly Athenian man. Iris appears confused that Pisetearus does not know who the gods are and that she is one of them. Pisetaerus then tells her that the birds are the gods now, the deities whom the humans must sacrifice to. After Pisetaerus threatens to rape her, Iris scolds him for his foul language and leaves, warning him that Zeus, whom she refers to as her father, will deal with him and make him pay.

[ 18 ] Iris also appears several times in Virgil 's Aeneid , usually as an agent of Juno . In Book 4, Juno dispatches her to pluck a lock of hair from the head of Queen Dido , so that she may die and enter Hades.

[ 19 ] In book 5, Iris, having taken on the form of a Trojan woman, stirs up the other Trojan mothers to set fire to four of Aeneas' ships in order to prevent them from leaving Sicily.

[ 20 ] Iris Carrying the Water of the River Styx to Olympus for the Gods to Swear By , by Guy Head (c. 1793) According to the Roman poet Ovid , after Romulus was deified as the god Quirinus , his wife Hersilia pleaded with the gods to let her become immortal as well so that she could be with her husband once again. Juno heard her plea and sent Iris down to her. With a single finger, Iris touched Hersilia and transformed her into an immortal goddess. Hersilia flew to Olympus, where she became one of the Horae and was permitted to live with her husband forevermore.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] Trojan War [ edit ] According to the lost epic Cypria by Stasinus , it was Iris who informed Menelaus , who had sailed off to Crete , of what had happened back in Sparta while he was gone, namely his wife Helen 's elopement with the Trojan Prince Paris as well as the death of Helen's brother Castor .

[ 23 ] Iris is frequently mentioned as a divine messenger in The Iliad , which is attributed to Homer . She does not, however, appear in The Odyssey , where her role is instead filled by Hermes . Like Hermes, Iris carries a caduceus or winged staff. By command of Zeus , the king of the gods, she carries a ewer of water from the River Styx , with which she puts to sleep all who perjure themselves. In Book XXIII, she delivers Achilles's prayer to Boreas and Zephyrus to light the funeral pyre of Patroclus .

[ 24 ] In the last book, Zeus sends Iris to King Priam , to tell him that he should go to the Achaean camp alone and ransom the body of his slain son Hector from Achilles . Iris swiftly delivers the message to Priam and returns to Olympus.

[ 25 ] Other myths [ edit ] Iris, Attic lekythos in Six's technique (superposed colours), circa 500–490 BC, found in Tanagra , now in Louvre .

According to the " Homeric Hymn to Apollo ", when Leto was in labor prior to giving birth to her twin children Apollo and Artemis , all the goddesses were in attendance except for two, Hera and Eileithyia , the goddess of childbirth. On the ninth day of her labor, Leto told Iris to bribe Eileithyia and ask for her help in giving birth to her children, without allowing Hera to find out.

[ 26 ] According to Callimachus , Iris along with Ares ordered, on Hera 's orders, all cities and other places to shun the pregnant Leto and deny her shelter where she could bring forth her twins.

[ 27 ] After Asteria , now transformed into the island of Delos , offered shelter to Leto, Iris flew back to Hera to inform her that Leto had been allowed to give birth due to Asteria defying Hera's orders, and took her seat beside Hera.

[ 28 ] According to Apollonius Rhodius , Iris turned back the Argonauts Zetes and Calais , who had pursued the Harpies to the Strophades ("Islands of Turning"). The brothers had driven off the monsters from their torment of the prophet Phineus , but did not kill them upon the request of Iris, who promised that Phineus would not be bothered by the Harpies again.

After King Creon of Thebes forbade the burial of the dead Argive soldiers who had raised their arms against Thebes, Hera ordered Iris to moisturize their dead bodies with dew and ambrosia.

[ 29 ] In a lesser-known narrative, Iris once came close to being raped by the satyrs after she attempted to disrupt their worship of Dionysus , perhaps at the behest of Hera . About fifteen black-and-red-figure vase paintings dating from the fifth century BC depict said satyrs either menacingly advancing toward or getting hold of her when she tries to interfere with the sacrifice.

[ 30 ] In another cup, Iris is depicted being assaulted by the satyrs, who apparently are trying to prevent Iris from stealing sacrificial meat from the altar of Dionysus, who is also present in the scene. On the other side, the satyrs are attacking Hera, who stands between Hermes and Heracles.

[ 31 ] The ancient playwright Achaeus wrote Iris , a now lost satyr play , which might have been the source of those vases' subject.

[ 31 ] In Euripides ' play Heracles Gone Mad , Iris appears alongside Lyssa , the goddess of madness and insanity, cursing Heracles with the fit of madness in which he kills his three sons and his wife Megara .

[ 32 ] Iris also prepared the bed of Zeus and Hera.

[ 33 ] Worship [ edit ] Cult [ edit ] Weber-Laborde head Louvre, possibly the head of Iris.

Iris, sculpture from the west pediment of the Parthenon, now at the British Museum .

[ 34 ] Unlike the other prominent messenger god of the Greeks, Hermes, Iris did not play a large part in the ancient Greek religion and was rarely worshipped. There are no known temples, shrines, or sanctuaries to Iris, or festivals held in her honour. While she is frequently depicted on vases and in bas-reliefs, few statues are known to have been made of Iris during antiquity. She was however depicted in sculpture on the west pediment of Parthenon in Athens .

Iris does appear to have been the object of at least some minor worship, but the only trace preserved of her cult is the note by Athenaeus in Scholars at Dinner that the people of Delos sacrificed to Iris, offering her cheesecakes called basyniae , a type of cake of wheat-flour, suet, and honey, boiled up together.

[ 35 ] Epithets [ edit ] Iris had numerous poetic titles and epithets , including chrysopteros ( χρυσόπτερος "golden winged"), podas ōkea ( πόδας ὠκέα "swift footed") or podēnemos ōkea ( ποδήνεμος ὠκέα "wind-swift footed"), roscida ("dewy", Latin), and Thaumantias or Thaumantis ( Θαυμαντιάς , Θαυμαντίς , "Daughter of Thaumas, Wondrous One"), aellopus ( ἀελλόπους "storm-footed, storm-swift).

[ 36 ] She also watered the clouds with her pitcher, obtaining the water from the sea.

Representation [ edit ] Iris is represented either as a rainbow or as a beautiful young maiden with wings on her shoulders. As a goddess, Iris is associated with communication , messages , the rainbow, and new endeavors. This personification of a rainbow was once described as being a link to the heavens and earth.

[ 37 ] In some texts she is depicted wearing a coat of many colors. With this coat she actually creates the rainbows she rides to get from place to place. Iris' wings were said to be so beautiful that she could even light up a dark cavern, a trait observable from the story of her visit to Somnus in order to relay a message to Alcyone .

[ 38 ] While Iris was principally associated with communication and messages, she was also believed to aid in the fulfillment of humans' prayers, either by fulfilling them herself or by bringing them to the attention of other deities.

[ 39 ] Genealogy [ edit ] Descendants of Gaia and Pontus [ 40 ] Gaia Pontus Nereus Doris [ 41 ] Thaumas Electra [ 42 ] Phorcys Ceto Eurybia The Nereids [ 43 ] IRIS Aello Ocypete The Harpies Pemphredo Enyo Echidna?

[ 44 ] ( Ladon ) [ 45 ] The Graiai Sthenno Euryale Medusa Poseidon [ 46 ] The Gorgons Pegasus Chrysaor Callirhoe [ 47 ] Geryon In the sciences [ edit ] The plant iris was named after her due to the wide variety of colours its flowers have.

7 Iris , a main-belt asteroid named after this goddess.

The chemical element iridium was named after Iris for its colorful salts.

In music [ edit ] Irris , k-pop girl-group named after the goddess Iris.

[ 48 ] Gallery [ edit ] Iris in art Iris sent by Jove in the Iliad (engraving by Tommaso Piroli after John Flaxman ) The Iris: an Illuminated Souvenir (1852) Alegoría del Aire by Antonio Palomino (circa 1700) Juno, Iris and Flora by François Lemoyne Grèce - Série courante de 1913-24 Type "Iris" - litho - Yvert 198B Iris (tiré d'un vase antique). Illustration de "Histoires des météores" (1870) Morpheus awakening as Iris draws near by René-Antoine Houasse (1690) Iris and Jupiter by Michel Corneille the Younger (1701) Iris depicted by John Atkinson Grimshaw Morpheus and Iris [ fr ] by Pierre-Narcisse Guérin (1811) Iris from the East Pediment of the Parthenon See also [ edit ] Ancient Greece portal Myths portal Religion portal Rainbow deity Angelia , another messenger goddess.

Angel Ithax , the Titans's messenger god.

Ninshubur Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Nonnus .

Dionysiaca . 47.340.

^ a b Liddell, Henry George; Scott, Robert (1940).

"ἶρις" .

A Greek-English Lexicon . Perseus Digital Library.

^ Etymology of ἶρις in Bailly, Anatole (1935) Le Grand Bailly: Dictionnaire grec-français , Paris: Hachette.

^ In some rarer traditions, she is the daughter of Zeus .

[ citation needed ] ^ Smith, s.v. Iris .

^ a b c Beekes 2009 , p. 1:598.

^ Fur.: 356.

^ Hesiod , Theogony 265 ; cf.

Apollodorus , 1.2.6 .

^ Nonnus , Dionysiaca 47.340 ^ Alcaeus frag 149 ^ Nonnus , Dionysiaca 26.355–365 ^ The Iliad, Book II, "And now Iris, fleet as the wind, was sent by Jove to tell the bad news among the Trojans." ^ a b Ptolemy Hephaestion , New History Book 6; epitomized in Photius ' Bibliotheca 190 ^ Andrews, P. B. S. (1965).

"The Falls of Troy in Greek Tradition" .

Greece & Rome .

12 (1): 28– 37.

doi : 10.1017/S0017383500014753 .

ISSN 0017-3835 .

JSTOR 642402 .

S2CID 162661766 . Retrieved 27 October 2022 .

^ Homeric Hymns 2.314–325 ^ Valerius Flaccus , Argonautica 4.60-78 ff ^ Ovid , Metamorphoses 11.585 ^ Welsh 2014 , p.

29 .

^ Virgil , Aeneid 4.696 ^ Virgil , Aeneid 5.606 ^ Ovid , Metamorphoses 14.829–851 ^ McLeish, Kenneth .

"Bloomsbury Dictionary of Myth" .

Credo Reference .

^ Proclus ' summary of Stasinus ' Cypria .

^ Mackie, Christopher John (2011).

"The Homer Encyclopedia" .

Credo Reference .

^ Homer , Iliad 24.144 – 189 ^ Grant, Michael (2002).

"Who's Who in Classical Mythology, Routledge" .

Credo Reference .

^ Callimachus , Hymn to Delos 67–69 ^ Callimachus , Hymn to Delos 110–228 ^ Statius , Thebaid 12.138 ff ^ Sells 2019 , p.

112 .

^ a b Antonopoulos, Christopoulos & Harrison 2021 , pp.

627–628 .

^ Euripides , Heracles 822 ^ Theocritus , Idylls 15.135 ^ British museum [1] Marble statue from the West pediment of the Parthenon.

^ Athenaeus , Scholars at Dinner 14.53 ; comp. Müller, Aegin. p. 170.

^ Homer uses the alternative form aellopos ( ἀελλόπος ): Iliad viii. 409.

^ Seton-Williams, M.V. (2000).

Greek Legends and Stories . Rubicon Press. pp.

75– 76.

^ Bulfinch, Thomas (1913).

Bulfinch's Mythology: the Age of Fable, the Age of Chivalry, Legends of Charlemagne: Complete in One Volume . Thomas Y. Crowell Co.

^ Seton-Williams, M.V. (2000).

Greek Legends and Stories . Rubicon Press. p. 9.

^ Theogony 233–297, 333–335 (Ladon) (Most, pp.

22, 23 , 28, 29 ); Caldwell, p. 7, tables 6–9; Hard, p. 696.

^ One of the Oceanid daughters of Oceanus and Tethys , at 350 .

^ One of the Oceanid daughters of Oceanus and Tethys , at 349 .

^ The fifty sea nymphs, including: Amphitrite ( 243 ), Thetis ( 244 ), Galatea ( 250 ), and Psamathe ( 260 ).

^ Who Echidna's mother is supposed to be, is unclear, she is probably Ceto, but possibly Callirhoe. The "she" at 295 is ambiguous. While some have read this "she" as referring to Callirhoe, according to Clay, p. 159 n. 32 , "the modern scholarly consensus" reads Ceto, see for example Gantz, p. 22; Caldwell, pp. 7, 46 295–303.

^ Unnamed by Hesiod, but described at 334–335 as a terrible serpent who guards the golden apples.

^ Son of Cronus and Rhea at 456 , where he is called "Earth-Shaker".

^ One of the Oceanid daughters of Oceanus and Tethys , at 351 .

^ "Irris, 신비로운 아우라 로고 모션 첫 공개…4세대 프리즘 걸그룹 출격 예고" .

Bibliography [ edit ] Ancient sources [ edit ] Apollodorus , Apollodorus, The Library, with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes.

Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

Apollonius Rhodius , Argonautica translated by Robert Cooper Seaton (1853–1915), R. C. Loeb Classical Library Volume 001. London, William Heinemann Ltd, 1912.

Online version at the Topos Text Project.

Callimachus .

Hymns , translated by Alexander William Mair (1875–1928). London: William Heinemann; New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons. 1921.

Online version at the Topos Text Project.

Hesiod , Theogony , in The Homeric Hymns and Homerica with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White , Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

Homer , The Iliad with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, PhD in two volumes . Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

Evelyn-White, Hugh, The Homeric Hymns and Homerica with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White . Homeric Hymns. Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914.

Euripides , The Complete Greek Drama', edited by Whitney J. Oates and Eugene O'Neill, Jr. in two volumes. 2 .

The Phoenissae , translated by E. P. Coleridge. New York. Random House. 1938.

Ovid .

Metamorphoses , Volume I: Books 1–8 . Translated by Frank Justus Miller. Revised by G. P. Goold.

Loeb Classical Library No. 42. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press , 1977, first published 1916.

ISBN 978-0-674-99046-3 .

Online version at Harvard University Press .

Statius , Thebaid , Volume II: Thebaid: Books 8–12.

Achilleid . Edited and translated by D. R. Shackleton Bailey.

Loeb Classical Library 498. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press , 2004.

Theocritus , Idylls and Epigrams with an Epilogue , translation by Daryl Hine, New York, Atheneum, 1982, ISBN 0-689-11320-X .

Valerius Flaccus , Argonautica . Translated by J. H. Mozley.

Loeb Classical Library 286. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press , 1934.

Vergil , Aeneid .

Theodore C. Williams. trans. Boston. Houghton Mifflin Co. 1910.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.

Modern sources [ edit ] Antonopoulos, Andreas P.; Christopoulos, Menelaos M.; Harrison, George W. M. (July 5, 2021).

Reconstructing Satyr Drama .

De Gruyter .

ISBN 9783110725216 .

Beekes, Robert S. P.

(2009).

Etymological Dictionary of Greek .

Leiden : Brill Publications . p. 1:598.

Grimal, Pierre (1996).

"Iris" .

The Dictionary of Classical Mythology .

ISBN 978-0-631-20102-1 . pp. 237–238.

Peyré, Yves (2009).

"Iris" .

A Dictionary of Shakespeare's Classical Mythology , ed. Yves Peyré.

Sells, Donald (2019).

Parody, Politics and the Populace in Greek Old Comedy .

Bloomsbury Academic .

ISBN 978-1-3500-6051-7 .

Welsh, Alexander (2014).

The Humanist Comedy .

New Haven, Connecticut : Yale University Press .

ISBN 978-0-300-19751-8 .

Smith, William (1873).

"Iris" .

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology . London.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Iris (mythology) .

Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Iris (mythology) ".

IRIS from The Theoi Project IRIS from Greek Mythology Link IRIS from greekmythology.com Hesiod, the Homeric Hymns, and Homerica by Hesiod (English translation at Project Gutenberg ) The Iliad by Homer (English translation at Project Gutenberg) The Argonautica , by c. 3rd century BC Apollonius Rhodius (English translation at Project Gutenberg) The Warburg Institute Iconographic Database (images of Iris) v t e Ancient Greek religion and mythology Religion and religious practice Main beliefs Ages of Man Golden Age Heroic Age Ancient accounts of Homer Apotheosis Arete Daemon Destiny Eudaimonia Euhemerism Eunoia Eusebeia Golden mean Golden Rule Greek words for love Hemitheos Hero cult Hubris Interpretatio graeca Katabasis Kleos Know thyself Metamorphosis Metempsychosis Nympholepsy Paradoxography Patron gods Pederasty Phronesis Polytheism Sophrosyne Soter Theia mania Xenia Texts / odes / epic poems Epic Cycle Aethiopis Cypria Iliad Iliupersis Little Iliad Nostoi Odyssey Telegony Theban Cycle Oedipodea Thebaid Epigoni Alcmeonis Others Aesop's Fables Aretalogy Argonautica Bibliotheca Catalogue of Women Cyranides Delphic maxims Derveni papyrus Dionysiaca Golden Verses of Pythagoras Greek Magical Papyri Homerica Homeric Hymns Interpretation of Dreams Oneirocritica Orphic Hymns Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Sibylline Books Sortes Astrampsychi Stories from Plato Atlantis Myth of Er Ring of Gyges Theogony Works and Days Religions Antecedents Minoan religion Mycenaean religion List of Mycenaean deities Paleo-Balkan mythology Proto-Indo-European mythology Religions of the ancient Near East Expressions Atheism Henotheism Monotheism Polytheism Hellenistic religions Early Christianity Christianization Relationship with Greek philosophy Esoteric systems Early alchemy Gnosticism Hermeticism Neoplatonism Hellenistic Judaism God-fearers Syncretic religions Alexander Ptolemaic cult Etruscan religion Greco-Buddhism Roman religion Imperial cult Religious views of emperor Julian Mystery religions and sacred mysteries Arcadian Mysteries Delos Mysteries Dionysian Mysteries Eleusinian Mysteries Imbrian Mysteries Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Orphism Samothracian Mysteries New religious movements Discordianism Feraferia Gaianism Hellenism Religious practice Worship / rituals Amphidromia Arotoi Hieroi Astragalomancy Baptes Cult of Artemis at Brauron Daduchos Divination Funeral and burial practices Funeral oration Greco-Roman mysteries Hero cult Heroön Hierophany Hieros gamos Hymns Incubation Komos Nekyia Omophagia Orgia Panegyris Prayer Sacrifice Animal sacrifice Hecatomb Holocaust Libation Pharmakos Votive offering Theatre Religious offices Amphictyonic league Archon basileus Basilinna Gerarai Hiereia Hierophant Hierophylakes Iatromantis Kanephoros Mystagogue Oracle Sibyl Thiasus Religious objects Baetyl Cult image Chryselephantine sculpture Xoanon Greek terracotta figurines Kernos Kykeon Loutrophoros Omphalos Panathenaic amphora Rhyton Sacrificial tripod Sceptre Thymiaterion Magic Apotropaic magic Curse tablet Divination Greek Magical Papyri Hermeticism Hermetica Necromancy Philia Events Festivals / feasts Actia Adonia Agrionia Amphidromia Anthesteria Apellai Apaturia Aphrodisia Arrhephoria Ascolia Bendidia Boedromia Brauronia Buphonia Chalceia Diasia Delia Delphinia Dionysia Ecdysia Elaphebolia Gamelia Halieia Haloa Heracleia Hermaea Hieromenia Iolaia Kronia Lenaia Leucophryna Lykaia Metageitnia Munichia Oschophoria Pamboeotia Pandia Plynteria Ptolemaieia Pyanopsia Skira Synoikia Soteria Tauropolia Thargelia Theseia Thesmophoria Games Agon Panathenaic Games Rhieia Panhellenic Games Olympic Games Heraean Games Pythian Games Nemean Games Isthmian Games Actia Sacred places Temples / sanctuaries Asclepieion Delphinion Mithraeum Necromanteion of Acheron Nymphaeum Panionium Parthenon Ploutonion Telesterion Temenos Temple of Artemis, Ephesus Temple of Zeus, Olympia Oracles Amphiareion of Oropos Aornum Claros Delphi Didyma Dodona Oracle of Apollo Thyrxeus at Cyaneae Oracle of Apollo at Ptoion Oracle of Artemis at Ikaros Oracle of Menestheus Sanctuary of the Great Gods Tegyra Mountains Cretea Mount Ida (Crete) Mount Ida (Turkey) Mount Lykaion Olympus Caves Cave of Zeus, Aydın Caves of Pan Psychro Cave Vari Cave Islands Island of Achilles Delos Islands of Diomedes Springs Castalian Spring Hippocrene Pierian Spring Others Athenian sacred ships Paralus Salaminia Eleusis Hiera Orgas Kanathos Olympia Sacred Way Theatre of Dionysus Myths and mythology Deities ( Family tree ) Primordial deities Aether Ananke Chaos Chronos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx Phanes Pontus Thalassa Tartarus Uranus Titans First generation Coeus Crius Cronus Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Second generation Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Metis Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Third generation Hecate Hesperus Phosphorus Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Water deities Amphitrite Alpheus Ceto Glaucus Naiads Nereids Nereus Oceanids Phorcys Poseidon Proteus River gods Scamander Thaumas Thetis Triton Love deities Erotes Anteros Eros Hedylogos Hermaphroditus Himeros Hymen/Hymenaeus Pothos Aphrodite Aphroditus Philotes Peitho War deities Adrestia Alala Alke Amphillogiai Androktasiai Ares Athena Bia Deimos Enyalius Enyo Eris Gynaecothoenas Homados Hysminai Ioke Keres Kratos Kydoimos Ma Machai Nike Palioxis Pallas Perses Phobos Phonoi Polemos Proioxis Chthonic deities Psychopomps Charon Hermes Hermanubis Thanatos Angelos Cabeiri The Erinyes (Furies) Hades / Pluto Hecate Hypnos Keres Lampad Melinoë Persephone Zagreus Health deities Aceso Aegle Artemis Apollo Asclepius Chiron Darrhon Eileithyia Epione Hebe Hygieia Iaso Paean Panacea Telesphorus Sleep deities Empusa Epiales Hypnos Pasithea Oneiroi Messenger deities Angelia Arke Hermes Iris Trickster deities Apate Hermes Momus Magic deities Circe Hecate Hermes Trismegistus Pasiphaë Art and beauty deities Aphrodite Apollo The Charites (Graces) Aglaea Euphrosyne Thalia Dionysus The Muses Calliope Clio Polyhymnia Euterpe Terpsichore Erato Melpomene Thalia Urania Other major deities The Anemoi (Winds) Boreas Eurus Notus Zephyrus Azone Chrysaor Cybele Eileithyia Glycon Harmonia Nemesis Pan Pegasus Zelus Heroes / heroines Individuals Abderus Achilles Actaeon Adonis Aeneas Ajax the Great Ajax the Lesser Akademos Amphiaraus Amphitryon Antilochus Atalanta Autolycus Bellerophon Bouzyges Cadmus Chrysippus Cyamites Daedalus Diomedes Dioscuri (Castor and Polydeuces) Echetlus Eleusis Erechtheus Eunostus Ganymede Hector Heracles Icarus Iolaus Jason Meleager Menelaus Narcissus Nestor Odysseus Oedipus Orpheus Otrera Pandion Peleus Pelops Penthesilea Perseus Theseus Triptolemus Groups Argonauts Calydonian hunters Epigoni Seven against Thebes Oracles / seers Aesacus Aleuas Amphiaraus Amphilochus Ampyx Anius Asbolus Bakis Branchus Calchas Carnus Carya Cassandra Elatus Ennomus Epimenides Halitherses Helenus Iamus Idmon Manto Melampus Mopsus Munichus Phineus Polyeidos Polypheides Pythia Sibyls Cimmerian Cumaean Delphic Erythraean Hellespontine Libyan Persian Phrygian Samian Telemus Theiodamas Theoclymenus Tiresias Other mortals Aegeus Aegisthus Agamemnon Andromache Andromeda Antigone Augeas Briseis Cassiopeia Creon of Thebes Chryseis Chrysothemis Clytemnestra Damocles Deidamia Deucalion Electra Eteocles Europa Gordias Hecuba Helen of Troy Hellen The Heracleidae Hermione Hippolyta Io Iphigenia Ismene Jocasta Laius Lycian peasants Lycaon The Maenads Memnon Messapian shepherds Midas Minos Myrrha Neoptolemus Niobe Orestes Paris Patroclus Penelope Philomela Phoenix Polybus of Corinth Polynices Priam Procne Pylades Pyrrha Telemachus Troilus Underworld Entrances to the underworld Rivers Acheron Cocytus Eridanos Lethe Phlegethon Styx Lakes/swamps Acherusia Avernus Lake Lerna Lake Caves Cave at Cape Matapan Cave at Lake Avernus Cave at Heraclea Pontica Charoniums Charonium at Aornum Charonium at Acharaca Ploutonion Ploutonion at Acharaca Ploutonion at Eleusis Ploutonion at Hierapolis Necromanteion (necromancy temple) Necromanteion of Acheron Places Elysium Erebus Fields of Asphodel Isles of the Blessed Mourning Fields Tartarus Judges Aeacus Minos Rhadamanthus Guards Campe Cerberus Residents Anticlea Danaïdes Eurydice Ixion Ocnus Salmoneus The Shades Sisyphus Tantalus Tiresias Titans Tityos Visitors Dionysus Heracles Hermes Odysseus Orpheus Pirithous Psyche Theseus Symbols/objects Bident Cap of invisibility Charon's obol Animals, daemons, and spirits Ascalaphus Ceuthonymus Eurynomos Menoetius Mythical Beings Lists Deities Mythological creatures Mortals Minor figures Trojan War characters Minor spirits Daemon Agathodaemon Cacodaemon Eudaemon Nymph Satyr Beasts / creatures Centaur Centaurides Ichthyocentaur Cyclops Dragon Drakaina Echidna Giant Gorgon Harpy Hecatonchires Hippocampus Horses of Helios Lamia Phoenix Python Siren Scylla and Charybdis Sphinx Typhon Captured / slain by heroes Calydonian boar Cerberus Cerynian Hind Chimera Cretan Bull Crommyonian Sow Erymanthian boar Khalkotauroi Lernaean Hydra Mares of Diomedes Medusa Minotaur Nemean lion Orthrus Polyphemus Stymphalian birds Talos Teumessian fox Tribes Achaeans Amazons Anthropophagi Bebryces Cicones Curetes Dactyls Gargareans Halizones Korybantes Laestrygonians Lapiths Lotus-eaters Myrmidons Pygmies Spartoi Telchines Places / Realms Aethiopia Ara Colchis Erytheia Hyperborea Ismarus Ithaca Libya Nysa Ogygia Panchaia Phlegra Scheria Scythia Symplegades Tartessos Themiscyra Thrinacia Troy Events Apollo and Daphne Calydonian boar hunt Eros and Psyche Judgment of Paris Labours of Heracles Orpheus and Eurydice Returns from Troy Odyssey Wars Amazonomachy Attic War Centauromachy Gigantomachy Indian War Theomachy Titanomachy Trojan War Objects Adamant Aegis Ambrosia Apple of Discord Argo Dragon's teeth Diipetes Eidolon Galatea Girdle of Aphrodite Golden apple Golden Fleece Gordian knot Harpe Ichor Labyrinth Lotus tree Milk of Hera Moly Necklace of Harmonia Orichalcum Palladium Panacea Pandora's box Petasos ( Winged helmet ) Phaeacian ships Philosopher's stone Shield of Achilles Shirt of Nessus Sword of Damocles Talaria Thunderbolt Thyrsus Trident of Poseidon Trojan Horse Winnowing Oar Wheel of fire Symbols Bowl of Hygieia Caduceus Cornucopia Gorgoneion Kantharos Labrys Orphic egg Ouroboros Owl of Athena Phallus Rod of Asclepius Swan song Wind East West North South Modern treatments Classical mythology in western art and literature Classicism Classics Greek mythology in popular culture Modern understanding of Greek mythology v t e Ancient Greek deities Primal elements Aether Chaos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx The Ourea Pontus Tartarus Uranus Titans Twelve Titans Coeus Crius Cronus Dione Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Descendants of the Titans Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Olympian deities Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Olympian Gods Asclepius Eileithyia Enyo Eris Iris Harmonia Hebe Heracles Paean Pan Muses Daughters of Zeus Calliope Clio Euterpe Erato Melpomene Polyhymnia Terpsichore Thalia Urania Daughters of Apollo Apollonis Borysthenis Cephisso Boeotian Muses Aoide Melete Mneme Muses of the Lyre Hypate Mese Nete Muses at Sicyon Polymatheia Charites (Graces) Aglaia Euphrosyne Hegemone Pasithea Thalia Horae (Hours) Dike Eirene Eunomia Children of Styx Bia Kratos Nike Zelus Water deities Sea deities Amphitrite Benthesikyme Brizo Calliste Calypso Ceto Eurybia Glaucus Leucothea Melicertes Nereus Nerites Oceanus Phorcys Pontus Poseidon Proteus Rhodos Tethys Thalassa Thaumas Thetis Triton Oceanids Acaste Admete Asia Callirhoe Ceto Clymene (consort of Helios) Clymene (wife of Iapetus) Clytie Dione Dodone Doris Electra Eurynome Idyia Melia (consort of Apollo) Melia (consort of Inachus) Metis Perse Philyra Pleione Plouto Styx Telesto Theia Zeuxo Nereids Amatheia Amphithoe Amphitrite Arethusa Cymatolege Cymo Dynamene Galatea Galene Protomedeia Psamathe Sao Spio Thalia Thetis River gods Achelous Alpheus Anapus Asopus Asterion Axius Caanthus Cebren Cephissus Enipeus Kladeos Meander Nilus Numicus Phyllis Peneus Sangarius Scamander Selemnus Simoeis Strymon Naiads Aegina Achiroe Aganippe The Anigrides Argyra Bistonis Bolbe Caliadne Cassotis Castalia Cleocharia Creusa Daphne Drosera Harpina The Ionides Ismenis Larunda Lilaea Liriope Melite Metope Minthe Moria Nana Nicaea Orseis Pallas Pirene Salmacis Stilbe The Thriae Corycia Cleodora Melaina Tiasa Personifications Children of Eris Algos Amphillogiai The Androktasiai Atë Dysnomia Horkos Hysminai Lethe Logoi Limos Machai Neikea Phonoi Ponos Pseudea Children of Nyx Apate Eris Geras Hesperides Hypnos The Keres The Moirai Atropos Clotho Lachesis Momus Moros Nemesis Oizys The Oneiroi Philotes Thanatos Others Achlys Adephagia Aergia Aidos Aion Alala Alastor Aletheia Alke Amechania Anaideia Ananke Angelia Anteros Apheleia Arete The Arae Astraea Caerus Chronos Chrysus Corus Deimos Dikaiosyne Dyssebeia Eiresione Ekecheiria Eulabeia Eupraxia Eusebeia Ersa Eros Erotes Gelos Hedone Hedylogos Heimarmene Hermaphroditus Homados Homonoia Horme Hymen Iacchus Ioke Kakia Koalemos Kydoimos The Litae Lyssa The Maniae Methe Nomos Palioxis Peitharchia Peitho Penia Penthus Pepromene Pheme Phobos Phrike Phthonus Poine Polemos Poros Praxidice Proioxis Prophasis Soter Soteria Thrasos Tyche Other deities Sky The Anemoi Boreas Eurus Notus Zephyrus Hesperus Phosphorus Phaethon Astrape and Bronte Aura The Hesperides The Hyades Nephele The Pleiades Alcyone Sterope Celaeno Electra Maia Merope Taygete Sirius Tritopatores Agriculture Aphaia Demeter Despoina Eunostus Opora Philomelus Plutus Health Asclepius Aceso Epione Iaso Hygieia Paean Panacea Telesphorus Rustic deities Aetna Agdistis The Alseids Amphictyonis Aristaeus Attis Britomartis The Cabeiri Comus The Dryades Erato The Hamadryades Chrysopeleia The Epimelides Hecaterus Leuce The Maenades The Meliae Hyperborean maidens The Oreads Echo Priapus Rhapso Silenus Telete Others Aphroditus Arke Auxesia Enodia Circe Enyalius Hecate Orthanes Palaestra Pasiphaë Phanes Sosipolis Authority control databases International VIAF 2 National Germany United States Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Iris_(mythology)&oldid=1304985453 " Categories : Deities in the Iliad Greek goddesses Messenger goddesses Characters in the Argonautica Rainbow deities Women of the Trojan war Deities in the Aeneid Personifications in Greek mythology Metamorphoses characters Sky and weather goddesses Personifications of weather Deeds of Hera Daughters of Zeus Avian humanoids Olympian deities Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2022 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles having different image on Wikidata and Wikipedia Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Pages with Ancient Greek (to 1453) IPA Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 10:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Iris (mythology) 56 languages Add topic

