Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical approach 2 Semiconductor electrochemistry Toggle Semiconductor electrochemistry subsection 2.1 Introduction 2.2 Semiconductor-electrolyte interface 2.3 Experimental setup 3 Main absorbers used in photoelectrochemistry Toggle Main absorbers used in photoelectrochemistry subsection 3.1 Semiconductor IV 3.2 Semiconductor III-V 3.3 Semiconductor II-VI 3.4 Metal oxides 3.5 Organic dyes 3.6 Organometallic dyes 3.7 Perovskites 4 Applications Toggle Applications subsection 4.1 Photoelectrochemical water splitting 4.2 Photoelectrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide 4.3 Regenerative cells or Dye-sensitized solar cell (Graetzel cell) 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Photoelectrochemistry 8 languages Afrikaans العربية Deutsch 한국어 Nederlands 日本語 Română Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of physical chemistry Photoelectrochemistry is a subfield of study within physical chemistry concerned with the interaction of light with electrochemical systems .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] It is an active domain of investigation. One of the pioneers of this field of electrochemistry was the German electrochemist Heinz Gerischer . The interest in this domain is high in the context of development of renewable energy conversion and storage technology.

Historical approach [ edit ] Photoelectrochemistry has been intensively studied in the 1970-80s because of the first peak oil crisis . Because fossil fuels are non-renewable, it is necessary to develop processes to obtain renewable resources and use clean energy .

Artificial photosynthesis , photoelectrochemical water splitting and regenerative solar cells are of special interest in this context. The photovoltaic effect was discovered by Alexandre Edmond Becquerel .

Heinz Gerischer , H. Tributsch, AJ. Nozik, AJ. Bard, A. Fujishima, K. Honda, PE. Laibinis, K. Rajeshwar, TJ Meyer, PV. Kamat, N.S. Lewis, R. Memming, John Bockris are researchers which have contributed a lot to the field of photoelectrochemistry.

Semiconductor electrochemistry [ edit ] Introduction [ edit ] Semiconductor materials have energy band gaps , and will generate a pair of electron and hole for each absorbed photon if the energy of the photon is higher than the band gap energy of the semiconductor. This property of semiconductor materials has been successfully used to convert solar energy into electrical energy by photovoltaic devices .

In photocatalysis the electron-hole pair is immediately used to drive a redox reaction. However, the electron-hole pairs suffer from fast recombination. In photoelectrocatalysis, a differential potential is applied to diminish the number of recombinations between the electrons and the holes. This allows an increase in the yield of light's conversion into chemical energy.

Semiconductor-electrolyte interface [ edit ] When a semiconductor comes into contact with a liquid ( redox species), to maintain electrostatic equilibrium, there will be a charge transfer between the semiconductor and liquid phase if formal redox potential of redox species lies inside semiconductor band gap. At thermodynamic equilibrium, the Fermi level of semiconductor and the formal redox potential of redox species are aligned at the interface between semiconductor and redox species. This introduces an upward band bending in a n-type semiconductor for n-type semiconductor/liquid junction (Figure 1(a)) and a downward band bending in a p-type semiconductor for a p-type semiconductor/liquid junction (Figure 1(b)). This characteristic of semiconductor/liquid junctions is similar to a rectifying semiconductor/metal junction or Schottky junction . Ideally to get a good rectifying characteristics at the semiconductor/liquid interface, the formal redox potential must be close to the valence band of the semiconductor for a n-type semiconductor and close to the conduction band of the semiconductor for a p-type semiconductor. The semiconductor/liquid junction has one advantage over the rectifying semiconductor/metal junction in that the light is able to travel through to the semiconductor surface without much reflection; whereas most of the light is reflected back from the metal surface at a semiconductor/metal junction. Therefore, semiconductor/liquid junctions can also be used as photovoltaic devices similar to solid state p–n junction devices. Both n-type and p-type semiconductor/liquid junctions can be used as photovoltaic devices to convert solar energy into electrical energy and are called photoelectrochemical cells . In addition, a semiconductor/liquid junction could also be used to directly convert solar energy into chemical energy by virtue of photoelectrolysis at the semiconductor/liquid junction.

Figure 1(a) band diagram of n-type semiconductor/liquid junction Figure 1(b) band diagram of p-type semiconductor/liquid junction Experimental setup [ edit ] Semiconductors are usually studied in a photoelectrochemical cell . Different configurations exist with a three electrode device. The phenomenon to study happens at the working electrode WE while the differential potential is applied between the WE and a reference electrode RE (saturated calomel, Ag/AgCl). The current is measured between the WE and the counter electrode CE (carbon vitreous, platinum gauze). The working electrode is the semiconductor material and the electrolyte is composed of a solvent, an electrolyte and a redox specie.

A UV-vis lamp is usually used to illuminate the working electrode. The photoelectrochemical cell is usually made with a quartz window because it does not absorb the light. A monochromator can be used to control the wavelength sent to the WE.

Main absorbers used in photoelectrochemistry [ edit ] Semiconductor IV [ edit ] Further information: Category:Group IV semiconductors C(diamond), Si, Ge, SiC , SiGe Semiconductor III-V [ edit ] BN, BP, BAs, AlN, AlP, AlAs, GaN, GaP, GaAs, InN, InP, InAs...

Semiconductor II-VI [ edit ] CdS, CdSe, CdTe, ZnO, ZnS, ZnSe, ZnTe, MoS 2 , MoSe 2 , MoTe 2 , WS 2 , WSe 2 Metal oxides [ edit ] TiO 2 , Fe 2 O 3 , Cu 2 O Organic dyes [ edit ] Main article: organic dye Methylene blue ...

Organometallic dyes [ edit ] Further information: Organometallic chemistry Perovskites [ edit ] Main article: Perovskites Very recently scalable all-perovskite based PEC photoelectrochemical system as solar hydrogen panel has been developed with >123 cm2 area.

[ 3 ] Applications [ edit ] Photoelectrochemical water splitting [ edit ] Main article: Photoelectrolysis of water Photoelectrochemistry has been intensively studied in the field of hydrogen production from water and solar energy. The photoelectrochemical splitting of water was historically discovered by Fujishima and Honda in 1972 onto TiO 2 electrodes. Recently many materials have shown promising properties to split efficiently water but TiO 2 remains cheap, abundant, stable against photo-corrosion. The main problem of TiO 2 is its bandgap which is 3 or 3.2 eV according to its crystallinity (anatase or rutile). These values are too high and only the wavelength in the UV region can be absorbed. To increase the performances of this material to split water with solar wavelength, it is necessary to sensitize the TiO 2 . Currently Quantum Dots sensitization is very promising but more research is needed to find new materials able to absorb the light efficiently.

Photoelectrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide [ edit ] Main article: Photoelectrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide Photosynthesis is the natural process that converts CO 2 using light to produce hydrocarbon compounds such as sugar. The depletion of fossil fuels encourages scientists to find alternatives to produce hydrocarbon compounds.

Artificial photosynthesis is a promising method  mimicking the natural photosynthesis to produce such compounds. The photoelectrochemical reduction of CO 2 is much studied because of its worldwide impact. Many researchers aim to find new semiconductors to develop stable and efficient photo-anodes and photo-cathodes.

Regenerative cells or Dye-sensitized solar cell (Graetzel cell) [ edit ] Dye-sensitized solar cells or DSSCs use TiO 2 and dyes to absorb the light. This absorption induces the formation of electron-hole pairs which are used to oxidize and reduce the same redox couple, usually I − /I 3 − . Consequently, a differential potential is created which induces a current.

References [ edit ] ^ "Compendium of Chemical Terminology" .

IUPAC .

doi : 10.1351/goldbook.P04607 .

^ "Electrochemistry Encyclopedia" .

^ Hansora, Dharmesh (2024-01-23). "All-perovskite-based unassisted photoelectrochemical water splitting system for efficient, stable and scalable solar hydrogen production".

Nature Energy .

9 (3): 272– 284.

Bibcode : 2024NatEn...9..272H .

doi : 10.1038/s41560-023-01438-x .

ISSN 2058-7546 .

S2CID 267219936 .

External links [ edit ] Complete review about semiconductor's photoelectrochemistry Review about semiconductor's photoelectrochemistry Archived 2011-06-28 at the Wayback Machine Electrochemistry Encyclopedia at the Library of Congress Web Archives (archived 2001-11-25) v t e Branches of chemistry Glossary of chemical formulae List of biomolecules List of inorganic compounds Periodic table Analytical Calorimetry Characterization Chromatography GC HPLC Crystallography Electroanalytical methods Elemental analysis Instrumental chemistry Mass spectrometry EI ICP MALDI Separation process Spectroscopy IR Raman UV-Vis NMR Titration Wet chemistry Theoretical Computational chemistry Mathematical chemistry Molecular modelling Molecular mechanics Molecular dynamics Molecular geometry VSEPR theory Quantum chemistry Physical Chemical kinetics Chemical physics Molecular physics Chemical thermodynamics Cryochemistry Electrochemistry Spectroelectrochemistry Photoelectrochemistry Equilibrium chemistry Femtochemistry Interface and colloid science Micromeritics Mechanochemistry Microwave chemistry Photochemistry Sonochemistry Spectroscopy Spin chemistry Structural chemistry Surface science Thermochemistry Inorganic Ceramic chemistry Cluster chemistry Coordination chemistry Magnetochemistry Organometallic chemistry Organolanthanide chemistry Solid-state chemistry Organic Dynamic covalent chemistry Enantioselective synthesis Fullerene chemistry Organic reactions Organic synthesis Petrochemistry Physical organic chemistry Polymer chemistry Retrosynthetic analysis Stereochemistry Alkane stereochemistry Total synthesis / Semisynthesis Biological Biochemistry Molecular biology Cell biology Bioinorganic chemistry Bioorganic chemistry Bioorganometallic chemistry Biophysical chemistry Chemical biology Bioorthogonal chemistry Clinical chemistry Medicinal chemistry Pharmacology Neurochemistry Interdisciplinarity Nuclear chemistry Radiochemistry Radiation chemistry Actinide chemistry Cosmochemistry / Astrochemistry / Stellar chemistry Geochemistry Biogeochemistry Photogeochemistry Environmental chemistry Atmospheric chemistry Ocean chemistry Clay chemistry Carbochemistry Food chemistry Carbohydrate chemistry Food physical chemistry Agricultural chemistry Soil chemistry Chemistry education Amateur chemistry General chemistry Clandestine chemistry Forensic chemistry Forensic toxicology Post-mortem chemistry Nanochemistry Supramolecular chemistry Chemical synthesis Green chemistry Click chemistry Combinatorial chemistry Biosynthesis Chemical engineering Stoichiometry Materials science Metallurgy Ceramic engineering Polymer science See also History of chemistry Nobel Prize in Chemistry Timeline of chemistry of element discoveries " The central science " Chemical reaction Catalysis Chemical element Chemical compound Atom Molecule Ion Chemical substance Chemical bond Alchemy Quantum mechanics Category Commons Portal WikiProject NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐dq6d8
Cached time: 20250812021218
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.258 seconds
Real time usage: 0.316 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 747/1000000
Revision size: 9636/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 32292/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 727/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 23988/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.152/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4347908/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  257.977      1 -total
 31.47%   81.181      1 Template:Reflist
 27.82%   71.764      1 Template:Branches_of_chemistry
 27.17%   70.089      1 Template:Navbox
 24.58%   63.414      2 Template:Cite_web
 20.86%   53.809      1 Template:Short_description
 11.23%   28.980      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.05%   18.178      2 Template:See
  6.25%   16.125      3 Template:Main_other
  5.61%   14.477      1 Template:SDcat Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:30883607:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812021218 and revision id 1238463819. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Photoelectrochemistry&oldid=1238463819 " Category : Photoelectrochemistry Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from April 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Webarchive template wayback links Webarchive template other archives This page was last edited on 4 August 2024, at 00:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Photoelectrochemistry 8 languages Add topic

