Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Purpose 2 Effect 3 History 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Pseudoscope 3 languages Français Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Binocular optical instrument that reverses depth perception Charles Wheatstone's prismatic pseudoscope. It switched the images presented to each eye to distort depth perception.

A pseudoscope is a binocular optical instrument that reverses depth perception . It is used to study human stereoscopic perception. Objects viewed through it appear inside out, for example: a box on a floor would appear as a box-shaped hole in the floor.

It typically uses sets of optical prisms, or periscopically arranged mirrors to swap the view of the left eye with that of the right eye.

Purpose [ edit ] In the 1800s Charles Wheatstone coined the name from the Greek ψευδίς σκοπειν – 'false view'. The device was used to explore his theory of stereo vision.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Basically, pseudoscopic vision is three-dimensional vision in reverse. For example, in aerial photography, swimming pools appear to look like buildings and buildings appear to look like swimming pools. In red and green plotters like the Kelsh and Multiplex this is achieved by reversing the lenses on the 3D glasses. The images will be reverse order. The right image will be viewed through the left eye, and the left image will be through the right eye.

Effect [ edit ] Switching the two pictures in a standard stereoscope changes all the elevated parts into depressions, and vice versa. The pseudoscope also changes convex into concave, and high-relief into low-relief.

Modern prismatic pseudoscope by Charles Whetstone's scheme History [ edit ] Pseudoscopic binocular microscope design by Father Cherubin d'Orleans, 1677 Before the pseudoscope itself was created intentionally, it existed in binocular instruments as an imperfection. The first binocular microscope was invented by the Capuchin friar Cherubin d'Orleans . Because his instrument consisted of two inverting systems, it produced a pseudoscopic impression of depth by accident, although not recognized by microscopists of the time.

G. M. Stratton's mirror pseudoscope The instrument subsequently fell into complete neglect for nearly two centuries. It was revived in 1852 by Charles Wheatstone , who published his ideas in his paper "On Binocular Vision",  in the Philosophical Transactions for 1852. Wheatstone's paper stimulated the investigation of binocular vision and many variations of pseudoscopes were created, chief types being the mirror or the prismatic.

In 1853 the American scientist John Leonard Riddell (1807–1865) devised his binocular microscope, which contained the essentials of Wheatstone's pseudoscope.

[ 3 ] References [ edit ] ^ Experimental Psychology p.146 by Edward Bradford Titchener, Macmillan, 1906 ^ "Best Marine Binoculars – the Secret Insights for Safe Boating" . 3 October 2021.

^ Binocular Instruments , from a classic 1911 encyclopedia External links [ edit ] Further reading & commercial pseudoscope Make your own Pseudoscope for 10 dollars History of design prismatic pseudoscope v t e Stereoscopy and 3D display Perception 3D stereo view Binocular rivalry Binocular vision Chromostereopsis Convergence insufficiency Correspondence problem Peripheral vision Depth perception Epipolar geometry Kinetic depth effect Stereoblindness Stereopsis Stereopsis recovery Stereoscopic acuity Vergence-accommodation conflict Display technologies Active shutter 3D system Anaglyph 3D Autostereogram Autostereoscopy Bubblegram Head-mounted display Holography Integral imaging Lenticular lens Multiscopy Parallax barrier Parallax scrolling Polarized 3D system Specular holography Stereo display Stereoscope Vectograph Virtual retinal display Volumetric display Wiggle stereoscopy Other technologies 2D to 3D conversion 2D plus Delta 2D-plus-depth Computer stereo vision Multiview Video Coding Parallax scanning Pseudoscope Stereo photography techniques Stereoautograph Stereoscopic depth rendition Stereoscopic rangefinder Stereoscopic spectroscopy Stereoscopic video coding Product types 3D camcorder 3D film 3D television 3D-enabled mobile phones 4D film Blu-ray 3D Digital 3D Stereo camera Stereo microscope Stereoscopic video game Virtual reality headset Notable products AMD HD3D Dolby 3D Fujifilm FinePix Real 3D Infitec MasterImage 3D Nintendo 3DS New 3DS Nvidia 3D Vision Panavision 3D RealD 3D Sharp Actius RD3D View-Master XpanD 3D Miscellany Stereographer Stereoscopic Displays and Applications Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pseudoscope&oldid=1305957024 " Categories : Optical instruments Optical illusions Experimental psychology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 02:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pseudoscope 3 languages Add topic

