Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Piston engines Toggle Piston engines subsection 1.1 Internal combustion engines 1.1.1 Trunk pistons 1.1.2 Crosshead pistons 1.1.3 Slipper pistons 1.1.4 Deflector pistons 1.1.5 Racing pistons 1.2 Hydraulic cylinders 1.3 Steam engines 2 Pumps Toggle Pumps subsection 2.1 For liquids 2.2 For gases 3 Air cannons 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 Bibliography 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Piston 64 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Magyar Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Scots Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Tyap Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Machine component used to compress or contain expanding fluids in a cylinder For other uses, see Piston (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Piston" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Pistons within a sectioned petrol engine Animation of a piston system.

A piston is a component of reciprocating engines , reciprocating pumps , gas compressors , hydraulic cylinders and pneumatic cylinders , among other similar mechanisms. It is the moving component that is contained by a cylinder and is made gas-tight by piston rings . In an engine, its purpose is to transfer force from expanding gas in the cylinder to the crankshaft via a piston rod and/or connecting rod . In a pump, the function is reversed and force is transferred from the crankshaft to the piston for the purpose of compressing or ejecting the fluid in the cylinder. In some engines, the piston also acts as a valve by covering and uncovering ports in the cylinder.

Piston engines [ edit ] Main article: Reciprocating engine Four-piston engine (3D render) Piston Internal combustion engines [ edit ] Internal combustion engine piston, sectioned to show the gudgeon pin .

An internal combustion engine is acted upon by the pressure of the expanding combustion gases in the combustion chamber space at the top of the cylinder. This force then acts downwards through the connecting rod and onto the crankshaft . The connecting rod is attached to the piston by a swivelling gudgeon pin (US: wrist pin). This pin is mounted within the piston: unlike the steam engine, there is no piston rod or crosshead (except big two stroke engines).

The typical piston design is on the picture. This type of piston is widely used in car diesel engines . According to purpose, supercharging level and working conditions of engines the shape and proportions can be changed.

High-power diesel engines work in difficult conditions. Maximum pressure in the combustion chamber can reach 20 MPa and the maximum temperature of some piston surfaces can exceed 450 °C. It is possible to improve piston cooling by creating a special cooling cavity.

Injector supplies this cooling cavity «A» with oil through oil supply channel «B». For better temperature reduction construction should be carefully calculated and analysed. Oil flow in the cooling cavity should be not less than 80% of the oil flow through the injector.

A – cooling cavity; B – oil supply channel The pin itself is of hardened steel and is fixed in the piston, but free to move in the connecting rod. A few designs use a 'fully floating' design that is loose in both components. All pins must be prevented from moving sideways and the ends of the pin digging into the cylinder wall, usually by circlips .

Gas sealing is achieved by the use of piston rings . These are a number of narrow iron rings, fitted loosely into grooves in the piston, just below the crown. The rings are split at a point in the rim, allowing them to press against the cylinder with a light spring pressure. Two types of ring are used: the upper rings have solid faces and provide gas sealing; lower rings have narrow edges and a U-shaped profile, to act as oil scrapers. There are many proprietary and detail design features associated with piston rings.

Pistons are usually cast or forged from aluminium alloys . For better strength and fatigue life, some racing pistons [ 1 ] may be forged instead. Billet pistons are also used in racing engines because they do not rely on the size and architecture of available forgings, allowing for last-minute design changes. Although not commonly visible to the naked eye, pistons themselves are designed with a certain level of ovality and profile taper, meaning they are not perfectly round, and their diameter is larger near the bottom of the skirt than at the crown.

[ 2 ] Early pistons were of cast iron , but there were obvious benefits for engine balancing if a lighter alloy could be used. To produce pistons that could survive engine combustion temperatures, it was necessary to develop new alloys such as Y alloy and Hiduminium , specifically for use as pistons.

A few early gas engines [ i ] had double-acting cylinders , but otherwise effectively all internal combustion engine pistons are single-acting . During World War II , the US submarine Pompano [ ii ] was fitted with a prototype of the infamously unreliable H.O.R.

double-acting two-stroke diesel engine. Although compact, for use in a cramped submarine, this design of engine was not repeated.

Media related to Internal combustion engine pistons at Wikimedia Commons Trunk pistons [ edit ] Trunk pistons are long relative to their diameter. They act both as a piston and cylindrical crosshead . As the connecting rod is angled for much of its rotation, there is also a side force that reacts along the side of the piston against the cylinder wall. A longer piston helps to support this.

Trunk pistons have been a common design of piston since the early days of the reciprocating internal combustion engine. They were used for both petrol and diesel engines, although high speed engines have now adopted the lighter weight slipper piston .

A characteristic of most trunk pistons, particularly for diesel engines, is that they have a groove for an oil ring below the gudgeon pin , in addition to the rings between the gudgeon pin and crown.

The name 'trunk piston' derives from the ' trunk engine ', an early design of marine steam engine . To make these more compact, they avoided the steam engine's usual piston rod with separate crosshead and were instead the first engine design to place the gudgeon pin directly within the piston. Otherwise these trunk engine pistons bore little resemblance to the trunk piston; they were extremely large diameter and double-acting. Their 'trunk' was a narrow cylinder mounted in the centre of the piston.

Media related to Trunk pistons at Wikimedia Commons Crosshead pistons [ edit ] Large slow-speed Diesel engines may require additional support for the side forces on the piston. These engines typically use crosshead pistons. The main piston has a large piston rod extending downwards from the piston to what is effectively a second smaller-diameter piston. The main piston is responsible for gas sealing and carries the piston rings. The smaller piston is purely a mechanical guide. It runs within a small cylinder as a trunk guide and also carries the gudgeon pin.

Lubrication of the crosshead has advantages over the trunk piston as its lubricating oil is not subject to the heat of combustion : the oil is not contaminated by combustion soot particles, it does not break down owing to the heat and a thinner, less viscous oil may be used. The friction of both piston and crosshead may be only half of that for a trunk piston.

[ 3 ] Because of the additional weight of these pistons, they are not used for high-speed engines.

Media related to Crosshead pistons at Wikimedia Commons Slipper pistons [ edit ] Slipper piston A slipper piston is a piston for a petrol engine that has been reduced in size and weight as much as possible. In the extreme case, they are reduced to the piston crown, support for the piston rings, and just enough of the piston skirt remaining to leave two lands so as to stop the piston rocking in the bore. The sides of the piston skirt around the gudgeon pin are reduced away from the cylinder wall. The purpose is mostly to reduce the reciprocating mass, thus making it easier to balance the engine and so permit high speeds.

[ 4 ] In racing applications, slipper piston skirts can be configured to yield extremely light weight while maintaining the rigidity and strength of a full skirt.

[ 5 ] Reduced inertia also improves mechanical efficiency of the engine: the forces required to accelerate and decelerate the reciprocating parts cause more piston friction with the cylinder wall than the fluid pressure on the piston head.

[ 6 ] A secondary benefit may be some reduction in friction with the cylinder wall, since the area of the skirt, which slides up and down in the cylinder is reduced by half. However, most friction is due to the piston rings , which are the parts which actually fit the tightest in the bore and the bearing surfaces of the wrist pin, and thus the benefit is reduced.

Media related to Slipper pistons at Wikimedia Commons Deflector pistons [ edit ] Two-stroke deflector piston Deflector pistons are used in two-stroke engines with crankcase compression, where the gas flow within the cylinder must be carefully directed in order to provide efficient scavenging . With cross scavenging , the transfer (inlet to the cylinder) and exhaust ports are on directly facing sides of the cylinder wall. To prevent the incoming mixture passing straight across from one port to the other, the piston has a raised rib on its crown. This is intended to deflect the incoming mixture upwards, around the combustion chamber .

[ 7 ] Much effort, and many different designs of piston crown, went into developing improved scavenging. The crowns developed from a simple rib to a large asymmetric bulge, usually with a steep face on the inlet side and a gentle curve on the exhaust. Despite this, cross scavenging was never as effective as hoped. Most engines today use Schnuerle porting instead. This places a pair of transfer ports in the sides of the cylinder and encourages gas flow to rotate around a vertical axis, rather than a horizontal axis.

[ 8 ] Media related to Deflector pistons at Wikimedia Commons Racing pistons [ edit ] Early (c. 1830) piston for a beam engine . The piston seal is made by turns of wrapped rope .

In racing engines, piston strength and stiffness is typically much higher than that of a passenger car engine, while the weight is much less, to achieve the high engine RPM necessary in racing.

[ 9 ] Hydraulic cylinders [ edit ] Pistons of Hydraulic cylinders used in a hot press Hydraulic cylinders can be both single-acting or double-acting . A hydraulic actuator controls the movement of the piston back and/or forth. Guide rings guides the piston and rod and absorb the radial forces that act perpendicularly to the cylinder and prevent contact between sliding the metal parts.

Steam engines [ edit ] Cast-iron steam engine piston, with a metal piston ring spring-loaded against the cylinder wall.

Steam engines are usually double-acting (i.e. steam pressure acts alternately on each side of the piston) and the admission and release of steam is controlled by slide valves , piston valves or poppet valves . Consequently, steam engine pistons are nearly always comparatively thin discs: their diameter is several times their thickness. (One exception is the trunk engine piston, shaped more like those in a modern internal-combustion engine.) Another factor is that since almost all steam engines use crossheads to translate the force to the drive rod, there are few lateral forces acting to try and "rock" the piston, so a cylinder-shaped piston skirt isn't necessary.

Pumps [ edit ] Piston pumps can be used to move liquids or compress gases .

For liquids [ edit ] Main article: Reciprocating pump For gases [ edit ] Main article: Reciprocating compressor Air cannons [ edit ] There are two special type of pistons used in air cannons : close tolerance pistons and double pistons. In close tolerance pistons O-rings serve as a valve, but O-rings are not used in double piston types.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Air gun Fire piston Fruit press Gas-operated reloading , using a gas piston Hydraulic cylinder List of auto parts Piston motion equations Shock absorber Slide whistle Steam locomotive components Syringe Wankel engine , an internal combustion engine design with a rotor instead of pistons Notes [ edit ] ^ 'Gas' here refers to a fuel gas , not gasoline .

^ A handful of submarines in the following class used a similar engine, with almost equally poor results.

References [ edit ] ^ Magda, Mike.

"What Makes A Racing Piston?" . Retrieved 2018-04-22 .

^ Bailey, Kevin.

"Full-Round vs. Strutted: Piston Forging Designs and Skirt Styles Explained" . Retrieved 2018-07-15 .

^ Ricardo (1922) , p. 116.

^ Ricardo (1922) , p. 149.

^ Piston with improved side loading resistance , 2009-10-12 , retrieved 2018-04-22 ^ Ricardo (1922) , pp. 119–120, 122.

^ Irving, Two stroke power units , pp. 13–15.

^ Irving, Two stroke power units , pp. 15–16.

^ "Racing Piston Technology – Piston Weight And Design – Circle Track Magazine" .

Hot Rod Network . 2007-05-31 . Retrieved 2018-04-22 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Irving, P.E.

(1967).

Two-Stroke Power Units . Newnes.

Ricardo, Harry (1922).

The Internal Combustion Engine . Vol. I: Slow-Speed Engines (1st ed.). London: Blackie .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pistons .

Piston Engines Essay How Stuff Works – Basic Engine Parts Piston Motion Equations v t e Internal combustion engine Part of the Automobile series Engine block and rotating assembly Balance shaft Block heater Bore Connecting rod Crankcase Crankcase ventilation system (PCV valve) Crankpin Crankshaft Core plug (freeze plug) Cylinder ( bank , layout ) Displacement Flywheel Firing order Stroke Main bearing Piston Piston ring Starter ring gear Valvetrain and Cylinder head Flathead layout Overhead camshaft layout Overhead valve (pushrod) layout Tappet / lifter Camshaft Chest Combustion chamber Compression ratio Head gasket Rocker arm Timing belt Valve Forced induction Blowoff valve Boost controller Intercooler Supercharger Turbocharger Fuel system Diesel engine Petrol engine Carburetor Fuel filter Fuel injection Fuel pump Fuel tank Ignition Magneto Compression ignition Coil-on-plug Distributor Glow plug Ignition coil Spark plug Spark plug wires Engine management Engine control unit (ECU) Electrical system Alternator Battery Dynamo Starter motor Intake system Airbox Air filter Idle air control actuator Inlet manifold MAP sensor MAF sensor Throttle Throttle position sensor Exhaust system Catalytic converter Diesel particulate filter EGT sensor Exhaust manifold Muffler Oxygen sensor Cooling system Air cooling Water cooling Electric fan Radiator Thermostat Viscous fan (fan clutch) Lubrication Oil Oil filter Oil pump Sump ( wet , dry ) Other Knocking / pinging Power band Redline Stratified charge Top dead centre Portal Category v t e Aircraft piston engine components, systems and terminology Piston engines Mechanical components Camshaft Connecting rod Crankpin Crankshaft Cylinder Cylinder head Gudgeon pin Hydraulic tappet Main bearing Obturator ring Oil pump Piston Piston ring Poppet valve Pushrod Rocker arm Sleeve valve Tappet Electrical components Alternator Capacitor discharge ignition Dual ignition Electronic fuel injection Generator Ignition system Magneto Spark plug Starter Terminology Air-cooled Aircraft engine starting Bore Compression ratio Dead centre Engine displacement Four-stroke engine Horsepower Ignition timing Manifold pressure Mean effective pressure Naturally aspirated Monosoupape Overhead camshaft Overhead valve engine Rotary engine Shock cooling Stroke Time between overhauls Two-stroke engine Valve timing Volumetric efficiency Propellers Components Propeller governor Propeller speed reduction unit Spinner Terminology Autofeather Blade pitch Constant-speed Contra-rotating Counter-rotating Scimitar Single-blade Variable-pitch Engine instruments Annunciator panel EFIS EICAS Flight data recorder Glass cockpit Hobbs meter Tachometer Engine controls Carburetor heat Throttle Fuel and induction system Avgas Carburetor Fuel injection Gascolator Inlet manifold Intercooler Pressure carburetor Supercharger Turbocharger Updraft carburetor Other systems Auxiliary power unit Coffman starter Hydraulic system Ice protection system Recoil start v t e Steam engines Operating cycle Atmospheric Watt Cornish Compound Uniflow Valves Valves Slide D slide Piston Drop Corliss Poppet Sleeve Bash Valve gear Gab Stephenson link Joy Walschaerts Allan Baker Corliss Lentz Caprotti Gresley conjugated Southern Mechanisms Beam Cataract Centrifugal governor Connecting rod Crank Crankshaft Tusi couple hypocycloidal straight line mechanism Link chain Parallel motion Plate chain Rotative beam Sun and planet gear Watt's linkage Boilers Simple boilers Haystack Wagon Egg-ended Box Flued Cornish Lancashire Fire-tube boilers Locomotive Scotch Launch Water-tube boilers Babcock & Wilcox Field-tube Sentinel Stirling Thimble tube Three-drum Yarrow Boiler feed Feedwater heater Feedwater pump Injector Cylinder Locomotive Oscillating Single- and double-acting Condenser Condensing steam locomotive Jet Kirchweger Watt's separate "Pickle-pot" Surface Other Blowback Crosshead Cutoff Expansion valve Hydrolock Piston Reciprocating engine Return connecting rod engine Six-column beam engine Steeple engine Safety valve Steeple compound engine Stroke Working fluid History Precursors Savery Engine (1698) Newcomen engine Newcomen Memorial Engine (1725) Fairbottom Bobs (1760) Elsecar Engine (1795) Watt engine Beam Kinneil Engine (1768) Old Bess (1777) Chacewater Mine engine (1778) Smethwick Engine (1779) Resolution (1781) Rotative beam Soho Manufactory engine (1782) Bradley Works engine (1783) Whitbread Engine (1785) National Museum of Scotland engine (1786) Lap Engine (1788) High-pressure Richard Trevithick Puffing Devil (1801) London Steam Carriage (1803) "Coalbrookdale Locomotive" (1803) "Pen-y-Darren" locomotive (1804) Compound Woolf's compound engine (1803) Murray Murray's Hypocycloidal Engine (1805) Salamanca (1812) High-speed Porter-Allen (1862) Ljungström (1908) See also Glossary of steam locomotive components History of steam road vehicles Cugnot's fardier à vapeur (1769) Murdoch's model steam carriage (1784) Lean's Engine Reporter List of steam technology patents Modern steam Stationary steam engine Timeline of steam power Water-returning engine Authority control databases National United States Japan Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐cjmj4
Cached time: 20250812014033
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.546 seconds
Real time usage: 0.714 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2551/1000000
Revision size: 15562/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 128231/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3568/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 57588/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.317/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7997194/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  560.775      1 -total
 18.94%  106.187      9 Template:Navbox
 17.66%   99.058      2 Template:Reflist
 14.96%   83.888      1 Template:Automotive_engine
 14.01%   78.591      3 Template:Cite_news
 12.09%   67.824      1 Template:Short_description
  9.57%   53.671      1 Template:Commons_category
  9.09%   50.958      1 Template:Sister_project
  8.80%   49.374      1 Template:Side_box
  8.70%   48.772      1 Template:More_citations_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:24776:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812014033 and revision id 1245500777. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Piston&oldid=1245500777 " Categories : Pistons Engine technology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2013 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is locally defined All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2021 CS1: long volume value Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 September 2024, at 10:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Piston 64 languages Add topic

