Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Experimental motivation 2 Detector description Toggle Detector description subsection 2.1 Charged current interaction 2.2 Neutral current interaction 2.3 Electron elastic scattering 3 Experimental results and impact 4 Other possible analyses 5 Participating institutions Toggle Participating institutions subsection 5.1 Canada 5.2 United Kingdom 5.3 United States 6 Honours and awards 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Sudbury Neutrino Observatory 15 languages العربية Deutsch Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 46°28′30″N 81°12′04″W ﻿ / ﻿ 46.47500°N 81.20111°W ﻿ / 46.47500; -81.20111 [ 13 ] From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Underground laboratory in Ontario, Canada Beyond the Standard Model Simulated Large Hadron Collider CMS particle detector data depicting a Higgs boson produced by colliding protons decaying into hadron jets and electrons Standard Model Evidence Hierarchy problem Dark matter Dark energy Quintessence Phantom energy Dark radiation Dark photon Cosmological constant problem Strong CP problem Neutrino oscillation Theories Brans–Dicke theory Cosmic censorship hypothesis Fifth force F-theory Theory of everything Unified field theory Grand Unified Theory Technicolor Kaluza–Klein theory 6D (2,0) superconformal field theory Noncommutative quantum field theory Quantum cosmology Brane cosmology String theory Superstring theory M-theory Mathematical universe hypothesis Mirror matter Randall–Sundrum model N = 4 supersymmetric Yang–Mills theory Twistor string theory Dark fluid Doubly special relativity de Sitter invariant special relativity Causal fermion systems Black hole thermodynamics Unparticle physics Graviphoton Graviscalar Graviton Gravitino Massive gravity Gauge gravitation theory Gauge theory gravity CPT symmetry Supersymmetry MSSM NMSSM Superstring theory M-theory Supergravity Supersymmetry breaking Extra dimensions Large extra dimensions Quantum gravity False vacuum String theory Spin foam Quantum foam Quantum geometry Loop quantum gravity Quantum cosmology Loop quantum cosmology Causal dynamical triangulation Causal fermion systems Causal sets Canonical quantum gravity Semiclassical gravity Superfluid vacuum theory Experiments ANNIE Gran Sasso INO LHC SNO Super-K Tevatron NOvA v t e The Sudbury Neutrino Observatory ( SNO ) was a neutrino observatory located 2100 m underground in Vale 's Creighton Mine in Sudbury , Ontario , Canada. The detector was designed to detect solar neutrinos through their interactions with a large tank of heavy water .

The detector was turned on in May 1999, and was turned off on 28 November 2006.  The SNO collaboration was active for several years after that analyzing the data taken.

The director of the experiment, Art McDonald , was co-awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 2015 for the experiment's contribution to the discovery of neutrino oscillation .

[ 1 ] The underground laboratory has been enlarged into a permanent facility and now operates multiple experiments as SNOLAB . The SNO equipment itself was being refurbished as of February 2017 [update] for use in the SNO+ experiment.

Experimental motivation [ edit ] See also: Solar neutrino problem The first measurements of the number of solar neutrinos reaching the Earth were taken in the 1960s, and all experiments prior to SNO observed a third to a half fewer neutrinos than were predicted by the Standard Solar Model . As several experiments confirmed this deficit the effect became known as the solar neutrino problem . Over several decades many ideas were put forward to try to explain the effect, one of which was the hypothesis of neutrino oscillations . All of the solar neutrino detectors prior to SNO had been sensitive primarily or exclusively to electron neutrinos and yielded little to no information on muon neutrinos and tau neutrinos .

In 1984, Herb Chen of the University of California at Irvine first pointed out the advantages of using heavy water as a detector for solar neutrinos.

[ 2 ] Unlike previous detectors, using heavy water would make the detector sensitive to two reactions, one reaction sensitive to all neutrino flavours, the other reaction sensitive to only electron neutrino.  Thus, such a detector could measure neutrino oscillations directly.  A location in Canada was attractive because Atomic Energy of Canada Limited , which maintains large stockpiles of heavy water to support its CANDU reactor power plants, was willing to lend the necessary amount (worth CA$ 330,000,000 at market prices) at no cost.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The Creighton Mine in Sudbury is among the deepest in the world and, accordingly, experiences a very small background flux of radiation. It was quickly identified as an ideal place for Chen's proposed experiment to be built, [ 3 ] and the mine management was willing to make the location available for only incremental costs.

[ 5 ] : 440 The SNO collaboration held its first meeting in 1984. At the time it competed with TRIUMF 's KAON Factory proposal for federal funding, and the wide variety of universities backing SNO quickly led to it being selected for development. The official go-ahead was given in 1990.

The experiment observed the light produced by relativistic electrons in the water created by neutrino interactions. As relativistic electrons travel through a medium, they lose energy producing a cone of blue light through the Cherenkov effect , and it is this light that is directly detected.

Detector description [ edit ] The Sudbury Neutrino Detector (Courtesy of SNO) A wide-angle view of the detector interior (Courtesy of SNO) The SNO detector target consisted of 1,000 tonnes (1,102 short tons ) of heavy water contained in a 6-metre-radius (20 ft) acrylic vessel. The detector cavity outside the vessel was filled with normal water to provide both buoyancy for the vessel and radiation shielding . The heavy water was viewed by approximately 9,600 photomultiplier tubes (PMTs) mounted on a geodesic sphere at a radius of about 850 centimetres (28 ft). The cavity housing the detector was the largest in the world at such a depth, [ 6 ] requiring a variety of high-performance rock bolting techniques to prevent rock bursts. The mining was completed in May 1993.

[ 7 ] The observatory is located at the end of a 1.5-kilometre-long (0.9 mi) drift , named the "SNO drift", isolating it from other mining operations. Along the drift are a number of operations and equipment rooms, all held in a clean room setting. Most of the facility is Class 3000 (fewer than 3,000 particles of 1 μm or larger per 1 ft 3 of air) but the final cavity containing the detector is an even stricter Class 100 .

[ 3 ] Charged current interaction [ edit ] In the charged current interaction, a neutrino converts the neutron in a deuteron to a proton . The neutrino is absorbed in the reaction and an electron is produced. Solar neutrinos have energies smaller than the mass of muons and tau leptons , so only electron neutrinos can participate in this reaction. The emitted electron carries off most of the neutrino's energy, on the order of 5–15 MeV , and is detectable. The proton which is produced does not have enough energy to be detected easily. The electrons produced in this reaction are emitted in all directions, but there is a slight tendency for them to point back in the direction from which the neutrino came.

Neutral current interaction [ edit ] In the neutral current interaction, a neutrino dissociates the deuteron, breaking it into its constituent neutron and proton. The neutrino continues on with slightly less energy, and all three neutrino flavours are equally likely to participate in this interaction.  Heavy water has a small cross section for neutrons, but when neutrons are captured by a deuterium nucleus, a gamma ray ( photon ) with roughly 6 MeV of energy is produced.  The direction of the gamma ray is completely uncorrelated with the direction of the neutrino. Some of the neutrons produced from the dissociated deuterons make their way through the acrylic vessel into the light water jacket surrounding the heavy water, and since light water has a very large cross section for neutron capture, these neutrons are captured very quickly.  Gamma rays of roughly 2.2 MeV are produced in this reaction, but because the energy of the photons is less than the detector's energy threshold (meaning they do not trigger the photomultipliers), they are not directly observable. However, when the gamma ray collides with an electron via Compton scattering, the accelerated electron can be detected through Cherenkov radiation.

Electron elastic scattering [ edit ] In the elastic scattering interaction, a neutrino collides with an atomic electron and imparts some of its energy to the electron. All three neutrinos can participate in this interaction through the exchange of the neutral Z boson , and electron neutrinos can also participate with the exchange of a charged W boson . For this reason this interaction is dominated by electron neutrinos, and this is the channel through which the Super-Kamiokande (Super-K) detector can observe solar neutrinos. This interaction is the relativistic equivalent of billiards , and for this reason the electrons produced usually point in the direction that the neutrino was travelling (away from the sun). Because this interaction takes place on atomic electrons it occurs with the same rate in both the heavy and light water.

Experimental results and impact [ edit ] The first scientific results of SNO were published on 18 June 2001, [ 8 ] [ 9 ] and presented the first clear evidence that neutrinos oscillate (i.e. that they can transmute into one another), as they travel from the Sun. This oscillation, in turn, implies that neutrinos have non-zero masses. The total flux of all neutrino flavours measured by SNO agrees well with theoretical predictions. Further measurements carried out by SNO have since confirmed and improved the precision of the original result.

Although Super-K had beaten SNO to the punch, having published evidence for neutrino oscillation as early as 1998, the Super-K results were not conclusive and did not specifically deal with solar neutrinos. SNO's results were the first to directly demonstrate oscillations in solar neutrinos. This was important to the standard solar model . In 2007, the Franklin Institute awarded the director of SNO Art McDonald with the Benjamin Franklin Medal in Physics.

[ 10 ] In 2015 the Nobel Prize for Physics was jointly awarded to Arthur B. McDonald, and Takaaki Kajita of the University of Tokyo, for the discovery of neutrino oscillations.

[ 11 ] Other possible analyses [ edit ] The SNO detector would have been capable of detecting a supernova within our galaxy if one had occurred while the detector was online. As neutrinos emitted by a supernova are released earlier than the photons, it is possible to alert the astronomical community before the supernova is visible. SNO was a founding member of the Supernova Early Warning System (SNEWS) with Super-Kamiokande and the Large Volume Detector . No such supernovae have yet been detected.

The SNO experiment was also able to observe atmospheric neutrinos produced by cosmic ray interactions in the atmosphere. Due to the limited size of the SNO detector in comparison with Super-K, the low cosmic ray neutrino signal is not statistically significant at neutrino energies below 1 GeV .

Participating institutions [ edit ] Large particle physics experiments require large collaborations. With approximately 100 collaborators, SNO was a rather small group compared to collider experiments . The participating institutions have included: Canada [ edit ] Carleton University Laurentian University Queen's University – designed and built many calibration sources and the device for deploying sources TRIUMF University of British Columbia University of Guelph Although no longer a collaborating institution, Chalk River Laboratories led the construction of the acrylic vessel that holds the heavy water, and Atomic Energy of Canada Limited was the source of the heavy water.

United Kingdom [ edit ] University of Oxford –  developed much of the experiment's Monte Carlo analysis program (SNOMAN), and maintained the program University of Sussex –  calibration United States [ edit ] Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL)  –  Led the construction of the geodesic structure that holds the PMTs Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL) Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) University of Pennsylvania –  designed and built the front end electronics and trigger University of Washington –  designed and built proportional counter tubes for detection of neutrons in the third phase of the experiment Brookhaven National Laboratory University of Texas at Austin Massachusetts Institute of Technology Honours and awards [ edit ] Asteroid 14724 SNO is named in honour of SNO.

In November 2006, the entire SNO team was awarded the inaugural John C. Polanyi Award for "a recent outstanding advance in any field of the natural sciences or engineering" conducted in Canada .

[ 12 ] SNO principal investigator Arthur B. McDonald won the 2015 Nobel Prize in Physics , jointly with Takaaki Kajita of Super-Kamiokande , for the discovery of neutrino oscillation.

SNO was awarded the 2016 Fundamental Physics Prize along with 4 other neutrino experiments.

See also [ edit ] DEAP – Dark Matter Experiment using Argon Pulse-shape at SNO location Homestake experiment – A predecessor experiment conducted 1970–1994 in a mine at Lead, South Dakota SNO+ – The successor of SNO SNOLAB –  A permanent underground physics laboratory being built around SNO References [ edit ] 46°28′30″N 81°12′04″W ﻿ / ﻿ 46.47500°N 81.20111°W ﻿ / 46.47500; -81.20111 [ 13 ] ^ "2015 Nobel Prize in Physics: Canadian Arthur B. McDonald shares win with Japan's Takaaki Kajita" .

CBC News . 2015-10-06.

^ Chen, Herbert H. (September 1984). "Direct Approach to Resolve the Solar-Neutrino Problem".

Physical Review Letters .

55 (14): 1534– 1536.

Bibcode : 1985PhRvL..55.1534C .

doi : 10.1103/PhysRevLett.55.1534 .

PMID 10031848 .

^ a b c "The Sudbury Neutrino Observatory – Canada's eye on the universe" .

CERN Courier .

CERN . 4 December 2001 . Retrieved 2008-06-04 .

^ "Heavy Water" . 31 January 2006. Archived from the original on 2015-12-19 . Retrieved 2015-12-03 .

^ Jelley, Nick; McDonald, Arthur B.

; Robertson, R.G. Hamish (2009).

"The Sudbury Neutrino Observatory" (PDF) .

Annual Review of Nuclear and Particle Science .

59 (1): 431– 65.

Bibcode : 2009ARNPS..59..431J .

doi : 10.1146/annurev.nucl.55.090704.151550 .

A good retrospective on the project.

^ Brewer, Robert.

"Deep Sphere: The unique structural design of the Sudbury Neutrinos Observatory buried within the earth" .

Canadian Consulting Engineer . Archived from the original on 2016-03-04 . Retrieved 2016-01-14 .

^ "Black hole to trap neutrinos completed by Inco miners" (PDF) .

Inco Triangle .

52 (5): 1. May 1993.

^ Ahmad, QR; et al. (2001). "Measurement of the Rate of ν e + d → p + p + e − Interactions Produced by 8 B Solar Neutrinos at the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory".

Physical Review Letters .

87 (7): 071301.

arXiv : nucl-ex/0106015 .

Bibcode : 2001PhRvL..87g1301A .

doi : 10.1103/PhysRevLett.87.071301 .

PMID 11497878 .

^ "Sudbury Neutrino Observatory First Scientific Results" . 3 July 2001. Archived from the original on 2015-12-12 . Retrieved 2008-06-04 .

^ "Arthur B. McDonald, Ph.D" .

Franklin Laureate Database .

Franklin Institute . Archived from the original on 2008-10-04 . Retrieved 2008-06-04 .

^ "The Nobel Prize in Physics 2015" . Retrieved 2015-10-06 .

^ "Past Winners – The Sudbury Neutrino Observatory" .

NSERC . 3 March 2008 . Retrieved 2008-06-04 .

^ SNOLAB User's Handbook Rev. 2 (PDF) , 2006-06-26, p. 33 , retrieved 2013-02-01 External links [ edit ] Media related to Sudbury Neutrino Observatory at Wikimedia Commons SNO's official site Joshua Klein's Introduction to SNO, Solar Neutrinos, and Penn at SNO "Experiment Cave" .

WIRED Science . Episode 104. 2007-10-24.

PBS . Archived from the original on October 26, 2007.

Written and Directed by David Sington (2006-02-21).

"The Ghost Particle" .

Nova . Season 34. Episode 3306 (607).

PBS .

Showcase of Canadian Engineering Achievement: Sudbury Neutrino Observatory (IEEE Canada).  Several articles about the civil engineering of SNO.

SNO experiment record on INSPIRE-HEP v t e Breakthrough Prize laureates Mathematics Simon Donaldson , Maxim Kontsevich , Jacob Lurie , Terence Tao and Richard Taylor (2015) Ian Agol (2016) Jean Bourgain (2017) Christopher Hacon , James McKernan (2018) Vincent Lafforgue (2019) Alex Eskin (2020) Martin Hairer (2021) Takuro Mochizuki (2022) Daniel A. Spielman (2023) Simon Brendle (2024) Dennis Gaitsgory (2025) Fundamental physics Nima Arkani-Hamed , Alan Guth , Alexei Kitaev , Maxim Kontsevich , Andrei Linde , Juan Maldacena , Nathan Seiberg , Ashoke Sen , Edward Witten (2012) Special : Stephen Hawking , Peter Jenni , Fabiola Gianotti (ATLAS), Michel Della Negra , Tejinder Virdee , Guido Tonelli , Joseph Incandela (CMS) and Lyn Evans (LHC) (2013) Alexander Polyakov (2013) Michael Green and John Henry Schwarz (2014) Saul Perlmutter and members of the Supernova Cosmology Project ; Brian Schmidt , Adam Riess and members of the High-Z Supernova Team (2015) Special : Ronald Drever , Kip Thorne , Rainer Weiss and contributors to LIGO project (2016) Yifang Wang , Kam-Biu Luk and the Daya Bay team , Atsuto Suzuki and the KamLAND team, Kōichirō Nishikawa and the K2K / T2K team, Arthur B. McDonald and the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory team, Takaaki Kajita and Yōichirō Suzuki and the Super-Kamiokande team (2016) Joseph Polchinski , Andrew Strominger , Cumrun Vafa (2017) Charles L. Bennett , Gary Hinshaw , Norman Jarosik , Lyman Page Jr.

, David Spergel (2018) Special : Jocelyn Bell Burnell (2018) Charles Kane and Eugene Mele (2019) Special : Sergio Ferrara , Daniel Z. Freedman , Peter van Nieuwenhuizen (2019) The Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration (2020) Eric Adelberger , Jens H. Gundlach and Blayne Heckel (2021) Special : Steven Weinberg (2021) Hidetoshi Katori and Jun Ye (2022) Charles H. Bennett , Gilles Brassard , David Deutsch , Peter W. Shor (2023) John Cardy and Alexander Zamolodchikov (2024) Life sciences Cornelia Bargmann , David Botstein , Lewis C. Cantley , Hans Clevers , Titia de Lange , Napoleone Ferrara , Eric Lander , Charles Sawyers , Robert Weinberg , Shinya Yamanaka and Bert Vogelstein (2013) James P. Allison , Mahlon DeLong , Michael N. Hall , Robert S. Langer , Richard P. Lifton and Alexander Varshavsky (2014) Alim Louis Benabid , Charles David Allis , Victor Ambros , Gary Ruvkun , Jennifer Doudna and Emmanuelle Charpentier (2015) Edward Boyden , Karl Deisseroth , John Hardy , Helen Hobbs and Svante Pääbo (2016) Stephen J. Elledge , Harry F. Noller , Roeland Nusse , Yoshinori Ohsumi , Huda Zoghbi (2017) Joanne Chory , Peter Walter , Kazutoshi Mori , Kim Nasmyth , Don W. Cleveland (2018) C. Frank Bennett and Adrian R. Krainer , Angelika Amon , Xiaowei Zhuang , Zhijian Chen (2019) Jeffrey M. Friedman , Franz-Ulrich Hartl , Arthur L. Horwich , David Julius , Virginia Man-Yee Lee (2020) David Baker , Catherine Dulac , Dennis Lo , Richard J. Youle [ de ] (2021) Jeffery W. Kelly , Katalin Karikó , Drew Weissman , Shankar Balasubramanian , David Klenerman and Pascal Mayer (2022) Clifford P. Brangwynne , Anthony A. Hyman , Demis Hassabis , John Jumper , Emmanuel Mignot , Masashi Yanagisawa (2023) Carl June , Michel Sadelain , Sabine Hadida , Paul Negulescu , Fredrick Van Goor , Thomas Gasser , Ellen Sidransky and Andrew Singleton (2024) v t e Neutrino detectors, experiments, and facilities Discoveries Cowan–Reines ( ν e ) Lederman–Schwartz–Steinberger ( ν μ ) DONUT ( ν τ ) Neutrino oscillation SN 1987 neutrino burst Operating (divided by primary neutrino source) Astronomical ANITA ANTARES ASD BDUNT Borexino BUST HALO IceCube LVD NEVOD SAGE Super-Kamiokande SNEWS Reactor CONUS/CONUS+ Daya Bay KamLAND RENO STEREO Accelerator ANNIE COHERENT ICARUS (Fermilab) MicroBooNE MINERνA MiniBooNE NA61/SHINE NOvA NuMI T2K Collider FASER SND@LHC 0νββ AMoRE COBRA CUORE KamLAND-Zen MAJORANA NEXT PandaX SNO+ XMASS Other KATRIN WITCH Construction ARA ARIANNA Baikal-GVD BEST DUNE Hyper-Kamiokande JUNO KM3NeT NUCLEUS SuperNEMO Retired AMANDA ANTARES CDHS Chooz CNGS Cuoricino DONUT Double Chooz ERPM EXO-200 GALLEX Gargamelle GERDA GNO Heidelberg-Moscow Homestake ICARUS IGEX IMB K2K Kamiokande KARMEN KGF LSND MACRO MINOS MINOS+ NARC NEMO OPERA RICE SciBooNE SNO Soudan 2 Utah Proposed CUPID nEXO JEM-EUSO GRAND INO LEGEND LENA Neutrino Factory Nucifer P-ONE SBND UNO WATCHMAN Cancelled DUMAND Project LAGUNA Long Baseline Neutrino Experiment NEMO Project NESTOR Project SOX BOREX See also BNO (Baksan or Baxan Neutrino Observatory) Kamioka Observatory LNGS SNOLAB List of neutrino experiments v t e Standard Model Background Particle physics Fermions Gauge boson Higgs boson Quantum field theory Gauge theory Strong interaction Color charge Quantum chromodynamics Quark model Electroweak interaction Weak interaction Quantum electrodynamics Fermi's interaction Weak hypercharge Weak isospin Constituents CKM matrix Spontaneous symmetry breaking Higgs mechanism Mathematical formulation of the Standard Model Beyond the Standard Model Evidence Hierarchy problem Dark matter Cosmological constant problem Strong CP problem Neutrino oscillation Theories Technicolor Kaluza–Klein theory Grand Unified Theory Theory of everything Supersymmetry MSSM NMSSM Split supersymmetry Supergravity Quantum gravity String theory Superstring theory Loop quantum gravity Causal dynamical triangulation Canonical quantum gravity Superfluid vacuum theory Twistor theory Experiments Gran Sasso INO LHC SNO Super-K Tevatron Category Commons Portals : Physics Canada Astronomy Stars Education Science Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sudbury_Neutrino_Observatory&oldid=1294852082 " Categories : Neutrino observatories Buildings and structures in Greater Sudbury Research institutes in Canada Nuclear research institutes Particle experiments Underground laboratories Physics beyond the Standard Model Laboratories in Canada Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing potentially dated statements from February 2017 All articles containing potentially dated statements Coordinates on Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 June 2025, at 05:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sudbury Neutrino Observatory 15 languages Add topic

