Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Causes Toggle Causes subsection 2.1 Socioeconomic aspects 3 Fossil fuel racism 4 Impacts on health Toggle Impacts on health subsection 4.1 Pollution 4.2 Environmental racism limits improvement 5 Reducing environmental racism Toggle Reducing environmental racism subsection 5.1 Studies 5.2 Procedural justice 5.3 Activism 5.3.1 Indigenous women's movements in Canada 5.4 Environmental reparations 5.5 Policies and international agreements 5.6 United States legislation and policies 5.7 Current initiatives in the United States 5.8 Potential solutions 6 Examples by region Toggle Examples by region subsection 6.1 Africa 6.1.1 Nigeria 6.1.2 South Africa 6.2 Asia 6.2.1 China 6.2.2 India 6.2.3 Russia 6.3 Europe 6.3.1 Eastern Europe 6.3.2 France 6.3.3 United Kingdom 6.4 North America 6.4.1 Canada 6.4.2 Mexico 6.4.3 United States 6.4.3.1 Native American peoples 6.5 Oceania 6.5.1 Australia 6.5.2 Micronesia 6.5.3 Papua New Guinea 6.5.4 Polynesia 6.6 South America 6.6.1 The Andes 6.6.2 Chile 6.6.3 Ecuador 6.6.4 Haiti 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Environmental racism 34 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bikol Central Català Čeština Cymraeg Dagbanli Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hausa Igbo Bahasa Indonesia മലയാളം ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Nederlands 日本語 پنجابی Português Română Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Türkçe Twi Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Environmental injustice that occurs within a racialized context Part of a series on Environmental justice Key topics Climate change effects poverty litigation Climate crisis debt justice reparations resilience Corporate accountability Corporate crime Corporate environmental responsibility Energy democracy Environmental conflict crime inequality in the UK injustice in Europe justice racism racism in the USA racism in Western Europe Rights Amendments List of environmental conflicts Urban forest inequity Academia Decolonization of knowledge Human geography Ecological economics Environmental Justice Atlas Environmental sociology Political ecology Social ecology Scholars : Robert Bullard Dina Gilio-Whitaker Joan Martinez Alier Kyle Powys Whyte Dorceta Taylor By region Africa Europe Western Europe Central and Eastern Europe Russia United Kingdom United States US-Mexico border Related topics Blockadia Climate finance Corporate accountability for human rights violations Corporate social responsibility Decolonization Desertification Electronic waste Environmental defender Water protector Land defender Environmentalism of the poor Environmentalism Environmental law Extractivism Global waste trade Green imperialism Human rights and climate change Impact investing List of environmental killings Locally unwanted land use Political representation of nature Rights of nature Sacrifice zone Stewardship Sumak Kawsay Toxic colonialism Water conflict Zapatismo Category v t e Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e People protesting the water crisis in Flint, Michigan , which disproportionately affected people of color and low-income communities Environmental racism , ecological racism , or ecological apartheid is a form of racism leading to negative environmental outcomes such as landfills, incinerators , and hazardous waste disposal disproportionately impacting communities of color , violating substantive equality .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Internationally, it is also associated with extractivism , which places the environmental burdens of mining, oil extraction, and industrial agriculture upon indigenous peoples and poorer nations largely inhabited by people of color.

[ 1 ] Environmental racism is the disproportionate impact of environmental hazards, pollution, and ecological degradation experienced by marginalized communities, as well as those of people of color.

[ 4 ] Race, socio-economic status, and environmental injustice directly impact these communities in terms of their health outcomes as well as their quality of health. Communities are not all created equal. In the United States, some communities are continuously polluted while the government gives little to no attention. According to Robert D. Bullard, father of environmental justice, environmental regulations are not equally benefiting all of society; people of color (African Americans, Latinos, Asians, Pacific Islanders, and Native Americans) are disproportionately harmed by industrial toxins in their jobs and their neighborhoods.

[ 5 ] Within this context, understanding the intersectionality of race, socio-economic status, and environmental injustice through its history and the disproportionate impact is a starting point for leaning towards equitable solutions for environmental justice for all segments of society. Exploring the historical roots, impacts of environmental racism, governmental actions, grassroots efforts, and possible remedies can serve as a foundation for addressing this issue effectively.

Response to environmental racism has contributed to the environmental justice movement, which developed in the United States and abroad throughout the 1970s and 1980s. Environmental racism may disadvantage minority groups or numerical majorities, as in South Africa where apartheid had debilitating environmental impacts on Black people. Internationally, trade in global waste disadvantages global majorities in poorer countries largely inhabited by people of color.

[ 1 ] It also applies to the particular vulnerability of indigenous groups to environmental pollution .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Environmental racism is a form of institutional racism, which has led to the disproportionate disposal of hazardous waste in communities of color in Russia. Environmental racism is a type of inequality where people in communities of color and other low income communities face a disproportionate risk of exposure to pollution and related health conditions.

[ 8 ] History [ edit ] Benjamin F. Chavis Jr. coined the phrase "environmental racism".

"Environmental racism" was a term coined in 1982 by Benjamin Chavis , previous executive director of the United Church of Christ (UCC) Commission for Racial Justice. In a speech opposing the placement of hazardous polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) waste in the Warren County, North Carolina landfill , Chavis defined the term as: racial discrimination in environmental policy making, the enforcement of regulations and laws, the deliberate targeting of communities of color for toxic waste facilities, the official sanctioning of the life-threatening presence of poisons and pollutants in our communities, and the history of excluding people of color from leadership of the ecology movements.

Recognition of environmental racism catalyzed the environmental justice movement that began in the 1970s and 1980s with influence from the earlier civil rights movement . Grassroots organizations and campaigns brought attention to environmental racism in policy making and emphasized the importance of minority input. While environmental racism has been historically tied to the environmental justice movement, throughout the years the term has been increasingly disassociated .
Following the events in Warren County, the UCC and US General Accounting Office released reports showing that hazardous waste sites were disproportionately located in poor minority neighborhoods. Chavis and Dr. Robert D. Bullard pointed out institutionalized racism stemming from government and corporate policies that led to environmental racism. These racist practices included redlining , zoning, and colorblind adaptation planning. Residents experienced environmental racism due to their low socioeconomic status, and lack of political representation and mobility. Expanding the definition in "The Legacy of American Apartheid and Environmental Racism", Dr. Bullard said that environmental racism: refers to any policy, practice, or directive that differentially affects or disadvantages (whether intended or unintended) individuals, groups, or communities based on race or color.

Institutional racism operates on a large scale within societal norms, policies, and procedures extending to environmental planning and decision-making, reinforcing environmental racism through government, legal, economic, and political institutions. Racism significantly increases exposure to environmental and health risks as well as access to health care.

Government agencies, including the federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), have often failed to protect people of color from pollution and industrial infiltrations. This failure is evident in the disproportionate pollution burden borne by communities of color, with African American and Latino neighborhoods experiencing higher levels of pollution compared to predominantly white areas.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] For instance, in Los Angeles, over 71% of African Americans and 50% of Latinos live in areas with the most polluted air, while only 34% of the white population does. Nationally, a significant portion of whites, African Americans, and Hispanics reside in counties with substandard air quality, with people of color disproportionately affected by pollution-related health issues.

[ 11 ] Although the term was coined in the US, environmental racism also occurs on the international level. Studies have shown that since environmental laws have become prominent in developed countries, companies have moved their waste towards the Global South .

[ 12 ] Less developed countries frequently have fewer environmental regulations and become pollution havens .

[ 13 ] Causes [ edit ] There are four factors which lead to environmental racism: lack of affordable land, lack of political power, lack of mobility, and poverty . Cheap land is sought by corporations and governmental bodies. As a result, communities which cannot effectively resist these corporations' governmental bodies and cannot access political power are unable to negotiate just costs.

[ 14 ] Communities with minimized socio-economic mobility cannot relocate. Lack of financial contributions also reduces the communities' ability to act both physically and politically. Chavis defined environmental racism in five categories: racial discrimination in defining environmental policies, discriminatory enforcement of regulations and laws, deliberate targeting of minority communities as hazardous waste dumping sites, official sanctioning of dangerous pollutants in minority communities, and the exclusion of people of color from environmental leadership positions Minority communities often do not have the financial means, resources, and political representation to oppose hazardous waste sites.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Known as locally unwanted land uses (LULUs), these facilities that benefit the whole community often reduce the quality of life of minority communities.

[ 17 ] These neighborhoods also may depend on the economic opportunities the site brings and are reluctant to oppose its location at the risk of their health. Additionally, controversial projects are less likely to be sited in non-minority areas that are expected to pursue collective action and succeed in opposing the siting of the projects in their area.
In cities in the Global North, suburbanization and gentrification lead to patterns of environmental racism. For example, white flight from industrial zones for safer, cleaner, suburban locales leaves minority communities in the inner cities and in close proximity to polluted industrial zones.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] In these areas, unemployment is high and businesses are less likely to invest in area improvement, creating poor economic conditions for residents and reinforcing a social formation that reproduces racial inequality. Furthermore, the poverty of property owners and residents in a municipality may be taken into consideration by hazardous waste facility developers, since areas with depressed real estate values will save developers' money.

Socioeconomic aspects [ edit ] Cost–benefit analysis (CBA) is a process that places a monetary value on costs and benefits to evaluate issues.

[ 20 ] Environmental CBA aims to provide policy solutions for intangible products such as clean air and water by measuring a consumer's willingness to pay for these goods. CBA can contribute to environmental racism [ dubious – discuss ] through the valuing of environmental resources based on their utility to society. When someone is willing and able to pay more for clean water or air, their payment financially benefits society more than when people cannot pay for these goods, which can create a burden on poor communities. This can manifest through discriminatory or disproportionate siting, in which hazardous waste sites are disproportionately placed in communities with a higher percentage of low-income or minority households.

[ 21 ] This form of economic valuation can contribute to these siting practices and further entrench environmental racism through the devaluation of property values in these communities.

[ 22 ] Economic property valuation can also contribute to environmental racism through environmental gentrification , which describes the process that can occur when the removal of decontamination or creation of green spaces in low-income and communities of color leads to higher-income, often White, populations moving to these areas. The improvement of the environmental quality of these communities, while often intended to reduce health disparities and advance environmental justice, can lead to an increase in property values that can displace previous residents.

[ 23 ] Fossil fuel racism [ edit ] Fossil fuels are interconnected with crises like climate change, racial injustice, and public health. Various stages of fossil fuels include extraction, processing, transport, and combustion, all contributing to harmful pollution and greenhouse gas emissions.

[ citation needed ] The impacts of fossil fuel processing are not distributed equally with Black, Brown, Indigenous, and poor as opposed to white, or wealthy communities. These communities experience health hazards from air and water pollution as well as the risks from climate change.

Sacrifice zones are the concept associated with these communities where systemic racism intersects with a fossil fuel-based economy. From a perspective by Energy Research & Social Science, the "fossil fuel racism" phenomenon is framed through the argument that systemic racism effectively subsidizes the fossil fuel industry by allowing it to externalize the costs of pollution onto communities of color.

[ 24 ] Fossil fuel racism allows for a shift in the focus to the systems and structures that perpetuate these injustices. Implications with this effort follow as climate policy approaches often fail to address racial disparities and focus on broader impacts on public health. There is an urgent need for political and policy solutions revolving around the fossil fuel industry to address systemic injustices perpetuated by fossil fuel production and consumption.

[ citation needed ] Impacts on health [ edit ] Environmental racism impacts the health of the communities affected by poor environments. Various factors that can cause health problems include exposure to hazardous chemical toxins in landfills and rivers. Exposure to these toxins can also weaken or slow brain development .

[ 15 ] The animal protection organization In Defense of Animals claims intensive animal agriculture negatively affects the health of nearby communities. They believe that associated manure lagoons produce hydrogen sulfide and contaminate local water supplies, leading to higher levels of miscarriages, birth defects, and disease outbreaks. These farms are disproportionately placed in low-income areas and communities of color. Other risks include exposure to pesticides, chemical run-off and particulate matter in the air.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] Poor cleanliness in facilities and chemical exposure may also affect agricultural workers, who are frequently people of color.

[ 26 ] Pollution [ edit ] A large quantity of gases released from a factory near apartments Dust pollution from drilling contributes to high amounts of toxic air inhaled.

The southeastern part of the United States has experienced a large amount of pollution and minority populations have been hit with the brunt of those impacts. There are many cases of people who have died or are chronically ill from coal plants in places such as Detroit , Memphis , and Kansas City .

Tennessee and West Virginia residents are frequently subject to breathing toxic ash due to blasting in the mountains for mining. Drought, flooding, the constant depletion of land and air quality determine the health and safety of the residents surrounding these areas. Communities of color and low-income status most often feel the brunt of these issues firsthand. There are many communities around the world that face the same problems. For example, the work of Desmond D'Sa focused on communities in South Durban where high pollution industries impact people forcibly relocated during Apartheid .

[ 27 ] Environmental racism limits improvement [ edit ] Environmental racism intensifies existing health disparities among marginalized communities, with BIPOC individuals disproportionately bearing the burden of environmental exposures and their health consequences. Black children, for example, are still more exposed to lead than children of other racial groups contributing to higher body burdens of toxins such as lead, polychlorinated biphenyls, and phthalates.

[ 11 ] Institutionalized racism in epidemiology and environmental health perpetuates the neglect of BIPOC experiences and contributes to the contribution of structural barriers in research funding and publication. For instance, studies on sperm health predominantly focus on White men, neglecting the reproductive health experiences of men of color despite their higher exposure to environmental toxins. This lack of inclusion in research both perpetuates health disparities and a lack of trust among BIPOC communities due to historical exploration in medical research.

[ 11 ] Structural racism within research contributes to the marginalization of BIPOC communities and limits the development of effective interventions that can address environmental health disparities.

Reducing environmental racism [ edit ] Activists have called for "more participatory and citizen-centered conceptions of justice." [ 28 ] [ 29 ] The environmental justice (EJ) movement and climate justice (CJ) movement address environmental racism in bringing attention and enacting change so that marginalized populations are not disproportionately vulnerable to climate change and pollution.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] According to the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, one possible solution is the precautionary principle , which states that "where there are threats of serious or irreversible damage, lack of full scientific certainty shall not be used as a reason for postponing cost-effective measures to prevent environmental degradation ." [ 32 ] Under this principle, the initiator of the potentially hazardous activity is charged with demonstrating the activity's safety. Environmental justice activists also emphasize the need for waste reduction in general, which would act to reduce the overall burden, as well as reduce methane emissions which in turn reduce climate change .

[ 29 ] Studies [ edit ] In wartimes, environmental racism occurs in ways that the public later learn about through reports. For example, Friends of the Earth International's Environmental Nakba report brings attention to environmental racism that has occurred in the Gaza Strip during the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict . Some Israeli practices include cutting off three days of water supply to refugee Palestinians and destroying farms.

[ 33 ] Besides studies that point out cases of environmental racism, studies have also provided information on how to go about changing regulations and preventing environmental racism from happening. In a study by Daum, Stoler and Grant on e-waste management in Accra, Ghana, the importance of engaging with different fields and organizations such as recycling firms, communities, and scrap metal traders are emphasized over adaptation strategies such as bans on burning and buy-back schemes that have not caused much effect on changing practices.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Environmental justice scholars such as Laura Pulido, Department Head of Ethnic Studies and Professor at the University of Oregon , [ 36 ] and David Pellow , Dehlsen and Department Chair of Environmental Studies and Director of the Global Environmental Justice Project at the University of California, Santa Barbara , [ 37 ] argue that recognizing environmental racism as an element stemming from the entrenched legacies of racial capitalism is crucial to the movement, with white supremacy continuing to shape human relationships with nature and labor.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] Procedural justice [ edit ] Current political ideologies surrounding how to make right issues of environmental racism and environmental justice are shifting towards the idea of employing procedural justice . Procedural justice is a concept that dictates the use of fairness in the process of making decisions, especially when said decisions are being made in diplomatic situations such as the allocation of resources or the settling of disagreements. Procedural justice calls for a fair, transparent, impartial decision-making process with equal opportunity for all parties to voice their positions, opinions, and concerns.

[ 41 ] Rather than just focusing on the outcomes of agreements and the effects those outcomes have on affected populations and interest groups, procedural justice looks to involve all stakeholders throughout the process from planning through implementation. In terms of combating environmental racism, procedural justice helps to reduce the opportunities for powerful actors such as often-corrupt states or private entities to dictate the entire decision-making process and puts some power back into the hands of those who will be directly affected by the decisions being made.

[ 13 ] Activism [ edit ] Activism takes many forms. One form is collective demonstrations or protests, which can take place on a number of different levels from local to international. Additionally, in places where activists feel as though governmental solutions will work, organizations and individuals alike can pursue direct political action. In many cases, activists and organizations will form partnerships both regionally and internationally to gain more clout in pursuit of their goals.

[ 42 ] Indigenous women's movements in Canada [ edit ] There have been many resistance movements in Canada initiated by Indigenous women against environmental racism. One that was prominent and had a great impact on the movement was, The Native Women's Association of Canada 's (NWAC) Sisters in Spirit Initiative. This initiative aims to create reports on the deaths and disappearances of Indigenous women in order to raise awareness and get government and civil society groups to take action.

[ 43 ] Though the Canadian federal government decided to defund the Sisters in Spirit Initiative in 2010, the NWAC continues to support women, Two-Spirit and LGBTQ+ Indigenous peoples in their fight to be heard.

[ 44 ] In other Indigenous resistance movements there is an emphasis on healing from trauma by focusing on spirituality and traditional practices in order to fight against the forces of patriarchy and racism that have caused environmental racism.

[ 45 ] Activists and Indigenous communities have also gone through state official legal routes to voice their concerns such as discussing treaties, anti-human trafficking laws, anti-violence against women laws and UNDRIP .

[ 45 ] These have been deemed insufficient solutions by Indigenous groups and communities because there are some voices that are not heard and because the state does not respect or recognize the sovereignty of Indigenous nations.

[ 45 ] Environmental reparations [ edit ] Some scientists and economists have looked into the prospect of Environmental Reparations, or forms of payment made to individuals who are affected by industry presence in some way. Potential groups to be impacted include individuals living in close proximity to industry, victims of natural disasters, and climate refugees who flee hazardous living conditions in their own country. Reparations can take many forms, from direct payouts to individuals, to money set aside for waste-site cleanups, to purchasing air monitors for low income residential neighborhoods, to investing in public transportation, which reduces green house gas emissions. As Robert Bullard writes, [ 2 ] Environmental Reparations represent a bridge to sustainability and equity... Reparations are both spiritual and environmental medicine for healing and reconciliation.

Policies and international agreements [ edit ] The export of hazardous waste to third world countries is another growing concern. Between 1989 and 1994, an estimated 2,611 metric tons of hazardous waste was exported from Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries to non-OECD countries. Two international agreements were passed in response to the growing exportation of hazardous waste into their borders. The Organization of African Unity (OAU) was concerned that the Basel Convention adopted in March 1989 did not include a total ban on the trans-boundary movement on hazardous waste. In response to their concerns, on 30 January 1991, the Pan-African Conference on Environmental and Sustainable Development adopted the Bamako Convention banning the import of all hazardous waste into Africa and limiting their movement within the continent. In September 1995, the G-77 nations helped amend the Basel Convention to ban the export of all hazardous waste from industrial countries (mainly OECD countries and Lichtenstein ) to other countries.

[ 46 ] A resolution was signed in 1988 by the OAU which declared toxic waste dumping to be a "crime against Africa and the African people".

[ 47 ] Soon after, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) passed a resolution that allowed for penalties, such as life imprisonment, to those who were caught dumping toxic wastes.

[ 47 ] Globalization and the increase in transnational agreements introduce possibilities for cases of environmental racism. For example, the 1994 North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) attracted US-owned factories to Mexico, where toxic waste was abandoned in the Colonia Chilpancingo community and was not cleaned up until activists called for the Mexican government to clean up the waste.

[ 48 ] Environmental justice movements have grown to become an important part of world summits. This issue is gathering attention and features a wide array of people, workers, and levels of society that are working together. Concerns about globalization can bring together a wide range of stakeholders including workers, academics, and community leaders for whom increased industrial development is a common denominator".

[ 49 ] Many policies can be expounded based on the state of human welfare. This occurs because environmental justice is aimed at creating safe, fair, and equal opportunity for communities and to ensure things like redlining do not occur.

[ 50 ] With all of these unique elements in mind, there are serious ramifications for policy makers to consider when they make decisions.

United States legislation and policies [ edit ] Relevant laws and regulations aimed to address environmental racism encompass a combination of tort law, civil rights law, and environmental law. Here's a quick breakdown of these laws: [ 51 ] Tort law: This law allows individuals or communities to seek compensation for damages caused by the negligence or wrongful actions of others. In the context of environmental racism, plaintiffs can use tort law to claim compensation for health issues, property damage, or loss of quality of life due to pollution or other environmental harms.

Civil rights law: Litigation under civil rights statutes focuses on challenging the discriminatory impact of environmental decisions and policies. Lawsuits may argue that certain actions or policies have a disparate impact on communities of color, violating their civil rights.

Environmental law: Federal environmental statutes, such as the Clean Air Act, Clean Water Act, and the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) provide mechanisms for challenging the adequacy of environmental reviews or compliance with regulatory standards.

Current initiatives in the United States [ edit ] Most initiatives currently focusing on environmental racism are more focused on the larger topic of environmental justice. They are at both the state and federal levels.

On the state level, local politicians focus on their communities to introduce policies that will affect them, including land use policies, improving the environmental health impacts, and involving their community in the planning processes for these policies.

[ 52 ] Fourteen states have created offices that are specifically focused on environmental justice and advise policymakers on how their policies may impact minority populations. Maryland established their Commission on Environmental Justice and Sustainable Communities in 2001. The most recently formed councils were formed in 2022 by Vermont and Oregon.

[ 52 ] Federally, the EPA is responsible for environmental justice initiatives including the Environmental Justice Government-to-Government Program (EJG2G). The EJG2G provides a clearer line of communication and funding between all types of governments such as state, local, and tribal to make a strong effort to steer towards a more environmentally equitable society.

[ 53 ] In April 2023, President Biden affirmed his commitment to environmental justice by introducing the Justice40 Initiative. The Justice40 initiative is a goal to make 40 percent of federal environmental programs go into marginalized communities that have not typically been the target for such programs. This initiative includes things like the Climate and Economic Justice Screening Tool and the training for federal agencies on how to use it to identify communities who may benefit from these programs. This initiative includes several federal agencies including the U.S. Department of Agriculture, the U.S. Department of Commerce, the U.S. Department of Energy, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, and the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. It's dedicated to community outreach by involving local governments and encouraging the community to have a say in the programs that may be implemented in their communities.

[ 54 ] Potential solutions [ edit ] Environmental racism is a crucial aspect that needs to be a part of the climate crisis conversation. Learning more about environmental racism, supporting a green economy that uplifts BIPOC communities, and making environmentalism a communal practice are approaches that can address these injustices.

[ 55 ] Environmentalism as a communal practice emphasizes the importance of viewing environmentalism as a communal effort rather than a competition between individuals by advocating for the well-being of these marginalized communities as well as supporting efforts that address overarching themes of environmental justice. Following this, understanding environmental racism highlights the concept of environmental racism where BIPOC communities disproportionately bear the burden of pollution and environmental hazards due to discrimination in public policies and industry practice. It is also important to understand the impact of environmental racism and to push for discussions that point out disparities imposed on communities of color. Supporting a green economy is also crucial, it's important to advocate for a transition to clean energy as well as uplifting BIPOC communities economically and socially. In addition, being involved within the clean energy sector for marginalized communities is another step to empowering BIPOC communities and leading in environmental protection efforts.

[ 55 ] Examples by region [ edit ] Main article: List of environmental conflicts Africa [ edit ] Main article: Environmental issues in Africa Nigeria [ edit ] Oil spill Further information: Environmental issues in the Niger Delta From 1956 to 2006, up to 1.5 million tons of oil were spilled in the Niger Delta , (50 times the volume spilled in the Exxon Valdez disaster ).

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] Indigenous people in the region have suffered the loss of their livelihoods as a result of these environmental issues , and they have received no benefits in return for enormous oil revenues extracted from their lands. Environmental conflicts have exacerbated ongoing conflict in the Niger Delta .

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] [ 60 ] Burning of toxic waste and urban air pollution are problems in more developed areas.

[ 61 ] Ogoni people , who are indigenous to Nigeria's oil-rich Delta region have protested the disastrous environmental and economic effects of Shell Oil's drilling and denounced human rights abuses by the Nigerian government and by Shell. Their international appeal intensified dramatically after the execution in 1995 of nine Ogoni activists , including Ken Saro-Wiwa , who was a founder of the nonviolent Movement for the Survival of the Ogoni People (MOSOP).

[ 62 ] South Africa [ edit ] The linkages between the mining industry and the negative impacts it has on community and individual health has been studied and well-documented by a number of organizations worldwide. Health implications of living in proximity to mining operations include effects such as pregnancy complications, mental health issues, various forms of cancer, and many more.

[ 63 ] During the Apartheid period in South Africa, the mining industry grew quite rapidly as a result of the lack of environmental regulation. Communities in which mining corporations operate are usually those with high rates of poverty and unemployment. Further, within these communities, there is typically a divide among the citizens on the issue of whether the pros of mining in terms of economic opportunity outweigh the cons in terms of the health of the people in the community. Mining companies often try to use these disagreements to their advantage by magnifying this conflict. Additionally, mining companies in South Africa have close ties with the national government, skewing the balance of power in their favor while simultaneously excluding local people from many decision-making processes.

[ 64 ] This legacy of exclusion has had lasting effects in the form of impoverished South Africans bearing the brunt of ecological impacts resulting from the actions of, for example, mining companies. Some argue that to effectively fight environmental racism and achieve some semblance of justice, there must also be a reckoning with the factors that form situations of environmental racism such as rooted and institutionalized mechanisms of power, social relations, and cultural elements.

[ 65 ] The term " energy poverty " is used to refer to "a lack of access to adequate, reliable, affordable and clean energy carriers and technologies for meeting energy service needs for cooking and those activities enabled by electricity to support economic and human development". Numerous communities in South Africa face some sort of energy poverty.

[ 66 ] South African women are typically in charge of taking care of both the home and the community as a whole. Those in economically impoverished areas not only have to take on this responsibility, but there are numerous other challenges they face. Discrimination on the basis of gender, race, and class are all still present in South African culture. Because of this, women, who are the primary users of public resources in their work at home and for the community, are often excluded from any decision-making about control and access to public resources. The resulting energy poverty forces women to use sources of energy that are expensive and may be harmful both to their own health and that of the environment. Consequently, several renewable energy initiatives have emerged in South Africa specifically targeting these communities and women to correct this situation.

[ 66 ] Asia [ edit ] China [ edit ] From the mid-1990s until about 2001, it is estimated that some 50 to 80 percent of the electronics collected for recycling in the western half of the United States was being exported for dismantling overseas, predominantly to China and Southeast Asia.

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] This scrap processing is quite profitable and preferred due to an abundant workforce, cheap labour, and lax environmental laws.

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] Guiyu , China , is one of the largest recycling sites for e-waste , where heaps of discarded computer parts rise near the riverbanks and compounds, such as cadmium , copper , lead, PBDEs , contaminate the local water supply.

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] Water samples taken by the Basel Action Network in 2001 from the Lianjiang River contained lead levels 190 times higher than WHO safety standards.

[ 70 ] Despite contaminated drinking water, residents continue to use contaminated water over expensive trucked-in supplies of drinking water.

[ 70 ] Nearly 80 percent of children in the e-waste hub of Guiyu, China , suffer from lead poisoning, according to recent reports.

[ 73 ] Before being used as the destination of electronic waste, most of Guiyu was composed of small farmers who made their living in the agriculture business.

[ 74 ] However, farming has been abandoned for more lucrative work in scrap electronics.

[ 74 ] "According to the Western press and both Chinese university and NGO researchers, conditions in these workers' rural villages are so poor that even the primitive electronic scrap industry in Guiyu offers an improvement in income".

[ 75 ] Researchers have found that as rates of hazardous air pollution increase in China, the public has mobilized to implement measures to curb detrimental impacts. Areas with ethnic minorities and western regions of the country tend to carry disproportionate environmental burdens.

[ 76 ] India [ edit ] See also: Bhopal disaster Bhopal , India Union Carbide Corporation is the parent company of Union Carbide India Limited which outsources its production to an outside country. Located in Bhopal, India , Union Carbide India Limited primarily produced the chemical methyl isocyanate used for pesticide manufacture.

[ 77 ] On 3 December 1984, a cloud of methyl isocyanate leaked as a result of the toxic chemical mixing with water in the plant in Bhopal.

[ 78 ] Approximately 520,000 people were exposed to the toxic chemical immediately after the leak.

[ 77 ] Within the first 3 days after the leak an estimated 8,000 people living within the vicinity of the plant died from exposure to the methyl isocyanate.

[ 77 ] Some people survived the initial leak from the factory, but due to improper care and improper diagnoses many have died.

[ 77 ] As a consequence of improper diagnoses, treatment may have been ineffective and this was precipitated by Union Carbide refusing to release all the details regarding the leaked gases and lying about certain important information.

[ 77 ] The delay in supplying medical aid to the victims of the chemical leak made the situation for the survivors even worse.

[ 77 ] Many today are still experiencing the negative health impacts of the methyl isocyanate leak, such as lung fibrosis, impaired vision, tuberculosis , neurological disorders , and severe body pains.

[ 77 ] The operations and maintenance of the factory in Bhopal contributed to the hazardous chemical leak. The storage of huge volumes of methyl isocyanate in a densely inhabited area, was in contravention with company policies strictly practiced in other plants.

[ 77 ] The company ignored protests that they were holding too much of the dangerous chemical for one plant and built large tanks to hold it in a crowded community.

[ 77 ] Methyl isocyanate must be stored at extremely low temperatures, but the company cut expenses to the air conditioning system leading to less than optimal conditions for the chemical.

[ 77 ] Additionally, Union Carbide India Limited never created disaster management plans for the surrounding community around the factory in the event of a leak or spill.

[ 77 ] State authorities were in the pocket of the company and therefore did not pay attention to company practices or implementation of the law.

[ 77 ] The company also cut down on preventive maintenance staff to save money.

[ 77 ] Russia [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Environmental racism in Russia .

[ edit ] Environmental racism is a form of institutional racism , which has led to the disproportionate disposal of hazardous waste in communities of colour in Russia.

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] It also results in indigenous people disproportionately bearing the environmental burdens of mining, and oil or gas extraction. In Russia, there are 47 officially recognized indigenous groups, who have had some rights to consultation and participation under Russian law since 1999. However, these guarantees have steadily eroded with the re-centralization of state control, and several indigenous autonomous territories have been abolished since the 1990s.

[ 81 ] Russia, an International Labor Organization member, has not ratified ILO 69, an agreement that explicitly asserts the right to self-determination for all indigenous peoples. This allows the Russian Federation to continue to deny Indigenous peoples' control over their land and resources. Russia is also a member of the United Nations , which recognizes indigenous peoples of classically colonized lands, but is somewhat vague about indigenous minorities who are not separated from their colonizers by an ocean. This is one of the arguments Russia uses to justify not complying with UN treaties in the case of the indigenous peoples of Siberia.

Environmental racism in Russia also affects Romani people and migrant workers.

Europe [ edit ] Main article: Environmental racism in Europe See also: Environmental racism in Western Europe and Environmental racism in Central and Eastern Europe Eastern Europe [ edit ] Predominantly living in Central and Eastern Europe , with pockets of communities in the Americas and Middle East , the ethnic Romani people have been subjected to environmental exclusion. Often referred to as gypsies or the gypsy threat, the Romani people of Eastern Europe mostly live under the poverty line in shanty towns or slums .

[ 82 ] Facing issues such as long term exposure to harmful toxins given their locations to waste dumps and industrial plants, along with being refused environmental assistance like clean water and sanitation, the Romani people have been facing racism via environmental means. Many countries such has Romania , Bulgaria and Hungary have tried to implement environmental protection initiatives across their respected countries; however, most have failed due to "addressing the conditions of Roma communities have been framed through an ethnic lens as "Roma issues".

[ 83 ] Only recently has some form of environmental justice for the Romani people come to light. Seeking environmental justice in Europe, the Environmental Justice Program is now working with human rights organizations to help fight environmental racism.

It is important to note that in the "Discrimination in the EU in 2009" report, conducted by the European Commission, "64% of citizens with Roma friends believe discrimination is widespread, compared to 61% of citizens without Roma friends." [ 84 ] France [ edit ] Exporting toxic wastes to countries in the Global South is one form of environmental racism that occurs on an international basis. In one alleged instance, in 2006, the French aircraft carrier Clemenceau was prohibited from entering Alang , an Indian ship-breaking yard, due to a lack of clear documentation about its toxic contents. French President Jacques Chirac ultimately ordered the carrier, which contained tons of hazardous materials including asbestos and PCBs , to return to France .

[ 85 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] For information on environmental inequality in the United Kingdom, see Environmental inequality in the United Kingdom .

In the UK environmental racism (or also climate racism) has been called out by multiple action groups such as the Wretched of the Earth call out letter [ 86 ] in 2015 and Black Lives Matter in 2016.

[ 87 ] North America [ edit ] Canada [ edit ] See more: Environmental racism in Nova Scotia The reconstructed Africville Church in Nova Scotia In Canada, progress is being made to address environmental racism (especially in Nova Scotia’s Africville community) with the passing of Bill 111 and Bill C-226, An Act to Address Environmental Racism, in the Nova Scotia Legislature.

[ 88 ] Africville, a Black community in Halifax, was destroyed in the 1960s under the guise of urban renewal after decades of systemic neglect and environmental harm, including the placement of an open dump, infectious disease hospital, and heavy industry nearby.

[ 89 ] Despite legislative progress, environmental racism continues to affect communities of colour in Nova Scotia and across Canada. In Shelburne, a historically Black community, residents have documented ongoing health concerns linked to proximity to a former toxic waste dump. The Nova Scotia NDP has criticized government delays in implementing recommendations to address environmental racism in the province.

[ 90 ] Indigenous communities such as the Aamjiwnaang First Nation also continue to be harmed by pollution from the Canadian chemical industry centered in Southeast Ontario.

[ 91 ] Forty percent of Canada's petrochemical industry is packed into a 15-square mile radius of Sarnia, Ontario.

[ 92 ] Immediately south of the petrochemical plants is the Aamjiwnaang reservation with a population of 850 Aamjiwnaang First Nation members. Since 2002, coalitions of Indigenous individuals have fought the disproportionate concentration of pollution in their neighborhood.

Environmental racism disproportionately affects women, particularly Indigenous women and women of color, including Black, South Asian, and other racialized immigrant communities.

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] Many low-income South Asian and racialized immigrant populations in urban centers such as Toronto, Vancouver, and Montreal face heightened exposure to air pollution, lack of access to green spaces, and proximity to industrial hazards due to systemic housing discrimination and economic marginalization.

[ 95 ] These environmental harms result in gendered health impacts, including increased rates of asthma, reproductive health issues, and cancer, disproportionately affecting women and children in these communities [ 96 ] [ 97 ] These patterns of injustice are rooted in Canada’s colonial history and ongoing structural racism, echoing global dynamics of climate colonialism and environmental racism identified by scholars and human rights advocates.

[ 98 ] In Indigenous communities like Grassy Narrows in Northern Ontario, residents continue to experience multigenerational health effects from mercury contamination in local waterways dating back to the 1960s.

[ 99 ] Mexico [ edit ] The Cucapá are a group of indigenous people that live near the U.S.-Mexico border, mainly in Mexico but some in Arizona as well. For many generations, fishing on the Colorado River was the Cucapá's main means of subsistence.

[ 100 ] In 1944, the United States and Mexico signed a treaty that effectively awarded the United States rights to about 90% of the water in the Colorado River, leaving Mexico with the remaining 10%.

[ 101 ] Over the last few decades, [ clarification needed ] the Colorado River has mostly dried up south of the border, presenting many challenges for people such as the Cucapá. Shaylih Meuhlmann, author of the ethnography Where the River Ends: Contested Indigeneity in the Mexican Colorado Delta, gives a first-hand account of the situation from Meuhlmann's point of view as well as many accounts from the Cucapá themselves. In addition to the Mexican portion of the Colorado River being left with a small fraction of the overall available water, the Cucapá are stripped of the right to fish on the river, the act being made illegal by the Mexican government in the interest of preserving the river's ecological health.

[ 100 ] The Cucapá are, thus, living without access to sufficient natural sources of freshwater as well as without their usual means of subsistence. The conclusion drawn in many such cases is that the negotiated water rights under the US-Mexican treaty that lead to the massive disparity in water allotments between the two countries boils down to environmental racism.

1,900 maquiladoras are found near the US-Mexico border. Maquiladoras are companies that are usually owned by foreign entities and import raw materials, pay workers in Mexico to assemble them, and ship the finish products overseas to be sold.

[ 102 ] While Maquiladoras provide jobs, they often pay very little. These plants also bring pollution to rural Mexican towns, creating health impacts for the poor families that live nearby.

In Mexico, industrial extraction of oil, mining, and gas, as well as the mass removal of slowly renewable resources such as aquatic life, forests, and crops.

[ 103 ] Legally, the state owns natural resources but is able to grant concessions to industry through the form of taxes paid. In recent decades, a shift towards refocusing these tax dollars accumulated on the communities most impacted by the health, social, and economic impacts of extractivism has taken place. However, many indigenous and rural community leaders argue that they ought to consent to companies extracting and polluting their resources, rather than be paid reparations after the fact.

[ citation needed ] United States [ edit ] Main article: Environmental racism in the United States Kamala Harris speaking about environmental justice in June 2020 A US Government Accountability Office study, completed in response to the 1982 protests of the PCB landfill in Warren County , was among the first studies that drew correlations between the racial and economic background of communities and the location of hazardous waste facilities. Nevertheless, the study was limited in scope by focusing only on off-site hazardous waste landfills in the Southeastern United States .

[ 104 ] In response to this limitation, in 1987, the United Church of Christ Commission for Racial Justice (CRJ) directed a comprehensive national study on demographic patterns associated with the location of hazardous waste sites.

[ 104 ] The CRJ national study conducted two examinations of areas surrounding commercial hazardous waste facilities and the location of uncontrolled toxic waste sites.

[ 104 ] The first study examined the association between race and socio-economic status and the location of commercial hazardous waste treatment, storage, and disposal facilities.

[ 104 ] After statistical analysis, the first study concluded that "the percentage of community residents that belonged to a racial or ethnic group was a stronger predictor of the level of commercial hazardous waste activity than was household income, the value of the homes, the number of uncontrolled waste sites, or the estimated amount of hazardous wastes generated by industry".

[ 105 ] A second study examined the presence of uncontrolled toxic waste sites in ethnic and racial minority communities and found that three of every five African and Hispanic Americans lived in communities with uncontrolled waste sites.

[ 106 ] A separate 1991 study found race to be the most influential variable in predicting where waste facilities were located.

[ 107 ] In 1994, President Bill Clinton 's issued Executive Order 12898 which directed agencies to develop a strategy to manage environmental justice.

[ 108 ] [ 109 ] In 2002, Faber and Krieg found a correlation between higher air pollution exposure and low performance in schools and found that 92% of children at five Los Angeles public schools with the poorest air quality were of a minority background [ 110 ] [ 111 ] disproportionate to Los Angeles' then 70% minority population.

As a result of the placement of hazardous waste facilities, minority populations experience greater exposure to harmful chemicals and suffer from health outcomes that affect their ability at work and in schools. A comprehensive study of particulate emissions across the United States, published in 2018, found that Black people were exposed to 54% more particulate matter emissions (soot) than the average American.

[ 112 ] [ 113 ] In a study that analyzed exposure to air pollution from vehicles in the American Mid-Atlantic and American North-East, it was found that African Americans were exposed to 61% more particulate matter than whites, with Latinos exposed to 75% more and Asians exposed to 73% more. Overall, minorities experienced 66% more pollution exposure from particulate matter than the white population.

[ 114 ] Similar patterns of environmental injustice have been observed with urban heat. A 2023 study found that historically redlined and low-income Black neighborhoods are disproportionately exposed to extreme heat, and that these hotter areas also tend to experience elevated violent crime rates—highlighting how environmental and social stressors often compound in structurally disadvantaged communities.

[ 115 ] People on the roofs of their houses avoiding the flood after Hurricane Katrina Carl Zimring states that environmental racism is often engrained in day-to-day work and living conditions.

[ 116 ] Examples cited of environmental racism in the US include the Dakota Access Pipeline (where a portion of the proposed 1,172 mile pipeline would pass near to the Standing Rock Indian Reservation ), the Flint water crisis (which affected a town that was 55% African American), cancer alley (Louisiana), [ 117 ] as well as the government response to hurricane Katrina (where a mandatory evacuation was not ordered in the majority-Black city of New Orleans until 20 hours before Hurricane Katrina made landfall).

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] [ 120 ] Overall, the US has worked to reduce environmental racism with municipality changes.

[ 121 ] These policies help develop further change. Some cities and counties have taken advantage of environmental justice policies and applied it to the public health sector.

[ 121 ] Native American peoples [ edit ] See also: Indian removal and Uranium mining and the Navajo people Photograph from 1892 of a pile of American bison skulls in Detroit, Michigan, waiting to be ground for fertilizer or charcoal. The United States Army encouraged massive hunts of American bison to force Native Americans off their traditional lands and into reservations farther west. That is considered an early example of environmental racism.

Native scholars have discussed whether the concept of Environmental Justice make sense in the context of Native Americans and settler colonialism. This is because Native Americans' legal status differs from other marginalized peoples in the United States. As such, Colville scholar Dina Gilio-Whitaker explains that "because Indigenous peoples' relationships to the state (i.e. the United States) are different than those of ethnic minorities, environmental justice must exceed equality and be able to live up to the concepts of tribal sovereignty, treaty rights, and government-to-government relationships." [ 122 ] Gilio-Whitaker further argues that the distributive justice model on which environmental racism is based is not helpful to Native communities: "Frameworks for EJ in non-Native communities that rely on distributive justice are built on capitalistic American values of land as commodity — i.e. private property — on lands that were expropriated from Native peoples." In contrast, Native peoples have very different relationships to land beyond the modes of land as commodity.

[ 122 ] [ 123 ] Indigenous studies scholars have argued that environmental racism, however, began in the United States with the arrival of settler colonialism .

Potawatomi philosopher Kyle Powys Whyte and Lower Brule Sioux historian Nick Estes explain that Native peoples have already lived through one environmental apocalypse, the coming of colonialism.

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] Métis geographer Zoe Todd and academic Heather Davis have also argued that settler colonialism is "responsible for contemporary environmental crisis." [ 126 ] In that way, it has been shown that climate change has been weaponized against Indigenous American peoples, as Founding Fathers such as Thomas Jefferson and Benjamin Franklin deforested the Americas and welcomed warmer weather, which they thought would displace Native peoples and enrich the United States. Thus, "the United States, from its birth, played a key role in causing catastrophic environmental change." [ 127 ] Whyte explains further that "Anthropogenic (human-caused) climate change is an intensification of environmental change imposed on Indigenous peoples by colonialism." [ 128 ] Anishinaabe scholar Leanne Betasamosake Simpson has also argued, "We should be thinking of climate change as part of a much longer series of ecological catastrophes caused by colonialism and accumulation-based society." [ 129 ] The Indian Removal Act of 1830 and the Trail of Tears may also be considered early examples of environmental racism in the United States. As a result of the former, by 1850, all tribes east of the Mississippi had been removed to western lands and essentially confined them to "lands that were too dry, remote, or barren to attract the attention of settlers and corporations." [ 130 ] During World War II , military facilities were often located conterminous to Indian reservations , which led to a situation in which "a disproportionate number of the most dangerous military facilities are located near Native American lands." [ 131 ] A study analyzing the approximately 3,100 counties in the Continental United States found that Native American lands are positively associated with the count of sites with unexploded ordnance deemed extremely dangerous. The study also found that the risk assessment code (RAC),  which is used to measure dangerousness of sites with unexploded ordnance, can sometimes conceal how much of a threat these sites are to Native Americans. The hazard probability, or probability that a hazard will harm people or ecosystems, is sensitive to the proximity of public buildings such as schools and hospitals. Those parameters neglect elements of tribal life such as subsistence consumption, ceremonial use of plants and animals, and low population densities. Because those tribal-unique factors are not considered, Native American lands can often receive low-risk scores, despite threats to their way of life. The hazard probability does not take Native Americans into account when considering the people or ecosystems that could be harmed. Locating military facilities coterminous to reservations lead to a situation in which "a disproportionate number of the most dangerous military facilities are located near Native American lands." [ 130 ] More recently, Native American lands have been used for waste disposal and illegal dumping by the US and multinational corporations.

[ 132 ] [ 133 ] The International Tribunal of Indigenous People and Oppressed Nations, convened in 1992 to examine the history of criminal activity against indigenous groups in the United States, [ 134 ] and published a Significant Bill of Particulars outlining grievances indigenous peoples had with the US. This included allegations that the US "deliberately and systematically permitted, aided, and abetted, solicited and conspired to commit the dumping, transportation, and location of nuclear, toxic, medical, and otherwise hazardous waste materials on Native American territories in North America and has thus created a clear and present danger to the health, safety, and physical and mental well-being of Native American People." [ 134 ] Oceania [ edit ] Australia [ edit ] The Australian Environmental Justice (AEJ) is a multidisciplinary organization which is closely partnered with Friends of the Earth Australia (FoEA). The AEJ focuses on recording and remedying the effects of environmental injustice throughout Australia . The AEJ has addressed issues which include "production and spread of toxic wastes, pollution of water, soil and air, erosion and ecological damage of landscapes, water systems, plants and animals".

[ 135 ] The project looks for environmental injustices that disproportionately affect a group of people or impact them in a way they did not agree to.

The Western Oil Refinery started operating in Bellevue, Western Australia , in 1954. It was permitted rights to operate in Bellevue by the Australian government in order to refine cheap and localized oil. In the decades following, many residents of Bellevue claimed they felt respiratory burning due to the inhalation of toxic chemicals and nauseating fumes. Lee Bell from Curtin University and Mariann Lloyd-Smith from the National Toxic Network in Australia stated in their article, "Toxic Disputes and the Rise of Environmental Justice in Australia" that "residents living close to the site discovered chemical contamination in the ground- water surfacing in their back yards".

[ 136 ] Under immense civilian pressure, the Western Oil Refinery (now named Omex) stopped refining oil in 1979. Years later, citizens of Bellevue formed the Bellevue Action Group (BAG) and called for the government to give aid towards the remediation of the site. The government agreed and $6.9 million was allocated to clean up the site. Remediation of site began in April 2000.

Micronesia [ edit ] See also: Nuclear testing at Bikini Atoll Papua New Guinea [ edit ] Panguna copper mine under construction, 1971 Starting production in 1972, the Panguna mine in Papua New Guinea has been a source of environmental racism. Although closed since 1989 due to conflict on the island, the indigenous peoples ( Bougainvillean ) have suffered both economically and environmentally from the creation of the mine. Terrance Wesley-Smith and Eugene Ogan, University of Hawaii and University of Minnesota respectively, stated that the Bougainvillean's "were grossly disadvantaged from the beginning and no subsequent renegotiation has been able to remedy the situation".

[ 137 ] These indigenous people faced issues such as losing land which could have been used for agricultural practices for the Dapera and Moroni villages, undervalued payment for the land, poor relocation housing for displaced villagers and significant environmental degradation in the surrounding areas.

[ 138 ] Polynesia [ edit ] See also: French nuclear testing in the South Pacific South America [ edit ] The Andes [ edit ] Extracitivism, or the process of humans removing natural, raw resources from land to be used in product manufacturing, can have detrimental environmental and social repercussions. Research analyzing environmental conflicts in four Andean countries (Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and Bolivia) found that conflicts tend to disproportionately affect indigenous populations and those with Afro-descent, and peasant communities.

[ 139 ] These conflicts can arise as a result of shifting economic patterns, land use policies, and social practices due to extractivist industries.

Chile [ edit ] Beginning in the late 15th century when European explorers began sailing to the New World, the violence towards and oppression of indigenous populations have had lasting effects to this day. The Mapuche-Chilean land conflict has roots dating back several centuries. When the Spanish went to conquer parts of South America, the Mapuche were one of the only indigenous groups to successfully resist Spanish domination and maintain their sovereignty. Moving forward, relations between the Mapuche and the Chilean state declined into a condition of malice and resentment. Chile won its independence from Spain in 1818 and, wanting the Mapuche to assimilate into the Chilean state, began crafting harmful legislation that targeted the Mapuche. The Mapuche have based their economy, both historically and presently, on agriculture. By the mid-19th century, the state resorted to outright seizure of Mapuche lands, forcefully appropriating all but 5% of Mapuche lineal lands. An agrarian economy without land essentially meant that the Mapuche no longer had their means of production and subsistence. While some land has since been ceded back to the Mapuche, it is still a fraction of what the Mapuche once owned. Further, as the Chilean state has attempted to rebuild its relationship with the Mapuche community, the connection between the two is still strained by the legacy of the aforementioned history.

Today, the Mapuche people are the largest population of indigenous people in Chile, with 1.5 million people accounting for over 90% of the country's indigenous population.

Ecuador [ edit ] Aftermath of Lago Agrio oil field Due to their lack of environmental laws, emerging countries like Ecuador have been subjected to environmental pollution, sometimes causing health problems, loss of agriculture, and poverty. In 1993, 30,000 Ecuadorians, which included Cofan , Siona, Huaorani , and Quichua indigenous people, filed a lawsuit against Texaco oil company for the environmental damages caused by oil extraction activities in the Lago Agrio oil field . After handing control of the oil fields to an Ecuadorian oil company, Texaco did not properly dispose of its hazardous waste, causing great damages to the ecosystem and crippling communities.

[ 140 ] Additionally, UN experts have said that Afro-Ecuadorians and other people of African descent in Ecuador have faced greater challenges than other groups in accessing clean water, with minimal response from the State.

[ 141 ] Haiti [ edit ] Legacies of racism exist in Haiti, and affect the way that food grown by peasants domestically is viewed compared to foreign food.

[ 142 ] Racially coded hierarchies are associated with food that differs in origin – survey respondents reported that food such as millet and root crops are associated with negative connotations, while foreign-made food such as corn flakes and spaghetti are associated with positive connotations. This reliance on imports over domestic products reveals how racism ties to commercial tendencies – a reliance on imports can increase costs, fossil fuel emissions, and further social inequality as local farmers loose business.

See also [ edit ] Biological inequity Climate change and poverty Electronic waste Environmental determinism Environmental discrimination in the United States Environmental dumping Environmental struggles of the Romani Fenceline community Green Imperialism Health inequality and environmental influence Intergenerational equity Intersectionality Netherlands fallacy NIMBY Pollution haven hypothesis Racial capitalism Sacrifice zone Pollution is Colonialism Toxic colonialism Transport divide – Unequal access to transport References [ edit ] ^ a b c BULLARD, ROBERT D. (2003).

"Confronting Environmental Racism in the 21st Century" .

Race, Poverty & the Environment .

10 (1): 49– 52.

ISSN 1532-2874 .

JSTOR 41554377 .

^ a b Bullard, Robert D (2001). "Environmental Justice in the 21st Century: Race Still Matters".

Phylon .

49 ( 3– 4): 151– 171.

doi : 10.2307/3132626 .

JSTOR 3132626 .

^ Dinc, Pinar (March 28, 2022).

"Environmental Racism and Resistance in Kurdistan" .

The Commentaries .

2 (1): 39– 48.

doi : 10.33182/tc.v2i1.2189 .

ISSN 2754-8805 .

^ Eligon, John (January 21, 2016).

"A Question of Environmental Racism in Flint" .

The New York Times .

^ Bullard, Robert D. (1993). "Anatomy of Environmental Racism and the Environmental Justice Movement". In Bullard, Robert D. (ed.).

Confronting Environmental Racism: Voices from the Grassroots . Boston, Massachusetts: South End Press. pp.

15– 39.

ISBN 0-89608-446-9 .

^ Dixson, Adrienne D.; Donnor, Jamel K.; Anderson, Celia Rousseau (April 2011).

"Introduction to the Special Issue the Race for Educational Equity" .

Teachers College Record: The Voice of Scholarship in Education .

113 (4): 699– 702.

doi : 10.1177/016146811111300405 .

ISSN 0161-4681 .

S2CID 149421422 .

^ Martin, Reinhold (June 16, 2020).

"Abolish Oil" .

Places Journal (2020).

doi : 10.22269/200616 .

S2CID 240984268 . Retrieved October 1, 2022 .

^ "Environmental racism: Research, current events, and global impact" .

www.medicalnewstoday.com . November 15, 2021 . Retrieved June 30, 2023 .

^ Kay, J., & Katz, C. (4 June 2012).

Pollution, poverty, and people of color: The factory on the hill.

Environmental Health News.

https://www.ehn.org/pollution-poverty-richmond ^ Jones, R. E., & Rainey, S. A. (2006). Examining linkages between race, environmental concern, health, and justice in a highly polluted community of color.

Journal of Black Studies, 36 (4), 473-496.

https://doi.org/10.1177/0021934705280411 ^ a b c Perry, Melissa J.; Arrington, Suzanne; Freisthler, Marlaina S.; Ibe, Ifeoma N.; McCray, Nathan L.; Neumann, Laura M.; Tajanlangit, Patrick; Trejo Rosas, Brenda M. (November 17, 2021).

"Pervasive structural racism in environmental epidemiology" .

Environmental Health .

20 (1): 119.

Bibcode : 2021EnvHe..20..119P .

doi : 10.1186/s12940-021-00801-3 .

ISSN 1476-069X .

PMC 8595076 .

PMID 34784917 .

^ "Environmental racism: time to tackle social injustice" .

The Lancet Planetary Health .

2 (11): e462. 2018.

doi : 10.1016/S2542-5196(18)30219-5 .

PMID 30396431 .

^ a b Schroeder, Richard; Martin, Kevin St.; Wilson, Bradley; Sen, Debarati (2008). "Third World Environmental Justice".

Society & Natural Resources .

21 (7). Abingdon, England: Taylor & Francis : 547– 555.

Bibcode : 2008SNatR..21..547S .

doi : 10.1080/08941920802100721 .

S2CID 44016010 .

^ Colquette, Kelly Michele; Robertson, Elizabeth A. Henry (1991).

"Environmental Racism: The Causes, Consequences, and Commendations" .

Tulane Environmental Law Journal .

5 (1): 153– 207.

JSTOR 43291103 . Retrieved October 16, 2020 .

^ a b Mascarenhas, Michael; Grattet, Ryken; Mege, Kathleen (September 1, 2021).

"Toxic Waste and Race in Twenty-First Century America: Neighborhood Poverty and Racial Composition in the Siting of Hazardous Waste Facilities" .

Environment and Society .

12 (1): 108– 126.

doi : 10.3167/ares.2021.120107 .

ISSN 2150-6779 .

^ Popper, Frank J. (March 1985).

"The Environmentalist and the LULU" .

Environment: Science and Policy for Sustainable Development .

27 (2): 7– 40.

Bibcode : 1985ESPSD..27b...7P .

doi : 10.1080/00139157.1985.9933448 .

ISSN 0013-9157 .

^ Gilbert, Dianne (January 1993).

"Not in My Backyard" .

Social Work .

doi : 10.1093/sw/38.1.7 .

ISSN 1545-6846 .

^ Collin, Robert W.; Collin, Robin Morris (2005). "Environmental Reparations". In Bullard, Robert D. (ed.).

The Quest for Environmental Justice: Human Rights and the Politics of Pollution . San Francisco, California: Sierra Club Books .

ISBN 978-1578051205 .

^ Lee, Eun Kyung; Donley, Gwendolyn; Ciesielski, Timothy H.; Gill, India; Yamoah, Owusua; Roche, Abigail; Martinez, Roberto; Freedman, Darcy A. (February 1, 2022).

"Health outcomes in redlined versus non-redlined neighborhoods: A systematic review and meta-analysis" .

Social Science & Medicine .

294 114696.

doi : 10.1016/j.socscimed.2021.114696 .

ISSN 0277-9536 .

PMID 34995988 .

^ "Cost-Benefit Analysis (CBA)", World Bank Group. n.d. Accessed: 20 November 2011.

^ Been, Vicki (April 1994).

"Locally Undesirable Land Uses in Minority Neighborhoods: Disproportionate Siting or Market Dynamics?" .

The Yale Law Journal .

103 (6): 1383– 1422.

doi : 10.2307/797089 .

JSTOR 797089 .

^ Mascarenhas, Michael; Grattet, Ryken; Mege, Kathleen (September 1, 2021).

"Toxic Waste and Race in Twenty-First Century America: Neighborhood Poverty and Racial Composition in the Siting of Hazardous Waste Facilities" .

Environment and Society .

12 (1): 108– 126.

doi : 10.3167/ares.2021.120107 .

ISSN 2150-6779 .

^ Schusler, Tania M.; Krings, Amy; Melstrom, Richard T. (August 1, 2023).

"Experiences with environmental gentrification: Evidence from Chicago" .

Landscape and Urban Planning .

236 104765.

Bibcode : 2023LUrbP.23604765S .

doi : 10.1016/j.landurbplan.2023.104765 .

ISSN 0169-2046 .

^ Donaghy, Timothy Q.; Healy, Noel; Jiang, Charles Y.; Battle, Colette Pichon (June 1, 2023).

"Fossil fuel racism in the United States: How phasing out coal, oil, and gas can protect communities" .

Energy Research & Social Science .

100 103104.

Bibcode : 2023ERSS..10003104D .

doi : 10.1016/j.erss.2023.103104 .

ISSN 2214-6296 .

^ Lucas, Sarah (December 2, 2015).

"Animal Agriculture and Environmental Racism" .

IDA USA . Retrieved February 26, 2020 .

^ a b Harris, David H. Jr. (July 30, 1997).

"The Industrialization of Agriculture and Environmental Racism: A Deadly Combination Affecting Neighborhoods and the Dinner Table" .

www.iatp.org . Retrieved April 11, 2020 .

^ "Fight against blight" .

Ensia . Retrieved October 19, 2023 .

^ Checker, Melissa (2005).

Polluted Promises: Environmental Racism and the Search for Justice in a Southern Town . New York City: New York University Press . pp.

122– 123.

ISBN 978-0814716588 .

^ a b Checker, Melissa (2008). "Withered Memories: Naming and Fighting Environmental Racism in Georgia". In Collins, Jane L.; di Leonardo, Micaela; Williams, Brett (eds.).

New Landscapes of Inequality: Neoliberalism and the Erosion of Democracy in America . Santa Fe, New Mexico: School for Advanced Research Press.

ISBN 978-1934691014 .

^ Lee, Jan (June 6, 2013).

"Understanding Environmental Justice Policies" .

Triple Pundit . Archived from the original on November 13, 2018 . Retrieved November 12, 2018 .

^ Hardy, Dean; Milligan, Richard; Heynen, Nik (December 2017).

"Racial coastal formation: The environmental injustice of colorblind adaptation planning for sea-level rise" .

Geoforum .

87 . Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier : 62– 72.

doi : 10.1016/j.geoforum.2017.10.005 .

^ UNCED. (5-16 June 1972). "Rio Declaration on Environment and Development", United Nations Environment Programme Archived 4 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "Beyond the US Borders: The Palestinian – Israeli Case | Environmental Leadership, Action and Ethics" .

edblogs.columbia.edu . Retrieved November 13, 2018 .

^ Daum, Kurt; Stoler, Justin; Grant, Richard J. (2017).

"Toward a More Sustainable Trajectory for E-Waste Policy: A Review of a Decade of E-Waste Research in Accra, Ghana" .

International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health .

14 (2): 135.

doi : 10.3390/ijerph14020135 .

ISSN 1661-7827 .

PMC 5334689 .

PMID 28146075 .

^ "Environmental Nakba" (PDF) .

Friends of the Earth International Report . September 2013.

^ Pulido, Laura.

"C.V." Archived 2022-03-29 at the Wayback Machine www.laurapulido.org . Retrieved 23 November 2021.

^ "David N. Pellow | Environmental Studies Program" .

www.es.ucsb.edu . Retrieved November 23, 2021 .

^ Pulido, Laura; De Lara, Juan (March 2018).

"Reimagining 'justice' in environmental justice: Radical ecologies, decolonial thought, and the Black Radical Tradition" .

Environment and Planning E: Nature and Space .

1 ( 1– 2): 76– 98.

Bibcode : 2018EnPlE...1...76P .

doi : 10.1177/2514848618770363 .

ISSN 2514-8486 .

S2CID 149765978 .

^ Pellow, David; Vazin, Jasmine (July 19, 2019).

"The Intersection of Race, Immigration Status, and Environmental Justice" .

Sustainability .

11 (14): 3942.

Bibcode : 2019Sust...11.3942P .

doi : 10.3390/su11143942 .

ISSN 2071-1050 .

^ Pulido, Laura (May 13, 2016).

"Geographies of race and ethnicity II" .

Progress in Human Geography .

41 (4): 524– 533.

doi : 10.1177/0309132516646495 .

ISSN 0309-1325 .

S2CID 147792869 .

^ "PROCEDURAL JUSTICE | COPS OFFICE" .

cops.usdoj.gov . Archived from the original on April 8, 2022 . Retrieved March 17, 2020 .

^ Schroeder, Richard; Martin, Kevin St; Wilson, Bradley; Sen, Debarati (July 15, 2008). "Third World Environmental Justice".

Society & Natural Resources .

21 (7): 547– 555.

Bibcode : 2008SNatR..21..547S .

doi : 10.1080/08941920802100721 .

ISSN 0894-1920 .

S2CID 44016010 .

^ The Native Women's Association of Canada (2021).

"About" .

The Native Women's Association of Canada . Retrieved February 26, 2021 .

^ Bourgeois, Robyn (2014).

"Warrior Women: Indigenous Women's Anti-Violence Engagement with the Canadian State" (PDF) .

University of Toronto : 1– 374.

^ a b c Women's Earth Alliance and Native Youth Sexual Health Network.

"VIOLENCE ON THE LAND, VIOLENCE ON OUR BODIES" (PDF) . Retrieved February 26, 2021 .

^ Bullard, Robert.

"Confronting Environmental Racism in the Twenty-First Century" . Global Dialogue. Archived from the original on April 26, 2012 . Retrieved November 19, 2011 .

^ a b "The transboundary shipments of hazardous wastes", International Trade in Hazardous Wastes , Routledge, April 23, 1998, doi : 10.4324/9780203476901.ch4 (inactive July 1, 2025), ISBN 9780419218906 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ Mohai, Paul; Pellow, David, David; Roberts, J. Timmons (2009).

"Environmental Justice" .

Annual Review of Environment and Resources .

34 . Palo Alto, California: Annual Reviews : 405– 430.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-environ-082508-094348 .

^ Claudio, Luz (October 2007).

"Standing on Principle: The Global Push for Environmental Justice" .

Environmental Health Perspectives .

115 (10): A500 – A503 .

doi : 10.1289/ehp.115-a500 .

ISSN 0091-6765 .

PMC 2022674 .

PMID 17938719 .

^ Bullard, Robert D. (1993).

Confronting Environmental Racism: Voices from the Grassroots . South End Press.

ISBN 978-0-89608-446-9 .

^ "Homepage" .

Milberg | Leading Class Action Law Firm . Retrieved April 25, 2024 .

^ a b "State and Federal Environmental Justice Efforts" .

www.ncsl.org . Retrieved April 25, 2024 .

^ US EPA, OEJECR (April 23, 2020).

"The Environmental Justice Government-to-Government Program" .

www.epa.gov . Retrieved April 25, 2024 .

^ "Justice40 Initiative | Environmental Justice" .

The White House . Retrieved April 25, 2024 .

^ a b "How to Unite the Fight for Racial Equity and Environmental Action" .

www.nrdc.org . September 29, 2020 . Retrieved April 25, 2024 .

^ "UNPO: Ogoni: Niger Delta Bears Brunt after Fifty Years of Oil Spills" .

unpo.org . November 2, 2009 . Retrieved November 13, 2022 .

^ "Nigeria's agony dwarfs the Gulf oil spill. The US and Europe ignore it" .

the Guardian . May 29, 2010 . Retrieved November 13, 2022 .

^ "Nigeria, The Ogoni Crisis, Vol. 7, No. 5" . Human Rights Watch. July 1995 . Retrieved December 15, 2014 .

^ Osaghae, Eghosa E. (1995).

"The Ogoni Uprising: Oil Politics, Minority Agitation and the Future of the Nigerian State" .

African Affairs .

94 (376): 325– 344.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordjournals.afraf.a098833 .

ISSN 0001-9909 .

JSTOR 723402 .

^ Agbonifo, John (2009).

"Oil, Insecurity, and Subversive Patriots in the Niger Delta: The Ogoni as Agent of Revolutionary Change" .

Journal of Third World Studies .

26 (2): 71– 106.

ISSN 8755-3449 .

JSTOR 45194563 .

^ Gall, Timothy; Derek, Gleason (2012).

Worldmark Encyclopedia of the Nations . Detroit: Gale, Cengage Learning. p. 545.

^ Spitulnik, Debra (2011).

Small Media Against Big Oil (Nigeria) . Thousand Oaks: SAGE Publications, Inc. p. 459.

^ Mancini, Lucia; Sala, Serenella (August 1, 2018).

"Social impact assessment in the mining sector: Review and comparison of indicators frameworks" .

Resources Policy .

57 : 98– 111.

Bibcode : 2018RePol..57...98M .

doi : 10.1016/j.resourpol.2018.02.002 .

ISSN 0301-4207 .

^ Leonard, Llewellyn (December 7, 2018).

"Mining Corporations, Democratic Meddling, and Environmental Justice in South Africa" .

Social Sciences .

7 (12): 259.

doi : 10.3390/socsci7120259 .

ISSN 2076-0760 .

^ Schlosberg, David (2004). "Reconceiving Environmental Justice: Global Movements And Political Theories".

Environmental Politics .

13 (3): 517– 540.

Bibcode : 2004EnvPo..13..517S .

doi : 10.1080/0964401042000229025 .

ISSN 0964-4016 .

S2CID 56387891 .

^ a b Fakier, Khayaat (May 2018). "Women and Renewable Energy in a South African Community: Exploring Energy Poverty and Environmental Racism".

Journal of International Women's Studies .

19 : 166– 167.

^ Grossman, 189.

^ Huo, Xia; Peng, Lin; Xu, Xijin; Zheng, Liangkai; Qiu, Bo; Qi, Zongli; Zhang, Bao; Han, Dai; Piao, Zhongxian (2007).

"Elevated Blood Lead Levels of Children in Guiyu, an Electronic Waste Recycling Town in China" .

Environmental Health Perspectives .

115 (7): 1113– 1117.

Bibcode : 2007EnvHP.115.1113H .

doi : 10.1289/ehp.9697 .

ISSN 0091-6765 .

PMC 1913570 .

PMID 17637931 .

^ Grossman, 194.

^ a b c Grossman, Elizabeth (2006).

High Tech Trash: Digital Devices, Hidden Toxics, and Human Health . Washington, D.C.: Island Press. p. 185.

ISBN 978-1597261906 .

^ Grossman, 184.

^ Shi, Jingchu; Zheng, Gene; Wong, Ming-Hung; Liang, Hong; Li, Yuelin; Wu, Yinglin; Li, Ping; Liu, Wenhua (2016). "Health risks of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons via fish consumption in Haimen bay (China), downstream of an e-waste recycling site (Guiyu)".

Environmental Research .

147 : 223– 240.

Bibcode : 2016ER....147..233S .

doi : 10.1016/j.envres.2016.01.036 .

PMID 26897061 .

^ Garber, Kent (December 20, 2007).

"Technology's Morning After" .

U.S. News & World Report . Retrieved November 6, 2012 .

^ a b Grossman, 187.

^ Grossman, 186-187.

^ He, Qi; Fang, Hong; Ji, Han; Fang, Siran (2017).

"Environmental Inequality in China: A "Pyramid Model" and Nationwide Pilot Analysis of Prefectures with Sources of Industrial Pollution" .

Sustainability .

9 (10): 1871.

Bibcode : 2017Sust....9.1871H .

doi : 10.3390/su9101871 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Das Gupta, Aruna; Das Gupta, Ananda (March 7, 2008). "Corporate Social Responsibility in India: Towards a Sane Society?".

Social Responsibility Journal .

4 (1). Bradford, England: Emerald Group Publishing : 214.

doi : 10.1108/17471110810856965 .

ISSN 1747-1117 .

^ LaBar, Gregg, "Citizen Carbide?", Occupational Hazards , Volume 53, Issue 11 (1991): 33.

^ BULLARD, ROBERT D. (2003).

"Confronting Environmental Racism in the 21st Century" .

Race, Poverty & the Environment .

10 (1): 49– 52.

ISSN 1532-2874 .

JSTOR 41554377 .

^ Bullard, Robert D (2001). "Environmental Justice in the 21st Century: Race Still Matters".

Phylon .

49 ( 3– 4): 151– 171.

doi : 10.2307/3132626 .

JSTOR 3132626 .

^ "Russia - IWGIA - International Work Group for Indigenous Affairs" .

www.iwgia.org . Retrieved May 29, 2022 .

^ Loveland, Matthew T.; Popescu, Delia (July 25, 2016). "The Gypsy Threat Narrative".

Humanity & Society .

40 (3). Thousand Oaks, California: SAGE Publications : 329– 352.

doi : 10.1177/0160597615601715 .

ISSN 0160-5976 .

S2CID 146701798 .

^ Harper, Krista; Steger, Tamara; Filcak, Richard (July 2009).

"Environmental Justice and Roma Communities in Central and Eastern Europe" .

ScholarWorks@UMass Amherst .

^ "Discrimination in the EU in 2009" (PDF) .

Europa . November 2009.

^ Ahmed, Zubair (January 6, 2006).

"Stay out, India tells toxic ship" .

BBC News . Retrieved November 6, 2012 .

^ "Open Letter from the Wretched of the Earth bloc to the organisers of the People's Climate March of Justice and Jobs | Reclaim the Power" .

reclaimthepower.org.uk . January 17, 2016 . Retrieved March 4, 2019 .

^ "Black Lives Matter Activists Shut Down London City Airport" .

Time . Retrieved March 4, 2019 .

^ Lee, B. J. (n.d.). Understanding environmental justice policies. Triple Pundit: People, Planet, Profit.

https://web.archive.org/web/20181113144421/https://www.triplepundit.com/special/skeo-environmental-justice/environmental-justice-policies/ ^ Tattrie, Jon (2014, January 27). Africville. The Canadian Encyclopedia.

https://www.thecanadianencyclopedia.ca/en/article/africville ^ MSN. (2025). Msn.com.

https://www.msn.com/en-ca/news/canada/ndp-chastises-ns-government-over-environmental-racism-recommendations/ar-AA1FNfoB ^ MacDonald, E. (2020, September 1). Environmental racism in Canada: What is it, what are the impacts, and what can we do about it? Ecojustice.

https://ecojustice.ca/news/environmental-racism-in-canada/ ^ Staff, V. (2013, August 8). The Chemical Valley. VICE.

https://www.vice.com/en/article/the-chemical-valley-part-1/ ^ Waldron, I. (2021, July 22). Environmental Racism and Climate Change: Determinants of Health in Mi’kmaw and African Nova Scotian Communities. The Canadian Climate Institute.

https://climateinstitute.ca/publications/environmental-racism-and-climate-change/ ^ Vista do Neocolonialismo climático: a métrica do carbono sob o olhar da justiça intergeracional. (n.d.).

https://periodicos.ufsc.br/index.php/sequencia/article/view/98530/55546 ^ Waldron, I. (2021, July 22). Environmental Racism and Climate Change: Determinants of Health in Mi’kmaw and African Nova Scotian Communities. The Canadian Climate Institute.

https://climateinstitute.ca/publications/environmental-racism-and-climate-change/ ^ Waldron, I. (2021, July 22). Environmental Racism and Climate Change: Determinants of Health in Mi’kmaw and African Nova Scotian Communities. The Canadian Climate Institute.

https://climateinstitute.ca/publications/environmental-racism-and-climate-change/ ^ Vista do Neocolonialismo climático: a métrica do carbono sob o olhar da justiça intergeracional. (n.d.).

https://periodicos.ufsc.br/index.php/sequencia/article/view/98530/55546 ^ Vista do Neocolonialismo climático: a métrica do carbono sob o olhar da justiça intergeracional. (n.d.).

https://periodicos.ufsc.br/index.php/sequencia/article/view/98530/55546 ^ VIOLENCE ON THE LAND, VIOLENCE ON OUR BODIES Building an Indigenous Response to Environmental Violence A partnership of Women’s Earth Alliance and Native Youth Sexual Health Network. (n.d.).

http://landbodydefense.org/uploads/files/VLVBReportToolkit2016.pdf ^ a b Muehlmann, Shaylih (May 23, 2013).

Where the river ends : contested indigeneity in the Mexican Colorado Delta . Durham.

ISBN 978-0-8223-7884-6 .

OCLC 843332838 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Muehlmann, Shaylih (May 2012). "Rhizomes and other uncountables: The malaise of enumeration in Mexico's Colorado River Delta: The countdown at the end of the Colorado River".

American Ethnologist .

39 (2): 339– 353.

doi : 10.1111/j.1548-1425.2012.01368.x .

^ Strömberg, Per. (2002).

The Mexican maquila industry and the environment : an overview of the issues . Mexico, DF: Naciones Unidas CEPAL/ECLAC.

ISBN 92-1-121378-9 .

OCLC 51868644 .

^ Tetreault, Darcy (February 2020).

"The new extractivism in Mexico: Rent redistribution and resistance to mining and petroleum activities" .

World Development .

126 104714.

doi : 10.1016/j.worlddev.2019.104714 .

ISSN 0305-750X .

S2CID 211317717 .

^ a b c d Colquette and Robertson, 159.

^ Colquette and Robertson, 159-160.

^ Colquette and Robertson, 159-161.

^ Godsil, Rachel D. (1991).

"Remedying Environmental Racism" .

Michigan Law Review .

90 (2): 394– 395.

doi : 10.2307/1289559 .

JSTOR 1289559 .

S2CID 158992939 .

^ "Presidential Documents" (PDF).

Federal Register . 1994 – via National Archives.

^ Mohai, Paul; Pellow, David; Roberts, J. Timmons (2009).

"Environmental Justice" .

Annual Review of Environment and Resources .

34 : 405– 430.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-environ-082508-094348 .

^ Massey, Rachel (2004).

Environmental Justice: Income, Race, and Health . Medford, Massachusetts: Global Development and Environment Institute.

^ Faber, Daniel R; Krieg, Eric J (2002).

"Unequal exposure to ecological hazards: environmental injustices in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts" .

Environmental Health Perspectives .

110 (suppl 2): 277– 288.

Bibcode : 2002EnvHP.110S.277F .

doi : 10.1289/ehp.02110s2277 .

ISSN 0091-6765 .

PMC 1241174 .

PMID 11929739 .

^ Mikati, Ihab; Benson, Adam F.; Luben, Thomas J.; Sacks, Jason D.; Richmond-Bryant, Jennifer (2018).

"Disparities in Distribution of Particulate Matter Emission Sources by Race and Poverty Status" .

American Journal of Public Health .

108 (4): 480– 485.

doi : 10.2105/AJPH.2017.304297 .

PMC 5844406 .

PMID 29470121 .

^ Geiling, Natasha (February 23, 2018).

"EPA study shows dangerous air pollution overwhelmingly impacts communities of color" .

Think Progress .

^ Holden, Emily (June 27, 2019).

"People of color live with 66% more air pollution, US study finds" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved April 11, 2020 .

^ Teron, Lemir (October 2023).

"Inequality, Urban Heat Islands, and Crime" (PDF) . Rockefeller Institute of Government . Retrieved July 7, 2025 .

^ Zimring, Carl A. (2015).

Clean and White: A History of Environmental Racism in the United States . New York City: NYU Press .

^ Lerner, Steve (2005).

Diamond: A Struggle for Environmental Justice in Louisiana's Chemical Corridor . Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

^ Henkel, Kristin.

"Institutional Discrimination, Individual Racism, and Hurricane Katrina" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on July 17, 2010 . Retrieved December 9, 2011 .

^ Adeola, Francis; Picou, Steven (2017). "Hurricane Katrina-linked environmental injustice: race, class, and place differentials in attitudes".

Disasters .

41 (2): 228– 257.

Bibcode : 2017Disas..41..228A .

doi : 10.1111/disa.12204 .

PMID 27238758 – via Wiley-Blackwell.

^ Bullard, Robert (Fall 2008). "Differential Vulnerabilities: Environmental and Economic Inequality and Government Response to Unnatural Disasters".

Social Research .

75 (3): 753– 784.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.455.4789 .

doi : 10.1353/sor.2008.0035 .

JSTOR 40972088 .

S2CID 126765571 .

^ a b "LOCAL POLICIES FOR ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE: A NATIONAL SCAN" (PDF) .

The New School .

^ a b Gilio-Whitaker, Dina (March 6, 2017).

"What Environmental Justice Means in Indian Country" .

KCET . Retrieved December 9, 2021 .

^ Dina Gilio-Whitaker (2010).

"Review" .

American Indian Quarterly .

34 (4): 543.

doi : 10.5250/amerindiquar.34.4.0543 .

ISSN 0095-182X .

^ "Our ancestors' dystopia now: indigenous conservation and the Anthropocene" (PDF) , The Routledge Companion to the Environmental Humanities , Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge, pp.

222– 231, January 6, 2017 , retrieved December 9, 2021 ^ Estes, Nick (2019).

Our history is the future : Standing Rock versus the Dakota Access Pipeline, and the long tradition of Indigenous resistance . London.

ISBN 978-1-78663-672-0 .

OCLC 1044540762 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Davis, Heather; Todd, Zoe (December 20, 2017).

"On the Importance of a Date, or, Decolonizing the Anthropocene" .

ACME: An International Journal for Critical Geographies .

16 (4): 761– 780.

ISSN 1492-9732 .

^ Keeler, Kyle (September 8, 2020).

"Colonial Theft and Indigenous Resistance in the Kleptocene" .

Edge Effects . Retrieved December 9, 2021 .

^ Whyte, Kyle (March 1, 2017).

"Indigenous Climate Change Studies: Indigenizing Futures, Decolonizing the Anthropocene" .

English Language Notes .

55 ( 1– 2): 153– 162.

doi : 10.1215/00138282-55.1-2.153 .

ISSN 0013-8282 .

S2CID 132153346 .

^ Simpson, Leanne Betasamosake (2017).

As we have always done : indigenous freedom through radical resistance . Minneapolis, MN.

ISBN 978-1-5179-0386-2 .

OCLC 982091807 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b Hooks, Gregory; Smith, Chad L. (2004). "The Treadmill of Destruction: National Sacrifice Areas and Native Americans".

American Sociological Review .

69 (4): 558– 575.

doi : 10.1177/000312240406900405 .

S2CID 145428620 .

^ Harris, Angela (2016).

"The Treadmill and the Contract: A Classcrits Guide to the Anthropocene" (PDF) .

Tennessee Journal of Race, Gender, and Social Justice .

5 .

doi : 10.70658/2693-3225.1079 .

S2CID 130240898 . Archived from the original (PDF) on February 9, 2020.

^ Goldtooth, Tom (1995). "Indigenous Nations: Summary of Sovereignty and Its Implications for Environmental Protection". In Bullard, Robert (ed.).

Environmental justice issues, policies, and solutions . Washington, D.C.: Island. pp.

115– 23.

ISBN 978-1559634175 .

^ Brook, Daniel (1998). "Environmental Genocide: Native Americans and Toxic Waste".

American Journal of Economics and Sociology .

57 (1).

doi : 10.1111/j.1536-7150.1998.tb03260.x .

^ a b Boyle, Francis A. (18 September 1992).

"Indictment of the Federal Government of the U.S. for the commission of international crimes and petition for orders mandating its proscription and dissolution as an international criminal conspiracy and criminal organization" . Accessed 6 November 2012.

^ "Australian Environmental Justice project" .

Friends of The Earth Australia . Retrieved February 17, 2020 .

^ Lloyd-Smith, Mariann; Bell, Lee (January 2003). "Toxic Disputes and the Rise of Environmental Justice in Australia".

International Journal of Occupational and Environmental Health .

9 (1). Abingdon, England: Routledge : 16.

doi : 10.1179/107735203800328966 .

PMID 12749627 .

S2CID 16075948 .

^ Wesley-Smith, Terrance; Ogan, Eugene (Fall 1992). "Copper, Class, and Crisis: Changing Relations of Production in Bougainville".

The Contemporary Pacific .

4 (2). Honolulu, Hawaii: University of Hawaii Press : 245– 267.

^ Regan, Anthony J. (October 1998). "Causes and course of the Bougainville conflict".

The Journal of Pacific History .

33 (3). Boca Raton, Florida: Taylor & Francis : 269– 285.

doi : 10.1080/00223349808572878 .

^ Pérez-Rincón, Mario; Vargas-Morales, Julieth; Martinez-Alier, Joan (March 1, 2019).

"Mapping and Analyzing Ecological Distribution Conflicts in Andean Countries" .

Ecological Economics .

157 : 80– 91.

Bibcode : 2019EcoEc.157...80P .

doi : 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2018.11.004 .

ISSN 0921-8009 .

S2CID 158620560 .

^ Copland, Liesl; Kamen, Jon; Berlinger, Joe. 2009. Crude: The Real Price of Oil; United States. Entendre Films, Red Envelope Entertainment.

^ "Ecuador: Discrimination and Environmental Racism Against People of African descent Must End, Say UN Experts" .

United Nations Office of the High Commissioner .

^ Steckley, Marylynn (September 2016).

"Eating up the social ladder: the problem of dietary aspirations for food sovereignty" .

Agriculture and Human Values .

33 (3): 549– 562.

doi : 10.1007/s10460-015-9622-y .

ISSN 0889-048X .

S2CID 141759179 .

External links [ edit ] United States Environmental Protection Agency - Environmental Justice Environmental Justice and Environmental Racism Marathon for Justice, 2016 - Film on Environmental Racism [1] Archived 2018-02-26 at the Wayback Machine Water and Environmental Racism.

Lesson by Matt Reed and Ursula Wolfe-Rocca v t e Environmental social science Fields Ecological anthropology Ecological economics Environmental anthropology Environmental crime Environmental economics Environmental communication Environmental history Environmental politics Environmental psychology Environmental sociology Human ecology Human geography Political ecology Regional science Related Agroecology Anthrozoology Behavioral geography Community studies Demography Design ecological environmental Ecological humanities Economics energy thermo Environmental education ethics law science studies justice racism Ethnobiology botany ecology zoology Forestry Industrial ecology Integrated geography Permaculture Political representation of nature Rural sociology Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Sustainability science studies Systems ecology Urban ecology geography metabolism studies Applied Architecture landscape sustainable Ecopsychology Engineering ecological environmental Green criminology Health environmental epidemiology occupational public Management environmental fisheries forest natural resource waste Planning environmental land use regional spatial urban Policy energy environmental Environment portal Category Concepts Degrees Journals Research institutes Scholars v t e Racism Types of racism Aversive Colorism Covert Cultural Cyber Environmental Formal Gendered Institutional Internalized Patent Laissez-faire Linguistic Neocolonial Romantic Scientific Societal Substantive Symbolic Manifestations of racism Anti-miscegenation laws Apartheid Biological determinism Discrimination based on nationality Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic jokes Ethnic slurs Ethnic stereotype Hate crime Hate speech Hate group Hypodescent / Hyperdescent Racial capitalism Racialization Racial hierarchy Racial nationalism Racial profiling Racial segregation Racism by region Global apartheid Africa South Africa Zimbabwe Asia China Japan North Korea South Korea Thailand Vietnam Arab world Libya Saudi Arabia Sudan Australia Europe Denmark France Germany Italy Poland Portugal Russia Soviet Union Spain Ukraine United Kingdom Middle East Iran Israel Palestine Turkey North America Canada United States Mexico South America Argentina Brazil Chile Racism by target Arab Asians Chinese Chinese Americans Zainichi Chinese Japanese Japanese Americans Japanese Koreans Korean Zainichi Koreans Vietnamese Black African Americans Arab Women Mexican Native Americans Jewish Anti-racism Jewish Americans In Jewish communities LGBT Middle Eastern Muslim Romani Slavic Wine industry Racial supremacy Black supremacy White supremacy White Related topics Ableism Alt-right Anti-racism Casteism Ethnic plastic surgery Go back to where you came from Herrenvolk democracy Interminority racism in the United States Hispanics/Latinos Lynching Passing Perpetual foreigner Psychometrics of racism Race and sexuality Race card Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racial misrepresentation Racial figleaf Racial integration Racial quota Racism in sport in Australia Reverse racism Sociology of race and ethnic relations Xenophobia Category Commons Index v t e Environmental justice Key topics Climate change effects poverty litigation Climate crisis debt justice reparations resilience Corporate accountability Corporate crime Corporate environmental responsibility Energy democracy Environmental conflict crime inequality in the UK injustice in Europe justice racism racism in the USA racism in Western Europe Rights Amendments List of environmental conflicts Urban forest inequity Academia Decolonization of knowledge Human geography Ecological economics Environmental Justice Atlas Environmental sociology Political ecology Social ecology Scholars : Robert Bullard Dina Gilio-Whitaker Joan Martinez Alier Kyle Powys Whyte Dorceta Taylor By region Africa Europe Western Europe Central and Eastern Europe Russia United Kingdom United States US-Mexico border Related topics Blockadia Climate finance Corporate accountability for human rights violations Corporate social responsibility Decolonization Desertification Electronic waste Environmental defender Water protector Land defender Environmentalism of the poor Environmentalism Environmental law Extractivism Global waste trade Green imperialism Human rights and climate change Impact investing List of environmental killings Locally unwanted land use Political representation of nature Rights of nature Sacrifice zone Stewardship Sumak Kawsay Toxic colonialism Water conflict Zapatismo Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐qtd5w
Cached time: 20250817003755
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.980 seconds
Real time usage: 2.254 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8872/1000000
Revision size: 106796/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 427327/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4359/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 22/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 537152/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.346/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21747261/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1844.035      1 -total
 51.29%  945.868      1 Template:Reflist
 28.76%  530.269     59 Template:Cite_journal
 21.15%  390.020      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 16.70%  307.892     10 Template:Excerpt
 15.37%  283.352      1 Template:Discrimination_sidebar
  9.17%  169.104     31 Template:Cite_web
  6.50%  119.843      2 Template:Environmental_justice
  6.30%  116.098      1 Template:Annotated_link
  4.67%   86.098     15 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:994228:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817003755 and revision id 1305972370. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Environmental_racism&oldid=1305972370 " Categories : Environmental controversies Environmental history of Canada Definition of racism controversy Urban decay Environmental justice Environmental social science concepts Environment and society Apartheid Racism Environmental racism Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from January 2025 Articles with excerpts All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from September 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2024 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2021 This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 04:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Environmental racism 34 languages Add topic

