Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Current projects 2 Methodologies Toggle Methodologies subsection 2.1 No-model approach 2.2 Sequential approaches 2.3 Variational (4D-Var) approach 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Ocean reanalysis Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Reconstructing an historical ocean state Ocean reanalysis is a method of combining historical ocean observations with a general ocean model (typically a computational model ) driven by historical estimates of surface winds, heat, and freshwater, by way of a data assimilation algorithm to reconstruct historical changes in the state of the ocean.

Historical observations are sparse and insufficient for understanding the history of the ocean and its circulation. By utilizing data assimilation techniques in combination with advanced computational models of the global ocean, researchers are able to interpolate the historical observations to all points in the ocean.  This process has an analog in the construction of atmospheric reanalysis and is closely related to ocean state estimation.

Current projects [ edit ] A number of efforts have been initiated in recent years to apply data assimilation to estimate the physical state of the ocean, including temperature , salinity , currents , and sea level , in recent years.

[ 1 ] There are three alternative state estimation approaches.  The first approach is used by the ‘no-model’ analyses, for which temperature or salinity observations update a first guess provided by climatological monthly estimates.

The second approach is that of the sequential data assimilation analyses, which move forward in time from a previous analysis using a numerical simulation of the evolving temperature and other variables produced by an ocean general circulation model .  The simulation provides the first guess of the state of the ocean at the next analysis time, while corrections are made to this first guess based on observations of variables such as temperature, salinity, or sea level.

The third approach is 4D-Var, which in the implementation described uses the initial conditions and surface forcing as control variables to be modified in order to be consistent with the observations as well as a numerical representation of the equations of motion through iterative solution of a giant optimization problem.

Methodologies [ edit ] No-model approach [ edit ] ISHII and LEVITUS begin with a first guess of the climatological monthly upper-ocean temperature based on climatologies produced by the NOAA National Oceanographic Data Center . The innovations are mapped onto the analysis levels.  ISHII uses and alternative 3DVAR approach to do an objective mapping with a smaller decorrelation scale in midlatitudes (300 km) that elongates in the zonal direction by a factor of 3 at equatorial latitudes.  LEVITUS begins similarly to ISHII, but uses the technique of Cressman and Barnes with a homogeneous scale of 555 km to objectively map the temperature innovation onto a uniform grid.

Sequential approaches [ edit ] The sequential approaches can be further divided into those using Optimal Interpolation and its more sophisticated cousin the Kalman Filter , and those using 3D-Var.  Among those mentioned above, INGV and SODA use versions of Optimal Interpolation.  CERFACS, GODAS, and GFDL all use 3DVar.  "To date we are unaware of any attempt to use Kalman Filter for multi-decadal ocean reanalyses." [ 1 ] The 4-Dimensional Local Ensemble Transform Kalman Filter (4D-LETKF) has been applied to the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory 's (GFDL) Modular Ocean Model (MOM2) for a 7-year ocean reanalysis from January 1997 – 2004.

[ 2 ] Variational (4D-Var) approach [ edit ] One innovative attempt by GECCO has been made to apply 4D-Var to the decadal ocean estimation problem. This approach faces daunting computational challenges, but provides some interesting benefits including satisfying some conservation laws and the construction of the ocean model adjoint.

See also [ edit ] Meteorological reanalysis References [ edit ] ^ a b Carton, J.A., and A. Santorelli, 2008: Global upper ocean heat content as viewed in nine analyses, J. Clim., 21, 6015–6035.

^ Hunt, B.R., Kostelich E.J., Szunyogh, I. Efficient Data Assimilation for Spatiotemporal Chaos: A Local Ensemble Transform Kalman Filter. arXiv:physics/0511236 v1 28 Nov 2005. Dated May 24, 2006.

External links [ edit ] List of existing ocean syntheses at ICDC SODA - Simple Oceanic Data Assimilation - Oceanographic Variables reanalysis dataset 1958-2001 Historical Ocean Subsurface Temperature Analysis with Error Estimates v t e Physical oceanography Waves Airy wave theory Ballantine scale Benjamin–Feir instability Boussinesq approximation Breaking wave Clapotis Cnoidal wave Cross sea Dispersion Edge wave Equatorial waves Gravity wave Green's law Infragravity wave Internal wave Iribarren number Kelvin wave Kinematic wave Longshore drift Luke's variational principle Mild-slope equation Radiation stress Rogue wave Draupner wave Rossby wave Rossby-gravity waves Sea state Seiche Significant wave height Soliton Stokes drift Stokes problem Stokes wave Swell Trochoidal wave Tsunami megatsunami Undertow Ursell number Wave action Wave base Wave height Wave nonlinearity Wave power Wave radar Wave setup Wave shoaling Wave turbulence Wave–current interaction Waves and shallow water one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations shallow water equations Wind fetch Wind setup Wind wave model Circulation Atmospheric circulation Baroclinity Boundary current Coriolis force Coriolis–Stokes force Craik–Leibovich vortex force Downwelling Eddy Ekman layer Ekman spiral Ekman transport El Niño–Southern Oscillation General circulation model Geochemical Ocean Sections Study Geostrophic current Global Ocean Data Analysis Project Gulf Stream Humboldt Current Hydrothermal circulation Langmuir circulation Longshore drift Loop Current Modular Ocean Model Ocean current Ocean dynamical thermostat Ocean dynamics Ocean gyre Overflow Princeton Ocean Model Rip current Subsurface ocean current Sverdrup balance Thermohaline circulation shutdown Upwelling Whirlpool Wind generated current World Ocean Circulation Experiment Tides Amphidromic point Earth tide Head of tide Internal tide Lunitidal interval Perigean spring tide Rip tide Rule of twelfths Slack tide Theory of tides Tidal bore Tidal force Tidal power Tidal race Tidal range Tidal resonance Tide gauge Tideline Landforms Abyssal fan Abyssal plain Atoll Bathymetric chart Carbonate platform Coastal geography Cold seep Continental margin Continental rise Continental shelf Contourite Guyot Hydrography Knoll Ocean bank Oceanic basin Oceanic plateau Oceanic trench Passive margin Seabed Seamount Submarine canyon Submarine volcano Plate tectonics Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Fracture zone Hydrothermal vent Marine geology Mid-ocean ridge Mohorovičić discontinuity Oceanic crust Outer trench swell Ridge push Seafloor spreading Slab pull Slab suction Slab window Subduction Transform fault Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis Volcanic arc Ocean zones Benthic Deep ocean water Deep sea Littoral Mesopelagic Oceanic Pelagic Photic Surf Swash Sea level Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis Global Sea Level Observing System North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System Sea-level curve Sea level drop Sea level rise World Geodetic System Acoustics Deep scattering layer Ocean acoustic tomography Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Underwater acoustics Satellites Jason-1 OSTM/Jason-2 Jason-3 Related Acidification Argo Benthic lander Color of water DSV Alvin Marginal sea Marine energy Marine pollution Mooring National Oceanographic Data Center Ocean Explorations Observations Reanalysis Ocean surface topography Ocean temperature Ocean thermal energy conversion Oceanography Outline of oceanography Pelagic sediment Sea surface microlayer Sea surface temperature Seawater Science On a Sphere Stratification Thermocline Underwater glider Water column World Ocean Atlas Category Commons Oceans portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ocean_reanalysis&oldid=1092154596 " Category : Oceanography Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 June 2022, at 13:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ocean reanalysis Add languages Add topic

