Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Volumes and issues Toggle Volumes and issues subsection 1.1 Frequency 2 Popular and scholarly 3 Indefinite vs. part-publication 4 Standard numbers 5 Distribution 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Periodical literature 46 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski IsiZulu Italiano Latina Latviešu Magyar مازِرونی 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Regularly scheduled published work "Periodical" redirects here. For other uses, see Periodicity (disambiguation) .

"First issue" redirects here. For the music album, see Public Image: First Issue .

The cover of an issue of the open-access journal PLOS Biology , published monthly by the Public Library of Science Periodical literature (singularly called a periodical publication or simply a periodical ) consists of published works that appear in new releases on a regular schedule ( issues or numbers , often numerically divided into annual volumes ). The most familiar example of periodical literature is the newspaper , but the magazine and the academic journal are also periodicals, as are some modern websites, e-journals , and other electronic-only publications produced recurrently on a schedule. Periodical publications cover a wide variety of topics, from academic, technical, and trade, to general-interest subjects such as leisure and entertainment .

Articles within a periodical are usually organized around a single main subject or theme and include a title, date of publication, author(s), and brief summary of the article. A periodical typically contains an editorial section that comments on subjects of interest to its readers. Other common features are reviews of recently published books and films, columns that express the authors' opinions about various topics, and advertisements.

A periodical is a serial publication . A book series is also a serial publication, but is not typically called a periodical. An encyclopedia or dictionary is also a book, and might be called a serial publication if it is published in many different editions over time.
A periodical series, such as a journal series, is a sequence of journals having certain characteristics in common that are formally identified together as a group ( see academic journal series ).

Volumes and issues [ edit ] Periodicals are typically published and referenced by volume and issue (also known as issue number or number).

Volume typically refers to the number of years the publication has been circulated, and issue refers to how many times that periodical has been published during that year. For example, the April 2011 publication of a monthly magazine first published in 2002 would be listed as, "volume 10, issue 4".

Roman numerals are sometimes used in reference to the volume number.

[ 1 ] When citing a work in a periodical, there are standardized formats such as The Chicago Manual of Style . In the latest edition of this style, a work with volume number 17 and issue number 3 may be written as follows: James M. Heilman, and Andrew G. West. "Wikipedia and Medicine: Quantifying Readership, Editors, and the Significance of Natural Language." Journal of Medical Internet Research 17, no. 3 (2015).

doi : 10.2196/jmir.4069 .

Sometimes, periodicals are numbered in absolute numbers instead of volume-relative numbers, typically since the start of the publication. In rare cases, periodicals even provide both: a relative issue number and an absolute number.

[ 2 ] There is no universal standard for indicating absolute numbers, but often a '#' is used.

The first issue of a periodical is sometimes also called a premiere issue or charter issue.

[ 3 ] The first issue may be preceded by dummy or zero issues. A last issue is sometimes called the final issue.

[ 4 ] Frequency [ edit ] Periodicals are often characterized by their period (or frequency ) of publication.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] This information often helps librarians make decisions about whether or not to include certain periodicals in their collection.

[ 7 ] It also helps scholars decide which journal to submit their paper to.

[ 8 ] Period Meaning Frequency Quinquennially Once per 5 years 1 ⁄ 5 per year Quadriennially Once per 4 years 1 ⁄ 4 per year Triennially Once per 3 years 1 ⁄ 3 per year Biennially Once per 2 years 1 ⁄ 2 per year Annually Once per year 1 per year Semiannually, Biannually Twice per year 2 per year Triannually Thrice per year 3 per year Quarterly Every quarter 4 per year Bimonthly Every 2 months 6 per year Semi-quarterly Twice per quarter 8 per year Monthly Every month 12 per year Semi-monthly Twice per month 24 per year Biweekly, Fortnightly Every two weeks 26 per year Weekly Every week 52 per year Semi-weekly Twice per week 104 per year Daily Once per business day Varies Popular and scholarly [ edit ] Cover of Science in School magazine [ 9 ] Periodicals are often classified as either popular or scholarly. Popular periodicals are usually magazines (e.g., Ebony and Esquire ).

Scholarly journals are most commonly found in libraries and databases. Examples are The Journal of Psychology and the Journal of Social Work .

Trade magazines are also examples of periodicals. They are written for an audience of professionals in particular fields. As of the early 1990s, there were over 6,000 academic, business, scientific, technical, and trade publications in the United States alone.

[ 10 ] Indefinite vs. part-publication [ edit ] These examples are related to the idea of an indefinitely continuing cycle of production and publication: magazines plan to continue publishing, not to stop after a predetermined number of editions. By contrast, a novel might be published in monthly parts, a method revived after the success of The Pickwick Papers by Charles Dickens .

[ 11 ] This approach is called part-publication , particularly when each part is from a whole work, or a serial , for example in comic books . It flourished during the nineteenth century, for example with Abraham John Valpy 's Delphin Classics , and was not restricted to fiction .

[ 12 ] A practical differentiation between a serially published book and a book series is that the first involves pieces of a book being released over time (e.g., chapters, sections) whereas the latter involves complete books being released one after another. The distinction is a little blurrier in the case of a multivolume reference book released via part-publication, where each volume is from one viewpoint a "whole book" but from another viewpoint not a whole work. The Encyclopædia Metropolitana and the London Encyclopædia were instances of the latter type.

Standard numbers [ edit ] The International Standard Serial Number (ISSN) is to serial publications (and by extension, periodicals) essentially what the International Standard Book Number (ISBN) is to books: a standardized reference number. However, the ISSN only identifies the overall serial, not any specific volume or issue, so is of much less utility in finding and accessing particular content.

Distribution [ edit ] Postal services often carry periodicals at a preferential rate; for example, Second Class Mail in the United States only applies to publications issued at least quarterly.

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Partwork Part References [ edit ] ^ "Periodical" .

ODLIS: Online Dictionary for Library and Information Science .

ABC-Clio . Retrieved 6 August 2012 .

^ "Front matter" .

Dr. Dobb's Journal of Computer Calisthenics & Orthodontia . Vol. 3, no. 2.

People's Computer Company . February 1978.

ISBN 0-8104-5490-4 . #22 . Retrieved 10 February 2020 .

[1] [2] ^ "PC: The Independent Guide To IBM Computers" .

PC . Vol. 1, no. 1.

Software Communications, Inc.

February–March 1982. pp. front matter, 9. Premiere/Charter issue . Retrieved 10 February 2020 .

[3] [4] ^ Thompson, David J., ed. (May 1990).

"Micro Cornucopia: The Micro Technical Journal" (PDF) .

Micro Cornucopia . Around the bend. No. 53. Bend, Oregon: Micro Cornucopia Inc.

pp. front matter.

ISSN 0747-587X . Retrieved 11 February 2020 .

[5] [6] [7] ^ "Frequency of Publication codes" .

www.libraries.rutgers.edu .

^ "Frequencies" .

www.oclc.org .

^ Dickinson, Kelly; Boyd, Bryanna; Gunningham, Regan (29 November 2010).

"Reference Analysis as an Aid in Collection Development: A Study of Master of Architecture Theses at Dalhousie University" .

Dalhousie Journal of Interdisciplinary Management .

5 (1).

doi : 10.5931/djim.v5i1.48 .

^ "Where to submit your manuscript".

How to Write and Publish a Scientific Paper (7th ed.).

Cambridge University Press . 7 June 2012. p. 33.

ISBN 9781107670747 .

^ "Cover of Science in School 32" . Retrieved 13 July 2015 .

^ Blake, Gary & Bly, Robert W.

(1993).

The Elements of Technical Writing . New York: Macmillan Publishers . p. 113.

ISBN 0020130856 .

^ "The Novel" .

Aspects of the Victorian Book – via The British Library.

^ Eliot, Simon & Rose, Jonathan (2007).

A Companion to the History of the Book . p.

297 .

ISBN 9781405127653 .

[ full citation needed ] ^ "Second Class Mail" .

Barron's Business Dictionary – via Answers.com.

External links [ edit ] Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Periodicals ".

Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States Czech Republic Latvia 2 Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Periodical_literature&oldid=1305912698 " Categories : Periodicals Comics terminology Publishing Hidden categories: All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from February 2015 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2025 This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 20:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Periodical literature 46 languages Add topic

