Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Concept Toggle Concept subsection 1.1 Jupiter Brain 2 Possible uses 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Matrioshka brain 18 languages العربية الدارجة Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Huge computer powered by a star's energy A matrioshka brain [ 1 ] [ 2 ] is a hypothetical megastructure of immense computational capacity powered by a Dyson sphere . It was proposed in 1997 by Robert J. Bradbury (1956–2011) [ 3 ] . It is an example of a class-B stellar engine , employing the entire energy output of a star to drive computer systems.

[ 4 ] This concept derives its name from the nesting Russian matryoshka dolls .

[ 5 ] The concept was deployed by Bradbury in the anthology Year Million: Science at the Far Edge of Knowledge .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Concept [ edit ] Matryoshka dolls set in a row The concept of a matrioshka brain comes from the idea of using Dyson spheres to power an enormous, star-sized computer. The term "matrioshka brain" originates from matryoshka dolls , which are wooden Russian nesting dolls. Matrioshka brains are composed of several Dyson spheres nested inside one another, the same way that matryoshka dolls are composed of multiple nested doll components.

A matrioshka brain would consist of several Dyson spheres (swarms) nested inside each other The innermost Dyson sphere of the matrioshka brain would draw energy directly from the star it surrounds and give off large amounts of waste heat while computing at a high temperature. The next surrounding Dyson sphere would absorb this waste heat and use it for its computational purposes, all while giving off waste heat of its own. This heat would be absorbed by the next sphere, and so on, with each sphere radiating at a lower temperature than the one before it. For this reason, Matrioshka brains with more nested Dyson spheres would tend to be more efficient, as they would waste less heat energy. The inner shells could run at nearly the same temperature as the star itself, while the outer ones would be close to the temperature of interstellar space. The engineering requirements and resources needed for this would be enormous.

Jupiter Brain [ edit ] The term "matrioshka brain" was invented by Robert Bradbury as an alternative to the Jupiter brain [ 8 ] —a concept similar to the matrioshka brain, but on a smaller planetary scale and optimized for minimal signal propagation delay . A matrioshka brain design is concentrated on sheer capacity and the maximum amount of energy extracted from its source star, while a Jupiter brain is optimized for computational speed.

[ 9 ] Jupiter brains are related to the idea of the hypothetical material computronium , which could be enmassed to sizes of entire planets and even stars.

[ 10 ] Possible uses [ edit ] Some possible uses of such an immense computational resource have been proposed.

An idea suggested by Charles Stross , in his novel Accelerando (2005), would be to use it to run perfect simulations or uploads of human minds into virtual reality spaces supported by the matrioshka brain. Stross even went as far as to suggest that a sufficiently powerful species utilizing enough raw processing power could launch attacks upon, and manipulate, the structure of the universe itself.

[ 11 ] In Godplayers (2005), Damien Broderick surmises that a matrioshka brain would allow simulating entire alternate universes.

[ 12 ] The futurist and transhumanist author Anders Sandberg wrote an essay speculating on implications of computing on the massive scale of machines such as the matrioshka brain, published by the Institute for Ethics and Emerging Technologies .

[ 8 ] Matrioshka brains and other megastructures are a common theme in the fictional Orion's Arm universe, where they are used by superintelligences as processing nodes connected by artificial wormholes .

The Dennis E. Taylor novel Heaven's River (2021) mentions building a Matrioshka brain for use with replicant and artificial intelligence.

In the Evan Currie novel, A Seed That Was Sown , the beginning of a new series subsequent to his Odyssey One series, makes use of a Matrioshka Brain as a central threat. Currie routinely uses tech at the edge of human knowledge for story components.

In the Expanse novel series, a crystalline sphere the size of Jupiter was found in a white dwarf system, dubbed the Adro Diamond. It was built by the ancient Ring Builder civilization as a massive computer and data storage archive. Estimated to be five billion years old, the Adro Diamond orbits a white dwarf star called Adro (with its name derived from the star it orbits), and possesses a machine-perfect smooth surface and is composed of densely packed carbon, making it almost transparent. Seemingly abandoned, the species that built the structure has long been extinct.

In the TV series Pantheon , the protagonist Maddie Kim, an uploaded intelligence , spends 16,000 years constructing a matrioshka brain. Using the DNA and epigenetic memory of every human who ever lived, she simulates billions of parallel universes over 101,000 years.

See also [ edit ] Artificial general intelligence Astronomical engineering Kardashev scale Megascale engineering Omega Point Technological singularity References [ edit ] ^ Bradbury, Robert J. (July 21, 1999).

"Matrioshka Brains" (PDF) .

www.gwern.net .

^ Ratner, Paul (October 28, 2018).

"Matrioshka Brain: How advanced civilizations could reshape reality" .

Big Think .

^ Dvorsky, George (March 6, 2011).

"Remembering Robert Bradbury" .

sentient developments . Retrieved August 10, 2025 .

^ Bradbury, Robert J.

"Matrioshka Brain Home Page" . Archived from the original on February 23, 2009 . Retrieved August 28, 2009 .

^ "Matrioshka Brains – Some Intermediate Stages in the Evolution of Life" (PDF) . Department of Astronomy, University of Virginia . Retrieved August 28, 2009 .

^ Levy, Brett (August 26, 2008).

"Book Review: 'Year Million: Science at the Far Edge of Knowledge', edited by Damien Broderick" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved August 28, 2009 .

^ Horgan, John (June 13, 2008).

"The Shape of Things to Come (review of Year Million)" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved August 28, 2009 .

^ a b Sandberg, Anders (1999).

"The Physics of Information Processing Superobjects: Daily Life Among the Jupiter Brains" .

Journal of Evolution and Technology .

5 (1).

^ "Jupiter & Matrioshka Brains: History & References" . Robert Bradbury. Archived from the original on September 7, 2010 . Retrieved August 28, 2009 .

^ Vatinno, Giuseppe (2010).

"Per una parusia tecnologica : la singolarità prossima ventura : Ich bin ein singularitarian (Ray Kurzweil)" .

Per Una Parusia Tecnologica : 1000– 1004.

doi : 10.1400/156178 .

^ Stross, Charles (2006).

Accelerando .

Ace Books .

ISBN 0-441-01415-1 .

^ Broderick, Damien (2005).

Godplayers . Thunder's Mouth.

ISBN 1-56025-670-2 .

External links [ edit ] Steve Bowers (2022).

"Matrioshka Brain" .

Encyclopedia Galactica . Orion's Arm Universe Project Inc.

Todd Drashner (2007).

"Matrioshka Hypernode" .

Encyclopedia Galactica . Orion's Arm Universe Project Inc.

"Matrioshka Micronode" . Orion's Arm . Retrieved August 28, 2009 .

Megaminds, abstract evolution and the consistency machine, aka how to build simulated realities .

Gorman, A. C. (2014) "The Anthropocene in the Solar System" . Journal of Contemporary Archaeology.

Human Brain and Universe – Similar Shapes?

, ScienceAlert (2020).

v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Matrioshka_brain&oldid=1305227421 " Categories : Exploratory engineering Fiction about stars Fictional computers Hypothetical technology Megastructures Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from January 2018 This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 20:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Matrioshka brain 18 languages Add topic

