Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Philosophy 3 Notes 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Philo of Larissa 32 languages Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego Íslenska Italiano עברית Latina Lietuvių Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Greek philosopher Philo of Larissa Φίλων ὁ Λαρισσαῖος Born c.

159 B.C Larissa Died c.

84 B.C Rome Philosophical work School Academic skepticism Institutions Academy ( scholarch ) Philo of Larissa ( Greek : Φίλων ὁ Λαρισσαῖος Philon ho Larissaios ; 159/8–84/3 BC [ 1 ] ) was a Greek philosopher . It is very probable that his actual name was Philio - with a second iota.

[ 2 ] He was a pupil of Clitomachus , whom he succeeded as head of the Academy . During the Mithridatic Wars which would see the destruction of the Academy, he travelled to Rome where Cicero heard him lecture. None of his writings survive. He was an Academic sceptic , like Clitomachus and Carneades before him, but he offered a more moderate view of skepticism than that of his teachers, permitting provisional beliefs without certainty.

Life [ edit ] Philo was born in Larissa in 154/3 BC . He moved to Athens where he became a pupil of Clitomachus , whom he succeeded as head of the Third or New Academy in 110–109 BC. According to Sextus Empiricus , he was the founder of a "Fourth Academy", [ 3 ] but other writers refuse to admit the separate existence of more than three academies. He was the teacher of Antiochus of Ascalon who would become his adversary in the Platonist school.

During the Mithridatic wars Philo left Athens and took up his residence in Rome in 88 BC. In Rome he lectured on rhetoric and philosophy, and collected around him many eminent pupils, amongst whom Cicero was the most famous and the most enthusiastic.

[ 4 ] Philo was the last undisputed scholarch of the Academy in direct succession from Plato. After his death in 84/3 BC, the Academy seceded into rivalling factions and eventually disappeared until the Neoplatonist revival.

Philosophy [ edit ] None of Philo's works are extant; our knowledge of his views is derived from Numenius , Sextus Empiricus and Cicero . In general, his philosophy was a reaction against the Academic skepticism of the Middle and New Academy in favor of the dogmatism of Plato .

He maintained that by means of conceptive notions ( katalêptikê phantasia ) objects could not be comprehended ( akatalêpta ), but were comprehensible according to their nature.

[ 5 ] How he understood the latter, whether he referred to the evidence and accordance of the sensations which we receive from things, [ 6 ] or whether he had returned to the Platonic assumption of an immediate spiritual perception, is not clear. In opposition to his disciple Antiochus , he would not admit a separation of an Old and a New Academy, but would rather find the doubts of scepticism even in Socrates and Plato, [ 7 ] and not less perhaps in the New Academy the recognition of truth which burst through its scepticism. At least on the one hand, even though he would not resist the evidence of the sensations, he wished even here to meet with antagonists who would endeavour to refute his positions [ 6 ] i.e. he felt the need of subjecting afresh what he had provisionally set down in his own mind as true to the examination of scepticism; and on the other hand, he did not doubt of arriving at a sure conviction respecting the ultimate end of life.

Notes [ edit ] ^ Woodruff, Paul (2019).

"Ancient Scepticism" from Nicholas D. Smith's "The Philosophy of Knowledge: A History, Volume 1" . Bloomsbury Academic. p. 210.

ISBN 978-1-4742-5827-2 .

^ K. Fleischer, Philo or Philio of Larissa?, in: CQ  72 (2022), pp. 222-232.

^ Sextus Empiricus, Hypotyp.

i. 220 ^ Cicero, ad Fam.

xiii. 1, Academica , i. 4, Brut.

89, Tusculanae Quaestiones , ii. 3 ^ Sextus Empiricus, Hypotyp.

i. 235; Cicero, Acad. Quaest.

ii. 6 ^ a b Aristocles, in Eusebius Praeparatio Evangelica xiv. 9.

^ Cicero, Acad. Quaest.

ii. 4, 5, 23 References [ edit ] Dorandi, Tiziano (1999). "Chapter 2: Chronology". In Algra, Keimpe; et al. (eds.).

The Cambridge History of Hellenistic Philosophy . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 48.

ISBN 978-0521250283 .

Attribution: This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Brandis, Christian A.

(1870).

"Philon (3. the Academic)" . In Smith, William (ed.).

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology . Vol. 3. p. 313.

Further reading [ edit ] Brittain, Charles, Philo of Larissa (Oxford University Press, 2001) ISBN 0-19-815298-1 External links [ edit ] Brittain, Charles.

"Philo of Larissa" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

v t e Platonists Ancient Academics Old Plato Aristotle Eudoxus Philip of Opus Aristonymus Coriscus and Erastus of Scepsis Demetrius of Amphipolis Euaeon of Lampsacus Heraclides and Python of Aenus Hestiaeus of Perinthus Lastheneia of Mantinea Timolaus of Cyzicus Speusippus Axiothea of Phlius Heraclides Ponticus Menedemus of Pyrrha Xenocrates Crantor Polemon Crates of Athens Skeptics Middle Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus New Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Dio of Alexandria Middle Platonists Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Anonymous Theaetetus Commentator Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Justin Martyr Gaius Albinus Alcinous Alexander Peloplaton Apuleius Atticus Maximus of Tyre Numenius of Apamea Ammonius Saccas Longinus Clement of Alexandria Origen Origen the Pagan Calcidius Neoplatonists Plotinus Students Amelius Porphyry of Tyre Iamblichus Sopater Eustathius of Cappadocia Sosipatra Aedesius Dexippus Chrysanthius Theodorus of Asine Julian Salutius Maximus of Ephesus Eusebius of Myndus Priscus of Epirus Antoninus Hypatia Gaius Marius Victorinus Augustine Macrobius Boethius Academy Plutarch of Athens Asclepigenia Hierocles Syrianus Hermias Aedesia Proclus Marinus Isidore Ammonius Hermiae Asclepiodotus Hegias Zenodotus Agapius Damascius Simplicius Priscian John Philoponus Olympiodorus David the Invincible Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Medieval John Scotus Eriugena Al-Farabi Anselm Peter Abelard Bernard Gilbert Thierry Henry of Ghent Bonaventure Theodoric of Freiberg Meister Eckhart Berthold of Moosburg Paul of Venice Modern Renaissance Florentine Academy Plethon Marsilio Ficino Cristoforo Landino Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Giordano Bruno Blaise Pascal Cambridge Ralph Cudworth Henry More Anne Conway Thomas Taylor Emanuel Swedenborg Josiah Royce Aleksei Losev Contemporary Analytic Gottlob Frege Bertrand Russell Kurt Gödel Roderick Chisholm W. V. O. Quine Jan Łukasiewicz Crispin Wright Edward N. Zalta Continental Edmund Husserl Leo Strauss v t e Philosophical skepticism Skeptical philosophies Academic Skepticism Ajñana Cartesian Charvaka Humeanism Pyrrhonism Solipsism Skeptical philosophers Sanjaya Belatthiputta Xenophanes Xeniades Metrodorus of Chios Anaxarchus Nausiphanes Pyrrho Timon Academic skeptics Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Aristanax Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Gaius Aurelius Cotta Dio of Alexandria Aenesidemus Favorinus Agrippa Sextus Empiricus Jayarāśi Bhaṭṭa Nicholas of Autrecourt Montaigne Pierre Charron Francisco Sanches Uriel da Costa William Chillingworth René Descartes Simon Foucher Pierre Bayle David Hume Gottlob Ernst Schulze William Drummond Benson Mates Peter Unger Robert Fogelin Skeptical scenarios Acatalepsy Aporia Brain in a vat Dream argument Epoche Evil demon Five-minute hypothesis Münchhausen trilemma Ignoramus et ignorabimus Problem of the criterion Problem of induction Reductio ad absurdum Regress argument Simulation hypothesis Suspension of judgment Wax argument Responses Here is one hand Semantic externalism Process reliabilism Epistemic closure Contextualism Relativism Skeptical philosophical literature Barhaspatya sutras Academica ( Cicero ) Outlines of Pyrrhonism Against the Dogmatists Against the Mathematicians Essays ( Montaigne ) Discourse on the Method A Treatise of Human Nature Aenesidemus Types of skepticism Radical Local Moral Scientific Religious Jewish skeptics Pseudoskepticism Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 FAST National Germany United States Netherlands Norway Sweden Vatican Israel People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Philo_of_Larissa&oldid=1252716355 " Categories : 150s BC births 80s BC deaths Ancient Larissaeans Roman-era Macedonians Roman-era philosophers in Athens 1st-century BC Greek philosophers 2nd-century BC Greek philosophers Academic skeptics People of the Mithridatic Wars Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Greek-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM without a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the DGRBM This page was last edited on 22 October 2024, at 17:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Philo of Larissa 32 languages Add topic

