Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Topics 2 Audience and reception 3 Recognition 4 References Toggle the table of contents Crocheting Adventures with Hyperbolic Planes 1 language Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 2009 book by Daina Taimina Crocheting Adventures with Hyperbolic Planes First edition Author Daina Taimina Publisher A K Peters Publication date 2009 Crocheting Adventures with Hyperbolic Planes is a book on crochet and hyperbolic geometry by Daina Taimiņa . It was published in 2009 by A K Peters, with a 2018 second edition by CRC Press.

Topics [ edit ] Further information: Mathematics and fiber arts The book is on the use of crochet to make physical surfaces with the geometry of the hyperbolic plane . The full hyperbolic plane cannot be embedded smoothly into three-dimensional space, but pieces of it can. Past researchers had made models of these surfaces out of paper, but Taimiņa's work is the first work to do so using textile arts.

[ 1 ] She had previously described these models in a research paper and used them as illustrations for an undergraduate geometry textbook, but this book describes more of the background for the project, makes it more widely accessible, [ 2 ] and provides instructions for others to follow in making these models.

[ 3 ] The book has nine chapters. The first chapter introduces the notion of the curvature of a surface, provides instructions for an introductory project in crocheting a patch of the hyperbolic plane, and provides an initial warning about the exponential growth in the area of this plane as a function of its radius, which will cause larger crochet projects to take a very long time to complete. Chapter two covers more concepts in the geometry of the hyperbolic plane, connecting them to crocheted models of the plane.

[ 4 ] The next three chapters take a step back to look at the broader history of the topics discussed in the book: geometry and its connection to human arts and architecture in chapter 3, crochet in chapter 4, and non-Euclidean geometry in chapter 5. Chapters 6, 7, and 8 cover specific geometric objects with negatively-curved surfaces, including the pseudosphere , helicoid , and catenoid , investigate mathematical toys, and use these crocheted models "to explore otherwise hard to visualize objects". A final chapter covers the applications of hyperbolic geometry and its ongoing research interest.

[ 4 ] Audience and reception [ edit ] The book is written for a general audience.

[ 2 ] [ 5 ] However, although suggesting that it has a place on mathematical coffee tables, reviewer Keith Leatham wonders who its real readers are likely to be.

[ 5 ] Reviewer Hinke Osinga , however, feels that the book can be of interest to readers interested in either crochet or mathematics, rather than (as Leatham suggests) requiring both interests. She writes "I highly recommend this book, perhaps not only as a beautiful coffee-table book with the subtle message that mathematics is fun, but also because crochet is a perfect tool for testing and exploring deep mathematical theories." [ 4 ] Recognition [ edit ] Crocheting Adventures with Hyperbolic Planes won the 2009 Bookseller/Diagram Prize for Oddest Title of the Year .

[ 6 ] It also won the 2012 Euler Book Prize of the Mathematical Association of America .

[ 7 ] References [ edit ] ^ Euler Book Prize Committee (September 2012), "Review of Crocheting Adventures with Hyperbolic Planes " , MAA Reviews , Mathematical Association of America ^ a b Wildstrom, David Jacob (2010), "Review of Crocheting Adventures with Hyperbolic Planes ", Mathematical Reviews , MR 2492335 ^ Mohorianu, Corina, "Review of Crocheting Adventures with Hyperbolic Planes ", zbMATH , Zbl 1160.00009 ^ a b c Osinga, Hinke M.

(February 2010), "Review of Crocheting Adventures with Hyperbolic Planes ", Journal of Mathematics and the Arts , 4 (1): 52– 54, doi : 10.1080/17513470903459526 , S2CID 121575146 ^ a b Leatham, Keith R. (December 2010 – January 2011), "Review of Crocheting Adventures with Hyperbolic Planes ", The Mathematics Teacher , 104 (5): 399, JSTOR 20876893 ^ Bloxham, Andy (March 26, 2010), "Crocheting Adventures with Hyperbolic Planes wins oddest book title award" , The Telegraph , London .

^ "Euler Book Prize" .

www.maa.org .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Crocheting_Adventures_with_Hyperbolic_Planes&oldid=1301321641 " Categories : Crochet Hyperbolic geometry Mathematics books 2009 non-fiction books Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 05:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Crocheting Adventures with Hyperbolic Planes 1 language Add topic

