Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Plato's use of the metaphor 2 Metaphor 3 The Ship of State since Plato 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Ship of State 10 languages Azərbaycanca Български Español Français Galego Nederlands 日本語 پښتو Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Metaphor in The Republic by Plato This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Ship of State" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Platonism Life Works Theory of forms Intelligible form Hyperuranion Theory of soul Nous Thumos Phren Epistemology Anamnesis Peritrope Dianoia Cardinal virtues Moral rationalism Political philosophy Mimesis Orthotes onomaton Euthyphro dilemma The Republic Allegory of the cave Analogy of the Sun Analogy of the divided line Form of the Good Noble lie Philosopher king Plato's number Ship of State Ring of Gyges Myth of Er Timaeus Atlantis Demiurge World soul Organicism Classical element Platonic solid Tertium quid Khôra Related articles Commentaries The Academy in Athens Middle Platonism Neoplatonism Neoplatonism and Gnosticism Neoplatonism and Christianity Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Allegorical interpretations of Plato Plato's unwritten doctrines Pseudo-Platonica Related categories Plato Philosophy portal v t e The Ship of State is an ancient and oft-cited metaphor , famously expounded by Plato in the Republic (Book 6, 488a–489d), which likens the governance of a city-state to the command of a vessel.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Plato expands the established metaphor and ultimately argues that the only people fit to be captain of the ship ( Ancient Greek : ναῦς ) are philosopher kings , benevolent men with absolute power who have access to the Form of the Good . The origins of the metaphor can be traced back to the lyric poet Alcaeus (fragments 6, 208, 249), and it is also found in Aeschylus' Seven Against Thebes , Sophocles' Antigone and Aristophanes' Wasps before Plato. 
During the Renaissance , Sebastian Brant amplified and reworked Plato's text in a satirical book called Ship of Fools ( Das Narrenschiff , 1494) which was translated soon in Latin , French and English .

Plato's use of the metaphor [ edit ] Plato establishes the comparison by saying that Zeus was one of the best models of describing the steering of a ship as just like any other "craft" or profession —in particular, that of a statesman . He then runs the metaphor in reference to a particular type of government: democracy .  Plato's democracy is not the modern notion of a mix of democracy and republicanism , but rather direct democracy by way of pure majority rule.

In the metaphor, found at 488a–489d, Plato's Socrates compares the population at large to a strong but near-sighted ship's master. The quarreling sailors are demagogues and politicians, and the ship's navigator is a philosopher. The sailors flatter themselves with claims to knowledge of sailing, despite knowing nothing of navigation, and are constantly vying with one another for the approval of the master, offering wine and gifts. In truth, the sailors care little for the master's wellbeing, and desire only to gain captaincy of the ship and access to its valuable food stores. The navigator is dismissed as a useless stargazer yet is the only one with the knowledge to direct the ship's course safely.

Metaphor [ edit ] The metaphor of the ship of state: [ 2 ] Imagine then a fleet or a ship in which there is a captain who is taller and stronger than any of the crew, but he is a little deaf and has a similar infirmity in sight, and his knowledge of navigation is not much better. The sailors are quarrelling with one another about the steering—everyone is of opinion that he has a right to steer, though he has never learned the art of navigation and cannot tell who taught him or when he learned, and will further assert that it cannot be taught, and they are ready to cut in pieces anyone who says the contrary. They throng about the captain, begging and praying him to commit the helm to them; and if at any time they do not prevail, but others are preferred to them, they kill the others or throw them overboard, and having first chained up the noble captain’s senses with drink or some narcotic drug, they mutiny and take possession of the ship and make free with the stores; thus, eating and drinking, they proceed on their voyage in such manner as might be expected of them. Him who is their partisan and cleverly aids them in their plot for getting the ship out of the captain’s hands into their own whether by force or persuasion, they compliment with the name of sailor, pilot, able seaman, and abuse the other sort of man, whom they call a good-for-nothing; but that the true pilot must pay attention to the year and seasons and sky and stars and winds, and whatever else belongs to his art, if he intends to be really qualified for the command of a ship, and that he must and will be the steerer, whether other people like or not the possibility of this union of authority with the steerer’s art has never seriously entered into their thoughts or been made part of their calling. Now in vessels which are in a state of mutiny and by sailors who are mutineers, how will the true pilot be regarded? Will he not be called by them a prater, a star-gazer, a good-for-nothing?

— Plato, The Republic , Book VI ( The Philosophy of Government ) The Ship of State since Plato [ edit ] Reference to it has been made routinely throughout Western culture ever since its inception; two notable literary examples are Horace 's ode 1.14 and " O Ship of State " by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow .

Roger Williams , the founder of Rhode Island , used the metaphor in his "Letter to the Town of Providence" (1656). The Jacobins of the French Revolution frequently used this reference for the new French Republic as it defended itself from several European monarchies [ citation needed ] .

It was also used by the biographer Asser in his Life of King Alfred , with the King "struggling like an excellent pilot to guide his ship laden with much wealth to the desired and safe haven of his homeland.

[ 3 ] Thomas Carlyle used it to inveigh against the democratic movements of his time.

[ 4 ] More recently, it has become a staple of American political discussion, where it is viewed simply as its image of the state as a ship, in need of a government as officers to command it—and conspicuously absent of its anti-democratic, pro- absolutist original meaning.

The term has entered popular culture as well.

Leonard Cohen 's song " Democracy " contains the line "Sail on. Sail on, o mighty ship of state. To the shores of need, past the reefs of greed, through the squalls of hate." Also, in his second novel Beautiful Losers (1966), Cohen writes "Sail on, sail on, O Ship of State, auto accidents, births, Berlin, cures for cancer!" (p. 12). In the British TV series Yes Minister , Sir Humphrey Appleby pointed out that "the Ship of State is the only ship that leaks from the top".

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Allegorical interpretations of Plato Collective intelligence Plato's political philosophy Spaceship Earth References [ edit ] ^ Brock, Roger (2013-05-23).

Greek Political Imagery from Homer to Aristotle . A&C Black. p. 58.

ISBN 978-1-4725-0218-6 .

^ a b Santas, Gerasimos (2008-04-15). "Chapter 10: Plato and the Ship of State by David Keyt".

The Blackwell Guide to Plato's Republic . John Wiley & Sons. pp.

189– 214.

ISBN 978-1-4051-5025-5 .

^ Keynes, Simon; Lapidge, Michael (1983).

Asser's Life of King Alfred and Other Contempary Sources . London: Penguin Books. p. 101.

ISBN 978-0-14-044409-4 .

^ Carlyle, Thomas (1850).

Latter-Day Pamphlets . London: Chapman and Hall. p. 20.

^ Season 3, episode 5 ("The Bed of Nails") at c. 25:33 min.

External links [ edit ] Longfellow's " O Ship of State Archived 2012-07-16 at the Wayback Machine ".

Text of book VI of Plato's Republic .

v t e Plato Works Apology Charmides Clitophon Cratylus Critias Crito Euthydemus Euthyphro First Alcibiades Gorgias Hippias Major Hippias Minor Ion Laches Laws Lysis Menexenus Meno Parmenides Phaedo Phaedrus Philebus Protagoras Republic Sophist Statesman Symposium Theaetetus Timaeus Of doubtful authenticity Axiochus Definitions Demodocus Epigrams Epinomis Epistles Seventh Letter Eryxias Halcyon Hipparchus Minos On Justice On Virtue Rival Lovers Second Alcibiades Sisyphus Theages Life The Academy in Athens Socratic problem List of speakers in Plato's dialogues Legacy Unwritten doctrines List of manuscripts of Plato's dialogues 23 24 228 229 Commentaries Middle Platonism Neoplatonism and Christianity and Gnosticism Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Plato's Dream Poitier Meets Plato Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ship_of_State&oldid=1288948267 " Categories : Metaphors referring to ships Republic (Plato) Political concepts Concepts in political philosophy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2012 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2024 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 5 May 2025, at 15:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ship of State 10 languages Add topic

