Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description and physical mechanism 2 In Japan 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Snow fence 9 languages العربية Deutsch Eesti Français 한국어 日本語 Română Slovenščina Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Barrier to combat snowdrift For other types of snow barrier devices, see snow barrier (disambiguation) .

Snow fences on Kitzsteinhorn Avalanche protection in Austria A snow fence , similar to a sand fence , is a barrier that forces windblown, drifting snow to accumulate in a desired place. Snow fences are employed primarily to minimize the amount of snowdrift on roadways and railways. Farmers and ranchers use snow fences to create drifts in basins for a ready spring water supply.

[ 1 ] Ski resorts also use snow fences to increase snow depth in specified areas, or for avalanche control .

Description and physical mechanism [ edit ] Diagram of effect (in French): Vent is wind direction, Congère is snow drift, Couverture de neige is snowcover.

Fir hedges as living snow fences Temporary snow fences are usually one of two varieties: perforated orange plastic sheeting attached to stakes at regular intervals (the type usually used for construction site fencing or temporary sports field fencing) or a cedar or other lightweight wood strip and wire fence, also attached to metal stakes. A permanent snow fence usually consists of poles with horizontal planks running across them to cover just over one-half of the total fence area. Taller fences trap more snow. Taking the height of the fence as one unit, it should be placed thirty-five units or more windward of the road or building it is meant to protect.

[ 2 ] Permanent snow fences can also consist of lines of closely spaced shrubs , conifer trees or maize stalks.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Snow fences work by causing turbulence in the wind, such that it drops much of its snow load on the lee side of the fence. Thus, snow fences cause snow drifts rather than preventing them. The fences are placed to cause snow to drift where beneficial or not harmful so that the snow does not drift onto undesired areas such as roads or buildings.

Snow fences have been reported to save lives and reduce maintenance costs. Snow and ice removal and control cost over $2 billion annually in the US.

[ 5 ] Studies published by Strategic Highway Research Program (SHRP) of National Research Council in 1991 showed that mechanical snow removal costs about 100 times more than trapping snow with fences.

Snow fences can also trap tumbleweeds .

In Japan [ edit ] Yukigakoi (Old type snow fence in Japan) In Tohoku and Hokkaido of Japan, especially in areas with strong wind and snow, such as the coastal areas of the Sea of Japan and the plains, structures that lead to snow fences called "Yukigakoi" made of reeds, chives, and wooden boards have been made for a long time. Even now, the culture of making "Yukigakoi" can be seen in some areas such as Hokkaido.

[ 6 ] As for transportation facilities, wooden fences made on railway lines in the 1880s as a measure against snowstorms began. However, initially, it was difficult to predict where the snowdrift would be formed, and it was impossible to control the snowdrift well. There was also a fire accident caused by the sparks generated by the steam locomotive due to the wooden structure, so it was unpopular. It is said that it has replaced the Railroad snow forest in Japan as well.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] On the other hand, for roads, a structure called a "Blowing pool type snow fence" was studied and installed for the first time in 1961, referring to the wooden Snow fence used all over the world. Then, in 1967, the Hokkaido Regional Development Bureau Construction machinery workshop (at that time) developed a "blow-off snow fence" that began to be installed on national roads in 1969. Later, the Hokkaido Development Civil Engineering Research Institute (currently, Public Works Research Institute Cold Region Civil Engineering Research Institute) researched "Blow-up prevention type snow fence" and installed it in 1978, and further applied "Blow-up prevention type snow fence" to "Blowing-proof snow fence" from 1981 and since 1988. It came to be installed.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] In recent Japanese railways, "blowing pool type" and "blowing-proof" snow fences have been re-evaluated for their usefulness based on the research results and achievements on the road so that they will be used again as railway snow protection measures.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Snow guard , a device attached to roofs to prevent snow from falling on people below Snow shed , which is designed so that snow collects on top References [ edit ] ^ Jairell, R; Schmidt, R (1999), "133", Snow Management and Windbreaks , Range Beef Cow Symposium, University of Nebraska–Lincoln , p. 12 ^ Iowa's Cooperative Snow Fence Program (PDF) . Des Moines, Iowa: Iowa Department of Transportation. June 2005. p. 11.

^ "Living Snow Fences: Functions and Benefits" (PDF) . University of Minnesota. 2011 . Retrieved 14 November 2014 .

^ Nixon, Wilfrid; Davison, Megan; Kochumman, George (November 2006), Living Snow Fences (PDF) , University of Iowa , retrieved 14 November 2014 ^ Blackburn, Robert R. (2004-01-01).

Snow and Ice Control: Guidelines for Materials and Methods . Transportation Research Board.

ISBN 9780309087995 .

^ a b c Takeuchi Masao (April 10, 2003).

Journal of the Japanese Society of Snow and Ice "SEPPYOU" Volume 65, Issue 3: For the control of blowing snow (5) - Technical development in use of snow - fences - (in Japanese). Yukiken Snow Eaters Co., Ltd.

^ a b Public Works Research Institute Cold Region Civil Engineering Research Institute.

Part 3 Snow fence (PDF) (in Japanese). Public Works Research Institute Cold Region Civil Engineering Research Institute.

^ Tsutsumi Takuya; Tsutsumi Takuya (March 2018).

Verification and improvement of snow control performance of windbreak fence (PDF) (in Japanese). Building Research Department Local Independent Administrative Agency Hokkaido Research Organization.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Snow fences .

The short film Effective Snow Fences is available for free viewing and download at the Internet Archive .

Plan for a 3 meter Wyoming-style snow fence.

Plan for a 3.6 meter Wyoming-style snow fence.

" What’s That Thing: Roadside Fence Edition ", by Mark Vanhoenacker, Slate, Aug. 1, 2013 Snow fences: do they still serve a purpose?

Building effective Snow Fences – Better than a good idea Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Snow_fence&oldid=1302355881 " Categories : Fences Snow Avalanche safety Hidden categories: CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 July 2025, at 22:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Snow fence 9 languages Add topic

