Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Founding 1.2 Early years 1.3 Six-Day War 1.4 War of Attrition 1.4.1 Operation Blanket 1.4.2 Operation Wrath of God 1.5 Yom Kippur War 1.6 Lebanon 1.6.1 Ansariya Ambush 1.7 Operation Moses 1.8 Tunisia 1988 1.9 Second Intifada 1.10 2006 Lebanon War 1.11 Syria 2008 1.12 Operation Cast Lead 1.13 Francop Affair 1.14 Gaza flotilla operation 1.15 Victoria Affair 1.16 Operation Protective Edge 1.17 Operation Full Disclosure 1.18 Persian Gulf crisis 1.19 Israel-Gaza war 1.20 Other operations 2 Organization 3 Training 4 Equipment Toggle Equipment subsection 4.1 Weaponry 4.2 Other equipment 5 Toxic exposure 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Shayetet 13 25 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Tiếng Việt ייִדיש 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Special operations unit of the Israeli Navy 13th Flotilla Shayetet 13 S'13 Insignia Active 1948–present Country Israel Branch Israeli Navy Type Maritime Sayeret Special Operation Force Role Special Operations Counter-terrorism Sabotage Special Reconnaissance Visit, board, search, and seizure (VBSS) Size 3 companies Part of Israeli Navy Garrison/HQ Atlit naval base Nickname(s) השייטת (HaShayetet, The Flotilla ) Motto(s) As the bat emerges from the darkness, As the blade cuts through with silence, As the grenade smashes in rage Engagements Suez Crisis Six-Day War War of Attrition Operation Spring of Youth Operation Litani 1982 Lebanon War South Lebanon conflict Operation Moses First Intifada Second Intifada Santorini Noah's Ark Abu Hasan 2006 Lebanon War Gaza War Francop Affair Gaza flotilla raid Iron Law Operation Full Disclosure Operation Protective Edge Gaza war 2024 Israeli invasion of Syria Iran–Israel war [ 1 ] Commanders Notable commanders Ami Ayalon Ze'ev Almog Yoav Galant Insignia Shoulder Tag Military unit v t e Shayetet 13 boardings Santorini Karine A Francop 2010 Gaza flotilla raid Victoria KLOS C June 2025 Gaza Freedom Flotilla July 2025 Gaza Freedom Flotilla Shayetet 13 ( Hebrew : שייטת 13 , lit.

'Flotilla 13') is a naval commando unit of the Israeli Navy and one of the primary reconnaissance units of the Israel Defense Forces . Shayetet 13 specializes in sea-to-land incursions, counter-terrorism , sabotage , maritime intelligence gathering, maritime hostage rescue , and boarding. The unit is trained for sea, air and land actions.

[ 2 ] The unit has taken part in almost all of Israel's major wars, as well as other actions.

The unit is one of the most secretive in the Israeli military. The details of many missions and identities of active operatives are kept highly classified . The unit is respected as among the best of the world's special forces , [ 3 ] and is compared to the US Navy SEALs and Britain's Special Boat Service .

[ 4 ] Unlike many other Israeli Special Forces Units which take men only for their 36-month mandatory service , volunteers for Shayetet 13 must agree to serve at least four and a half years.

[ 5 ] History Founding Yohai Ben-Nun , Hero of Israel , founder of the Shayetet 13, and sixth commander of the Israeli Navy Shayetet 13 with the symbol of the Palmach in the former Palyam base in Caesarea , 1948 Shayetet 13 is a veteran Israeli special forces unit. It was formed in 1949 by Yohai Ben-Nun with men drawn from the ranks of the Palyam , the naval branch of the Palmach , the elite fighting force of the Haganah , the ancestor of the Israel Defense Forces . The need for such a dedicated unit was a matter of debate during the early years of the IDF, and the unit subsequently suffered size and budget restrictions. Upon its foundation, the existence of Shayetet 13 was a state secret, and its members wore general Israeli Navy insignia rather than their own unique one.

[ 6 ] Early years IDF Chief of Staff Tzvi Tzur inspects graduates of the Shayetet 13 training course, 1963 Shayetet 13 commandos participated in the 1956 Suez Crisis . They performed several failed reconnaissance missions before the war and later participated in the land campaign as regular soldiers. A plan for Shayetet 13 commandos to capture an Egyptian Navy frigate was almost put into action. The plan was called off because the elite unit's soldiers were deemed too valuable to risk for low-priority targets.

[ 7 ] In 1957, Shayetet 13 began to jointly train with the French Marine Commandos , and as a result, information about its existence began to leak. Two years later, the unit's soldiers were permitted to wear their distinctive bat insignia, and the existence of the unit was made public the year after that.

[ 8 ] [ 6 ] In the late 1950s, Shayetet 13 commandos carried out a series of reconnaissance missions to monitor the deliveries of Soviet gunboats to Syria and monitor Lebanon during the 1958 Lebanon crisis . On July 9, 1958, Shayetet 13 operatives infiltrated Beirut harbor in Operation Yovel. They were spotted and had to retreat, swimming back out to sea where an Israeli Navy torpedo boat picked them up and exchanged fire with a Lebanese patrol craft that intervened. The Israelis were able to retreat without any casualties.

[ 7 ] In 1962, it participated in a joint operation with the Golani Brigade against Syrian positions in the Golan Heights in retaliation for Syrian firing on Israeli fishermen. While the Golani force was successful, the Shayetet 13 force failed to complete its mission, a raid on a Syrian post in Kursi , and retreated without casualties after coming under fire. The fiasco became known as "Operation Rabbit".

In August 1966, the unit was given the mission of retrieving the wreckage of a Syrian Air Force MiG that had been shot down and crashed into the Sea of Galilee . Near the end of the operation, Syrian troops opened fire, and the salvage rope attached to the aircraft was dropped. The Syrians were later able to pick it up and drag their aircraft to safety.

[ 7 ] Six-Day War Shayetet 13 operators in the Suez Canal area, July 1967 During the 1967 Six-Day War , the unit was tasked with neutralizing enemy fleets. Shayetet 13 commandos infiltrated Port Said , but found no ships there, and during a raid into Alexandria , six divers were captured and taken prisoner, and released in January 1968. Several other missions also failed.

[ 7 ] [ 9 ] In July 1967, Shayetet 13 commandos crossed the Suez Canal and blew up an Egyptian rail line in two places. The operation was carried out in retaliation for Egyptian shelling.

[ 7 ] Operation Barak was an Israeli naval mission to fly the flag in the Suez Canal carried out in July 1967, following Egyptian artillery attacks and firing on Israeli ships in the Suez Canal. Shayetet 13 participated in the operation. The operation was carried out in daylight, and the Egyptians opened fire from their positions, sinking a boat.

[ 7 ] War of Attrition Shayetet 13 saw extensive action in the War of Attrition . It carried out repeated commando raids in the Suez Canal area, often assisting Sayeret Matkal . Throughout 1969 the unit carried out a series of land-based mining, maritime patrol, and sabotage missions. On the night of June 21, 1969, Shayetet 13 carried out Operation Frenzy 5. After a preliminary reconnaissance mission by a Shayetet 13 team a month before, a force of commandos attacked an Egyptian guard post after landing from the sea, killing 32 Egyptian soldiers and blowing up five buildings, with the only Israeli casualties being two commandos slightly injured.

[ 10 ] In July 1969, the unit successfully carried out the Green Island raid in cooperation with Sayeret Matkal . Three of the six Israeli soldiers killed during the operation were Shayetet 13 operatives. The Egyptians lost approximately 80 soldiers. On September 7, 1969, Shayetet 13 carried out Operation Escort , raiding the Egyptian anchorage at Ras Sadat and destroying a pair of Egyptian P-183 torpedo-boats. Three commandos were killed on the way back from the mission when one of their charges detonated.

Escort , nevertheless, allowed the IDF to carry out Operation Raviv , a highly successful 10-hour raid on Egypt's Red Sea coast.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] During the 1970s, the unit underwent a reorganization, with more emphasis placed on sea-to-land incursions and on effective training. More issues rose with other IDF Special Forces units, which at the time suggested that Shayetet 13 should only provide the transportation to the target and assistance in crossing water obstacles, while leaving the surface warfare to the other IDF Special Forces units.

[ 9 ] Operation Blanket In 1970, in response to the persecution of Syrian Jews and their efforts to flee to Israel, the Israeli government launched Operation Blanket to bring them to Israel. In an operation directed by the Mossad lasting a few years, Shayetet 13 commandos and Mossad agents made dozens of clandestine incursions into Syria, with the participants having to resort to living undercover in Damascus . The operation succeeded in bringing only a few dozen young Jews to Israel.

[ 13 ] Operation Wrath of God Shayetet 13 took part in Operation Spring of Youth in 1973, in which Israeli special forces raided Beirut and killed several members of Black September , the terrorist group which carried out the Munich massacre of Israeli athletes in the Munich 1972 Summer Olympics .

[ 14 ] The Shayetet 13 force that participated in the operation landed in north Beirut and destroyed a small Fatah explosives workshop.

Yom Kippur War During the Yom Kippur War , Shayetet 13 commandos infiltrated Egyptian ports numerous times, sinking five Egyptian naval vessels and heavily damaging another. Two commandos went missing during one of the raids.

[ 7 ] Lebanon Operation Bardas 20 took place on January 14, 1971, to neutralize a guerrilla base in Lebanon , near Sidon , where about two dozen militants were training as frogmen. During the operation, the commandos destroyed some of the camp's buildings, and a number of guerrillas were wounded, including commander Abu Youssef.

[ 7 ] Shayetet 13, Unit 707, and Sayeret Tzanhanim commandos jointly raided guerrilla bases in Nahr al-Bared and Beddawi on February 19, 1973, in Operation Bardas 54–55. During the operation, about 40 guerrillas were killed and 60 wounded, and a Turkish military trainer was taken prisoner.

[ 7 ] In the years following the Yom Kippur War , Shayetet 13 carried out various missions against guerrilla boats and those who assisted them, with mediocre success. During Operation Litani in 1978, Shayetet 13 carried out ambushes, killing a senior enemy commander in one of them. From 1979 to 1981, the unit carried out 22 successful raids against guerrilla targets in Lebanon . The successes resulted in a unit decoration.

[ 7 ] In one notable raid on April 19, 1980, Shayetet 13 commandos raided the base of a guerrilla organization that according to intelligence was planning an attack on a community in Israel, killing about 15 guerrillas, including the commander of the would-be infiltration unit and two of its members, and two structures were destroyed. Several commandos were wounded.

[ 7 ] During the 1982 Lebanon War , Shayetet 13 commandos participated in securing a beachhead for an Israeli amphibious landing north of Sidon . Two teams of commandos landed, one of which swam to the mouth of the Awali River and another which came ashore on the landing beach in rubber dinghies. The commandos engaged in a brief battle with armed Palestinians and enabled Israeli armor and infantry to land. The unit also carried out three raids on PLO targets in Beirut , and carried out several other raids and ambushes during the war.

[ 7 ] Shayetet 13 was also responsible for stopping ships that were ferrying weapons out of the country to Italy , including Yasser Arafat 's personal boat.

[ 8 ] From the early 1980s the unit became increasingly involved in the Lebanon conflict , demonstrating an excellent track record of dozens of successful operations each year and inflicting heavy losses on Hezbollah in terms of casualties and equipment destroyed.

[ 15 ] Typical missions at the time were interdiction of guerrilla vessels, blowing up enemy headquarters and key facilities, conducting ambushes and planting explosives on guerrilla routes.

[ 9 ] On November 25, 1988, the unit, along with other forces, conducted a raid on the Headquarters of PFLP-GC , with the aim of killing its leader Ahmad Jibril . However, the raid failed and an officer was killed and several Israeli commandos were wounded. Jibril arranged a press conference at the base, brandishing the personal weapon of the killed IDF officer. The IDF estimated that 20 guerrillas were killed in the raid, although the Palestinians only conceded eight.

[ 16 ] Israeli military analyst Ronen Bergman described the operation as an "embarrassing flop".

[ 17 ] Ansariya Ambush Main article: Ansariya ambush On September 5, 1997, the unit suffered a major blow during a raid in Lebanon . A force of sixteen Shayetet 13 commandos landed on Lebanon's coast, south of Sidon between the towns of Loubieh and Ansariya. Speculation about their mission was that they were trying to assassinate a senior Shia Muslim cleric of the Hezbollah movement. They landed in the dark early hours of that Friday and started moving inland. The IDF said the force had been "on its way to its mission" when it was ambushed.

[ 18 ] Hezbollah and Amal commandos were lying in wait for them. The clash took place outside a 15-km deep security zone which Israel occupied in south Lebanon. The soldiers were ambushed after entering an orchard booby-trapped with bombs, which exploded as they entered.

[ 19 ] The commandos were knocked to the ground and came under heavy fire, killing the force's commander, Lt. Col. Yossi Korakin almost immediately. More commandos were killed when the firing triggered the explosives one of the commandos was carrying. Israel immediately dispatched a rescue team in a CH-53 helicopter. A rescue force of helicopters and missile boats arrived, joining in a battle that lasted until dawn as the rescuers evacuated the dead. Mortar shells exploded nearby, killing a doctor in the rescue force, and shrapnel hit the CH-53, but it was able to take off. The IDF lost twelve dead, including eleven Shayetet 13 commandos. Two Hezbollah fighters were lightly wounded.

[ 20 ] The uncollected remains of the Israeli soldiers were returned to Israel on June 25, 1998, in a prisoner exchange deal. After 14 years, Hezbollah revealed that they knew the position of the commandos in advance thanks to the interception of video footage broadcast by Israeli UAVs that were hovering over the area in the days before the mission.

Operation Moses During the mid-1980s, Shayetet 13 played an active part in Operation Moses , which brought thousands of Ethiopian Jews to Israel. After the Mossad had established a diving resort on the Sudanese coast to serve a conduit for Jews fleeing Ethiopia , Shayetet 13 operatives would arrive on dinghies at night to ferry the refugees to an Israel Navy boat waiting offshore.

[ 21 ] Tunisia 1988 On April 16, 1988, Shayetet 13 commandos, along with Sayeret Matkal and Mossad operatives, took part in the assassination of Khalil al-Wazir at his home in Tunisia .

[ 22 ] Second Intifada During the Second Intifada , Shayetet 13 commandos took part in ground counter terror operations deep within the West Bank and the Gaza Strip . Shayetet 13 participated in hundreds of operations against Hamas , Islamic Jihad and the Al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades , killing dozens of militants and arresting hundreds. Shayetet 13 snipers were responsible for the assassination of Thabet Thabet, a senior Fatah political official in Tulkarm .

[ 23 ] The unit also participated in the Battle of Jenin , during which a Shayetet 13 force extracted an Israeli reserve army unit which was pinned down after having been ambushed and recovered the bodies of soldiers who had been killed in the ambush. It earned high acclaim due to the successful capture of three Palestinian vessels which attempted to smuggle in weapons: Karine A , Santorini , Abu Hasan , and Abu-Yusuf. The Karine A incident, in particular was considered a highly difficult operation. In 2004, the unit's operations were temporarily suspended following a complaint from B'Tselem , an Israeli human rights group, that Shayetet 13 operatives had shot an unarmed Palestinian fighter in Jenin for no reason. An investigation found that the commandos had good reason to assume the guerrilla was concealing a grenade, and the unit was put back into action.

[ 7 ] In 2002 and again in 2003, Shayetet 13 won the Chief-of-Staff citation for successful counter terrorism operations.

2006 Lebanon War On August 5, 2006, during the 2006 Lebanon War , Shayetet 13 commandos carried out the Tyre raid . The commandos raided an apartment block in Tyre which was allegedly housing Hezbollah commanders. According to Israeli sources, between 6 and 10 Hezbollah fighters were killed.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Lebanese sources claimed that one or two Hezbollah fighters, a Lebanese soldier, and at least four civilians were killed in the operation.

[ 26 ] Ten commandos were wounded in the raid, two of them severely. The IDF admitted that the senior Hezbollah commanders who had been the primary target of the raid had managed to escape.

[ 27 ] Syria 2008 According to the Sunday Times , Shayetet 13 snipers on a yacht were responsible for the assassination of Syrian General Muhammad Suleiman .

[ 28 ] Operation Cast Lead During Operation Cast Lead , which lasted from December 2008 to January 2009, Shayetet 13 commandos landed on the Gaza Strip coastline to strike Hamas targets on land.

[ 29 ] They were also reportedly involved in two Israeli airstrikes in Sudan against Iranian -supplied arms being smuggled into the Gaza Strip. The strikes hit a 17-truck convoy carrying arms, and an Iranian arms ship docking in Sudan.

[ 30 ] Francop Affair Main article: Francop Affair On 4 November 2009, the Antiguan -flagged vessel MV Francop which had been carrying arms and munitions from Iran to Hezbollah was successfully boarded and taken over by Shayetet 13 commandos. The commandos subsequently found the well-hidden weapons.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] Gaza flotilla operation Main article: 2010 Gaza flotilla raid On May 31, 2010, Shayetet 13 took part in Operation Sea Breeze or Operation Sky Winds against a flotilla trying to break the blockade of Gaza. The commandos, armed with non-lethal weaponry and 9mm pistols as sidearms, roped down from helicopters and boarded from speedboats, and apprehended five ships with mostly passive resistance. Aboard the MV Mavi Marmara , the commandos were attacked by dozens of activists armed with knives, iron bars, slingshots and improvised weapons, and allegedly with firearms, including those seized from commandos. Three soldiers were captured, carried below deck, and were temporarily held in a passenger hall. The commandos initially used non-lethal force, but after this proved ineffective, they opened fire with live ammunition and seized control of the ship. Nine activists were killed, [ 33 ] and several dozen were wounded. Seven commandos were also wounded, two of them seriously.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] International condemnation of the action followed.

[ 36 ] Subsequently, Shayetet 13 commandos boarded and seized the aid ship MV Rachel Corrie with no resistance.

Victoria Affair Main article: Victoria Affair On March 15, 2011, Shayetet 13 took part in "Operation Iron Law," conducted on the high seas against the Liberian-flagged, German-owned Victoria , a cargo vessel found to be carrying 50 tons of weapons which intelligence reports indicated had been consigned to Hamas .

[ 37 ] The Victoria was interdicted approximately 200 nautical miles from the Israeli coast, as it traveled from Turkey to El-Arish port in Egypt (other sources give the destination as Alexandria, Egypt).

[ 37 ] According to the Israel Defense Forces, Victoria loaded the cargo in the port of Latakia in Syria and sailed to Mersin , Turkey.

[ 38 ] The ship was intercepted by Israeli Navy Sa'ar 5-class corvettes and boarded by commandos from Shayetet 13, without resistance.

[ 37 ] The IDF has stated that the ship's crew was unaware it was carrying weapons, as they were concealed in 39 of the 100 containers on deck beneath bags of Syrian lentils and cotton.

[ 37 ] When seized by Shayetet 13, Victoria was redirected to the Port of Ashdod . There, further inspections were conducted and the contraband was unloaded. Israel then announced it would release the ship and allow Victoria to continue to the Egyptian port of Alexandria.

[ 39 ] Operation Protective Edge See also: 2014 Gaza War During the 2014 Gaza War, code-named Operation Protective Edge, Shayetet 13 carried out numerous missions against rocket-launching positions.

[ 40 ] On July 13, Shayetet 13 commandos raided a compound from which long-range rockets were being fired with the support of helicopters and warships, killing three Hamas fighters while four of the commandos were lightly injured.

[ 41 ] Operation Full Disclosure Main article: Operation Full Disclosure Operation Full Disclosure task force, with speedboats carrying Shayetet 13 commandos in the foreground On March 5, 2014, Shayetet 13 commandos raided the ship Klos C , an Iranian ship heading for Port Sudan from Iraq with weapons believed to have been destined for militant groups.

Persian Gulf crisis During the 2019–2021 Persian Gulf crisis, Shayetet 13 commandos carried out attacks which damaged numerous Iranian cargo ships carrying oil and weapons to Syria from late 2019 to 2021 with limpet mines and other weapons. Some of the attacks took place in the Red Sea .

[ 42 ] The unit is also believed to have been behind an attack on the MV Saviz , believed to be an Iranian intelligence ship of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps Navy , which was heavily damaged by a limpet mine in April 2021.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] Israel-Gaza war Shayetet 13 commandos during the Gaza War Shayetet 13 has had an extensive role in the Gaza war . During the October 7 attacks , the unit participated in the fighting to recapture areas in southern Israel overrun by Hamas. A force of Shayetet 13 commandos retook the Sufa military outpost as part of the Battle of Sufa , [ 45 ] and the unit's commandos also took part in fighting in Be'eri , Kfar Aza , Sa'ad , Mefalsim , and Nir Oz . During the fighting in southern Israel, Shayetet 13 commandos killed more than 60 enemy fighters and rescued about 250 hostages.

[ 46 ] Shayetet 13 commandos captured Muhammad Abu Ghali, the deputy commander of the southern division of Hamas' naval force, during the fighting.

[ 47 ] Shortly before the main Israeli ground invasion of the Gaza Strip began, Shayetet 13 commandos carried out a seaborne raid against military infrastructure used by Hamas' Nukhba naval commando force.

[ 48 ] Shayetet 13 commandos took part in the Israeli invasion of the Gaza Strip . In November 2023, Shayetet 13 commandos backed by tanks of the 188th Armored Brigade , combat engineers, and air support took over the Gaza harbor, which was used as a training base for Hamas naval commandos, in an operation in which 10 militants were killed.

[ 49 ] In December 2023, Shayetet 13 and the 401st Brigade raided a series of schools in Gaza City's Sheikh Radwan neighborhood, uncovering hundreds of weapons, as well as killing several militants and capturing dozens.

[ 50 ] During the Battle of Jabalia , Shayetet 13 commandos along with soldiers of the 551st Reserve Brigade raided Hamas' general security headquarters in Jabalia .

[ 51 ] Other operations In 1985, a Shayetet 13 raid sank a PLO boat in Algeria . In 2012, Shayetet 13 commandos seized a Liberian-flagged German cargo ship on suspicion that it was carrying weapons, but no weaponry was found.

[ 52 ] That same year, numerous members of Shayetet 13 were awarded citations for covert operations in enemy territory after the unit had carried out a series of operations which resulted in "many successes" according to the IDF.

[ 53 ] In 2013, it was reported that Shayetet 13 commandos had installed espionage equipment on an island close to the Syrian city of Tartus which enabled Israel to monitor the Russian naval presence there.

[ 54 ] Many of Shayetet 13's missions are classified, though some known or suspected activities of the unit have been revealed by other means. In one example, Zeev Almog , the former commander of the unit, remarked that during his time, 23 ships were raided and 7 sunk by the unit, without elaborating.

[ 8 ] Retired Israeli Navy Colonel Mike Eldar said that "Israel can arrange an operation where it sends a team from Shayetet 13 to attach a mine to a ship, which can even be done at the port of destination or any other way station. The [commandos] can easily swim to the ship undetected, and many such operations have been carried out over the years against terrorists or states." [ 55 ] Organization Shayetet 13 operatives during training Shayetet 13 has an estimated 300 personnel divided into three specialized company-sized units (Hebrew: Pluga ), these include: [ 56 ] Haposhtim (raids) unit – is the primary unit of Shayetet 13. Their missions include special reconnaissance and direct-action missions on land, maritime counter-terrorism and hostage rescues.

Underwater unit – the offensive divers unit. Its missions range from underwater attacks and sabotage, to hydrographic reconnaissance, beachhead reconnaissance and security. Not to be confused with the defensive divers YALTAM unit.

Above water unit – is similar to an American Special Boat Team and specializes in surface attacks, sea transportation of units to and from target areas.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] The unit is headquartered at Atlit naval base .

[ 59 ] Training Shayetet 13 commandos prepare for an exercise aboard a warship Shayetet 13 commandos in training The training of Shayetet 13 recruits lasts 20 months, and is considered one of the toughest courses in the IDF. Shayetet 13 operates a summer course for teenagers about to enter military service considering joining the unit, who have the opportunity to get a taste of training in diving, raids, navigation, boats, and more. Those who enlist in Shayetet 13 are put through a five-stage training process: Selection process. A selection camp to recruit for the unit is held twice a year. All recruits must have a medical profile of 97. All combatants must be male. Cadets undergo extensive medical tests, after which they are put through a series of physically and mentally grueling exercises for four days. Doctors and psychologists are at hand to prevent burnout and physical injury. This phase stresses psychological toughness, and tests recruits in their ability to take and operate under stress and fear. Few succeed in passing this phase.

Six months of basic and advanced infantry training with the Nahal Brigade .

[ 60 ] Preparation phase: this phase lasts for three months and consists of advanced infantry and weapons training, parachute training, basic elements of maritime warfare, operation of small vessels, long swims, forced marches, and demolitions.

Four weeks of advanced training in combat diving. During this course, cadets learn the basics of combat diving, and how to cope with situations such as cold, darkness, clouded water, and how to survive high-risk underwater situations.

Dedicated phase. This is the most rigorous phase of training which lasts about a year, and most of the dropouts leave during this phase. This phase includes training in advanced diving techniques with close-circuit systems, underwater demolition, sea-to-land incursions via diving, ships, submarines, and parachuting into the sea. The unit's snipers also undergo six weeks of sniper training, divided into three weeks of long-range sniper training at the IDF Sniper School, and three weeks of short-range sniper training for hostage situations at the IDF Counter-Terror School. Cadets then train in maritime counter-terrorism operations, such as the boarding of vessels, oil rigs and near-coast buildings. During this phase, soldiers are divided between the three specialized units based on their capabilities and personal interests, and train on their future specialty.

During their training, cadets are trained in a variety of martial arts, among them Krav Maga , a hand-to-hand combat system which is Israel's national martial art.

[ 61 ] Toward the end of their training, Shayetet 13 recruits go through a course in enduring enemy captivity which recruits from other special forces units and pilot cadets must also go through. Following a surprise mock kidnapping, they are held in prison-like conditions for two weeks,  during which they subjected to threats, interrogation, and physical violence, and are forced to perform humiliating activities.

[ 62 ] Even after their induction into active service, Shayetet 13 commandos continue to take part in training exercises, and participate in cross-training with foreign special forces units such as the US Navy SEALs and other regional partners such as the Underwater Demolition Team (MYK).

[ 58 ] [ 63 ] [ 64 ] [ 65 ] Equipment Israel Navy Gang (pig) SDV BIR-55 by the Italian CABI Cattaneo firm A Morena-class rigid-hulled inflatable boat Weaponry M4 carbine [ 66 ] AK-47 [ 67 ] M203 grenade launcher [ 66 ] CTAR-21 carbine X95 carbine Uzi 9mm Sub-machine gun Negev machine gun [ 66 ] SR-25 sniper rifle M24 sniper rifle Glock pistols [ 68 ] Other equipment Limpet mines [ 66 ] Zodiac RHIB boats [ 66 ] Morena RHIB boats [ 69 ] Snunit fast attack craft [ 66 ] Toxic exposure In 2000, the Israeli newspaper Yedioth Ahronoth reported that Shayetet 13 veterans had an unusually high occurrence of cancer and other serious illnesses compared to the general population. The IDF subsequently launched a commission of inquiry. It was suspected that the cause was due to soldiers training in the heavily polluted Kishon River , which until the early 1990s was used by the unit for swimming and diving exercises. At the same time petrochemical facilities in Haifa were regularly dumping toxic chemicals into the river. The commission of inquiry failed to reach a firm conclusion and stated that it did not find statistical evidence that diving in the Kishon River caused cancer. A compromise was subsequently reached in which some of the soldiers were recognized as having contracted illnesses due to their military service while others were not. Over the following years, veterans who were not recognized as well as civilian fishermen who worked in and around the river repeatedly filed unsuccessful lawsuits against the government and the companies responsible for the pollution.

[ 70 ] [ 18 ] In December 2021, Israeli defense minister Benny Gantz ordered a new investigation of the matter. The probe found that pollution had indeed been responsible for the high rates of illness, concluding that the soldiers' exposure to toxic chemicals in the Kishon River was so extreme as to be "incomparable to any other case like it." As a result, the Israeli Defense Ministry decided to recognize every veteran who had trained in the Kishon River and subsequently contracted an illness, regardless of type, as a disabled veteran.

[ 70 ] References ^ Zitun, Yoav.

"1,000 לוחמים בים, מהצוללות ועד שייטת 13: הסטי"לים יירטו 30 כטב"מים מאיראן | תיעוד" .

Ynet .

^ "Shayetet 13" .

idf.il . 27 December 2021.

^ Mahnaimi, Uzi; Jenkins, Gareth (6 June 2010).

"TimesonLine- Operation calamity" .

The Times . London. Archived from the original on 7 May 2011 . Retrieved 7 June 2010 .

^ Booth, Robert (31 May 2010).

"Israeli attack on Gaza flotilla sparks international outrage" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 21 June 2010 .

^ Miller, David (2003).

Illustrated Directory of Special Forces . Voyageur Press.

ISBN 978-0760314197 . Retrieved 28 July 2014 – via Google Books.

^ a b "Israeli navy longsleeves – shayetet 13" . Archived from the original on 18 December 2007 . Retrieved 4 December 2007 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m "Shayetet 13" . Zionism-israel.com . Retrieved 11 August 2013 .

^ a b c Ronen, Moshe; Zratt, Elad (5 June 2014).

"On victories and defeats: Tales from Israel's naval commando chiefs" .

Ynetnews . Retrieved 30 December 2016 .

^ a b c "isayeret.com – The Israeli Special Forces & Special Operations (Sayeret) Database" . Archived from the original on 14 October 2009 . Retrieved 4 December 2007 .

^ "אתר צה"ל – צבא ההגנה לישראל" .

www.idf.il . Archived from the original on 15 October 2011 . Retrieved 12 January 2022 .

^ "The War And The Woman" . Time Magazine. 19 September 1969. Archived from the original on 6 May 2008 . Retrieved 16 June 2010 .

^ Moores, Lawrence W. (21 December 1992).

"The Mounted Raid: An Overlooked Deep Operations Capability" (PDF) . Fort Leavenworth, Kansas: School of Advanced Military Studies, United States Army Command and General Staff College. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 October 2012 . Retrieved 16 June 2010 .

^ Johnson, Loch K.: Strategic Intelligence , p. 72 ^ Geller, Doron.

"Operation Spring of Youth" . Retrieved 7 December 2007 .

^ "Shayetet-13 – Jewish Virtual Library" . Retrieved 30 December 2016 .

^ Joel Brinkley (10 December 1988).

"Israel Launches Big Land Attack On a Palestinian Base in Lebanon" .

New York Times . Retrieved 2 May 2021 .

^ Bergman, Ronen, Rise and Kill First, The secret history of Israel's targeted assassinations , Random house, New York, 2018, p. 350 [ ISBN missing ] ^ a b "Shayetet 13: Encyclopedia II – Shayetet 13 – History" . Archived from the original on 18 December 2007 . Retrieved 4 December 2007 .

^ IDF encrypting drones after Hizbullah accessed footage By Yaakov Katz, Jerusalem Post 10/27/2010 23:13 ^ Blanford 2011 , p. 190 ^ Dvori, Nir (15 June 2010).

"25 Years of Operation Moses: Previously Unseen Footage" (in Hebrew). Channel 2 News . Retrieved 16 June 2010 .

^ Crenshaw, Martha: The Consequences of Counterterrorism , p. 344 ^ Rees, Matt (7 January 2001).

"The Work Of Assassins" .

Time . Retrieved 30 December 2016 – via content.time.com.

^ "Commando raid in Tyre kills senior Hezbollah operatives" .

Haaretz .

^ Weiss, Efrat (5 August 2006).

"Tyre raid 'heroic operation' " .

Ynetnews .

^ "Israeli commandos stage Tyre raid" .

BBC . 5 August 2006 . Retrieved 4 December 2007 .

^ "Elite Shayetet unit often carries army's heaviest, most secretive burdens" .

Haaretz .

^ Ahronoth, Yedioth (26 August 2010).

"The long road to Syria – Israel News, Ynetnews" .

Ynetnews . Ynetnews.com . Retrieved 11 August 2013 .

^ "Haaretz – Israel News" . Retrieved 30 December 2016 .

^ "Report: Naval commando forces involved in Sudan strike – Israel News, Ynetnews" .

Ynetnews . Ynetnews.com. 20 June 1995 . Retrieved 11 August 2013 .

^ "Israeli Navy Captures Arms Shipment" .

BBC News . 4 November 2009 . Retrieved 4 November 2009 .

^ "Video of the Shayetet capturing "Francop" " .

IDF Spokesperson . 4 November 2009.

Archived from the original on 18 November 2021 . Retrieved 4 November 2009 .

^ Washington Post , 1-06-2010, "Israeli troops raid aid flotilla headed for Gaza, killing nine" [1] ^ "Gaza aid flotilla activists arrive in Turkey" . CNN. 3 June 2010 . Retrieved 3 June 2010 .

^ Edmund Sanders (1 June 2010).

"Israel criticized over raid on Gaza flotilla" .

Los Angeles Times . Archived from the original on 31 May 2010 . Retrieved 2 June 2010 .

^ "Olmert: Israel needs to repair ties with friendly nations after Gaza flotilla raid" .

Haaretz . 2 June 2010 . Retrieved 11 August 2013 .

^ a b c d Yaakov Katz (18 March 2011).

"Victoria's Secret: The inside story of an arms-laden ship" .

The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 22 March 2011 .

^ Yonat Frilling (15 March 2011).

"Israeli Navy Seizes Suspected Arms Vessel" .

Fox News . Archived from the original on 18 March 2011 . Retrieved 22 March 2011 .

^ Anshell Pfeffer and Barak Ravid (17 March 2011).

"Israel to include weapons ship in UN panel on Iran arms smuggling" .

Haaretz . Retrieved 22 March 2011 .

^ Zitun, Yoav (16 July 2014).

"Source: IDF units operating in Gaza since op began" .

Ynetnews . Retrieved 30 December 2016 .

^ זיתון, יואב; לוי, אליאור; צורי, מתן (13 July 2014).

"שייטת 13 פשטה על מתחם בעזה, 4 נפצעו קל" .

Ynet .

^ Kingsley, Patrick; Bergman, Ronen; Fassihi, Farnaz; Schmitt, Eric (26 March 2021).

"Israel's Shadow War With Iran Moves Out to Sea" .

The New York Times .

^ "דיווח: הקומנדו פגע בספינת ביון איראנית" .

כיכר השבת (in Hebrew). 6 April 2021 . Retrieved 6 April 2021 .

^ "Iranian vessel, said to be IRGC-linked spy ship, hit by limpet mine in Red Sea" .

The Times of Israel .

^ "Israeli Shayetet 13 Special Forces Seize Sufa Military Post Near Gaza Border | Defense News October 2023 Global Security army industry | Defense Security global news industry army year 2023 | Archive News year" .

www.armyrecognition.com . 14 October 2023.

^ IDF publishes footage of elite troops retaking Gaza border post from Hamas on Saturday ^ IDF: Israeli Navy commandos take senior Hamas member captive ^ WATCH: Elite Israeli Navy unit destroys Hamas infrastructure overnight ^ Soldiers of the 188th Brigade and Shayetet 13 have gained operational control of the Gaza harbor ^ Elite IDF unit clears Gaza City schools of Hamas terrorists ^ IDF: Troops fight in center of Khan Younis, raid Hamas general security HQ in Jabaliya ^ "Israeli naval commandos intercept suspect Liberian-flagged ship, find nothing untoward" .

The Times of Israel .

^ "Gantz commends 'Shayetet 13' for string of covert ops" .

The Jerusalem Post | JPost.com .

^ " 'Israel tracked Russian navy in Syria' " .

The Times of Israel .

^ 'Israel knows the location of every ship on the globe at any given time' ^ "Israel – Navy – (S-13) Shayetet 13 / Flotilla 13" .

www.globalsecurity.org .

^ "Arquivo.pt" . Archived from the original on 14 October 2009.

^ a b John Pike.

"Israel – Navy – (S-13) Shayetet 13 / Flotilla 13" . Globalsecurity.org . Retrieved 11 August 2013 .

^ "Israeli Navy" .

www.idf.il . Retrieved 6 April 2024 .

^ "שייטת 13: "השייטת" " . Mako.co.il. July 2011 . Retrieved 11 August 2013 .

^ Fuchs, A. J. (19 February 2016).

"Israeli Counter Terrorist force training Krav Maga" .

MMA Underground . Retrieved 6 April 2024 .

^ "Beatings, threats, humiliations: How the IDF trains soldiers for enemy captivity" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 4 May 2020 .

^ Yehoshua, Yossi (15 April 2014).

"Silent soldiers: Inside the IDF's elite naval commando unit" .

Ynetnews . Retrieved 30 December 2016 .

^ Νικήτας, Γιάννης (24 June 2022).

"Αποκλειστικό: Οδοιπορικό στη Μονάδα Υποβρυχίων Καταστροφών της Εθνικής Φρουράς, το στρατηγικό εργαλείο ειδικών επιχειρήσεων της Κύπρου (Video & φωτογραφίες)" .

Defence Review (in Greek) . Retrieved 8 April 2024 .

^ Vlassis, Savvas (23 October 2018).

"Shayetet 13: "Όπως η νυχτερίδα αναδύεται στο σκοτάδι" " .

Δούρειος Ίππος . Retrieved 8 April 2024 .

^ a b c d e f "Shayetet 13, Israeli Naval Commandos" . Specwarnet.net. 21 August 1946 . Retrieved 11 August 2013 .

^ Eric Sof, Shayetet 13: The IDF’s most elite and secretive unit , Spec Ops Magazine , April 12, 2023 ^ Sof, Eric (26 September 2012).

"Shayetet 13: The IDF's most elite and secretive unit" .

Spec Ops Magazine . Retrieved 6 April 2024 .

^ "European and American weapons in Israeli attack on Gaza Flotilla – Stop Wapenhandel" (in Dutch). 25 October 2010 . Retrieved 6 April 2024 .

^ a b Gross, Judah Ari.

"Defense Ministry to recognize soldiers who swam in toxic river as disabled veterans" .

The Times of Israel .

External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Shayetet 13 .

Official IDF Shayetet 13 promotion video in YouTube (in Hebrew) .

"Shayetet 13 detailed unit profile" .

isayeret.com .

v t e Naval special operations forces Current Tactical Divers Group Clearance Diving Branch 641st Naval Special Operations Brigade Special Warfare Diving and Salvage GRUMEC COMANF Canadian Armed Forces Divers 7th Marine Brigade Frogman Corps Commandos Marine Coastal Jaegers Kampfschwimmer Underwater Demolition Command MARCOS Denjaka KOPASKA Taifib Sepah Navy Special Force 1st Marine Brigade Shayetet 13 COMSUBIN Special Boarding Unit Marine Commandos PASKAL Fuerzas Especiales Netherlands Maritime Special Operations Forces Marinejegerkommandoen Special Service Group (Navy) Naval Special Operations Command JW Formoza Special Actions Detachment 101st Amphibious Reconnaissance Battalion Amphibious Reconnaissance and Patrol Unit Russian commando frogmen Naval Diving Unit 4 Special Forces Regiment Republic of Korea Navy Special Warfare Flotilla Special Boat Squadron FGNE Kustjägarna Naval Special Warfare Command Reconnaissance Battalion Sualtı Taaruz Sualtı Savunma Special Boat Service Navy SEALs Special warfare combatant-craft crewmen Defunct Navy Beach Commandos Kampfschwimmer Decima Flottiglia MAS UOE Royal Naval Commandos Beach Jumpers Underwater Demolition Team v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐mvrjr
Cached time: 20250817093337
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.288 seconds
Real time usage: 1.618 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 12524/1000000
Revision size: 54092/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 662226/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12745/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 236910/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.613/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23715608/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1062.633      1 -total
 37.45%  397.958      1 Template:Reflist
 16.90%  179.606     24 Template:Cite_news
 14.77%  156.995      1 Template:Naval_special_operations_forces
 14.59%  155.085      1 Template:Military_navigation
 13.76%  146.255     46 Template:Flag_icon
 13.13%  139.487     31 Template:Cite_web
  9.27%   98.462      1 Template:Underwater_diving
  8.92%   94.811      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  8.51%   90.441      1 Template:Langx Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:14379454:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817093337 and revision id 1306360070. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Shayetet_13&oldid=1306360070 " Categories : Special forces of Israel Israeli Navy Armed forces diving Military units and formations established in 1948 Naval special forces units and formations Military counterterrorist organizations Hidden categories: Pages with missing ISBNs CS1 Hebrew-language sources (he) CS1 Greek-language sources (el) CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia extended-confirmed-protected pages Use dmy dates from July 2025 Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Hebrew-language text Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Hebrew-language sources (he) This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 09:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Shayetet 13 25 languages Add topic

