Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Medieval Scotland 2 Renaissance Scotland 3 18th century Toggle 18th century subsection 3.1 Natural law 3.2 Moral philosophy 3.3 Aesthetics 4 19th century 5 20th century 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Scottish philosophy 1 language 한국어 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on Philosophy Philosophy portal Contents Outline Glossary History Categories Philosophies By period Ancient Egyptian Greek Roman Chinese Medieval Buddhism Neo-Confucianism Scholasticism Renaissance Modern Enlightenment Idealism Contemporary Analytic Continental By region African Egyptian Ethiopian South African Eastern Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Vietnamese Indigenous American Aztec Middle Eastern Iranian Western United States British French German Italian Russian By religion Buddhist Confucian Christian Hindu Islamic Jain Jewish Taoist Branches Epistemology Ethics Logic Metaphysics Aesthetics Education History Language Law Metaphilosophy Mind Ontology Phenomenology Political Religion Science Philosophers Aesthetic philosophers Epistemologists Ethicists Logicians Metaphysicians Philosophers of mind Social and political philosophers Women in philosophy v t e Part of a series on the History of Scotland Eras Prehistoric ( timeline ) 12,000 BC–700 BC Iron Age During the Roman Empire 69–384 Middle Ages Early High Late Early Modern Modern History (timeline) Rule House of Alpin (843–878; 889–1040) House of Moray (1040–1058) House of Dunkeld (1058–1286) House of Balliol (1292–1296) House of Bruce (1306–1371) House of Stuart (1371–1652) (1660–1707) Commonwealth (1652–1660) Acts of Union 1707 Topics Scandinavian Scotland 793–1468 Wars of independence Renaissance Reformation Restoration Glorious Revolution Colonization of the Americas Enlightenment Romanticism Clans The Scots language Economics Education Military Maritime Historiography Demography Natural history Culture Architecture Art The Kilt Literature Philosophy Politics Devolution Local government Scottish National Party Scottish Socialist Party Sport Football Rugby union National football team Golf Religion Christianity Scottish Reformation Scottish Episcopal Church Great Disruption Jews and Judaism Islam and Muslims By region Edinburgh timeline Glasgow  timeline Scotland portal v t e Scottish philosophy is a philosophical tradition created by philosophers belonging to Scottish universities. Although many philosophers such as Francis Hutcheson , David Hume , Thomas Reid , and Adam Smith are familiar to almost all philosophers it was not until the 19th century that the notion of 'Scottish philosophy' became recognized and highly regarded internationally. In the 20th century, however, this tradition declined as Scottish-educated philosophers left for England.

Medieval Scotland [ edit ] See also: Scotism Early philosophy served theology, that is the study of god and religion. Naturally, this emphasized the origins of sin and the corruption of human nature. The main topics of medieval philosophy include areas that are still studied in philosophy today. These topics related to the philosophy of religion which was also created during that time. Philosophy of religion contains many traditional philosophical problems that are presently still discussed, these being firstly the problem of the compatibility of the divine attributes. This refers to how that arises when we say that God can be omnipotent (all powerful), omniscient (all knowing), and omnibenevolent (all benevolent). Secondly, the problem of evil, which tries to address the contradiction that arises when explaining the creation of if God is all good and all knowing. Thirdly, the problem of the compatibility of divine foreknowledge with human free will. This is a continuation of the problem of evil as human free will is used to respond to the problem of evil but creates another contradiction with divine foreknowledge.

[ 1 ] In the High Middle Ages , a Scottish philosopher, John Duns Scotus (1265-1308) made significant impressions on the areas of natural theology , metaphysics, the theory of knowledge, ethics and moral philosophy. Natural theology is the effort to establish the existence and nature of God through argument. Scotus’s stance on natural theology is that human beings can come to know God in ways apart from revelation. Scotus believes that all our knowledge is derived from our experience of sensible things and from this beginning, we can come to grasp God.

[ 2 ] Renaissance Scotland [ edit ] During the 15th century, Scotland established three universities that were to become the foundation of Scottish philosophical tradition, these were University of St Andrews , the University of Glasgow and the University of Aberdeen . Scottish philosophy was compulsory to all university students. While this pre-enlightenment period was primarily focused on the rehabilitation of the philosophy of their predecessors – writings of the Platonic and Aristotelian modes – this period was not without its accomplishments. The invention of the logarithmic tables by John Napier (1550-1617) allowed the development of the sciences, while significant contributions to science were made by other Scots such as James Gregory (1638-75), Robert Sibbald (1641-1722) and Archibald Pitcairne (1652-1713).

[ 3 ] In the second half of the 17th century, Scottish universities developed their own form of Cartesianism , influenced in large part by Reformed Scholasticism of the first half of the 17th century. Mention of Descartes first appeared in the graduation theses by regent Andrew Cant for Marischal College, the University of Aberdeen in 1654. Cartesianism was very successful in Scottish universities. Until the end of the 1660s, the universities gradually incorporated occasional Cartesianism themes into the scholastic structure of the curriculum. Later, in the 1670s the curriculum was consolidated and structured according to the order of exposition of the new philosophy.

[ 4 ] 18th century [ edit ] Scottish philosophy of this time overlaps with the period of Scottish Enlightenment . The Enlightenment was a period of rapid expansion of knowledge in all academic disciplines not limited to philosophy. Scottish philosophers of this time were extensively studied. The prominent ideas of this century include aesthetics , moral philosophy , natural law , rhetoric , common sense philosophy , etc.

[ 5 ] Natural law [ edit ] The idea of " natural law " can first be found in Supplements and Observations upon Samuel Pufendorf's On the Duty of Man and Citizen according to the Law of Nature by Gershom Carmichael, which says that we are required to do what God prescribes to us as a sign of love and veneration. Failure to act in the prescribed manner is interpreted by God as expressing contempt or hatred. Natural law has two precepts which are distinguished as immediate and mediate duties. The first precept is the idea that we have an immediate duty to worship God so that he may receive our love and veneration for him. The second precept covers our mediate duties of promoting the common good by treating others well. These precepts form the foundation of natural law. The central figure of this narrative is God, hence before the application of the precepts in our duty as worshipers, we must first acknowledge God as the creator and ruler of the universe and all that resides within it.

[ 5 ] Moral philosophy [ edit ] "Moral philosophy" is the idea that to be morally good one must be motivated by benevolence and a desire for the happiness of others. The idea of moral philosophy was can be traced to Francis Hutcheson 's work, A System of Moral Philosophy, in Three Books , first published in Glasgow in 1755. Hutcheson's moral philosophy emerged as a reaction to Hobbes' psychological egoism and Clarke and Wollaston's rationalism. The main objection was to the idea that compassion and benevolence are due to the calculations of self-interest and that people should be discouraged from making others sympathetic towards themselves since this reflected their self-interests and was therefore dishonest. Hutcheson believed that moral knowledge is gained through our moral senses, of which there are three, these senses are separate from our external five senses. The three senses are the public sense, the moral sense and the sense of honour. Public sense refers to how we empathize with the happiness or misery of others. The moral sense is how we perceive the good and bad ourselves and others and our reaction to that manifestation. Sense of honour our reaction of approval or praise when we see or commit a good action. Features of Hutcheson’s moral philosophy appear in his aesthetic theory, particularly his theory of our moral sense of beauty and the pleasure we take in it, which is not simply incidental to perceiving beauty.

[ 5 ] Aesthetics [ edit ] Lord Kames defines beauty as anything that you can derive pleasure from in his Essays on the Principles of Morality and Natural Religion . Something is considered beautiful when it is regarded with respect to its purpose while an object that is poorly designed or has no purpose may be considered ugly. Therefore, a house may be considered beautiful in light of its purpose as a human residence. Objects that are beautiful may give rise to the feeling of pleasure in the observer. Thus, a ship may give pleasure because it is elegantly shaped as well as because it facilitates trade which in turn is a positive beneficial exchange. Likewise, pleasure can be applied to human action, actions that carry a positive intent such as acts of generosity towards a worthy recipient can be considered beautiful. This derivation of pleasure from the display of generosity or other virtues can be traced to the original constitution of our nature, that is that we experience pleasure through no conscious decision of our own when we see beauty.

[ 5 ] 19th century [ edit ] The influence of Immanuel Kant and German idealism on the philosophical tradition of the Scottish Enlightenment changed the philosophical agenda in the 19th century. Enlightenment thinking became less important and the "science of the mind" was discussed. Logic, also known as the philosophy of truth and reason and the philosophy of perception dominated, whereby human understanding evolves through increasing human experience and knowledge. Since the aim of philosophy was to reconcile the seemingly incompatible elements in the human experience, Scottish Idealists welcomed the growth of the natural sciences, especially biology as a source of new material for continual evolutionary development of human understanding.

[ 6 ] Thomas Brown 's philosophy of the mind was reminiscent of on Hume's empirical phenomenalism and did not make any reference to Thomas Reid's principles of common sense. Brown was speculated to be critical of Reid, although it was also hinted that the target of his criticisms was directed at Steward.

[ 7 ] The influence of the German philosophical movement was brought into the Scottish philosophical tradition by Sir William Hamilton who combined Reid's common-sense philosophy with logic and Kant's philosophy. His essays on a review of Victor Cousin 's lectures and The Philosophy of Perception brought attention among the community to Kant and post-Kantian philosophy.

[ 7 ] Another ambassador was Thomas Carlyle , whose Critical and Miscellaneous Essays introduced many English speakers to German philosophy, and whose own contributions make him a prominent figure in the Scottish philosophical tradition.

[ 8 ] Scottish philosophy began to acquire a self-conscious identity, which according to James McCosh , now consists of two opposing strands: the first is the materialism of Alexander Bain , and second the Hegelianism of Edward Caird . McCosh's knowledge of the Scottish philosophical tradition came from his studies at the University of Glasgow , and later at the University of Edinburgh where he attended Hamilton's lectures as a divinity student. McCosh defined the heart of Scottish philosophy as the combination of observational methods of inquiry combined with moral and religious formation. From McCosh's perspective, the increasing popularity of Scottish philosophical school was a step in a different direction from the original methods and moral and religious standpoints. While the materialism of Bain retained the original observational methods, it abandoned moral formation. Additionally, the Idealism of Caird abandoned religious formation. To McCosh this signalled the demise of the Scottish philosophical tradition. McCosh was hopeful that the rise of cultural and intellectual independence of the United States would provide a fertile ground for the birth of a new American philosophy that would preserve the best of Scottish philosophical tradition.

[ 6 ] Scottish philosophy had a strong influence on the development of Australian philosophy , especially through the persons of the first professors of philosophy at Sydney University and Melbourne University , Sir Francis Anderson and Henry Laurie , and John Anderson , Challis Professor of Philosophy at Sydney University from 1927 to 1958.

[ 9 ] 20th century [ edit ] By the 20th century, the identity of Scottish philosophy came into decline and the distinction between Scottish and English philosophy began to be impractical. This is due to the increase in communication and movement between Scotland and England due to advances in transport. Traveling between Edinburgh and London could be accomplished in ten and a half hours via the Flying Scotsman , an express train service. This same journey would have taken two weeks in 1753 when a stagecoach service first operated. Traditionally, the continuation of Scottish philosophy relied on the teachers being succeeded by their students. The second half of the nineteenth century broke this relation as Scottish-educated philosophers left for England. Eventually, the changing social, political and economic conditions resulted in reforms that revitalized the university curriculum. Scottish philosophy came to be one subject among many.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Scotland portal Scottish common sense realism References [ edit ] ^ Spade, Paul Vincent (3 August 2004).

"Medieval Philosophy" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

^ Williams, Thomas (31 May 2001).

"John Duns Scotus" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

^ Broadie, Alexander (2008).

History of Scottish Philosophy . Edinburgh University Press.

ISBN 9780748628643 .

^ Gellera, Giovanni (September 2015). "The Reception of Descartes in the Seventeenth-Century Scottish Universities: Metaphysics and Natural Philosophy (1650–1680)".

Journal of Scottish Philosophy .

13 (3): 179– 201.

doi : 10.3366/jsp.2015.0103 .

^ a b c d Broadie, Alexander (27 June 2001).

"Scottish Philosophy in the 18th Century" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

^ a b Graham, Gordon (2015).

"Scottish Philosophy in the 19th Century" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

^ a b c Graham, Gordon (2015). Graham, Gordon (ed.).

Scottish Philosophy in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries . Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199560684.001.0001 .

ISBN 9780191814419 .

^ Jordan, Alexander (2019-09-20).

"The Contribution of Thomas Carlyle to British Idealism, c. 1880–1930" .

Scottish Historical Review .

98 : 439– 468.

doi : 10.3366/shr.2019.0428 .

S2CID 204477593 .

^ Franklin, James (2003).

Corrupting the Youth: A history of philosophy in Australia . Sydney: Macleay Press. pp. 8, 35, 104, 119, 132.

ISBN 1876492082 .

v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Scotland articles Outline of Scotland History Timeline Prehistoric Roman times Middle Ages Early Middle Ages Kingdom High Middle Ages Davidian Revolution Wars of Independence Late Middle Ages Renaissance Early modern Reformation Colonisation of the Americas Glorious Revolution Treaty of Union 1707 Acts of Union Jacobitism Enlightenment Lowland Clearances Highland Clearances Industrial Revolution Romanticism Modern Geography Anglo-Scottish border Central Belt Climate Conservation Fauna Flora Geology Highlands Islands Lochs Lowlands Mountains and hills highest Protected areas Waterfalls Glens Ecoregions Biosphere reserves Environment Municipalities Munro Politics Government Politics Government list of governments international relations Devolution Elections electoral system First Minister Keeper of the Great Seal of Scotland Deputy First Minister Great Seal of Scotland Human rights LGBT rights Independence Local government history cities Armed forces military history Monarchs Members of Parliament Parliament Member of the Scottish Parliament Political parties Republicanism Scotland Office Secretary of State Nationalism Unionism Law Advocate General Courts ( List ) Supreme Courts of Scotland ( Court of Session , High Court of Justiciary , Office of the Accountant of Court ) Crown Office Lord Advocate Lord President Procurator fiscal Solicitor General Sheriff principal College of Justice Scots property law Udal law Prison population Police Scotland Economy Agriculture Bank of Scotland Charities Companies Fishing Forestry Harris Tweed Housing Media Oil industry ( North Sea oil ) Power stations Renewable energy Royal Bank of Scotland Tourism Transport Whisky Silicon Glen Unemployment International trade Society Culture Architecture Art Clans Cuisine Education Curriculum for Excellence schools colleges universities Scottish Qualifications Authority Education Scotland Hogmanay Identity Inventions and discoveries Literature Museums Music Oldest buildings Performing arts Philosophy Placenames Prostitution Royal National Mòd Sport Surnames Symbols anthem coat of arms flags national flag tartan regimental unicorn World Heritage Sites Festivals Comedy Demographics Languages Highland English Scottish English Scottish Gaelic Scots British Sign Language People ( list ) Actors Artists Inventors Musicians Scientists Writers Religion Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Christmas Church of Scotland General Assembly moderators Roman Catholicism Scottish Episcopal Church Baptist Union Free Church of Scotland Hinduism Islam Judaism Sikhism Ethnic minorities Outline Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Scottish_philosophy&oldid=1297830224 " Categories : Scottish philosophy Religion in Scotland Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 28 June 2025, at 19:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Scottish philosophy 1 language Add topic

