Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Extinct species 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Fauna of Uruguay 1 language Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Native animals of  Uruguay Fauna of Uruguay Capybara Crab-eating fox Greater rhea Red ovenbird Black-necked swan Southern lapwing Rattlesnake Sorubim Tetra The fauna of Uruguay is a part of the wildlife of Uruguay.uuujjjmm Overview [ edit ] It is characteristic of the Uruguayan savanna . Grazing mammals include the Pampas deer (Ozotoceros bezoarticus) , the [gray brocket] or Guazuvirá deer ( Mazama gouazoubira ) , and the capybara (Hydrochoerus hydrochaeris) , the world's largest living rodent .

Uruguay is home to a rich avifauna , including the Southern lapwing and the magnificent black-necked swan . As a result, birdwatching has become popular in selected locations.

There are several snakes, with four venomous species: the rattlesnake ( Crotalus durissus terrificus ) , coral snake ( Micrurus altirostris ) , yarará ( Bothrops pubescens ) , and crossed pit viper ( Bothrops alternatus ) .

Despite the humid climate of much of the country, the vast majority of Uruguay's land is made up of savannas, so there is not much amphibian diversity. However, the Argentine horned frog, Ceratophrys ornata , thrives in the savannas of central and northwestern Uruguay. Other notable amphibian species of Uruguay include Pseudis minuta , Boana pulchella , Rhinella achavali , and Rhinella diptycha .

Waterlife is also rich, with species such as the tararira ( Hoplias malabaricus ) or the white-dotted skate .

Extinct species [ edit ] Extinct fauna includes megafauna , such as Josephoartigasia monesi , Lestobradys , and Glyptodon (some of them coexisted with the arrival of humans, who were responsible for their extinction).

Older extinct species include Uruguaysuchus , Meridiosaurus and Neuquensaurus , all from the Cretaceous .

Jaguars are extinct in Uruguay.

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] List of amphibians of Uruguay List of birds of Uruguay List of mammals of Uruguay List of non-marine molluscs of Uruguay Flora of Uruguay Uruguayan savanna References [ edit ] ^ "How to Save the Jaguars? Turn the Locals From Foe to Friend" .

National Geographic News . June 17, 2017. Archived from the original on June 27, 2020.

v t e Fauna of South America Sovereign states Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Dependencies and other territories Falkland Islands French Guiana South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands v t e Uruguay articles History Charrúa people Spanish colonization Viceroyalty (1776–1814) British invasions (1806–1807) Banda Oriental Liga Federal (1815–1820) Cisplatina province (1821–1828) Thirty-Three Orientals Treaty of Montevideo (1828) Civil War (1839–1851) Uruguayan War (1864–1865) Paraguayan War (1864–1870) Revolution of the Lances (1870–1872) Battle of Masoller (1904) Batllism Tupamaros Dictatorship (1973–1985) Expiry Law (1986) Geography Borders Cities Montevideo Climate Departments Environment Climate change Extreme points Fauna Flora Geology Islands Lighthouses Municipalities National parks Rivers Time DST Politics President Cabinet Political parties Elections Foreign relations General Assembly (parliament) Legal system Civil Code Constitution Judiciary Law Nationality law Passport Supreme Court Legal issues Abortion Cannabis use Human rights Human trafficking Law enforcement LGBT rights Prostitution Military Army Navy Air Force History Ranks Economy Agriculture Banking Central Bank Currency Energy Science and technology State companies Stockbreeding Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Trade unions Transport Society Anthem Coat of arms Demographics Emigration Ethnic groups Flag Healthcare Immigration LGBT People Public holidays Squatting Water supply and sanitation Women Culture Cinema Cuisine Wine Education Languages Literature Mate Media Museums Music Religion Smoking Sport Outline Index Bibliography Category Portal This Uruguay -related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fauna_of_Uruguay&oldid=1303429060 " Categories : Fauna of Uruguay Uruguay stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles using infobox templates with no data rows All stub articles This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 00:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fauna of Uruguay 1 language Add topic

