Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Archaea 2 Bacteria 3 Eukaryote 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Outline of life forms 6 languages Bosanski Dansk Français Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Life forms ) Overview of and topical guide to life forms "Lifeform" redirects here. For other uses, see Lifeform (disambiguation) .

Life timeline This box: view talk edit −4500 — – — – −4000 — – — – −3500 — – — – −3000 — – — – −2500 — – — – −2000 — – — – −1500 — – — – −1000 — – — – −500 — – — – 0 — Water Single-celled life Photosynthesis Multicellular life Plants Arthropods Molluscs Flowers Dinosaurs Mammals Birds Primates Hadean Archean Proterozoic Phanerozoic ← Earth formed ← Earliest water ← LUCA ← Earliest fossils ← Atmospheric oxygen ← Sexual reproduction ← Earliest fungi ← Neoproterozoic oxygenation event ← Ediacaran biota ← Cambrian explosion ← Earliest tetrapods ← Earliest hominoid ( million years ago ) The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to life forms: A life form (also spelled life-form or lifeform ) is an entity that is living , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] such as plants ( flora ), animals ( fauna ), and fungi ( funga ). It is estimated that more than 99% of all species that ever existed on Earth, amounting to over five billion species, [ 3 ] are extinct .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Earth is the only celestial body known to harbor life forms. No form of extraterrestrial life has yet been discovered.

[ 6 ] Archaea [ edit ] Archaea – a domain of single-celled microorganisms, morphologically similar to bacteria, but they possess genes and several metabolic pathways that are more closely related to those of eukaryotes, notably the enzymes involved in transcription and translation. Many archaea are extremophiles, which means living in harsh environments, such as hot springs and salt lakes, but they have since been found in a broad range of habitats.

Thermoproteota – a phylum of the Archaea kingdom. Initially Thermoprotei Sulfolobales – grow in terrestrial volcanic hot springs with optimum growth occurring Euryarchaeota – In the taxonomy of microorganisms Haloarchaea Halobacteriales – in taxonomy, the Halobacteriales are an order of the Halobacteria, found in water saturated or nearly saturated with    salt.

Methanobacteria Methanobacteriales – information including symptoms, causes, diseases, symptoms, treatments, and other medical and health issues.

Methanococci Methanococcales aka Methanocaldococcus jannaschii – thermophilic methanogenic archaea, meaning that it thrives at high temperatures and produces methane Methanomicrobia Methanosarcinales – In taxonomy, the Methanosarcinales are an order of the Methanomicrobia Methanopyri Methanopyrales – In taxonomy, the Methanopyrales are an order of the methanopyri.

Thermococci Thermococcales Thermoplasmata Thermoplasmatales –  An order of aerobic, thermophilic archaea, in the kingdom Halophiles – organisms that thrive in high salt concentrations Korarchaeota Korarchaeum cryptofilum – These archaea have only been found in high temperature hydrothermal environments, particularly hot springs Lokiarchaeota Methanogens Nanoarchaeota Nanoarchaeum equitans – This organism was discovered in 2002 and lives inside another archaea.

Psychrophiles – (sigh-crow-files) Nitrososphaerota –  a phylum of the Archaea proposed in 2008 after the genome of Cenarchaeum symbiosum thermophilic – (a thermophile is an organism) Bacteria [ edit ] Bacteria Gram positive no outer membrane Actinomycetota (high- G+C ) Bacillota (low- G+C ) Mycoplasmatota (no wall ) Gram negative outer membrane present Aquificota Deinococcota Fibrobacterota / Chlorobiota / Bacteroidota ( FCB group ) Frateuria aurantia (a species of Proteobacteria) Fusobacteriota Gemmatimonadota Nitrospirota Planctomycetota / Verrucomicrobiota / Chlamydiota ( PVC group ) Pseudomonadota / Myxococcota / Bdellovibrionota / Campylobacterota Spirochaetota Synergistota Unknown / ungrouped Acidobacteriota Chloroflexota Chrysiogenota Cyanobacteria Deferribacterota Dictyoglomota Thermodesulfobacteriota Thermotogota Eukaryote [ edit ] Eukaryote – organisms whose cells contain complex structures enclosed within membranes.

Unikonta Opisthokonta Animal – multicellular eukaryotic organisms that form the biological kingdom Animalia. With few exceptions, animals consume organic material , breathe oxygen , are able to move , reproduce sexually , and grow from a hollow sphere of cells, the blastula , during embryonic development .

Subkingdom Parazoa Porifera Placozoa Subkingdom Eumetazoa Radiata (unranked) Ctenophora Cnidaria Bilateria (unranked) Orthonectida Rhombozoa Acoelomorpha Chaetognatha Superphylum Deuterostomia Chordata Hemichordata Echinodermata Xenoturbellida Vetulicolia † Protostomia (unranked) Superphylum Ecdysozoa Kinorhyncha Loricifera Priapulida Nematoda Nematomorpha Lobopodia Onychophora Tardigrada Arthropoda Superphylum Platyzoa Platyhelminthes Gastrotricha Rotifera Acanthocephala Gnathostomulida Micrognathozoa Cycliophora Superphylum Lophotrochozoa Sipuncula Hyolitha † Nemertea Phoronida Bryozoa Entoprocta Brachiopoda Mollusca Annelida Echiura Mesomycetozoa Fungi – any member of the group of eukaryotic organisms that includes unicellular microorganisms such as yeasts and molds , as well as multicellular fungi that produce familiar fruiting forms known as mushrooms .

Blastocladiomycota Chytridiomycota Glomeromycota Microsporidia Neocallimastigomycota Dikarya (inc.

Deuteromycota ) Ascomycota Pezizomycotina Saccharomycotina Taphrinomycotina Basidiomycota Agaricomycotina Pucciniomycotina Ustilaginomycotina Subphyla incertae sedis Entomophthoromycotina Kickxellomycotina Mucoromycotina Zoopagomycotina Amoebozoa Conosa Mycetozoa (slime-molds) Archamoebae Lobosa Protamoebae Bikonta Apusozoa Excavata Archaeplastida (plants, broadly defined) Glaucophyta – glaucophytes Rhodophyceae – red algae Chloroplastida Chlorophyta – green algae (part) Ulvophyceae Trebouxiophyceae Chlorophyceae Chlorodendrales – green algae (part) Prasinophytae – green algae (part) Mesostigma Charophyta sensu lato – green algae (part) and land plants Streptophytina – stoneworts and land plants Charales – stoneworts Plantae – land plants (embryophytes) SAR supergroup Alveolata Heterokonta Rhizaria See also [ edit ] Outline of biology Earliest known life forms Extraterrestrial life Hypothetical types of biochemistry Life Marine life Organism References [ edit ] ^ "life form" .

World English Dictionary . Dictionary.com. 2009.

^ "life form" .

Online Oxford Dictionary of English . Oxford University Press. 2005. Archived from the original on 2011-08-11.

^ Kunin, W.E.; Gaston, Kevin, eds. (31 December 1996).

The Biology of Rarity: Causes and consequences of rare—common differences . Springer.

ISBN 978-0412633805 . Retrieved 26 May 2015 .

^ Stearns, Beverly Peterson; Stearns, S. C.; Stearns, Stephen C. (2000).

Watching, from the Edge of Extinction .

Yale University Press . p. preface x.

ISBN 978-0-300-08469-6 . Retrieved 30 May 2017 .

^ Novacek, Michael J. (8 November 2014).

"Prehistory's Brilliant Future" .

New York Times . Retrieved 2014-12-25 .

^ "Are we alone in the universe?" . NASA. March 1, 2022 . Retrieved July 12, 2022 .

External links [ edit ] Life (Systema Naturae 2000) Vitae (BioLib) Biota (Taxonomicon) Wikispecies – a free directory of life MicrobeWiki , extensive wiki about bacteria and viruses v t e Wikipedia outlines General reference Culture and the arts Geography and places Health and fitness History and events Mathematics and logic Natural and physical sciences People and self Philosophy and thinking Religion and belief systems Society and social sciences Technology and applied sciences Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Outline_of_life_forms&oldid=1300544116 " Categories : Tree of life (biology) Outlines of biology Outlines Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 00:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Outline of life forms 6 languages Add topic

