Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Nature of the concept 3 Criticisms 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Original position 10 languages Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Nederlands 日本語 Русский Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Thought experiment used for reasoning about the principles that should structure a society "Veil of ignorance" redirects here. For the album by Raised Fist, see Veil of Ignorance (album) .

Citizens make choices about their society from an "original position" of equality (left) behind a "veil of ignorance" (curtain, center) , without knowing what gender, race, abilities, tastes, wealth, or position in society they will have (right) . Philosopher John Rawls claims this will cause them to choose "fair" policies.

In philosophy, the original position is a hypothetical position from which members of society would consider which principles they would select for the basic structure of their society if they had no knowledge ahead of time regarding the position which they would end up occupying in that society. The idea of having no such knowledge, because everyone is behind a veil of ignorance , represents a thought experiment often associated with the work of the American philosopher John Rawls .

In this "original position", their position behind the "veil of ignorance" prevents everyone from knowing their ethnicity , social status , gender , and (crucially in Rawls's formulation) their or anyone else's ideas of how to lead a good life. Ideally, this would force participants acting rationally to adopt an "initial agreement" on the principles impartially .

[ 1 ] In Rawls's theory the original position plays the same role as the "state of nature" does in the social contract tradition of Thomas Hobbes and John Locke . The original position figures prominently in Rawls's 1971 book, A Theory of Justice . It has influenced a variety of thinkers from a broad spectrum of philosophical orientations.

Rawls coined the phrases original position and veil of ignorance .

[ 2 ] However, the same thought experiment had already been described earlier in social choice by William Vickrey [ 3 ] and John Harsanyi , [ 4 ] [ 5 ] who independently derived proofs showing a rational observer in the original position would adopt a utilitarian framework.

[ 6 ] History [ edit ] The concept of the veil of ignorance has been in use by other names for centuries by philosophers such as John Stuart Mill and Immanuel Kant whose work discussed the concept of the social contract , Adam Smith with his "impartial spectator", or the ideal observer theory .

John Harsanyi was the first to mathematically formalize the concept, [ 4 ] [ 5 ] using it to  an argument in favor of utilitarianism rather than an argument for a social contract (as rational agents consider expected outcomes, not worst-case outcomes ).

[ 7 ] The usage of the term by John Rawls was developed in his 1971 book A Theory of Justice .

[ 8 ] [ 2 ] Modern work tends to focus on the different decision theories that might describe the choice of the decision-maker "behind the veil".

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] In addition, Michael Moehler has shown that, from a moral point of view, decision theory is not necessarily central to veil of ignorance arguments, but the precise moral ideals that are assumed to model the veil. From a moral point of view, there is not one veil of ignorance but many different versions of it.

[ 11 ] Nature of the concept [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Original position" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Rawls specifies that the parties in the original position are concerned only with citizens' share of what he calls primary social goods , which include basic rights as well as economic and social advantages. Rawls also argues that the representatives in the original position would adopt the maximin rule as their principle for evaluating the choices before them. Borrowed from game theory , maximin stands for maximizing the minimum, i.e., making the choice that produces the highest payoff for the least advantaged position. Thus, maximin in the original position represents a formulation of social equality .

The reason that the least well off member gets benefited is that it is argued that under the veil of ignorance people will act as if they were risk-averse. The original position is a unique and irrevocable choice about all the most important social goods, and they do not know the probability they will become any particular member of society. As insurance against the worst possible outcome, they will pick rules that maximize the benefits given to the minimum outcome (maximin).

However, some scholars note that if the original position is formulated under risk neutrality rather than extreme risk aversion, the resulting principle shifts away from Rawls’s maximin approach and converges on a wealth-maximizing rule. In this respect, John Harsanyi’s analysis suggests that rational individuals, not knowing their future station but treating outcomes according to expected utility, would opt for maximizing average or total well-being.

[ 4 ] [ 12 ] (See wealth maximization for further discussion of this approach.) In social contract theory, citizens in a state of nature contract with each other to establish a state of civil society. For example, in the Lockean state of nature, the parties agree to establish a civil society in which the government has limited powers and the duty to protect the persons and property of citizens. In the original position, the representative parties select principles of justice that are to govern the basic structure of society. Rawls argues that the representative parties in the original position would select two principles of justice: Each citizen is guaranteed a fully adequate scheme of basic liberties, which is compatible with the same scheme of liberties for all others; Social and economic inequalities must satisfy two conditions: to the greatest benefit of the least advantaged (the difference principle); attached to positions and offices open to all.

The reason that the least well off member gets benefited is that it is argued that under the veil of ignorance people will act as if they were risk-averse. The original position is a unique and irrevocable choice about all the most important social goods, and they do not know the probability they will become any particular member of society. As insurance against the worst possible outcome, they will pick rules that maximize the benefits given to the minimum outcome (maximin).

Rawls returns to the concept of an original position in his The Law of Peoples (1999), where he speaks of "using the idea of the original position a second time" to show how representatives of "peoples" (a concept similar to states in Rawls's reasoning") would determine how liberal and otherwise "decent" peoples would relate to each other.

[ 13 ] Thomas Nagel has elaborated on the concept of original position, arguing that social ethics should be built taking into account the tension between original and actual positions.

[ citation needed ] The original position has been modeled mathematically along Wright-Fisher's diffusion , classical in population genetics .

[ 14 ] The original position has also been used as an argument for negative eugenics , though Rawls's argument was limited to its use as a preventative measure.

[ 15 ] Criticisms [ edit ] In Anarchy, State, and Utopia (1974), Robert Nozick argues that, while the original position may be the just starting point, any inequalities derived from that distribution by means of free exchange are equally just, and that any re-distributive tax is an infringement on people's liberty. He also argues that Rawls's application of the maximin rule to the original position is risk aversion taken to its extreme, and is therefore unsuitable even to those behind the veil of ignorance.

[ 16 ] In Liberalism and the Limits of Justice (1982), [ 17 ] Michael Sandel has criticized Rawls's notion of a veil of ignorance, pointing out that it is impossible, for an individual, to completely prescind from beliefs and convictions (from the Me ultimately), as is required by Rawls's thought experiment.

In a 1987 empirical research study, [ 18 ] Frohlich, Oppenheimer, and Eavey showed that, in a simulated original position, undergraduates at American universities agreed upon a distributive principle that maximizes the average with a specified floor constraint (a minimum for the worst-off in any given distribution) over maximizing the floor or the average alone.

In How to Make Good Decisions and Be Right All the Time (2008), Iain King argues that people in the original position should not be risk-averse, leading them to adopt the Help Principle (help someone if your help is worth more to them than it is to you) rather than maximin.

[ 19 ] Philosopher and Law Professor Harold Anthony Lloyd argues that Rawls's veil of ignorance is hardly hypothetical but instead dangerously real since individuals cannot know at any point in time the future either for themselves or for others (or in fact know all aspects of either their relevant past or present). Faced with the high stakes of such ignorance, careful egoism effectively becomes altruism by minimizing/sharing risk through social safety nets and other means such as insurance.

[ 20 ] See also [ edit ] Bayesian probability Justice as Fairness: A Restatement Divide and choose Pie rule Tabula rasa Counterfactual References [ edit ] ^ "Veil of Ignorance" .

Ethics Unwrapped . Retrieved May 27, 2020 .

^ a b John Rawls, Justice as Fairness: A Restatement , Cambridge, Massachusetts: Belknap Press, 2001.

^ Vickrey, William (1945). "Measuring Marginal Utility by Reactions to Risk".

Econometrica .

13 (4): 319– 333.

doi : 10.2307/1906925 .

JSTOR 1906925 .

^ a b c Harsanyi, J. C. (1953). "Cardinal Utility in Welfare Economics and in the Theory of Risk-taking".

Journal of Political Economy .

61 (5): 434– 435.

doi : 10.1086/257416 .

JSTOR 1827289 .

S2CID 222439814 .

^ a b Harsanyi, J. C. (1955). "Cardinal Welfare, Individualistic Ethics, and Interpersonal Comparisons of Utility".

Journal of Political Economy .

63 (4): 309– 21.

doi : 10.1086/257678 .

JSTOR 1827128 .

S2CID 222434288 .

^ Feiwel, George, ed. (1987).

Arrow and the Foundations of the Theory of Economic Policy . Springer. p. 92.

ISBN 9781349073573 .

...the fictitious notion of 'original position' [was] developed by Vickery (1945), Harsanyi (1955), and Rawls (1971).

^ Freeman, Samuel (2016).

"Original Position" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved September 13, 2017 .

^ Rawls, John (1971).

A Theory of Justice . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Belknap Press .

ISBN 0-674-00078-1 .

^ Mongin, Ph. (2001).

"The Impartial Observer Theorem of Social Ethics" .

Economics and Philosophy .

17 (2): 147– 179.

doi : 10.1017/S0266267101000219 .

S2CID 17352285 .

^ Gajdos, Th.; Kandil, F. (2008).

"The Ignorant Observer" (PDF) .

Social Choice and Welfare .

31 (2): 193– 232.

doi : 10.1007/s00355-007-0274-8 .

S2CID 11230946 .

^ Moehler, Michael (2018), Minimal Morality: A Multilevel Social Contract Theory . Oxford University Press.

^ Pi, Daniel, and Parisi, Francesco (2023). "Wealth Maximization Redux: A Defense of Posner’s Economic Approach to Law", History of Economic Ideas 31: 101-136.

^ Rawls, J. (1999), The Law of Peoples with "The Idea of Public Reason Revisited" , p. 17, Cambridge, London: Harvard University Press ^ Mostapha Benhenda A model of deliberation based on Rawls’s political liberalism Soc Choice Welf (2011) 36: 121–78 ^ Shaw, David (2006).

Genetic Morality . Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang. p. 147.

ISBN 3-03911-149-3 .

What Rawls says is that "Over time a society is to take steps to preserve the general level of natural abilities and to prevent the diffusion of serious defects." The key words here are "preserve" and "prevent". Rawls clearly envisages only the use of negative eugenics as a preventative measure to ensure a good basic level of genetic health for future generations. To jump from this to "make the later generations as genetically talented as possible," as Pence does, is a masterpiece of misinterpretation. This, then, is the sixth argument against positive eugenics: the Veil of Ignorance argument. Those behind the Veil in Rawls's Original Position would agree to permit negative, but not positive eugenics. This is a more complex variant of the Consent argument, as the Veil of Ignorance merely forces us to adopt a position of hypothetical consent to particular principles of justice.

^ Nozick, Robert (1974).

Anarchy, State, and Utopia . Basic Books.

ISBN 978-0465097203 .

^ Sandel, Michael (1982).

Liberalism and the Limits of Justice . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521567411 .

^ Frohlich, Norman; Oppenheimer, Joe A.; Eavey, Cheryl L. (1987). "Choices of Principles of Distributive Justice in Experimental Groups".

American Journal of Political Science .

31 (3): 606– 636.

doi : 10.2307/2111285 .

JSTOR 2111285 .

^ King, Iain (2008).

How to Make Good Decisions and Be Right All the Time: Solving the Riddle of Right and Wrong . Bloomsbury. pp.

77– 78.

ISBN 9781847063472 .

^ Lloyd, Harold Anthony (March 2, 2016).

"Beyond Rawls' Fiction: The Veil of Ignorance Is Real" .

HuffPost Contributors blog . Retrieved March 2, 2024 .

Further reading [ edit ] Ken Binmore , Natural Justice , Oxford University Press, 2005.

Samuel Freeman, The Cambridge Companion to Rawls , Cambridge University Press, 2002.

Thomas Pogge , Realizing Rawls , Cornell University Press, 1989.

External links [ edit ] Macquarie University page on this 'Original Position' article at Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Choices of Principles of Distributive Justice in Experimental Groups v t e John Rawls Major works A Theory of Justice " Justice as Fairness " Political Liberalism The Law of Peoples Justice as Fairness: A Restatement Notable ideas Original position Reflective equilibrium Overlapping consensus Public reason Primary goods Related topics Habermas–Rawls debate A Theory of Justice: The Musical v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Original_position&oldid=1300111445 " Categories : Deontology John Rawls Justice Political theories Social agreement Social theories Thought experiments in philosophy Thought experiments in ethics Concepts in political philosophy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from March 2015 Articles needing additional references from May 2025 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 09:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Original position 10 languages Add topic

