Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Summary 2 Publication history 3 Reception 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Bibliography 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Reading Capital 5 languages Deutsch Español فارسی Français 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1965 book by Louis Althusser Reading Capital Cover of the 1966 edition Authors Louis Althusser , Étienne Balibar , Roger Establet , Jacques Rancière , Pierre Macherey Original title Lire le Capital Translators Ben Brewster David Fernbach Language French Subject Das Kapital Publisher François Maspero, New Left Books Publication date 1965 Publication place France Published in English 1970 Media type Print ( Hardcover and Paperback ) Pages 340 (abridged English translation) 565 (complete English translation) ISBN 978-1-78478-141-5 Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Reading Capital ( French : Lire le Capital ) is a 1965 book about the philosopher Karl Marx 's Das Kapital by the philosophers Louis Althusser , Étienne Balibar , and Jacques Rancière , the sociologist Roger Establet , and the critic Pierre Macherey . The book was first published in France by François Maspero. An abridged English translation was published in 1970, and an unabridged translation in 2015. The book was influential among intellectuals.

Summary [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( February 2019 ) The philosopher Louis Althusser and his co-authors — the philosopher Étienne Balibar, the sociologist Roger Establet, the philosopher Jacques Rancière, and the critic Pierre Macherey — discuss Karl Marx 's Das Kapital (1867–1883) and subjects such as the labor theory of value , dialectical materialism , and historical materialism . Rancière notes that his contribution builds on Althusser's For Marx (1965).

[ 1 ] He explores the dynamics of capital accumulation, exploitation of workers, and the resulting class struggles. Marx critiques the capitalist mode of production, highlighting its inherent contradictions and tendency toward crises. He predicts that these contradictions will eventually lead to the overthrow of capitalism by the proletariat, paving the way for a classless, communist society. The work is foundational for Marxist theory and socialist movements.

Publication history [ edit ] Reading Capital was first published in French by François Maspero in 1965. An abridged French François Maspero edition followed in 1968. An abridged Italian translation was also published. An abridged English translation by Ben Brewster was published in 1970 by New Left Books. An unabridged English translation by Ben Brewster and David Fernbach was published in 2015 by Verso Books .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Reception [ edit ] Together with Althusser's For Marx (1965), Reading Capital drew Althusser to the attention of French intellectuals and attracted a significant international readership. The appearance of Reading Capital and For Marx in English translation influenced the development of Marxist thought in the Anglophone world throughout the 1970s.

[ 4 ] The Marxian economist Harry Cleaver wrote that Althusser and his co-authors provided one of the most politically influential of the philosophical reinterpretations of Das Kapital that were made by Marxists in the 1960s and 1970s. However, he considered their influence regrettable, writing that in For Marx and Reading Capital , Althusser's aim was to revitalize dialectical materialism "as an ideology to mediate the widely discredited political practices of the French Communist Party ." He accused Althusser of ignoring working class struggles in favor of an abstract "science of history", and noted that Althusser himself admitted that Reading Capital largely ignored the class struggle .

[ 5 ] William S. Lewis described Reading Capital as the culmination of the rereading of Marx that Althusser began in 1953. He considered it a theoretically sophisticated text. However, he suggested that the difficulty of the work supported the charge that Althusser aspired to "Leninist vanguardism" and wanted "a small, theoretically sophisticated cadre" to "direct the revolution", and expressed agreement with the historian Eric Hobsbawm 's view that the book showed that Althusser was an "extremely selective reader of Marx." [ 6 ] The economist Alain Lipietz further pointed out that, while Reading Capital helped to disengage French Marxism from an oversimplification, determinism and mechanism inherited from the Stalinist period, [ 7 ] it also obscured and censored the first chapter of Das Kapital , in which Marx analyzed the relationship of commodity and money.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Louis Althusser and the Traditions of French Marxism References [ edit ] ^ Althusser et al. 2015 , pp. 1–549.

^ Althusser & Balibar 1977 , pp. iv–8.

^ Althusser et al. 2015 , p. iv.

^ Levine 2017 , p. 27.

^ Cleaver 2000 , pp. 47, 49–51.

^ Lewis 2005 , pp. 158, 163, 189.

^ Lipietz 1993 , pp. 99–138.

^ Kremers & Izuta 2017 , p. 724.

Bibliography [ edit ] Books Althusser, Louis; Balibar, Étienne (1977).

Reading Capital . London: New Left Books .

Althusser, Louis; Balibar, Étienne; Establet, Roger; Macherey, Pierre; Rancière, Jacques (2015).

Reading Capital: The Complete Edition . London: Verso Books .

ISBN 978-1-78478-141-5 .

Backer, Davud I. (2019).

The Gold and the Dross: Althusser for Educators . Boston, Maryland: Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-394681 .

Cleaver, Harry (2000).

Reading Capital Politically . Leeds: AK Press .

ISBN 190259329-4 .

Levine, Andrew (2017). "Althusser, Louis". In Audi, Robert (ed.).

The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy, Third Edition . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1-107-64379-6 .

Lewis, William S. (2005).

Louis Althusser and the Traditions of French Marxism . Lanham, Maryland: Lexington Books.

ISBN 0-7391-1307-0 .

Lipietz, Alain (1993). "From Althusserianism to "Regulation Theory" ". In Kaplan, E. Ann; Sprinker, Michael (eds.).

The Althusserian Legacy . London: Verso .

ISBN 9780860915942 .

Journals Kremers, Daniel; Izuta, Shunsuke (2017).

"Bedeutungswandel der Zivilgesellschaft oder das Elend der Ideengeschichte: Eine kommentierte Übersetzung von Hirata Kiyoakis Aufsatz zum Begriff shimin shakai bei Antonio Gramsci (Teil 1)" (PDF) .

Asiatische Studien - Études Asiatiques .

71 (2).

doi : 10.1515/asia-2017-0044 .

External links [ edit ] Generation Online : How to Read Marx's Capital Liberation School : Reading Capital with Comrades Authority control databases National Germany Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Reading_Capital&oldid=1276633295 " Categories : 1965 non-fiction books French non-fiction books Marxist books Works by Louis Althusser Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Articles to be expanded from February 2019 All articles to be expanded This page was last edited on 19 February 2025, at 23:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Reading Capital 5 languages Add topic

