Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life Toggle Life subsection 1.1 Youth 1.2 Early prominence as philosopher and critic 1.3 Lavater 1.4 Illness 1.5 Death 2 Philosophical work Toggle Philosophical work subsection 2.1 Works on religion and civil society 2.2 Later years and legacy 3 Family 4 In popular culture 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Citations 7.2 Sources 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Moses Mendelssohn 47 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Gaelg 한국어 Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Latviešu Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt ייִדיש 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German philosopher and theologian (1729–1786) Moses Mendelssohn Portrait by Anton Graff (1773) Born ( 1729-09-06 ) 6 September 1729 Dessau , Anhalt-Dessau , Holy Roman Empire Died 4 January 1786 (1786-01-04) (aged 56) Berlin , Kingdom of Prussia , Holy Roman Empire Spouse Fromet Guggenheim ​ ( m.

1762) ​ Children Joseph Abraham Nathan Brendel Recha Henriette Philosophical work Era 18th-century philosophy Main interests Metaphysics · Philosophy of religion Signature Moses Mendelssohn [ note 1 ] (6 September 1729 [ note 2 ] – 4 January 1786) was a German-Jewish philosopher and theologian . His writings and ideas on Jews and the Jewish religion and identity were a central element in the development of the Haskalah , or 'Jewish Enlightenment' of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
Born to a poor Jewish family in Dessau , Principality of Anhalt , and originally destined for a rabbinical career, Mendelssohn educated himself in German thought and literature. Through his writings on philosophy and religion he came to be regarded as a leading cultural figure of his time by both Christian and Jewish inhabitants of German-speaking Europe and beyond. His involvement in the Berlin textile industry formed the foundation of his family's wealth.

His descendants include the composers Fanny and Felix Mendelssohn ; Felix's son, chemist Paul Mendelssohn Bartholdy ; Fanny's grandsons, Paul and Kurt Hensel ; and the founders of the Mendelssohn & Co.

banking house.

Life [ edit ] Youth [ edit ] Moses Mendelssohn was born in Dessau to Mendel Heymann [ de ] and Bela Rachel Wahl [ de ] . His father's name was Mendel, but Moses and his brother Saul were the first to adopt the surname Mendelssohn ("Mendel's son").

[ 2 ] Moses's son Abraham Mendelssohn wrote in 1829 (to Felix), "My father felt that the name Moses Ben Mendel Dessau would handicap him in gaining the needed access to those who had the better education at their disposal. Without any fear that his own father would take offense, my father assumed the name Mendelssohn. The change, though a small one, was decisive." [ 3 ] Mendel was an impoverished scribe —a writer of Torah scrolls—and his son Moses in his boyhood developed curvature of the spine . Moses' early education was provided by his father and by the local rabbi, David Fränkel , who, besides teaching him the Bible and Talmud , introduced to him the philosophy of Maimonides . In 1743 Fränkel received a call to Berlin , and a few months later Moses followed him.

[ 4 ] Moses, age 14, "entered Berlin at the Rosenthaler Tor, the only gate in the city wall through which Jews (and cattle) were allowed to pass." [ 5 ] "Mendelssohn enrolled in Frankel's exacting seminary, where the program consisted of unending rote repetitions of early medieval texts, interpretations thereof, elaborations of Talmudic law, and copious commentary accumulated over the centuries." [ 6 ] A refugee Polish Jew, Israel Zamosz , taught him mathematics, [ 7 ] and a young Jewish physician taught him Latin . He was, however, mainly self-taught. He learned to spell and to philosophize at the same time (according to the historian Graetz ). With his scanty earnings he bought a Latin copy of John Locke 's An Essay Concerning Human Understanding , and mastered it with the aid of a Latin dictionary. He then made the acquaintance of Aaron Solomon Gumperz , who taught him basic French and English. In 1750, a wealthy Jewish silk -merchant, Isaac Bernhard, [ 8 ] appointed him to teach his children. Mendelssohn soon won the confidence of Bernhard, who made the young student successively his bookkeeper and his partner.

[ 4 ] It was possibly Gumperz who introduced Mendelssohn to Gotthold Ephraim Lessing in 1754, who became one of his greatest friends. It is said that the first time Mendelssohn met Lessing, they played chess . In Lessing's play Nathan the Wise Nathan and the character Saladin first meet during a game of chess. Lessing had recently produced the drama Die Juden , whose moral was that a Jew can possess nobility of character. This notion was, in the contemporary Berlin of Frederick the Great , generally ridiculed as untrue. Lessing found in Mendelssohn the realization of his dream. Within a few months, the two became closely intellectually allied. Lessing also brought Mendelssohn to public attention for the first time: Mendelssohn had written an essay attacking Germans' neglect of their native philosophers (principally Gottfried Leibniz ), and lent the manuscript to Lessing. Without consulting the author, Lessing published Mendelssohn's Philosophical Conversations ( Philosophische Gespräche ) anonymously in 1755. In the same year there appeared in Danzig (now Gdańsk , Poland) an anonymous satire, Pope a Metaphysician ( Pope ein Metaphysiker ), which turned out to be the joint work of Lessing and Mendelssohn.

[ 4 ] Early prominence as philosopher and critic [ edit ] Mendelssohn became the leading spirit of Friedrich Nicolai 's important literary undertakings, the Bibliothek and the Literaturbriefe , and ran some risk by criticizing the poems of Frederick II, King of Prussia; Frederick’s good nature kept him out of trouble. In 1762 he married Fromet Guggenheim, who survived him by twenty-six years. In the year following his marriage Mendelssohn won the prize offered by the Berlin Academy for an essay on the application of mathematical proofs to metaphysics , On Evidence in the Metaphysical Sciences ; among the competitors were Thomas Abbt and Immanuel Kant , who came second.

[ 9 ] In October 1763 the king granted Mendelssohn, but not his wife or children, the privilege of Protected Jew ( Schutzjude ), which assured his right to undisturbed residence in Berlin.

[ 4 ] [ 10 ] As a result of his correspondence with Abbt, Mendelssohn resolved to write on the immortality of the soul.

Materialistic views were at the time rampant and fashionable, and faith in immortality was at a low ebb. At this favourable juncture appeared Phädon oder über die Unsterblichkeit der Seele ( Phaedo or On the Immortality of Souls ; 1767). Modelled on Plato 's dialogue of the same name , Mendelssohn's work possessed some of the charm of its Greek exemplar and impressed the German world with its beauty and lucidity of style.

[ 11 ] Phaedo was an immediate success, and besides being one of the most widely read books of its time in German was speedily translated into several European languages, [ 11 ] including English . The author was hailed as the "German Plato", or the "German Socrates"; royal and other aristocratic friends showered attentions on him, and it was said that "no stranger who came to Berlin failed to pay his personal respects to the German Socrates." [ 12 ] Lavater [ edit ] Mendelssohn, Lavater and Lessing, in an imaginary portrait by the Jewish artist Moritz Daniel Oppenheim (1856), Magnes Collection of Jewish Art and Life So far, Mendelssohn had devoted his talents to philosophy and criticism ; now, however, an incident turned the current of his life in the direction of the cause of Judaism . In April 1763, Johann Kaspar Lavater , then a young theology-student from Zurich, made a trip to Berlin, where he visited the already famous Jewish philosopher with some companions. They insisted on Mendelssohn telling them his views on Jesus and managed to get from him the statement, that, provided the historical Jesus had kept himself and his theology strictly within limits of orthodox Judaism, Mendelssohn "respected the morality of Jesus' character." [ 13 ] Six years later, in October 1769, Lavater sent Mendelssohn his German translation of Charles Bonnet 's essay on Christian Evidences, with a preface where he publicly challenged Mendelssohn to refute Bonnet or if he could not then to "do what wisdom, the love of truth and honesty must bid him, what a Socrates would have done if he had read the book and found it unanswerable." [ 14 ] Mendelssohn answered in an open letter in December 1769: "Suppose there were living among my contemporaries a Confucius or a Solon , I could, according to the principles of my faith, love and admire the great man without falling into the ridiculous idea that I must convert a Solon or a Confucius." [ 15 ] The ongoing public controversy cost Mendelssohn much time, energy and strength.

Lavater later described Mendelssohn in his book on physiognomy , Physiognomische Fragmente zur Beförderung der Menschenkenntnis und Menschenliebe (1775–1778), as "a companionable, brilliant soul, with piercing eyes, the body of an Aesop [who was traditionally considered ugly]—a man of keen insight, exquisite taste and wide erudition [...] frank and open-hearted" [ 15 ] —ending his public praise with the wish of Mendelssohn recognizing, "together with Plato and Moses... the crucified glory of Christ." When, in 1775 the Swiss-German Jews, faced with the threat of expulsion, turned to Mendelssohn and asked him to intervene on their behalf with "his friend" Lavater, Lavater, after receiving Mendelssohn's letter, promptly and effectively secured their stay.

Illness [ edit ] In March 1771 Mendelssohn's health deteriorated so badly that Marcus Elieser Bloch , his doctor, decided his patient had to give up philosophy, at least temporarily.

[ 16 ] After a short and restless sleep one evening, Mendelssohn found himself incapable of moving and had the feeling of something lashing his neck with fiery rods, his heart was palpitating and he was in an extreme anxiety, yet fully conscious. This spell was then broken suddenly by some external stimulation. Attacks of this kind recurred. The cause of his disease was ascribed to the mental stress due to his theological controversy with Lavater.

[ 17 ] However, this sort of attack, in milder form, had presumably occurred many years earlier. Bloch diagnosed the disease as due to 'congestion of blood in the brain' (a meaningless diagnosis in modern medical practice as such congestion is anatomically impossible), and after some controversy this diagnosis was also accepted by the famous Hanoverian court physician, Johann Georg Ritter von Zimmermann , an admirer of Mendelssohn.

[ 17 ] In retrospect, his illness might be diagnosed as a heart-rhythm-problem (such as atrial fibrillation ) and/or a mild form of familial dysautonomia , a hereditary disease of Ashkenazi Jews, which often brings with it a curvature of the spine and epilepsy -like symptoms in times of stress.

[ 18 ] Mendelssohn was treated with China bark , blood lettings on the foot, leeches applied to the ears, enemas , foot baths, lemonade and mainly vegetarian food. “No mental stress whatsoever” was ordered. However, although he remained subject to periods of setback, he eventually recovered sufficiently to write the major works of his later career.

[ 17 ] Death [ edit ] Moses Mendelssohn's (reconstructed) grave in Berlin Mendelssohn died on 4 January 1786 as the result (it was thought at the time) of a cold contracted while carrying a manuscript (his reply to Jacobi, titled To Lessing's Friends (An die Freunde Lessings) ) to his publishers on New Year's Eve; Jacobi was held by some to have been responsible for his death.

[ 9 ] He was buried in the Jewish Cemetery of Berlin.

[ 19 ] The translation of the Hebrew inscription on his gravestone (see picture to the right) reads: "H[ere] r[ests] / the wise R[eb] Moses of Dessau / born on the 12th of Elul 5489 [6 September 1729] / died on Wednesday the 5th of Shevat [4 January] / and buried the next morning on Thursday 6th/ 5546 [5 January 1786] / M[ay] H[is] S[oul be] B[ound up in the] B[ond of eternal] L[ife]".

[ 20 ] Although the cemetery was largely destroyed during the Nazi era, after German reunification , in 2007-2008, it was reestablished with monuments to its past, including a recreation of Mendelssohn's gravestone.

Philosophical work [ edit ] Works on religion and civil society [ edit ] Moses Mendelssohn's glasses, in the Jewish Museum, Berlin Mendelssohn’s Ritual Laws of the Jews, 1826 edition, in the collection of the Jewish Museum of Switzerland .

It was after the breakdown of his health that Mendelssohn decided to "dedicate the remains of my strength for the benefit of my children or a goodly portion of my nation"—which he did by trying to bring the Jews closer to "culture, from which my nation, alas! is kept in such a distance, that one might well despair of ever overcoming it". One of the means of doing this was by "giving them a better translation of the holy books than they previously had".

[ 21 ] To this end Mendelssohn undertook his German translation of the Pentateuch and other parts of the Bible. This work was called the Bi'ur ( the explanation ) (1783) and also contained a commentary, only that on Exodus having been written by Mendelssohn himself. The translation was in an elegant High German, designed to allow Jews to learn the language faster. Most of the German Jews in that period spoke Yiddish and many were literate in Hebrew (the language of Jewish scripture, liturgy, and scholarship). The commentary was also thoroughly rabbinic, quoting mainly from medieval exegetes but also from Talmud-era midrashim . Mendelssohn is also believed to be behind the foundation of the first modern public school for Jewish boys, "Freyschule für Knaben", in Berlin in 1778 by one of his most ardent pupils, David Friedländer , where both religious and worldly subjects were taught.

Mendelssohn also tried to better the Jews' situation in general by furthering their rights and acceptance. He induced Christian Wilhelm von Dohm to publish in 1781 his work, On the Civil Amelioration of the Condition of the Jews , which played a significant part in the rise of tolerance. Mendelssohn himself published a German translation of the Vindiciae Judaeorum by Menasseh Ben Israel .

[ 15 ] The interest caused by these actions led Mendelssohn to publish his most important contribution to the problems connected with the position of Judaism in a Gentile world. This was Jerusalem (1783; Eng. trans. 1838 and 1852). It is a forcible plea for freedom of conscience, described by Kant as "an irrefutable book".

[ 15 ] Mendelssohn wrote: Brothers, if you care for true piety, let us not feign agreement, where diversity is evidently the plan and purpose of Providence. None of us thinks and feels exactly like his fellow man: why do we wish to deceive each other with delusive words?

[ 22 ] Its basic thrust is that the state has no right to interfere with the religion of its citizens, Jews included. While it proclaims the mandatory character of Jewish law for all Jews (including, based on Mendelssohn's understanding of the New Testament , those converted to Christianity), it does not grant the rabbinate the right to punish Jews for deviating from it. He maintained that Judaism was less a "divine need, than a revealed life".

Jerusalem concludes with the cry "Love truth, love peace!"—in a quote from Zacharias 8:19.

Kant called this "the proclamation of a great reform, which, however, will be slow in manifestation and in progress, and which will affect not only your people but others as well." Mendelssohn asserted the pragmatic principle of the possible plurality of truths: that just as various nations need different constitutions—to one a monarchy , to another a republic , may be the most congenial to the national genius—so individuals may need different religions. The test of religion is its effect on conduct. This is the moral of Lessing's Nathan the Wise ( Nathan der Weise ), the hero of which is undoubtedly Mendelssohn, and in which the parable of the three rings is the epitome of the pragmatic position.

[ 15 ] To Mendelssohn his theory represented a strengthening bond to Judaism. But in the first part of the 19th century, the criticism of Jewish dogmas and traditions was associated with a firm adhesion to the older Jewish mode of living. Reason was applied to beliefs, the historic consciousness to life. Modern reform in Judaism has parted to some extent from this conception.

[ 15 ] In the view of the German writer Heinrich Heine , "as Luther had overthrown the Papacy, so Mendelssohn overthrew the Talmud ; and he did so after the same fashion, namely, by rejecting tradition, by declaring the Bible to be the source of religion, and by translating the most important part of it. By these means he shattered Judaic, as Luther had shattered Christian, catholicism ; for the Talmud is, in fact, the catholicism of the Jews." [ 23 ] Later years and legacy [ edit ] Mendelssohn grew ever more famous, and counted among his friends many of the great figures of his time. But his final years were overshadowed and saddened by the so-called pantheism controversy . Ever since his friend Lessing had died, he had wanted to write an essay or a book about his character. When Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi , an acquaintance of both men, heard of Mendelssohn's project, he stated that he had confidential information about Lessing being a " Spinozist ", which, in these years, was regarded as being more or less synonymous with " atheist "—something which Lessing was accused of being anyway by religious circles.

[ 24 ] This led to an exchange of letters between Jacobi and Mendelssohn which showed they had hardly any common ground. Mendelssohn then published his Morgenstunden oder Vorlesungen über das Dasein Gottes ( Morning hours or lectures about God's existence ), seemingly a series of lectures to his oldest son, his son-in-law and a young friend, usually held "in the morning hours", in which he explained his personal philosophical world-view, his own understanding of Spinoza and Lessing's "purified" ( geläutert ) pantheism. But almost simultaneously with the publication of this book in 1785, Jacobi published extracts of his and Mendelssohn's letters as Briefe über die Lehre Spinozas , stating publicly that Lessing was a self-confessed "pantheist" in the sense of "atheist". Mendelssohn was thus drawn into a poisonous literary controversy, and found himself attacked from all sides, including former friends or acquaintances such as Johann Gottfried von Herder and Johann Georg Hamann . Mendelssohn's contribution to this debate, To Lessing's Friends (An die Freunde Lessings) (1786), was his last work, completed a few days before his death.

Mendelssohn's complete works have been published in 19 volumes (in the original languages) (Stuttgart, 1971 ff., ed. A. Altmann and others) Family [ edit ] See also: Mendelssohn family Medal honoring Mendelssohn Mendelssohn had six children , of whom only his second-oldest daughter, Recha, and his eldest son, Joseph, retained the Jewish faith.

[ 25 ] His sons were: Joseph (founder of the Mendelssohn banking house and a friend and benefactor of Alexander von Humboldt ), Abraham (who married Lea Salomon and was the father of Fanny and Felix Mendelssohn ), and Nathan (a mechanical engineer of considerable repute). His daughters were Brendel (later Dorothea; the wife of Simon Veit and mother of Philipp Veit , subsequently the mistress, and then wife, of Friedrich von Schlegel ), Recha , and Henriette , all gifted women. Recha's only grandson (son of Heinrich Beer, brother of the composer Giacomo Meyerbeer ), was born and educated as a Jew, but died very young, together with his parents, apparently from an epidemic.

[ citation needed ] Joseph Mendelssohn's son Alexander (1798-1871) was the last male descendant of Moses Mendelssohn to practice Judaism.

[ 15 ] In popular culture [ edit ] Dutch comic artist Typex drew a 2022 biographical graphic novel about Moses Mendelssohn, titled Moishe .

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] See also [ edit ] Biurists Fridolin Friedmann Sara Grotthuis Heinrich Josefsohn The Jewish question Notes [ edit ] ^ / ˈ m ɛ n d əl s ən , - z oʊ n / MEN -dəl-sən, -⁠zohn ; [ 1 ] German: [ˈmɛndl̩szoːn] ^ Hebrew calendar 12 Elul 5489 References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ "Mendelssohn" .

Dictionary.com Unabridged (Online). n.d.

^ Shoenberg, D. (1983). "Kurt Alfred Georg Mendelssohn. 7 January 1906-18 September 1980".

Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society .

29 : 361– 398.

doi : 10.1098/rsbm.1983.0015 .

ISSN 0080-4606 .

JSTOR 769808 .

S2CID 71750767 .

^ Michael P. Steinberg, "Mendelssohn and Judaism," in The Cambridge Companion to Mendelssohn , ed. Peter Mercer-Taylor, p. 34, Cambridge University Press, 2004); translation by Eric Werner, corrected by Michael Steinberg ISBN 0-521-82603-9 ^ a b c d Abrahams 1911 , p. 120.

^ Elon, Amos, The Pity of It All: A Portrait of the German-Jewish Epoch, 1743-1933 (New York: Picador, 2002), p. 1.

^ Elon, Amos, The Pity of It All: A Portrait of the German-Jewish Epoch, 1743-1933 (New York: Picador, 2002), pp. 33-34.

^ Adam Shear, "Jehudah Halevi's Kuzari in the Haskalah" , p. 79; "Zamość, Yisra’el ben Mosheh ha-Levi" in The YIVO Encyclopedia of Jews in Eastern Europe , accessed 31 October 2017.

^ "Textiles" .

^ a b Dahlstrom (2008) ^ Elon, Amos (2002).

The Pity of it All: A History of Jews in Germany, 1743-1933 . New York: Metropolitan Books. p.

45 .

ISBN 978-0-8050-5964-9 .

^ a b Elon (2002), p. 40.

^ Abrahams 1911 , pp. 120–121.

^ Moses Mendelssohn, Public Letter to Lavater, 12 December 1769 (Berlin 1770) ^ Lavater(1774), p. 2 .

^ a b c d e f g Abrahams 1911 , p. 121.

^ Bloch (1774), pp. 60-71 ^ a b c Brand, 1974 ^ Tree (2007), p. 69, n.143, medical analysis by Dr. Channa Maayan, Hadassah Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel.

^ "Visit Berlin" .

^ 1 Samuel , 25:29 ^ Moses Mendelssohn, private letter to August Hennings, 29 July 1779. Cited in Schoeps (2009), pp. 60-61 ^ cited in Momigliano (1987), p. 158 ^ Heine, Heinrich (1959).

Religion and Philosophy in Germany: A Fragment (1959), Beacon Press, p. 94.

^ Altmann (1973), pp. 733 ff.

^ " The Jerusalem Post , Jpost.com" . 31 July 2017 . Retrieved 2 August 2021 .

^ "Typex" .

^ "Striptekenaar Typex maakte een boek over Moses Mendelssohn. 'Ik was gelijk verkocht' | Trouw" .

www.trouw.nl . Retrieved 4 July 2025 .

^ "Moishe: Zes Anekdotes uit het Leven van Moses Mendelssohn" . 22 February 2022.

Attribution This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Abrahams, Israel (1911). " Mendelssohn, Moses ". In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 18 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

120– 121.

Sources [ edit ] Altmann, Alexander .

Moses Mendelssohn: A Biographical Study , 1973.

ISBN 0-8173-6860-4 .

(in German) Bloch, Marcus, Medicinische Bemerkungen. Nebst einer Abhandlung vom Pyrmonter-Augenbrunnen . Berlin 1774 Brand, Aron , The Illness of Moses Mendelssohn , "Koroth" 6, 421-426, 1974 Dahlstrom, Daniel, Moses Mendelssohn , The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2008 Edition) , Edward N. Zalta (ed.) (in German) Kayserling, Meyer Moses Mendelssohn, sein Leben und seine Werke. Nebst einem Anhange ungedruckter Briefe . Leipzig, 1862.

(in German) Lavater, J. K., Sammlung derer Briefe, welche bey Gelegenheit der Bonnetschen philosophischen Untersuchung der Beweise für das Christenthum zwischen Hrn. Lavater, Moses Mendelssohn, und Hrn Dr. Kölbele gewechselt worden [Collection of those letters which have passed between Mr. Lavater, Moses Mendelssohn, and Mr. Dr. Kölbele on occasion of Bonnet's investigation concerning the evidence of Christianity], Frankfurt am Main 1774 ( Google Books ).

Mendelssohn, Moses, tr. A. Arkush, intr. A. Altmann: Jerusalem, or, on religious power and Judaism , 1983.

ISBN 0-87451-263-8 .

Mendelssohn, Moses, tr., intr., comm. B. Rosenstock: Last Works , 2012. Includes Morning Hours: Lectures on the Existence of God ( Morgenstunden , 1785) and To the Friends of Lessing ( An die Freunde Lessings , 1786).

ISBN 978-0-252-03687-3 .

Momigliano, Arnaldo , On Pagans, Jews, and Christians , Wesleyan University Press, 1987 ISBN 0-8195-6218-1 (in German) Schoeps, Julius H.

Das Erbe der Mendelssohhns , Frankfurt 2009.

ISBN 978-3-10-073606-2 (in German) Tree, Stephen.

Moses Mendelssohn . Rowohlt Verlag, Reinbek, 2007.

ISBN 3-499-50671-8 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Moses Mendelssohn .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Moses Mendelssohn .

Works by and about Moses Mendelssohn in University Library JCS Frankfurt am Main: Digital Collections Judaica Works by or about Moses Mendelssohn at the Internet Archive Moses Mendelssohn's books at Google Books Translation of Moses Mendelssohn's Sache Gottes, The Case for God, a work unpublished in his lifetime dealing with questions related to theodicy, including Mendelssohn's denial of the doctrine of eternal punishment Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry Ohr Le-Netivah (introduction to the 'Biur') on HebrewBooks.org Contains Mendelssohn's Jerusalem, slightly modified for easier reading Moses Mendelssohn In Our Time (BBC Radio 4) stream (original broadcast 22 March 2012) discussion with Christopher Clark ( University of Cambridge ), Abigail Green ( University of Oxford ), Adam Sutcliffe ( King's College London ), hosted by Melvyn Bragg , and including a list of further readings.

Video Lecture on Moses Mendelssohn by Dr. Henry Abramson Guide to the Material on Moses Mendelssohn Collection at the Leo Baeck Institute, New York Digitized works by Moses Mendelssohn at the Leo Baeck Institute, New York Resources on Moses Mendelssohn at the Berlin State Library Newspaper clippings about Moses Mendelssohn in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW v t e Moses Mendelssohn family Sons of Mendel Dessau Moses Mendelssohn (married Fromet Gugenheim) Saul Mendelssohn Moses Mendelssohn's children Dorothea Mendelssohn Recha Mendelssohn Joseph Mendelssohn Henriette (Maria) Mendelssohn Abraham Mendelssohn Bartholdy Nathan Mendelssohn Abraham Mendelssohn's children Fanny Mendelssohn Felix Mendelssohn Rebecka Mendelssohn Paul Mendelssohn Other descendants of Moses Paul Hensel Kurt Hensel Sebastian Hensel Arnold Mendelssohn Paul Mendelssohn Bartholdy Philipp Veit Alexander Carl Otto Westphal Joachim Wach Related articles Mendelssohn & Co.

(bank) Itzig family (related by marriage) Kurt Mendelssohn (descendant of Saul Mendelssohn) v t e Felix Mendelssohn Mendelssohn-Werkverzeichnis List of compositions Vocal Stage A Midsummer Night's Dream " Wedding March " Antigone Oedipus at Colonus Die beiden Neffen Die Heimkehr aus der Fremde Die Hochzeit des Camacho Sacred Oratorio: St. Paul / Paulus Elijah / Elias Denn er hat seinen Engeln befohlen Wer bis an das Ende beharrt Christus Other: " Psalm 42 " Vom Himmel hoch (chorale cantata) Drei Motetten Lobgesang (Symphony No. 2) Verleih uns Frieden " Hear my prayer " Lord, have mercy upon us Jauchzet dem Herrn, alle Welt (Psalm 100) Mitten wir im Leben sind Other Die erste Walpurgisnacht " On Wings of Song " Festgesang Festgesang an die Künstler Orchestral Symphony 13 String Symphonies No. 1 No. 2 (symphony-cantata Lobgesang ) No. 3 ( Scottish ) No. 4 ( Italian ) No. 5 ( Reformation ) Concerto Violin and Strings Violin Piano, Violin and Strings Piano: No. 1 – No. 2 Two Pianos: in E major – in A ♭ major Other Calm Sea and Prosperous Voyage The Hebrides Die schöne Melusine Chamber String quartet String Quartet in E ♭ major No. 1 No. 2 No. 3 No. 4 No. 5 No. 6 Four pieces for string quartet Other Violin Sonata: No. 1 – No. 2 – No. 3 Viola Sonata Cello Sonata: No. 1 – No. 2 Assai tranquillo for cello and piano Clarinet Sonata Piano Trio: in C minor – No. 1 – No. 2 Piano Quartet: No. 1 – No. 2 – No. 3 String Quintet: No. 1 – No. 2 Piano Sextet String Octet Solo Piano : Lieder ohne Worte (Songs Without Words) – Rondo capriccioso, Op. 14 – Fantasie, Op. 28 – Preludes and Fugues, Op. 35 – Variations sérieuses , Op. 54 Organ: Six Organ Sonatas People Daniel Itzig ( mother's side great-grandfather) Moses ( father's side grandfather) Bella Salomon (mother’s side grandmother} Sara Levy (née Itzig) (mother’s side great aunt) Abraham (father) Lea Mendelssohn Bartholdy (mother) Fanny and Rebecka (sisters) Paul (son) Other Mendelssohn Foundation Mendelssohn Scholarship MendelssohnKammerChor Berlin Fanny & Felix Mendelssohn Museum Mendelssohn House, Leipzig Mendelssohn is on the Roof Category Audio v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category v t e Jews and Judaism Outline of Judaism Index of Jewish history-related articles History Timeline Israelites Origins of Judaism Ancient Israel and Judah Second Temple period Synagogal Judaism Rabbinic Judaism Middle Ages Zionism Population Assimilation Atheists Buddhists Israeli Jews Karaites Samaritans Lists of Jews Persecution Antisemitism Xueta Christianity Zionism, race and genetics Gentile Groups claiming affiliation with Israelites Diaspora Ashkenazim Afrikaner-Jode Chuts Galitzianers Lita'im Oberlander Jews Ostjuden Udmurt and Tatar Jews Unterlander Jews Yekkes Beta Israel Beta Abraham Falash Mura Desi Jews Bene Israel Kochinim Dönmeh Gruzínim Italkim Neofiti Kaifeng Jews Karaites Constantinopolitan Karaites Crimean Karaites Kurdish Jews Krymchaks Lemba Maghrebi Berber Jews Mizrahi Afghan Jews Alexandrian Jews Baghdadi Bukharan Jews Egyptian Jews Mountain Jews Palestinian Jews Persian Jews Urfalim Teimanim Adeni Jews Ḥabbanim Hadhrami Jews Saada Jews Mustaʿravim Jewish tribes of Arabia Romaniote Sephardim Eastern Sephardim Livornese Jews North African Sephardim Paradesi Meshuchrarim Sephardic Bnei Anusim Xuetes Languages ( Diasporic ) Hebrew Modern Ashkenazi Sephardi Mizrahi Yemenite Tiberian Samaritan Signed Medieval Mishnaic Biblical Babylonian Palestinian Catalanic Judeo-Amazigh Judeo-Arabic Yahudic Judeo-Baghdadi Judeo-Moroccan Judeo-Tripolitanian Judeo-Tunisian Judeo-Yemeni Judaeo-Aramaic Targum Barzani Betanure Hulaulá Lishana Deni Lishán Didán Lishanid Noshan Biblical Talmudic Palestinian Galilean Judeo-Aragonese Jewish English Yeshivish Yinglish Heblish Judeo-Gascon Judaeo-Greek Judeo-Italian Judaeo-Piedmontese Judeo-Latin Judeo-Malay Judeo-Malayalam Judeo-Marathi Judaeo-Occitan Judeo-Persian Bukhori Judeo-Borujerdi Judeo-Golpaygani Judeo-Hamedani Judeo-Shirazi Juhuri Judaeo-Portuguese Judeo-Urdu Karaim Kayliñña Kivruli Knaanic Koiné Greek Krymchak Lachoudisch Ladino Haketia Tetuani Lotegorisch Qwareña Shassagh Shassi Shuadit Yiddish dialects Eastern Galitzish Litvish Poylish Klezmer-loshn Western Judeo-Alsatian Lachoudisch Scots-Yiddish Zarphatic Philosophy Beliefs Mitzvah Rabbinic authority Chosen people Conversion Eschatology Messiah Ethics Holiness God Names of God Halakha Haskalah Kabbalah Sefirot Land of Israel Who is a Jew?

Branches Religious movements Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Litvaks Modern Conservative Reform Reconstructionist Humanistic Neo-Hasidism Renewal Neolog relations Haymanot Hellenistic Karaite Samaritanism Science Secularism Schisms Literature Sifrei Kodesh Tanakh /Hebrew Bible Torah Nevi'im Ketuvim Rabbinic Mishnah Talmud Tosefta Midrash Kabbalah texts Hekhalot literature Pardes Rimonim Sefer HaBahir Sefer HaEtz Chaim Sefer Raziel HaMalakh Sefer Yetzirah Zohar Shulchan Aruch Siddur Hebrew literature Culture Astrology perspectives Monen Astronomy Calendar Holidays Cuisine Kashrut Education Leadership Rabbi Rebbe Marriage Divorce Music Mythology Names Politics Prayer Synagogue Hazzan Symbolism Studies Center for Jewish History American Jewish Historical Society American Sephardi Federation Leo Baeck Institute New York Yeshiva University Museum YIVO Institute for Jewish Research Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation Encyclopaedia Judaica Genetics Jew (word) Jewish Encyclopedia Jewish Virtual Library National Library of Israel YIVO Encyclopedia United States Holocaust Memorial Museum Encyclopedia of the Holocaust Holocaust Encyclopedia Relations with other religions Christian Anabaptism Catholicism Mormonism Protestantism Jews and Christmas Jews and Halloween non-Christian Buddhism Islam Hinduism Italics indicate extinct languages Category Judaism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii zbMATH Artists ULAN MusicBrainz FID People Netherlands Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC 2 RISM Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐65tkh
Cached time: 20250817043821
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.020 seconds
Real time usage: 1.309 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6032/1000000
Revision size: 30953/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 219274/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8060/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 110515/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.635/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19458483/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1078.757      1 -total
 26.12%  281.721      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 15.63%  168.574      2 Template:Reflist
 14.14%  152.499      2 Template:NoteTag
 10.61%  114.469      1 Template:IPA
  9.52%  102.649      9 Template:Navbox
  7.25%   78.208      1 Template:Cite_Dictionary.com
  7.12%   76.820      1 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
  6.46%   69.728     12 Template:Sfn
  6.26%   67.500      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:44893:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043821 and revision id 1302512095. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Moses_Mendelssohn&oldid=1302512095 " Categories : 1729 births 1786 deaths Enlightenment philosophers 18th-century German Jews 18th-century German theologians 18th-century Jewish theologians German Jewish theologians German male non-fiction writers Haskalah Jewish philosophers Mendelssohn family People from Dessau-Roßlau Philosophers of Judaism Translators of the Bible into German Translators of Dante Alighieri 18th-century German writers 18th-century German male writers 18th-century German philosophers Jewish translators of the Bible People of the Haskalah Hidden categories: Pages with German IPA Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2022 Biography with signature Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2016 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with German-language sources (de) Commons link from Wikidata Articles with Internet Archive links Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 21:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Moses Mendelssohn 47 languages Add topic

