Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 General concept Toggle General concept subsection 1.1 Endurance 2 Architecture Toggle Architecture subsection 2.1 Pendulum 2.2 Loop 3 Components Toggle Components subsection 3.1 Counterlung 3.2 Scrubber 3.3 Breathing hoses 3.4 Mouthpiece or facemask 3.5 Oxygen supply 3.6 Valves 3.7 Oxygen sensors 4 System variants Toggle System variants subsection 4.1 Oxygen rebreathers 4.1.1 Oxygen feed options 4.2 Mixed gas rebreathers 4.3 Rebreathers using an absorbent that releases oxygen 4.4 Rebreathers which use liquid oxygen 4.4.1 Cryogenic rebreather 5 Fields of application Toggle Fields of application subsection 5.1 Diving rebreathers 5.1.1 Surface supplied diving gas reclaim systems 5.1.2 Saturation diving life-support systems 5.2 Atmospheric diving suits 5.3 Industrial and rescue self-contained rebreathers 5.4 Mountaineering rebreathers 5.5 Rebreathers for unpressurised aircraft and high altitude parachuting 5.6 Anaesthesia systems 5.7 Space suits 5.8 Habitat life-support systems 6 Safety Toggle Safety subsection 6.1 Hazards 6.1.1 Hypoxia 6.1.2 Carbon dioxide buildup 6.1.3 Leakage of toxic gases into the breathing loop 6.1.4 Fire hazards of high concentration of oxygen 6.1.5 Caustic cocktail 6.2 Failure modes 6.2.1 Scrubber failure 6.2.2 Other failure modes 7 History Toggle History subsection 7.1 Early history 7.2 Working rebreathers 7.3 Rebreathers during World War II 7.4 Post-WWII 8 Manufacturers and models 9 See also 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Rebreather 15 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Français Italiano Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Cryogenic rebreather ) Portable apparatus to recycle breathing gas For rebreathers used in underwater diving, see Diving rebreather . For diving with a rebreather, see Rebreather diving . For breathing gas recycling in a habitat, see Life-support system . For surface recycling of breathing gas recovered from a diver, see Gas reclaim system .

Rebreather A fully closed circuit electronic rebreather ( AP Diving Inspiration) Acronym CCUBA (closed circuit underwater breathing apparatus); CCR (closed circuit rebreather), SCR (semi-closed rebreather) Uses Breathing set Related items Davis apparatus , Self-contained breathing apparatus , Escape hood A rebreather is a breathing apparatus that absorbs the carbon dioxide of a user's exhaled breath to permit the rebreathing (recycling) of the substantial unused oxygen content, and unused inert content when present, of each breath. Oxygen is added to replenish the amount metabolised by the user. This differs from open-circuit breathing apparatus, where the exhaled gas is discharged directly into the environment. The purpose is to extend the breathing endurance of a limited gas supply, while also eliminating the bubbles otherwise produced by an open circuit system. The latter advantage over other systems is useful for covert military operations by frogmen , as well as for undisturbed observation of underwater wildlife. A rebreather is generally understood to be a portable apparatus carried by the user. The same technology on a vehicle or non-mobile installation is more likely to be referred to as a life-support system .

Rebreather technology may be used where breathing gas supply is limited, such as underwater, in space, where the environment is toxic or hypoxic (as in firefighting), mine rescue, high-altitude operations, or where the breathing gas is specially enriched or contains expensive components, such as helium diluent or anaesthetic gases.

Rebreathers are used in many environments: underwater, diving rebreathers are a type of self-contained underwater breathing apparatus which have provisions for both a primary and emergency gas supply. On land they are used in industrial applications where poisonous gases may be present or oxygen may be absent, firefighting , where firefighters may be required to operate in an atmosphere immediately dangerous to life and health for extended periods, in hospital anaesthesia breathing systems to supply controlled concentrations of anaesthetic gases to patients without contaminating the air that the staff breathe, and at high altitude, where the partial pressure of oxygen is low, for high altitude mountaineering. In aerospace there are applications in unpressurised aircraft and for high altitude parachute drops, and above the Earth's atmosphere, in space suits for extra-vehicular activity . Similar technology is used in life-support systems in submarines, submersibles, atmospheric diving suits , underwater and surface saturation habitats, spacecraft, and space stations, and in gas reclaim systems used to recover the large volumes of helium used in saturation diving .

The recycling of breathing gas comes at the cost of technological complexity and specific hazards, some of which depend on the application and type of rebreather used. Mass and bulk may be greater or less than open circuit depending on circumstances. Electronically controlled diving rebreathers may automatically maintain a partial pressure of oxygen between programmable upper and lower limits, or set points, and be integrated with decompression computers to monitor the decompression status of the diver and record the dive profile .

General concept [ edit ] As a person breathes, the body consumes oxygen and produces carbon dioxide .

Base metabolism requires about 0.25 L/min of oxygen from a breathing rate of about 6 L/min, and a fit person working hard may ventilate at a rate of 95 L/min but will only metabolise about 4 L/min of oxygen.

[ 1 ] The oxygen metabolised is generally about 4% to 5% of the inspired volume at normal atmospheric pressure , or about 20% of the available oxygen in the air at sea level . Exhaled air at sea level contains roughly 13.5% to 16% oxygen.

[ 2 ] The situation is even more wasteful of oxygen when the oxygen fraction of the breathing gas is higher, and in underwater diving, the compression of breathing gas due to depth makes the recirculation of exhaled gas even more desirable, as an even larger proportion of open circuit gas is wasted. Continued rebreathing of the same gas will deplete the oxygen to a level which will no longer support consciousness, and eventually life, so gas containing oxygen must be added to the breathing gas to maintain the required concentration of oxygen.

[ 3 ] However, if this is done without removing the carbon dioxide, it will rapidly build up in the recycled gas, resulting almost immediately in mild respiratory distress, and rapidly developing into further stages of hypercapnia , or carbon dioxide toxicity. 
A high ventilation rate is usually necessary to eliminate the metabolic product carbon dioxide (CO 2 ). The breathing reflex is triggered by CO 2 concentration in the blood, not by the oxygen concentration, so even a small buildup of CO 2 in the inhaled gas quickly becomes intolerable; if a person tries to directly rebreathe their exhaled breathing gas, they will soon feel an acute sense of suffocation , so rebreathers must remove the CO 2 in a component known as a carbon dioxide scrubber .

[ 4 ] By adding sufficient oxygen to compensate for the metabolic usage, removing the carbon dioxide, and rebreathing the gas, most of the volume is conserved.

[ 4 ] Relation of physiological effects to carbon dioxide concentration and exposure period.

[ 5 ] Effects of different levels of oxygen partial pressure [ 1 ] PO 2 (bar) Application and effect <0.08 Coma ultimately leading to death 0.08-0.10 Unconsciousness in most people 0.09-0.10 Serious signs/symptoms of hypoxia 0.14-0.16 Initial signs/symptoms of hypoxia (normal environment oxygen in some very high altitude areas) 0.21 Normal environment oxygen (sea level air) 0.35–0.40 Normal saturation dive PO 2 level 0.50 Threshold for whole-body effects ; maximum saturation dive exposure 1.0–1.20 Common range for recreational closed circuit set point 1.40 Recommended limit for recreational open circuit bottom sector 1.60 NOAA limit for maximum exposure for a working diver Recreational/technical limit for decompression 2.20 Commercial/military "Sur-D" chamber surface decompression on 100% O 2 at 12 msw (meters of sea water) 2.40 40% O 2 nitrox recompression treatment gas for use in the chamber at 50 msw 2.80 100% O 2 recompression treatment gas for use in the chamber at 18 msw 3.00 50% O 2 nitrox recompression treatment gas for use in the chamber at 50 msw Endurance [ edit ] The endurance of a rebreather, the duration for which it can be safely and comfortably used, is dependent on the oxygen supply at the oxygen consumption rate of the user, and the capacity of the scrubber to remove carbon dioxide at the rate it is produced by the user. These variables are closely linked, as the carbon dioxide is a product of metabolic oxygen consumption , though not the only product. This is independent of depth, except for work of breathing increase due to gas density increase.

[ 4 ] Architecture [ edit ] Comparison of pendulum and loop rebreather architecture 1 Mouthpiece with dive/surface valve 2 Two way breathing hose 2a Exhalation hose with non-return valve 2b Inhalation hose with non-return valve 3 Scrubber 4 Counterlung 5 Automatic make-up valve 6 Manual bypass valve 7 Breathing gas storage cylinder 8 Cylinder valve 9 Regulator first stage 10 Cylinder pressure gauge 11 Over-pressure valve There are two basic arrangements controlling the flow of breathing gas inside the rebreather, known as the pendulum and loop systems.

Pendulum [ edit ] In the pendulum configuration, the user inhales gas from the counterlung through a breathing hose, and exhaled gas returns to the counterlung by flowing back through the same hose. The scrubber is usually between the breathing hose and the counterlung bag, and gas flow is bi-directional. All of the flow passages between the user and the active absorbent in the scrubber are dead space – volume containing gas which is rebreathed without modification by the rebreather. The dead space increases as the absorbent is depleted. Breathing hose volume must be minimised to limit dead space.

Loop [ edit ] In the loop configuration, the user inhales gas through one hose, and exhales through a second hose.  Exhaled gas flows into the scrubber from one side, and exits at the other side. There may be one large counterlung, on either side of the scrubber, or two smaller counterlungs, one on each side of the scrubber. Flow is in one direction, enforced by non-return valves, which are usually in the breathing hoses where they join the mouthpiece. Only the flow passage in the mouthpiece before the split between inhalation and exhalation hoses is dead space, and this is not affected by hose volume.

[ 6 ] Components [ edit ] Oxygen rebreather KIP-8 interior showing the basic components Russian firefighting rebreather KIP-8 exterior There are some components that are common to almost all personal portable rebreathers. These include the ambient pressure breathing volume components, usually called the breathing loop in a circulating flow rebreather, and the make-up gas supply and control system.

Counterlung [ edit ] The counterlung is an airtight bag of strong flexible material that holds the volume of the exhaled gas until it is inhaled again. There may be a single counterlung, or one on each side of the scrubber, which allows a more even flow rate of gas through the scrubber, which can reduce work of breathing and improve scrubber efficiency by a more consistent dwell time .

Scrubber [ edit ] Main article: Carbon dioxide scrubber The scrubber is a container filled with carbon dioxide absorbent material, mostly strong bases , through which the exhaled gas passes to remove the carbon dioxide. The absorbent may be granular or in the form of a moulded cartridge.

[ 7 ] Granular absorbent may be manufactured by breaking up lumps of lime and sorting the granules by size, or by moulding granules at a consistent size and shape.

[ 8 ] Gas flow through the scrubber may be in one direction in a loop rebreather, or both ways in a pendulum rebreather. The scrubber canister generally has an inlet on one side and an outlet on the other side.

A typical absorbent is soda lime , which is made up of calcium hydroxide Ca(OH) 2 , and sodium hydroxide NaOH. The main component of soda lime is calcium hydroxide, which is relatively cheap and easily available. Other components may be present in the absorbent. Sodium hydroxide is added to accelerate the reaction with carbon dioxide. Other chemicals may be added to prevent unwanted decomposition products when used with standard halogenated inhalation anaesthetics. An indicator may be included to show when carbon dioxide has dissolved in the water of the soda lime and formed carbonic acid, changing the pH from basic to acid, as the change of colour shows that the absorbent has reached saturation with carbon dioxide and must be changed.

[ 8 ] The carbon dioxide combines with water or water vapor to produce a weak carbonic acid: CO 2 + H 2 O –> H 2 CO 3 . This reacts with the hydroxides to produce carbonates and water in an exothermic reaction.

[ 6 ] In the intermediate reaction, the carbonic acid reacts exothermically with sodium hydroxide to form sodium carbonate and water: H 2 CO 3 + 2NaOH –> Na 2 CO 3 + 2H 2 O + heat. In the final reaction, the sodium carbonate reacts with the slaked lime (calcium hydroxide) to form calcium carbonate and sodium hydroxide: Na 2 CO 3 + Ca(OH) 2 –> CaCO 3 + 2NaOH. The sodium hydroxide is then available again to react with more carbonic acid.

[ 8 ] 100 grams (3.5 oz) of this absorbent can remove about 15 to 25 litres (0.53 to 0.88 cu ft) of carbon dioxide at standard atmospheric pressure.

[ 6 ] [ 8 ] This process also heats and humidifies the air, which is desirable for diving in cold water, or climbing at high altitudes, but not for working in hot environments.

Other reactions may be used in special circumstances.

Lithium hydroxide and particularly lithium peroxide may be used where low mass is important, such as in space stations and space suits. Lithium peroxide also replenishes the oxygen during the scrubbing reaction.

[ 9 ] Another method of carbon dioxide removal occasionally used in portable rebreathers is to freeze it out, which is possible in a cryogenic rebreather which uses liquid oxygen. The liquid oxygen absorbs heat from the carbon dioxide in a heat exchanger to convert the oxygen to gas, which is sufficient to freeze the carbon dioxide. This process also chills the gas, which is sometimes, but not always, desirable.

Breathing hoses [ edit ] Draeger Ray dive/surface valve with bite grip scuba mouthpiece, non-return valves, and breathing hoses A breathing hose or sometimes breathing tube on a rebreather is a flexible tube for breathing gas to pass through at ambient pressure. They are distinguished from the low-, intermediate-, and high-pressure hoses which may also be parts of rebreather apparatus. They have a wide enough bore to minimise flow resistance at the ambient pressure in the operational range for the equipment, are usually circular in cross section, and may be corrugated to let the user's head move about without the tube collapsing at kinks.

[ 6 ] Each end has an airtight connection to the adjacent component, and they may contain a one-way valve to keep the gas circulating the right way in a loop system. Depending on the service, they may be made of a flexible polymer, an elastomer , a fibre or cloth reinforced elastomer, or elastomer covered with a woven fabric for reinforcement or abrasion resistance. If the woven layer is bonded to the outside surface it protects the rubber from damage from scrapes but makes it more difficult to wash off contaminants.

[ 6 ] Breathing hoses typically come in two types of corrugation. Annular corrugations, as depicted in the photo, benefit from easier field repair if a tear or hole while helical corrugations allow efficient drainage after cleaning.

[ 10 ] Breathing hoses are usually long enough to connect the apparatus to the user's head in all attitudes of their head, but should not be unnecessarily long, which will cause additional weight, hydrodynamic drag , risk snagging on things, or contain excess dead space in a pendulum rebreather. Breathing hoses can be tethered down to a diver's shoulders or ballasted for neutral buoyancy to minimise loads on the mouthpiece.

Mouthpiece or facemask [ edit ] A mouthpiece with bite-grip , an oro-nasal mask , a full-face mask , or a sealed helmet is provided so that the user can breathe from the unit hands-free.

Oxygen supply [ edit ] A store of oxygen, usually as compressed gas in a high pressure cylinder, but sometimes as liquid oxygen , that feeds gaseous oxygen into the ambient pressure breathing volume, either continuously, or when the user operates the oxygen addition valve, or via a demand valve in an oxygen rebreather, when the volume of gas in the breathing circuit becomes low and the pressure drops, or in an electronically controlled mixed gas rebreather, after a sensor has detected insufficient oxygen partial pressure, and activates a solenoid valve.

Valves [ edit ] Valves are needed to control gas flow in the breathing volume, and gas feed from the storage container. They include: Non-return valves in the breathing loop of loop rebreathers, which enforce one-directional flow to minimise dead space, Dive/surface valves on diving rebreathers, which prevent water from entering the breathing volume when the mouthpiece is removed, or the user elects to breathe ambient air at the surface.

Gas supply valves, including a cylinder valve, to allow high pressure gas to flow from the cylinder. This may be manually operated by the user to directly supply make-up gas, or may provide the gas to a pressure regulator which reduces the pressure to a few bar above ambient pressure, and supplies this intermediate pressure gas to the gas feed system, which may contain one or more of: Manually operated feed valve, Constant mass flow orifice or needle valve, to provide a continuous feed, Demand valve which automatically adds gas when the volume of the counterlung(s) is too low, and pressure in the breathing volume drops below ambient pressure.

Overpressure valve, to release excess gas. This is mainly used in diving rebreathers to compensate for expansion during ascent. Excess gas may also be vented past the skirt seal of a full-face mask, or through the nose when a mouthpiece is used.

Oxygen sensors [ edit ] See also: Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen sensors may be used to monitor partial pressure of oxygen in mixed gas rebreathers to ensure that it does not fall outside the safe limits, but are generally not used on oxygen rebreathers, as the oxygen content is fixed at 100%, and its partial pressure varies only with the ambient pressure.

System variants [ edit ] Re breathers can be primarily categorised as diving rebreathers, intended for hyperbaric use, and other rebreathers used at pressures from slightly more than normal atmospheric pressure at sea level to significantly lower ambient pressure at high altitudes and in space. Diving rebreathers must often deal with the complications of avoiding hyperbaric oxygen toxicity, while normobaric and hypobaric applications can use the relatively trivially simple oxygen rebreather technology, where there is no requirement to monitor oxygen partial pressure during use providing the ambient pressure is sufficient.

Rebreathers can also be subdivided by functional principle as closed circuit and semi-closed circuit rebreathers.

Closed circuit rebreather : A closed circuit rebreather adds oxygen to the loop gas to make up for oxygen used by metabolic processes. These processes do not use diluent gas, so none is added unless the volume of the loop is reduced for other reasons, such as intentional dumping, flushing, or an ambient pressure change. Gas is dumped from the loop when it expands during a pressure reduction, or too much is added.

[ citation needed ] Semi-closed circuit rebreather , also known as a gas extender : A semi-closed circuit rebreather either dumps some loop gas nearly constantly or constantly adds gas to the loop, and consequently needs an inflow of both diluent and oxygen to make up the volume. Changes in ambient pressure also require changes in the number (mass) of gas in the loop to maintain the working volume.

[ citation needed ] Oxygen rebreathers [ edit ] Siebe Gorman Proto 1 mine rescue rebreather, a simple oxygen rebreather.

Further information: Diving rebreather § Oxygen rebreathers 2 This is the earliest type of rebreather and was commonly used by navies for submarine escape and shallow water diving work, for mine rescue, high altitude mountaineering and flight, and in industrial applications from the early twentieth century. Oxygen rebreathers can be remarkably simple and mechanically reliable, and they were invented before open-circuit scuba. They only supply oxygen, so there is no requirement to control the gas composition other than removing the carbon dioxide.

[ 11 ] Oxygen feed options [ edit ] Further information: Diving rebreather § Oxygen feed options In some rebreathers the oxygen cylinder has oxygen supply mechanisms in parallel. One is constant flow ; the other is a manual on-off valve called a bypass valve; both feed into the same hose which feeds the counterlung.

[ 12 ] Others are supplied via a demand valve on the counterlung. This will add gas at any time that the counterlung is emptied and the diver continues to inhale. Oxygen can also be added manually by a button which activates the demand valve.

[ 13 ] Some simple oxygen rebreathers had no automatic supply system, but only the manual feed valve, and the diver had to operate the valve at intervals to refill the breathing bag as the volume of oxygen decreased below a comfortable level.

Mixed gas rebreathers [ edit ] Further information: Diving rebreather § Mixed gas rebreathers Mixed gas electronically controlled closed circuit diving rebreather All rebreathers other than oxygen rebreathers may be considered mixed gas rebreathers, as the breathing gas is a mixture of oxygen and metabolically inactive diluent gas. These can be divided into semi-closed circuit, where the supply gas is a breathable mixture containing oxygen and inert diluents, usually nitrogen and helium, and which is replenished by adding more of the mixture as the oxygen is used up, sufficient to maintain a breathable partial pressure of oxygen in the loop, and closed circuit rebreathers, where two parallel gas supplies are used: the diluent, to provide the bulk of the gas, and which is recycled, and oxygen, which is metabolically expended. Carbon dioxide is considered a waste product, and in a correctly functioning rebreather, is effectively removed when the gas passes through the scrubber.

Rebreathers using an absorbent that releases oxygen [ edit ] Russian multipurpose rebreather IDA-71 with lid of casing opened showing interior – one of the scrubber canisters can optionally be filled with superoxide.

Further information: Diving rebreather § Rebreathers using an absorbent that releases oxygen There have been a few rebreather designs (e.g. the Oxylite) which use potassium superoxide , which gives off oxygen as it absorbs carbon dioxide, as the carbon dioxide absorbent: 4KO 2 + 2CO 2 = 2K 2 CO 3 + 3O 2 . A small volume oxygen cylinder is needed to fill and purge the loop at the start of use.

[ 14 ] This technology may be applied to both oxygen and mixed gas rebreathers, and can be used for diving and other applications. Potassium superoxide reacts vigorously with liquid water, releasing considerable heat and oxygen, and causing a fire hazard, so the more successful applications have been for space-suits, fire-fighting and mine rescue.

[ 15 ] Rebreathers which use liquid oxygen [ edit ] Further information: Diving_rebreather § Rebreathers which use liquid oxygen Aerorlox liquid oxygen rebreather in a coal mining museum A liquid oxygen supply can be used for oxygen or mixed gas rebreathers. If used underwater, the liquid-oxygen container must be well insulated against heat transfer from the water. Industrial sets of this type may not be suitable for diving, and diving sets of this type may not be suitable for use out of water due to conflicting heat transfer requirements. The set's liquid oxygen tank must be filled immediately before use. Examples of the type include: Blackett's Aerophor Aerorlox [ 16 ] Cryogenic rebreather [ edit ] Further information: Diving rebreather § Cryogenic rebreather A cryogenic rebreather removes the carbon dioxide by freezing it out in a "snow box" by the low temperature produced as liquid oxygen evaporates to replace the oxygen used.

Fields of application [ edit ] Underwater – as a self-contained breathing apparatus , where it is sometimes known as "closed circuit scuba " as opposed to "open circuit scuba" where the diver exhales breathing gas into the surrounding water.

[ 17 ] Surface-supplied diving equipment may incorporate rebreather technology either as a gas reclaim system , where the surface-supplied breathing gas is returned and scrubbed at the surface, or as a gas extender carried by the diver.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Rebreathers may also be used as self-contained diver bailout systems for either scuba or surface-supplied diving.

[ 20 ] Mine rescue and other industrial applications – where poisonous gases may be present or oxygen may be absent.

Fire fighting , where personnel may be required to operate in an atmosphere immediately dangerous to life and health for longer periods than open-circuit Self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) can provide air.

Crewed spacecraft and space suits – outer space is, effectively, a vacuum without oxygen to support life.

Himalayan or high-altitude mountaineering . High altitude reduces the partial pressure of oxygen in the ambient air, which reduces the ability of the climber to function effectively. Mountaineering rebreathers are closed-circuit oxygen sets that provide a higher partial pressure of oxygen to the climber than the ambient air.

[ 21 ] Medical anaesthesia breathing systems – to supply controlled concentrations of anaesthetic gases to patients without contaminating the air that the staff breathe, and to conserve anaesthetic gas.

Life-support systems of submarines , underwater habitats , and saturation diving systems use a scrubber system working on the same principles as a rebreather.

This may be compared with some applications of open-circuit breathing apparatus: The oxygen enrichment systems primarily used by medical patients, high altitude mountaineers and commercial aircraft emergency systems, in which the user breathes ambient air which is enriched by the addition of pure oxygen, Open circuit breathing apparatus used by firefighters, underwater divers and some mountaineers, which supplies fresh gas for each breath, which is then discharged into the environment.

Gas masks and respirators which filter contaminants from ambient air which is then breathed.

Diving rebreathers [ edit ] SIVA Underwater Mine Countermeasures (MCM) Diving Apparatus (oxygen rebreather) Main article: Diving rebreather The widest variety of rebreather types is used in diving, as the consequences of breathing under pressure complicate the requirements, and a large range of options are available depending on the specific application and available budget. A diving rebreather is safety-critical life-support equipment – some modes of failure can kill the diver without warning, others can require immediate appropriate response for survival.

Surface supplied diving gas reclaim systems [ edit ] See also: Saturation diving § Gas reclaim systems A helium reclaim system (or push-pull system) is used to recover helium based breathing gas after use by the diver when this is more economical than losing it to the environment in open circuit systems. The recovered gas is passed through a scrubber system to remove carbon dioxide, filtered to remove odours, and pressurised into storage containers, where it may be mixed with oxygen to the required composition for re-use, either immediately, or at a later date.

Saturation diving life-support systems [ edit ] See also: Saturation diving § Life support systems The life support system provides breathing gas and other services to support life for the personnel under pressure in the accommodation chambers and closed diving bell. It includes the following components: [ 22 ] Breathing gas supply, distribution and recycling equipment: scrubbers, filters, boosters, compressors, mixing, monitoring, and storage facilities Chamber climate control system – control of temperature and humidity, and filtration of gas Instrumentation, control, monitoring and communications equipment Fire suppression systems Sanitation systems The life support system for the bell provides and monitors the main supply of breathing gas, and the control station monitors the deployment and communications with the divers. Primary gas supply, power and communications to the bell are through a bell umbilical, made up from a number of hoses and electrical cables twisted together and deployed as a unit.

[ 23 ] This is extended to the divers through the diver umbilicals.

[ 22 ] The accommodation life support system maintains the chamber environment within the acceptable range for health and comfort of the occupants. Temperature, humidity, breathing gas quality, sanitation systems, and equipment function are monitored and controlled.

[ 23 ] Atmospheric diving suits [ edit ] US Navy atmospheric diving suit Main article: Atmospheric diving suit An atmospheric diving suit is a small one-man articulated submersible of roughly anthropomorphic form, with limb joints which allow articulation under external pressure while maintaining an internal pressure of one atmosphere. Breathing gas supply may be surface supplied by umbilical, or from a rebreather carried on the suit. An emergency gas supply rebreather may also be fitted to a suit with either surface supply or rebreather for primary breathing gas. As the internal pressure is maintained at one atmosphere, there is no risk of acute oxygen toxicity. This is an underwater diving application, but has more in common with industrial applications than with ambient pressure scuba rebreathers.

Industrial and rescue self-contained rebreathers [ edit ] Mine rescue rebreathers in a Czech museum Different design criteria apply to SCBA rebreathers for use only out of the water: There is no variation in ambient pressure on the components. The counterlung may be placed for comfort and convenience.

Cooling of the gas in the breathing loop may be desirable, as the absorbent produces heat as it reacts with carbon dioxide, and the warming of the gas is not welcome in hot industrial situations such as firefighting and deep mines.

[ 24 ] Absorbent containers may in some cases rely on gravity for preventing channeling.

If a full-face mask is used, it may have viewports designed for convenience or improved field of vision, and they do not need to be flat and parallel to prevent visual distortion as when underwater.

[ 24 ] In firefighting rebreathers, consideration must be given to making the set reasonably flame-proof and protecting it from heat and debris impacts.

[ 24 ] The need to ditch the set quickly may not arise, and harness straps may not need a quick-release.

Buoyancy is not a consideration, but weight may be critical. Good ergonomic design for ease of carrying, comfort, and balance are important where the unit may be worn in confined spaces, while climbing and crawling through small gaps.

[ 24 ] A spring loaded counterlung pressurisation system may be used to provide slight positive pressure in the breathing loop, to prevent noxious gas entry if the mask seal is not perfect.

[ 24 ] There are no constraints due to the physiological effects of breathing under pressure. Complex gas mixtures are unnecessary. Oxygen rebreathers can usually be used, which makes the design considerably simpler, and the mechanism more reliable.

A system allowing the user to access drinking water from a bag may be fitted, A bite operated valve van be used to control flow.

[ 24 ] Radio voice communications may be fitted.

[ 24 ] A constant mass flow system may be used to ensure a minimum fresh gas supply, with a demand valve to add gas if the loop is emptied.

[ 24 ] Gas supply and absorbent duration would usually be matched for efficiency [ 24 ] Insulation may be needed for the breathing loop for use in sub-zero temperatures where freezing of the absorbent would reduce its effectiveness.

[ 24 ] A water trap may be provided to collect condensed water from the absorbent reaction and from metabolic product.

[ 24 ] Monitoring functions may include: [ 24 ] Cylinder pressure (analog and digital) Estimated remaining duration of use until residual low pressure warning is activated Temperature indication Automatic recording of warning signals Optical and/or acoustic warning signals may be provided for: [ 24 ] Low gas pressure in the cylinder Alarm triggered by lack of user movement Manually triggered alarm.

Mountaineering rebreathers [ edit ] Mountaineering rebreathers provide oxygen at a higher concentration than available from atmospheric air in a naturally hypoxic environment. They need to be lightweight and to be reliable in severe cold including not getting choked with deposited frost.

[ 25 ] A high rate of system failures due to extreme cold has not been solved.

[ citation needed ] Breathing pure oxygen results in an elevated partial pressure of oxygen in the blood: a climber breathing pure oxygen at the summit of Mount Everest has a greater oxygen partial pressure than breathing air at sea level.  This results in being able to exert greater physical effort at altitude. The exothermic reaction helps keep the scrubber contents from freezing, and helps reduce heat loss from the user.

Both chemical and compressed gas oxygen have been used in experimental closed-circuit oxygen systems – the first on Mount Everest in 1938 . The 1953 expedition used closed-circuit oxygen equipment developed by Tom Bourdillon and his father for the first assault team of Bourdillon and Evans ; with one "dural" 800l compressed oxygen cylinder and soda lime canister (the second (successful) assault team of Hillary and Tenzing used open-circuit equipment).

[ 26 ] Rebreathers for unpressurised aircraft and high altitude parachuting [ edit ] Similar requirement and working environment to mountaineering, but weight is less of a problem. The Soviet IDA71 rebreather was also manufactured in a high altitude version, which was operated as an oxygen rebreather.

Anaesthesia systems [ edit ] Main article: Anaesthetic machine Anaesthetic machines can be configured as rebreathers to provide oxygen and anaesthetic gases to a patient during surgery or other procedures that require sedation.  An absorbent is present in the machine to remove the carbon dioxide from the loop.

[ 27 ] Both semi-closed and fully closed circuit systems may be used for anaesthetic machines, and both push-pull (pendulum) two directional flow and one directional loop systems are used.

[ 28 ] The breathing circuit of a loop configured machine has two unidirectional valves so that only scrubbed gas flows to the patient while expired gas goes back to the machine.

[ 27 ] The anaesthetic machine can also provide gas to ventilated patients who cannot breathe on their own.

[ 29 ] A waste gas scavenging system removes any gasses from the operating room to avoid environmental contamination.

[ 30 ] Space suits [ edit ] Buzz Aldrin on the Moon on the 1969 Apollo 11 mission, showing the portable life support system .

Orlan space suit on an EVA from the International Space Station , with the life-support umbilical in view.

Main article: Space suit One of the functions of a space suit is to provide the wearer with breathing gas. This can be done via an umbilical from the life-support systems of the spacecraft or habitat, or from a primary life support system carried on the suit. Both of these systems involve rebreather technology as they both remove carbon dioxide from the breathing gas and add oxygen to compensate for oxygen used by the wearer.
Space suits usually use oxygen rebreathers as this allows a lower pressure in the suit which gives the wearer better freedom of movement.

Habitat life-support systems [ edit ] See also: Life-support system Submarines , underwater habitats , bomb shelters, space stations , and other living spaces occupied by several people over medium to long periods on a limited gas supply, are equivalent to closed circuit rebreathers in principle, but generally rely on mechanical circulation of breathing gas through the scrubbers.

Safety [ edit ] See also: Rebreather diving § Safety There are several safety issues with rebreather equipment, and these tend to be more severe in diving rebreathers.

Hazards [ edit ] Some of the hazards are due to the way the equipment works, while others are related to the environment in which the equipment is used, as rebreathers are usually used where no breathable ambient atmosphere is available.

Hypoxia [ edit ] Hypoxia can occur in any rebreather which contains enough inert gas to allow breathing without triggering automatic gas addition.

In an oxygen rebreather this can occur if the loop is not sufficiently purged at the start of use. Purging is the replacement of the original gas content by fresh gas, and may have to be repeated to completely remove inert gas. Purging should be done while breathing off the unit so that the inert gas in the user's lungs and body tissues that finds its way into the loop is also removed from the system.

Carbon dioxide buildup [ edit ] Carbon dioxide buildup will occur if the scrubber medium is absent, badly packed, inadequate or exhausted. The normal human body is fairly sensitive to carbon dioxide partial pressure, and a buildup will be noticed by the user. However, there is not often much that can be done to rectify the problem except changing to another breathing gas supply until the scrubber can be repacked. Continued use of a rebreather with an ineffective scrubber is not possible for very long, as the levels will become toxic and the user will experience extreme respiratory distress, ultimately leading to loss of consciousness and death. The rate at which these problems develop depends on the volume of the circuit and the metabolic rate of the user at the time.

Carbon dioxide buildup can also occur when a combination of exertion and work of breathing exceeds the capacity of the user. If this occurs where the user cannot reduce exertion sufficiently, it may be impossible to correct. This problem is more likely to occur with diving rebreathers at depths where the density of the breathing gas is severely elevated.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] [ 33 ] The only recourse is to vent the expelled breath outside the closed system, therefore not reusing the oxygen, and thereby increasing use of the gas mixture, but this is not an option in every field of application.

Leakage of toxic gases into the breathing loop [ edit ] Industrial rebreathers are often used where the ambient air is contaminated and may be toxic. Parts of the loop will be at a slightly lower than external ambient pressure during inhalation, and if the circuit is not airtight external gases may leak in. This is a particular issue around the edge of a full-face mask, where the rubber mask skirt must seal against the user's face.

Fire hazards of high concentration of oxygen [ edit ] High partial pressures of oxygen greatly increase fire hazard, and many materials which are self-extinguishing in atmospheric air will burn continuously in a high oxygen concentration. This is more of a hazard for terrestrial applications such as rescue and firefighting than for diving, where the ignition risk is relatively low.

Caustic cocktail [ edit ] Caused by a loop flood reaching the absorbent canister, so only applicable in immersed applications.

Failure modes [ edit ] Further information: Diving rebreather § Failure modes Scrubber failure [ edit ] The term "break-through" means the failure of the scrubber to continue removing sufficient carbon dioxide from the gas circulating in the loop. This will inevitably happen if the scrubber is used too long, but can happen prematurely in some circumstances. There are several ways that the scrubber may fail or become less efficient: Complete consumption of the active ingredient in a "general break through". Depending on scrubber design and user workload, this may be gradual, allowing the user to become aware of the problem in time to make a controlled exit or bailout to open circuit, or relatively sudden, triggering an urgent or emergency response.

Bypassing the absorbent. The absorbent granules must be packed closely so that all exhaled gas comes into contact with the surface of soda lime and the canister is designed to avoid any large spaces or gaps between the absorbent granules or between the granules and the canister walls that would let gas bypass contact with the absorbent. If any of the seals, such as O-rings , or spacers that prevent bypassing of the scrubber, are not present or not fitted properly, or if the scrubber canister has been incorrectly packed or fitted, it may allow the exhaled gas to bypass the absorbent, and the scrubber will be less effective. This failure mode is also called "tunneling" when absorbent settles to form void spaces inside the canister. Bypass will cause an unexpected early break-through.

When the gas mix is under pressure at depth, the gas molecules are more densely packed, and the carbon dioxide molecules' mean path between collisions is shorter, so they are not so free to move around to reach the absorbent surface, and require a longer dwell time . Because of this effect, the scrubber must be bigger for deep diving than is needed for a shallow-water, industrial or high altitude rebreather.

Carbon dioxide absorbent can be caustic and can cause burns to the eyes, mucous membranes and skin. A mixture of water and absorbent occurs when the scrubber floods and depending on the chemicals used, can produce a chalky taste or a burning sensation if the contaminated water reaches the mouthpiece, which should prompt the diver to switch to an alternative source of breathing gas and rinse their mouth out with water. This is known to rebreather divers as a caustic cocktail . The excessive wetting of the absorbent also reduces the rate of carbon dioxide removal and can cause premature break-through even if no caustic liquid reaches the diver. Work of breathing may also increase. Many modern diving rebreather absorbents are designed not to produce this caustic fluid if they get wet.

[ clarification needed ] In below-freezing operation (primarily mountain climbing), wet scrubber chemicals can freeze when oxygen bottles are changed, while there is a pause in the exothermic reaction of taking up the carbon dioxide, thus preventing carbon dioxide from reaching the scrubber material, and slowing the reaction when used again.

Other failure modes [ edit ] Flooding of the ambient pressure volume can occur in diving rebreathers.

Gas leakage to or from the ambient pressure volume can occur. Since the volume of gas lost or gained is likely to be very small, it is most relevant when the surroundings contain toxic gases or fumes.

Oxygen monitoring failure can lead to incorrect partial pressure of oxygen in the breathing gas. This is only relevant in mixed gas rebreathers used for diving.

Gas injection system failure is also mainly a problem of mixed gas diving rebreathers. Oxygen rebreathers gas injection systems are generally robust and reliable and can be manually overridden if they fail, and this form of failure is identifiable by an inappropriate volume of gas in the ambient pressure volume of the rebreather.

History [ edit ] See also: Timeline of diving technology Early history [ edit ] Around 1620, Cornelius Drebbel discovered that heating saltpetre ( potassium nitrate ) would generate oxygen.

[ 34 ] The first basic rebreather based on carbon dioxide absorption was patented in France in 1808 by Pierre-Marie Touboulic from Brest , a mechanic in Napoleon 's Imperial Navy. This early rebreather design worked with an oxygen reservoir, the oxygen being delivered progressively by the diver and circulating in a closed circuit through a sponge soaked in limewater , a solution of calcium hydroxide in water.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] Touboulic called his invention Ichtioandre (Greek for 'fish-man').

[ 37 ] [ citation needed ] There is no evidence of a prototype having been manufactured.

A prototype rebreather was built in 1849 by Pierre Aimable De Saint Simon Sicard , [ 38 ] In 1853 Professor T. Schwann presented a rebreather at the Belgian Academy of Science .

[ 39 ] [ 36 ] It had a large back mounted oxygen tank with working pressure of about 13.3 bar, and two scrubbers containing sponges soaked in a caustic soda solution.

[ 36 ] Working rebreathers [ edit ] Henry Fleuss , inventor of the rebreather The first commercially practical closed-circuit scuba was designed and built by the diving engineer Henry Fleuss in 1878, while working for Siebe Gorman in London.

[ 40 ] [ 12 ] His self-contained breathing apparatus consisted of a rubber mask connected to a breathing bag, with (estimated) 50–60% O 2 supplied from a copper tank and CO 2 scrubbed by rope yarn soaked in a solution of caustic potash; the system giving a duration of about three hours.

[ 12 ] [ 41 ] Fleuss tested his device in 1879 by spending an hour submerged in a water tank, then one week later by diving to a depth of 5.5 m in open water, upon which occasion he was slightly injured when his assistants abruptly pulled him to the surface.

His apparatus was first used under operational conditions in 1880 by Alexander Lambert, the lead diver on the Severn Tunnel construction project, who was able to travel 1000 feet in the darkness to close several submerged sluice doors in the tunnel; this had defeated his best efforts with standard diving dress due to the danger of the air supply hose becoming fouled on submerged debris, and the strong water currents in the workings.

[ 12 ] In 1880 Fleuss, used a rebreather to inspect Seaham Colliery in the UK after a gas explosion.

[ 36 ] Fleuss and Siebe Gorban developed the Proto breathing apparatus for mine rescue in 1911.

[ 36 ] Fleuss continually improved his apparatus, adding a demand regulator and tanks capable of holding greater amounts of oxygen at higher pressure. Sir Robert Davis , head of Siebe Gorman , improved the oxygen rebreather in 1910 [ 12 ] [ 41 ] with his invention of the Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus , the first practical rebreather to be made in quantity. While intended primarily as an emergency escape apparatus for submarine crews, it was soon also used for diving , being a handy shallow water diving apparatus with a thirty-minute endurance, [ 41 ] and as an industrial breathing set .

Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus being tested at the submarine escape test tank at HMS Dolphin, Gosport , 14 December 1942 The rig comprised a rubber breathing/buoyancy bag containing a canister of barium hydroxide to scrub exhaled CO 2 and, in a pocket at the lower end of the bag, a steel pressure cylinder holding approximately 56 litres of oxygen at a pressure of 120 bar. The cylinder was equipped with a control valve and was connected to the breathing bag . Opening the cylinder's valve admitted oxygen to the bag and charged it to the pressure of the surrounding water. The rig also included an emergency buoyancy bag on the front of to help keep the wearer afloat. The DSEA was adopted by the Royal Navy after further development by Davis in 1927.

[ 42 ] Various industrial oxygen rebreathers such as the Siebe Gorman Salvus and the Siebe Gorman Proto , both invented in the early 1900s, were derived from it.

Professor Georges Jaubert invented the chemical compound Oxylithe in 1907. It was a form of sodium peroxide (Na 2 O 2 ) or sodium superoxide (NaO 2 ). As it absorbs carbon dioxide in a rebreather's scrubber it emits oxygen. This compound was first incorporated into a rebreather design by Captain S.S. Hall and Dr. O. Rees of the Royal Navy in 1909. Although intended for use as a submarine escape apparatus, it was never accepted by the Royal Navy and was instead used for shallow water diving.

[ 41 ] In 1912 the German firm Dräger began mass production of their own version of standard diving dress with the air supply from a rebreather. The apparatus had been invented some years earlier by Hermann Stelzner, an engineer at the Dräger company, [ 43 ] for mine rescue .

[ 44 ] In the 1930s, after some tragic accidents in the 1920s, the United States Navy began to equip Porpoise- and Salmon-class submarines with primitive rebreathers called Momsen lungs , which were in use until the 1960s.

Rebreathers during World War II [ edit ] Further information: Frogman A 1945 Royal Navy frogman with Davis apparatus In the 1930s, Italian sport spearfishers began to use the Davis rebreather ; Italian manufacturers received a licence from the English patent holders to produce it. This practice soon came to the attention of the Italian Navy , which developed an extensively upgraded model designed by Teseo Tesei and Angelo Belloni [ it ] that was used by its frogman unit Decima Flottiglia MAS with good results during World War II.

[ 41 ] During the Second World War , captured Italian frogmen's rebreathers influenced improved designs for British rebreathers.

[ 41 ] Many British frogmen's breathing sets used aircrew breathing oxygen cylinders salvaged from shot-down German Luftwaffe aircraft. The earliest of these breathing sets may have been modified Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus ; their fullface masks were the type intended for the Siebe Gorman Salvus , but in later operations different designs were used, leading to a fullface mask with one big face window, at first circular or oval and later rectangular (mostly flat, but the sides curved back to allow better vision sideways). Early British frogman's rebreathers had rectangular counterlungs on the chest like Italian frogman's rebreathers, but later designs had a square recess in the top of the counterlung so it could extend further up toward the shoulders. In front they had a rubber collar that was clamped around the absorbent canister.

[ 41 ] Some British armed forces divers used bulky thick diving suits called Sladen suits ; one version of it had a flip-up single faceplate for both eyes to let the user get binoculars to his eyes when on the surface.

The Dräger rebreathers, especially the DM20 and DM40 model series, were used by the German helmet divers and German frogmen during World War II . Rebreathers for the US Navy were developed by Dr.

Christian J. Lambertsen for underwater warfare.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] Lambertsen held the first closed-circuit oxygen rebreather course in the United States for the Office of Strategic Services maritime unit at the Naval Academy on 17 May 1943.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] During and after WWII , needs arose in the armed forces to dive deeper than allowed by pure oxygen. That prompted, at least in Britain, design of simple constant-flow "mixture rebreather" variants of some of their diving oxygen rebreathers (= what is now called " nitrox "): SCMBA from the SCBA ( Swimmer Canoeist's Breathing Apparatus ), and CDMBA from the Siebe Gorman CDBA , by adding an extra gas supply cylinder. Before a dive with such a set, the diver had to know the maximum or working depth of his dive, and how fast his body used his oxygen supply, and from those to calculate what to set his rebreather's gas flow rate to.

Post-WWII [ edit ] The diving pioneer Hans Hass used Dräger oxygen rebreathers in the early 1940s for underwater cinematography.

Due to the military importance of the rebreather, amply demonstrated during the naval campaigns of the Second World War , most governments were reluctant to issue the technology into the public domain. In Britain rebreather use for civilians was negligible, and the BSAC formally prohibited rebreather use by its members. The Italian firms Pirelli and Cressi-Sub at first each sold a model of sport diving rebreather, but after a while discontinued those models. Some home made rebreathers were used by cave divers to penetrate cave sumps .

Most high-altitude mountaineers use open-circuit oxygen equipment; the 1953 Everest expedition used both closed-circuit and open-circuit oxygen equipment: see bottled oxygen .

Eventually the Cold War ended, and in 1989 the Communist Bloc collapsed , and as a result the perceived risk of sabotage attacks by combat divers dwindled, and Western armed forces had less reason to requisition civilian rebreather patents , and automatic and semi-automatic recreational diving rebreathers with oxygen partial pressure sensors started to appear.

Manufacturers and models [ edit ] For diving rebreather makes and models, see Diving rebreather § Manufacturers and models .

Industrial/rescue: Blackett's Aerophor – A nitrox semi-closed-circuit rebreather with liquid gas storage made in England from 1910 onwards for use in mine rescue and other industrial uses.

[ citation needed ] Sabre Safety SEFA (Selected Elevated Flow Apparatus) – an industrial oxygen rebreather formerly made by Sabre Safety with 2 hours duration on a filling.

[ citation needed ] Siebe Gorman – British manufacturer of diving equipment and salvage contractor The Savox was an oxygen rebreather with a use duration of 45 minutes. It had no hard casing and was worn in front of the body.

[ 16 ] Siebe Gorman Salvus – Industrial rescue and shallow water oxygen rebreather Siebe Gorman Proto – Industrial rescue rebreather set IDA71 – Russian military rebreather for underwater and high altitude use Others: This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( October 2022 ) See also [ edit ] Carbon dioxide scrubber – Device which absorbs carbon dioxide from circulated gas Escape set – Self contained breathing apparatus providing gas to escape from a hazardous environment Primary life support system , also known as Portable Life Support System – Life support device for a space suit Self-contained breathing apparatus ( SCBA ) – Breathing gas supplied respirator carried by the user (surface-only (industrial) breathing sets including rebreathers) References [ edit ] ^ a b NOAA Diving Program (U.S.) (28 Feb 2001). Joiner, James T. (ed.).

NOAA Diving Manual, Diving for Science and Technology (4th ed.). Silver Spring, Maryland: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research, National Undersea Research Program.

ISBN 978-0-941332-70-5 .

CD-ROM prepared and distributed by the National Technical Information Service (NTIS)in partnership with NOAA and Best Publishing Company ^ Dhami, P.S.; Chopra, G.; Shrivastava, H.N. (2015).

A Textbook of Biology . Jalandhar, Punjab: Pradeep Publications. pp. V/101.

^ US Navy (1 December 2016).

U.S. Navy Diving Manual Revision 7 SS521-AG-PRO-010 0910-LP-115-1921 (PDF) . Washington, DC.: US Naval Sea Systems Command.

Chapter 15 – Electronically Controlled Closed-Circuit Underwater Breathing Apparatus (EC-UBA) Diving, Section 15-2 Principles of operation ^ a b c US Navy Diving Manual 2016 , Chapter 15 – Electronically Controlled Closed-Circuit Underwater Breathing Apparatus (EC-UBA) Diving, Section 15-2 Principles of operation.

^ James W. Miller, ed. (1979). "Fig 2.4".

NOAA Diving Manual (2nd ed.). Washington, DC.: US Dept of Commerce – National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration. pp.

2– 7.

^ a b c d e Odom, J. (August 1999).

An Introduction to Semi-Closed Circuit Rebreathers: The Dräger Series of Recreational Rebreathers (PDF) (Revision 4a ed.). Technical Diving International, 1995.

^ Gant, Nicholas; van Waart, Hanna; Ashworth, Edward T.; Mesley, Peter; Mitchell, Simon J. (December 2019).

"Performance of cartridge and granular carbon dioxide absorbents in a closed-circuit diving rebreather" .

Diving and Hyperbaric Medicine .

49 (4): 298– 303.

doi : 10.28920/dhm49.4.298-303 .

PMC 7039778 .

PMID 31828749 .

^ a b c d Sandham, John, ed. (2009).

"EBME & Clinical Engineering Articles: Soda lime production" .

www.ebme.co.uk . Retrieved 24 October 2022 .

^ Greenwood, Norman N.

; Earnshaw, Alan (1984).

Chemistry of the Elements . Oxford: Pergamon Press .

ISBN 978-0-08-022057-4 .

^ Bozanic, Jeffery E. (2010).

Mastering Rebreathers (2nd ed.). Flagstaff, Arizona: Best Publishing Company. p. 198.

ISBN 978-1-930536-57-9 .

^ Older, P. (1969).

"Theoretical Considerations in the Design of Closed Circuit Oxygen Rebreathing Equipment" .

Royal Australian Navy, School of Underwater Medicine .

RANSUM -4-69. Archived from the original on May 9, 2008 . Retrieved 2008-06-14 .

^ a b c d e Davis, RH (1955).

Deep Diving and Submarine Operations (6th ed.). Tolworth, Surbiton, Surrey: Siebe Gorman & Company Ltd . p. 693.

^ US Navy (2006). "Chapter 19: Closed-Circuit Oxygen UBA Diving".

US Navy Diving Manual, 6th revision . United States: US Naval Sea Systems Command. pp.

19– 9. Archived from the original on 2008-05-02 . Retrieved 2008-06-15 .

^ Kelley, JS; Herron, JM; Dean, WW; Sundstrom, EB (1968).

"Mechanical and Operational Tests of a Russian 'Superoxide' Rebreather" .

US Navy Experimental Diving Unit Technical Report . NEDU-Evaluation-11-68. Archived from the original on May 9, 2008 . Retrieved 2009-01-31 .

^ Holquist, Jordan B.; Klaus, David M.; Graf, John C. (13–17 July 2014).

Characterization of Potassium Superoxide and a Novel Packed Bed Configuration for Closed Environment Air Revitalization (PDF) . 44th International Conference on Environmental Systems ICES-2014-192. Tucson, Arizona.

^ a b Robinson, Brian. Taylor, Fionn (ed.).

"Breathing Apparatus" .

Bob's History of Mining . Retrieved 27 December 2013 .

^ Richardson, Drew; Menduno, Michael; Shreeves, Karl (1996).

"Proceedings of Rebreather Forum 2.0" .

Diving Science and Technology Workshop.

: 286. Archived from the original on September 15, 2008 . Retrieved 2008-08-20 .

^ "DESCO 29019 U.S. Navy Helium Diving Helmet w/Double Exhaust Valve" . DESCO . Retrieved 2 July 2019 .

^ "Going deep" .

divingheritage.com . Retrieved 2 July 2019 .

^ "The OBS A/S reclaim helmet" . DiveScrap Index – the scrapbook of diving history . Retrieved 2 July 2019 .

^ Roxburgh, H.L. (1947).

"Oxygen Equipment for Climbing Mount Everest" .

The Geographical Journal .

109 (4/6): 207– 16.

doi : 10.2307/1789440 .

JSTOR 1789440 . Retrieved 5 August 2023 .

^ a b Crawford, J. (2016). "8.5.1 Helium recovery systems".

Offshore Installation Practice (revised ed.). Butterworth-Heinemann. pp.

150– 155.

ISBN 9781483163192 .

^ a b Staff, US Navy (2006).

"15" .

US Navy Diving Manual, 6th revision . United States: US Naval Sea Systems Command. Archived from the original on 2 May 2008 . Retrieved 15 June 2008 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m "Dräger PSS BG 4 plus Breathing Apparatus" (PDF) .

www.draeger.com . Retrieved 30 October 2022 .

^ Hendricks, David M; Pollock, Neal W; Natoli, Michael J; Hobbs, Gene W ; Gabrielova, Ivana; Vann, Richard D (1999). "Mountaineering oxygen mask efficiency at 4572 m.".

In: Roach RC, Wagner PD, Hackett PH. Hypoxia: Into the Next Millennium (Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology Series) . Kluwer Academic: New York: 387– 388.

^ Hunt, John (1953).

The Ascent of Everest . London: Hodder & Stoughton. pp.

257 –262.

^ a b staff (2003-08-18).

"Breathing Circuit" .

University of Florida . Retrieved 2013-04-25 .

^ Ravishankar, M.

"Anesthesia breathing machines: an in-depth review" .

www.capnography.com . Archived from the original on 17 May 2013 . Retrieved 30 April 2013 .

^ staff (2003-08-18).

"Mechanical and Manual Ventilation Systems" .

University of Florida . Retrieved 2013-04-25 .

^ staff (2003-08-18).

"The Scavenging System" .

University of Florida . Retrieved 2013-04-25 .

^ Mitchell, Simon J.; Cronjé, Frans J.; Meintjes, W.A. Jack; Britz, Hermie C. (2007).

"Fatal Respiratory Failure During a "Technical" Rebreather Dive at Extreme Pressure" .

Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine .

78 (2): 81– 86.

PMID 17310877 . Retrieved 21 November 2019 .

^ Mitchell, Simon (August 2008). "Four: Carbon Dioxide Retention". In Mount, Tom; Dituri, Joseph (eds.).

Exploration and Mixed Gas Diving Encyclopedia (1st ed.). Miami Shores, Florida: International Association of Nitrox Divers. pp.

279– 286.

ISBN 978-0-915539-10-9 .

^ Mitchell, Simon (2015).

"Respiratory failure in technical diving" .

www.youtube.com . DAN Southern Africa . Retrieved 6 October 2021 .

^ "Cornelius Drebbel: inventor of the submarine" .

Dutch Submarines . Archived from the original on 2012-05-30 . Retrieved 2008-02-23 .

^ Bahuet, Eric (19 October 2003).

"Avec ou sans bulles? (With or without bubbles)" .

La Plongée Souterrain (in French). plongeesout.com. Introduction . Retrieved 5 February 2017 .

^ a b c d e "Breathing apparatus in mining: Don't hold your breath" .

Australian Mine Safety Journal . 19 October 2020 . Retrieved 31 October 2022 .

^ Bahuet, Eric.

"L'Ichtioandre (illustration)" .

La Plongée Souterrain (in French). plongeesout.com . Retrieved 5 February 2017 .

^ Saint Simon Sicard's invention as mentioned by the Musée du Scaphandre website (a diving museum in Espalion, south of France) ^ Bech, Janwillem.

"Theodor Schwann" . Retrieved 2008-02-23 .

^ "Henry Albert Fleuss" .

scubahalloffame.com . Archived from the original on 2015-01-12.

^ a b c d e f g Quick, D. (1970).

"A History Of Closed Circuit Oxygen Underwater Breathing Apparatus" .

Royal Australian Navy, School of Underwater Medicine .

RANSUM -1-70. Archived from the original on May 9, 2008 . Retrieved 2009-03-03 .

^ Paul Kemp (1990).

The T-Class submarine – The Classic British Design . Arms and Armour. p. 105.

ISBN 0-85368-958-X .

^ "Dräger diving helmets" .

Drägerwerk . www.divingheritage.com . Retrieved 12 December 2016 .

^ Bech, Janwillem (ed.).

"Photos Draeger 1907 Rescue Apparatus" . Retrieved 19 December 2017 .

^ Vann RD (2004).

"Lambertsen and O2: beginnings of operational physiology" .

Undersea Hyperb Med .

31 (1): 21– 31.

PMID 15233157 . Archived from the original on June 13, 2008 . Retrieved 2008-04-25 .

^ a b Butler, F.K. (2004).

"Closed-circuit oxygen diving in the U.S. Navy" .

Undersea Hyperb Med .

31 (1): 3– 20.

PMID 15233156 . Archived from the original on June 13, 2008 . Retrieved 2008-04-25 .

^ Hawkins T (Jan–Mar 2000). "OSS Maritime".

The Blast .

32 (1).

External links [ edit ] Media related to Rebreathers at Wikimedia Commons Anesthesia breathing systems NIOSH Docket # 123, titled "Reevaluation of NIOSH limitations on and precaution for safe use of positive-pressure closed-circuit SCBA" is available at web.archive.org v t e Breathing apparatus High altitude breathing apparatus Aviation breathing apparatus Emergency oxygen system Mountaineering breathing apparatus Occupational breathing apparatus Respirator Regulated by NIOSH and others Gas mask Canister Supplied-air respirator Self-contained breathing apparatus Self-contained self-rescue device Particulate respirator N95 respirator Dust mask Powered air-purifying respirator Chemical cartridge Facepieces Smoke hood Elastomeric respirator Regulations 42 CFR 84 (United States) ANSI K13.1-1973 EN 149/14683/143 (Europe) GB2626 (China), and others Medical breathing apparatus Anaesthetic machine Bubble CPAP Continuous positive airway pressure Resuscitator Bag valve mask Pocket mask Ventilator Iron lung Non-invasive ventilation Oxygen therapy Hyperbaric medicine Built-in breathing system Positive airway pressure Respiratory gas humidification Supplemental oxygen Nasal cannula Reservoir cannula Non-rebreather mask Oxygen hood Oxygen mask Oxygen tent Partial rebreather mask Simple face mask Venturi mask Underwater breathing apparatus Open-circuit scuba Diving helmet Diving rebreather Full-face diving mask Surface-supplied diving equipment Snorkel Helicopter escape set Submarine escape set Atmospheric diving suit Gas extender Helium reclaim system User respiratory interface Breathing mask Full facepiece Half mask orinasal mask General Breathing gas Breathing performance of regulators Dead space Emergency gas supply Escape breathing apparatus Facepiece Hazmat suit Negative pressure breathing Open circuit breathing apparatus Oxygen concentrator Positive pressure breathing Respiratory protective equipment Pressure regulator Constant flow regulator Demand valve Rebreather Closed circuit rebreather Counterlung Oxygen rebreather Carbon dioxide scrubber Semi-closed circuit Work of breathing Escape respirator Category Commons Glossary v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐m84kx
Cached time: 20250818040748
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.188 seconds
Real time usage: 1.458 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8668/1000000
Revision size: 87093/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 626454/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7230/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 21/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 200580/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.631/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19672455/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1008.379      1 -total
 33.61%  338.867      1 Template:Reflist
 15.85%  159.787      2 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 14.23%  143.507     14 Template:Cite_book
 13.55%  136.650     10 Template:Annotated_link
  9.52%   95.992     36 Template:Navbox
  9.12%   91.964      1 Template:Underwater_diving
  7.35%   74.098      1 Template:Breathing_apparatus
  7.33%   73.877     18 Template:Cite_web
  6.91%   69.679     12 Template:Cite_journal Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:294126:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818040748 and revision id 1306360682. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rebreather&oldid=1306360682#Cryogenic_rebreather " Categories : Rebreathers Spaceflight technology Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value CS1: unfit URL CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2012 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2013 Articles to be expanded from October 2022 All articles to be expanded Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 09:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rebreather 15 languages Add topic

