Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mythological and religious universal languages 2 Early modern history 3 Modern history 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Universal language 8 languages العربية Ελληνικά Esperanto فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia မြန်မာဘာသာ Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hypothetical language This article is about a universally used language. For a widespread language, see World language .

For other uses, see Universal language (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Universal language" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Universal language may refer to a hypothetical or historical language spoken and understood by all or most of the world's people.  In some contexts, it refers to a means of communication said to be understood by all humans.  It may be the idea of an international auxiliary language for communication between groups speaking different primary languages. A similar concept can be found in pidgin language , which is actually used to facilitate understanding between two or more people with no common language. In other conceptions, it may be the primary language of all speakers, or the only existing language.   Some religious and mythological traditions state that there was once a single universal language among all people, or shared by humans and supernatural beings.

In other traditions, there is less interest in or a general deflection of the question. The written Classical Chinese language is still read widely but pronounced differently by readers in China , Vietnam , Korea and Japan ; for centuries it was a de facto universal literary language for a broad-based culture. In something of the same way Sanskrit in India and Nepal , and Pali in Sri Lanka and in Theravada countries of South-East Asia ( Burma , Thailand , Cambodia ) and Old Tamil in South India and Sri Lanka , were literary languages for many for whom they were not their mother tongue .

Comparably, the Latin language ( qua Medieval Latin ) was in effect a universal language of literati in the Middle Ages , and the language of the Vulgate Bible in the area of Catholicism , which covered most of Western Europe and parts of Northern Europe and Central Europe .

In a more practical fashion, trade languages, such as ancient Koine Greek , may be seen as a kind of real universal language, that was used for commerce.

In historical linguistics , monogenesis refers to the idea that all spoken human languages are descended from a single ancestral language spoken many thousands of years ago.

Mythological and religious universal languages [ edit ] Main articles: Mythical origins of language , Adamic language , Divine language , and Language of the birds Various religious texts, myths, and legends describe a state of humanity in which originally only one language was spoken.

In Jewish and Christian beliefs, the story of the Tower of Babel tells of a consequent " confusion of tongues " (the splintering of numerous languages from an original Adamic language ) [ citation needed ] as a punishment from God.

Myths exist in other cultures describing the creation of multiple languages as an act of a god as well, such as the destruction of a 'knowledge tree' by Brahma in Indic tradition, or as a gift from the God Hermes in Greek myth. Other myths describe the creation of different languages as concurrent with the creation of different tribes of people, or due to supernatural events.

Early modern history [ edit ] Further information: Philosophical language This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "Universal language" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Recognizable strands in the contemporary ideas on universal languages took form only in Early Modern Europe. In the early 17th century, some believed that a universal language would facilitate greater unity among mankind largely due to the subsequent spread of religion, specifically Christianity, as espoused in the works of Comenius . But there were ideas of a universal language apart from religion as well. A lingua franca or trade language was nothing very new; but an international auxiliary language was a natural wish in light of the gradual decline of Latin. Literature in vernacular languages became more prominent with the Renaissance . Over the course of the 18th century, learned works largely ceased to be written in Latin . According to Colton Booth ( Origin and Authority in Seventeenth-Century England (1994) p. 174) "The Renaissance had no single view of Adamic language and its relation to human understanding." The question was more exactly posed in the work of Francis Bacon .

In the vast writings of Gottfried Leibniz can be found many elements relating to a possible universal language, specifically a constructed language , a concept that gradually came to replace that of a rationalized Latin as the natural basis for a projected universal language. Leibniz conceived of a characteristica universalis (also see mathesis universalis ), an "algebra" capable of expressing all conceptual thought. This algebra would include rules for symbolic manipulation, what he called a calculus ratiocinator . His goal was to put reasoning on a firmer basis by reducing much of it to a matter of calculation that many could grasp. The characteristica would build on an alphabet of human thought .

Leibniz's work is bracketed by some earlier mathematical ideas of René Descartes , and the satirical attack of Voltaire on Panglossianism . Descartes's ambitions were far more modest than Leibniz's, and also far more successful, as shown by his wedding of algebra and geometry to yield what we now know as analytic geometry . Decades of research on symbolic artificial intelligence have not brought Leibniz's dream of a characteristica any closer to fruition.

Other 17th-century proposals for a 'philosophical' (i.e. universal) language include those by Francis Lodwick , Thomas Urquhart (possibly parodic), George Dalgarno ( Ars signorum , 1661), and John Wilkins ( An Essay towards a Real Character and a Philosophical Language , 1668). The classification scheme in Roget 's Thesaurus ultimately derives from Wilkins's Essay .

Candide , a satire written by Voltaire , took aim at Leibniz as Dr. Pangloss , with the choice of name clearly putting universal language in his sights, but satirizing mainly the optimism of the projector as much as the project. The argument takes the universal language itself no more seriously than the ideas  of the speculative scientists and virtuosi of Jonathan Swift 's Laputa . For the like-minded of Voltaire's generation, universal language was tarred as fool's gold with the same brush as philology with little intellectual rigour , and universal mythography , as futile and arid directions.

In the 18th century, some rationalist natural philosophers sought to recover a supposed Edenic language . It was assumed that education inevitably took people away from an innate state of goodness they possessed, and therefore there was an attempt to see what language a human child brought up in utter silence would speak. This was assumed to be the Edenic tongue, or at least the lapsarian tongue.

Others attempted to find a common linguistic ancestor to all tongues; there were, therefore, multiple attempts to relate esoteric languages to Hebrew (e.g.

Basque and Irish ), as well as the beginnings of comparative linguistics .

Modern history [ edit ] Further information: World language The constructed language movement produced such languages as Esperanto (1887), Latino sine flexione (1903), Ido (1907), Interlingue (1922), and Interlingua (1951).

[ 1 ] English remains the dominant language of international business and global communication through the influence of global media and the former British Empire that had established the use of English in regions around the world such as North America, Africa, Australia and New Zealand. However, English is not the only language used in major international organizations, because many countries do not recognize English as a universal language. For instance, the United Nations use six languages — Arabic , Chinese , English , French , Russian , and Spanish .

The early ideas of a universal language with complete conceptual classification by categories is still debated on various levels.

Michel Foucault believed such classifications to be subjective, citing Borges ' fictional Celestial Emporium of Benevolent Knowledge's Taxonomy as an illustrative example.

See also [ edit ] Asemic writing aUI Blinking Body language Bouba/kiki effect Code Emoji Facial expression Gibberish Global language system International Sign Pidgin Semiotics Sense Sign Sign language Somatosensory system Stick figure Symbol Universal translator Universal grammar Visible Speech Whistled language References [ edit ] ^ Gode, Alexander , Interlingua: A Dictionary of the International Language , New York: Storm Publishers, 1951.

Bibliography [ edit ] Slaughter, M. M. (1982).

Universal Languages and Scientific Taxonomy in the Seventeenth Century .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-24477-0 .

Sweet, Henry (1911).

"Universal Languages" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.).

v t e Constructed languages Classification Artistic Fictional Language game International auxiliary Zonal Engineered Experimental Musical Philosophical Specific languages by group International auxiliary Babm Blissymbols Bolak Communicationssprache Esperanto Adjuvilo Arcaicam Esperanto II Ido Mundolinco Reformed Romániço Universal other esperantidos Glosa Interglossa Idiom Neutral Intal Interlingua Interlingue International Sign Kotava Langue nouvelle Latino sine flexione Lingua Franca Nova Lingwa de planeta Mondial Neo Nal Bino Novial Pasilingua Sambahsa Solresol Sona Unish Universalglot Uropi Volapük Zonal Afrihili Budinos Efatese Eurolengo Guosa Ortatürk Pan-Germanic language Tutonish Pan-Romance language Neolatino Romance Romanid Pan-Slavic language Interslavic Iazychie Runyakitara Wede Weltdeutsch Engineered aUI Basic English Dutton Speedwords Ithkuil Kalaba-X Astrolinguistics Lincos Lingua generalis Loglan Logopandecteision Lojban Real Character Ro Toki Pona Viossa Fictional and other artistic Atlantean Belter Creole Brithenig Chakobsa Dritok Dothraki Elvish languages Enchanta Kēlen Kiliki Klingon Kobaïan Láadan Lapine Loxian Lydnevi Mänti Middle-earth languages Adûnaic Quenya Sindarin Black Speech Khuzdul Valarin Westron Naʼvi Nadsat Newspeak Simlish Spocanian Star Wars languages Syldavian Talossan Teonaht Tsolyáni Utopian Valyrian Venedic Verdurian Wenja Ritual and other Balaibalan Damin Enochian Eskayan Kukurá Lingua ignota Medefaidrin Myska Palawa kani Yerkish Zaum Neography Constructed script Esperanto orthography Sitelen Pona Tolkien's scripts Cirth Sarati Tengwar Study Esperantology A Secret Vice Bridge of Words Conlanging: The Art of Crafting Tongues In the Land of Invented Languages La Ricerca della Lingua Perfetta nella Cultura Europea Comparisons Esperanto/Ido Esperanto/Interlingua Esperanto/Novial Ido/Interlingua Ido/Novial Interlingue/Interlingua Lojban/Loglan List of constructed languages List of language creators Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐f57pt
Cached time: 20250812014550
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.348 seconds
Real time usage: 0.479 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1159/1000000
Revision size: 10056/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 59814/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1323/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 20590/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.212/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5633540/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  390.682      1 -total
 21.05%   82.224      2 Template:Navbox
 21.01%   82.067      1 Template:Constructed_languages
 19.90%   77.756      1 Template:Cite_book
 15.70%   61.324      1 Template:Short_description
 15.23%   59.491      1 Template:Refimprove
 14.62%   57.101      2 Template:Ambox
  9.03%   35.280      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.15%   20.133      1 Template:About
  4.80%   18.748      1 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1214877:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812014550 and revision id 1303052171. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Universal_language&oldid=1303052171 " Categories : International auxiliary languages Interlinguistics Language and mysticism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2010 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2021 Articles needing additional references from May 2023 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 21:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Universal language 8 languages Add topic

