Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Pre-European history 2.2 Trust reserve 2.3 Park designation 3 Recreation 4 References Toggle the table of contents Whitireia Park Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Headland in New Zealand Whitireia Park Whitirea Park, with Tītahi Bay in the background Type Park Location Lower Hutt , Wellington Region , New Zealand Coordinates 41°06′23″S 174°50′29″E ﻿ / ﻿ 41.1063681°S 174.8413128°E ﻿ / -41.1063681; 174.8413128 Area 180 hectares (440 acres) Operated by Whitireia Park Board Open 6am-6pm (May-August) 6am-7pm (September) 6am-8pm (October) 6am-9pm (November-February) 6am-8pm (March) 6am-7pm (April) Whitireia Park is a headland north of Tītahi Bay and Te Awarua-o-Porirua Harbour in Porirua , in the Wellington Region at the southern end of New Zealand's North Island . It is a park administered by the Whitireia Park Board, in collaboration with Wellington Regional Council .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The park includes Onehunga Bay, Kaitawa Point and part of Rocky Bay.

[ 1 ] Geography [ edit ] The park covers 180 hectares (440 acres) of hilly headland, consisting mostly of open grasslands, with some native bush.

[ 1 ] The headland has uplifted from the harbour during a series of earthquakes over the past one or two million years. The most recent earthquake in January 1855 created the marshland at Te Onepoto Bay and the western coastline beaches, and made Porirua Harbour too shallow for large sailing ships.

[ 3 ] Te Onepoto Bay now provides a habitat for water birds, including kingfishers and white-faced herons . There are also some little shags , black shags , royal spoonbills , black backed gulls and shore plover .

[ 3 ] There is 2 hectares (4.9 acres) of remnant coastal kohekohe forest, with two rare Streblus banksii trees and Doodia australis fern.

[ 3 ] The wetland behind the Onehunga Bay carpark is dominated by toetoe and flax, where pūkeko , paradise ducks and other wetland birds live. The dunes at the bay are also being planted with spinifex , pingao , shore spurge , sand tussock , sand daphne and native iris , where native insects and lizards live.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] Pre-European history [ edit ] Polynesian explorer Kupe is believed to have landed just south of Tītahi Bay at Komangarautawhiri. According to oral history, his canoe floated away on the outgoing tide and then returned to shore on an incoming tide.

[ 4 ] The anchor stone of Kupe's canoe is believed to have remained in Onehunga Bay for centuries and was respected by Māori tribes. During the 1840s, British troops drowned after breaking chips off the stone, and some Māori believed it was punishment for sacrilege. The stone is now stored at Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa , but there is a monument at the Onehunga Bay carpark.

[ 1 ] Before European settlement, Māori fished the waters for kina , pāua and kuku .

[ 4 ] Ngāti Toa conquered the area in the mid-1820s under the leadership of Te Rauparaha , partly due to its strategic position near early European trading ports. The headland had sparse vegetation, and the population lived on a diet of seafood, bracken ferns and kumara, and their kumara-growing terraces are still visible above the headland cliffs.

[ 4 ] An archaeological survey by the Department of Conservation suggests Māori occupation continued until 1840s.

[ 5 ] Trust reserve [ edit ] Fire in Whitireia Park in 2010 Helicopters fighting fire in Whitireia Park in 2010 The park was established by a local trust board and the Broadcasting Corporation of New Zealand in 1976, with support from Ngāti Toa and local businesses.

[ 4 ] Under a management plan finalised in 1978, the Department of Conservation was also involved in managing the park.

[ 6 ] In the decades since, a track has been built around the park, and the New Zealand Defence Force has removed abandoned motor vehicle bodies from around the headland.

Radio New Zealand has maintained control of 53 hectares (130 acres) of the park as a base for a radio transmitter, but most of its land is leased for grazing to reduce fire risk.

[ 4 ] In 2006, work began on replanting the wetland behind the Onehunga Bay carpark.

[ 3 ] Much of the vegetation on the headland was destroyed in a fire in February 2010.

[ 7 ] Working bees have been organised to replant the park.

[ 8 ] Park designation [ edit ] Wellington Regional Council took control of the park in March 2011, with Ngāti Toa continuing to be involved in its management.

[ 4 ] [ 6 ] Dog leashes became mandatory at Onehunga Bay in February 2017.

[ 9 ] In 2018, Radio New Zealand proposed having some of its greenfield land rezoned for residential development.

[ 10 ] Part of the park walking track was closed in July 2021 due to a sewage leak.

[ 11 ] Recreation [ edit ] The park has views over Mana Island and the South Island to the west, Te Awarua-o-Porirua Harbour to the east and south.

[ 1 ] The Onepoto loop track runs up the hill from Onehunga Bay, down through the inland valley and back through to the bay. It takes almost two hours to complete, and requires moderate fitness and decent footwear.

[ 8 ] [ 12 ] Parts of the track are exposed to sea winds.

[ 13 ] The park is also used for fishing, mountain biking, horse riding, rock climbing, bird spotting, orienteering, model plane flying, canoeing, kitesurfing, diving, picnicking and swimming.

[ 1 ] [ 8 ] [ 6 ] The park is open 6am-6pm from May to August, 6am-7pm during September, 6am-8pm during October, 6am-9pm from November to February, 6am-8pm during March, and 6am-7pm during April. The park may be closed at any time due to weather conditions.

[ 1 ] Dogs are permitted but must be kept under control, and must be kept on a leash at Onehunga Bay. Fire and fireworks are banned at all times.

[ 1 ] References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Porirua .

^ a b c d e f g h "Whitireia Park" .

gw.govt.nz .

Wellington Regional Council .

^ Whitireia Park Board (2016).

Whitireia Park Management Plan and Whitireia Park Bylaws 2016 (PDF) (Report).

Greater Wellington Regional Council . Retrieved 8 January 2024 .

^ a b c d e "Whitireia Park Environment" (PDF) .

gw.govt.nz .

Wellington Regional Council .

^ a b c d e f "History of Whitireia Park" .

gw.govt.nz .

Wellington Regional Council .

^ Walton, A (2002).

"An archaeological survey of Whitireia Park, Porirua" (PDF) .

doc.govt.nz .

Department of Conservation .

^ a b c "Help us shape the future of Whitireia Park" .

windsurfingnz.org . Windsurfing New Zealand.

^ Dando, Kris (8 April 2016).

"Whitireia Park fire flashback" .

stuff.co.nz .

Dominion Post .

^ a b c "Whitireia Park Recreation" .

gw.govt.nz .

Wellington Regional Council .

^ Fallon, Virginia (17 February 2017).

"On a short leash: pooches freedom curtailed at Porirua beach" .

stuff.co.nz .

Dominion Post .

^ Nicoll, Jared (1 August 2018).

"Radio NZ tuning into property possibilities for Porirua's Whitireia Park" .

stuff.co.nz .

Dominion Post .

^ Campbell, Georgina (20 July 2021).

"Sewage leaks into Porirua Harbour, coastal walking track closed" .

New Zealand Media and Entertainment .

New Zealand Herald .

^ "Our top walks" .

poriruacity.govt.nz .

Porirua City Council .

^ "Back Your Backyard: 12-hour guide to Porirua" .

stuff.co.nz .

Dominion Post . 6 July 2020.

v t e Porirua , New Zealand Seat : Porirua Central Populated places Aotea Ascot Park Camborne Cannons Creek Elsdon Hongoeka Judgeford Karehana Bay Kenepuru Mana Moonshine Valley Onepoto Rānui Paekākāriki Hill Papakōwhai Paremata Pāuatahanui Plimmerton Porirua Central Pukerua Bay Takapūwāhia Tītahi Bay Waitangirua Whitby Geographic features Aotea Lagoon Mana Island Porirua Harbour Rangituhi / Colonial Knob Facilities and attractions Belmont Regional Park Escarpment Track Gear Homestead Haywards–Plimmerton line Jerry Collins Stadium Johnsonville–Porirua Motorway Papakowhai Homestead Pataka Art + Museum Porirua Lunatic Asylum Puketiro Wind Farm Royal New Zealand Police College St Alban's Church Taupō Swamp Taylor-Stace Cottage Titahi Bay Transmitter Te Rauparaha Arena Transmission Gully Motorway Whitireia New Zealand Whitireia Park Railway stations Kenepuru Mana Muri Plimmerton Paremata Porirua Pukerua Government City Council Mayor Regional Council Sports Paremata-Plimmerton RFC Porirua Pumas Western Suburbs FC Schools Aotea College Bishop Viard College Mana College v t e Greater Wellington Regional Council Regional parks Akatarawa Forest Baring Head Battle Hill Farm Forest Park Belmont Regional Park East Harbour Regional Park Hutt River Trail Hutt Water Collection Area Kaitoke Regional Park Pakuratahi Forest Queen Elizabeth Park Te Awarua-o-Porirua Harbour Wainuiomata Regional Park Wainuiomata Water Collection Area Wairarapa Moana Wetlands Wellington Harbour Whitireia Park v t e Protected areas of New Zealand Conservation parks Ahuriri Aorangi Aotea Catlins Coromandel Craigieburn Eyre Mountains/Taka Ra Haka Hakatere Hāwea Hanmer Kaimai Mamaku Kaimanawa Kaweka Ka Whata Tu O Rakihouia Korowai / Torlesse Tussocklands Lake Sumner Mavora Lakes Mount Richmond Northland North-west Nelson Oteake Pirongia Pureora Remutaka Ruahine Raukumara Ruataniwha Tararua Te Kahui Kaupeka Te Papanui Victoria Whakarewarewa Whirinaki Te Pua-a-Tāne Ecological islands Brook Waimārama Sanctuary Bushy Park Sanctuary Mountain Maungatautari Orokonui Ecosanctuary Tawharanui Open Sanctuary Zealandia Government purpose reserves Pāuatahanui Wildlife Reserve Pukaha / Mount Bruce National Wildlife Centre Historic reserves Hāpūpū / J M Barker Maungauika / North Head Puhi Kai Iti / Cook Landing Site Stony Batter Te Kuri a Paoa/Young Nick's Head Marine reserves Akaroa Auckland Islands Cape Rodney-Okakari Point Hautai Hawea (Clio Rocks) Hikurangi Horoirangi Kahukura (Gold Arm) Kahurangi Kapiti Kermadec Islands Kutu Parera (Gaer Arm) Long Bay-Okura Long Island-Kokomohua Moana Uta (Wet Jacket Arm) Motu Manawa-Pollen Island Moutere Hauriri / Bounty Islands Moutere Ihupuku / Campbell Island Moutere Mahue / Antipodes Island Parininihi Piopiotahi (Milford Sound) Pohatu / Flea Bay Poor Knights Islands Punakaiki Taipari Roa (Elizabeth Island) Tapuae Taputeranga Taumoana (Five Finger Peninsula) Tauparikākā Tāwharanui Te Angiangi Te Awaatu Channel (The Gut) Te Hapua (Sutherland Sound) Te Matuku Te Paepae o Aotea (Volkner Rocks) Te Tapuwae o Hua (Long Sound) Te Tapuwae o Rongokako Tonga Island Tuhua (Mayor Island) Ulva Island-Te Wharawhara Waiau Glacier Coast Westhaven (Te Tai Tapu) Whanganui-A-Hei (Cathedral Cove) Whangarei Harbour National parks Current Abel Tasman Aoraki / Mount Cook Arthur's Pass Egmont Fiordland Kahurangi Mount Aspiring Nelson Lakes Paparoa Rakiura Tongariro Westland Tai Poutini Whanganui Former Te Urewera National reserves Hāpūpū / J M Barker Lewis Pass Puhi Kai Iti / Cook Landing Site Subantarctic Islands Te Kuri a Paoa/Young Nick's Head Recreation reserves Bastion Point Otago Central Rail Trail Truby King Recreation Reserve Regional parks Akatarawa Ambury Ashley Rakahuri Ātiu Creek Auckland Botanic Gardens Āwhitu Battle Hill Farm Belmont Duder East Harbour Ferrymead Glenfern Sanctuary Hunua Ranges Kaitoke Lake Tekapo Long Bay Mahurangi Motukorea Browns Island Muriwai Mutukaroa / Hamlins Hill Ōmana Onekawa Te Mawhai Orere Point Pākiri Pakuratahi Papamoa Hills Queen Elizabeth Scandrett Shakespear Tāpapakanga Tāwharanui Tawhitokino Te Ārai Te Muri Te Rau Pūriri Waharau Waimakariri River Wainuiomata Regional Park Waitākere Ranges Waitawa Wenderholm Whakanewha Whakatīwai Scenic reserves Alice Eaves Reserve Bruce Park Goldie Bush Peel Forest Park Waro Limestone Wetlands Awarua Wetland Farewell Spit Firth of Thames Kopuatai Peat Dome Manawatū Estuary Pāuatahanui Wildlife Reserve Wairarapa Moana Whangamarino Other areas Fensham Reserve Hutt Water Collection Area Northern Pegasus Bay Wainuiomata Water Collection Area Whitireia Other Amenity area Ecological area Sanctuary area Wilderness area Wildlife management area Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Whitireia_Park&oldid=1297693151 " Categories : Porirua Parks in the Wellington Region Landforms of the Wellington Region Radio New Zealand Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2021 Use New Zealand English from September 2021 All Wikipedia articles written in New Zealand English Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Commons link is locally defined Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 27 June 2025, at 21:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Whitireia Park Add languages Add topic

