Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education Toggle Early life and education subsection 1.1 In Pennsylvania Magazine 2 American Revolution Toggle American Revolution subsection 2.1 Common Sense (1776) 2.2 Possible involvement in drafting the Declaration of Independence 2.3 The American Crisis (1776) 2.4 Foreign affairs 2.4.1 Silas Deane Affair 2.5 "Public Good" 2.6 Funding the Revolution 3 France and Rights of Man 4 The Age of Reason Toggle The Age of Reason subsection 4.1 Criticism of George Washington 5 Later years 6 Death 7 Ideas and views Toggle Ideas and views subsection 7.1 Slavery 7.2 State funded social programs 7.3 Agrarian Justice 7.4 Fiat currency 8 Religious views 9 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 9.1 Abraham Lincoln 9.2 Thomas Edison 9.3 South America 9.4 Memorials 9.5 In popular culture 10 See also 11 Notes 12 Citations 13 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 13.1 Primary sources 13.2 Fiction 14 External links Toggle External links subsection 14.1 Works by Thomas Paine Toggle the table of contents Thomas Paine 86 languages العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская भोजपुरी Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar मैथिली Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American philosopher and author (1737–1809) For other people with the same name, see Thomas Paine (disambiguation) .

Thomas Paine Portrait c.

1792 Deputy of the National Convention In office September 20, 1792 – December 28, 1793 Preceded by Constituency established Succeeded by Constituency abolished Constituency Pas-de-Calais 28th Chief Clerk of the Pennsylvania General Assembly In office November 2, 1779 – November 3, 1780 Preceded by John Morris Jr.

Succeeded by Samuel Sterett Secretary of the Congressional Committee on Foreign Affairs In office April 17, 1777 – January 8, 1779 Preceded by William Bingham Succeeded by James Lovell Personal details Born Thomas Pain ( 1737-02-09 ) February 9, 1737 ( N.S.

) Thetford , Norfolk, England Died June 8, 1809 (1809-06-08) (aged 72) Greenwich Village , New York City, U.S.

Spouses Mary Lambert ​ ​ ( m.

1759 ; died 1760) ​ Elizabeth Ollive ​ ​ ( m.

1771 ; sep.

1774 ) ​ Philosophical work Era Age of Enlightenment School Liberalism ( Radicalism ) Republicanism Secular humanism Main interests Politics ethics religion Signature Part of a series on Radicalism History Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Belgian Revolution Chartism Progressive Era Ideas Anti-clericalism Civic nationalism Civil liberties Classical liberalism Cultural radicalism Classical radicalism Direct democracy Egalitarianism Freedom of movement Jacobinism Labor movement Laissez-faire Liberal socialism Social democracy Libertarianism left Liberté, égalité, fraternité Modernity Populism left-wing Progressivism Rationalism Reform movement Republicanism Revolution Secularism Laicité Social change Social justice Social liberalism Suffrage women Utilitarianism Utopian socialism Welfare People Alem Alfonsín Atatürk Bentham Bolívar Bonino Bright Bryan Cartwright Castberg Clemenceau Cobbett Cobden Daladier Dewey Dilke Domergue Fox Garibaldi George Godwin Green Hébert Herriot Hobhouse Hunt Jefferson Lacombe La Follette Leclerc Lerroux Lloyd George Mazzini Mendès France Mill (James) Mill (John Stuart) Mommsen Mossadegh Paine Pannella Papanastasiou Papandreou Plastiras Robespierre Roosevelt Rosselli Roux Sacchi Saint-Just Servan-Schreiber Stevens Varlet Venizelos Videla Virchow Wilkes Wilson Wollstonecraft Yrigoyen Zahle Groups Alfarista Radical Front Association of Radicals for the United States of Europe Authentic Radical Liberal Party Ecuadorian Radical Liberal Party European Radical Alliance Independent Radicals Italian Radical Party Italian Radicals Liberals, Democrats and Radicals National Radical Party Partido Ecologista Radical Intransigente People's Radical Party 1881 1919 1990 Political Party of Radicals Radical Cause Radical Change Radical Civic Union Radicales K Radical Democracy Radical Democratic Party Bulgaria Estonia India Spain United States Radical Federative Movement Radical International Radical League Radical Liberal Party Luxembourg Paraguay Radical Movement Radical Movement of Social Democratic Alliance Radical Party Bolivia France Hungary Italy Luxembourg Radical Party of Chile 1863 2018 Radical Party of the Left Radical People's Party Finland Norway Turkey Radical Republican Party Radical Republicans Radical Socialist Party Luxembourg Estonia Radical Socialist Republican Party Radical Whigs Radicals of the Left Radicals (UK) Socialist Radical Party Stratford Dialectical and Radical Club Transnational Radical Party Ultra-radicals By region Bulgaria Chile Denmark Ecuador France Hungary Italy Paraguay Romania Spain Switzerland United States Works Rights of Man (1791) The English Constitution Produced and Illustrated (1824) Related Conservative liberalism History of socialism Irish republicanism Liberalism in Europe History portal Liberalism portal v t e Thomas Paine (born Thomas Pain ; [ 1 ] February 9, 1737 [ O.S.

January 29, 1736] [ Note 1 ] – June 8, 1809) was an English-born American Founding Father , French Revolutionary , inventor, political philosopher , and statesman.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] He authored Common Sense (1776) and The American Crisis (1776–1783), two of the most influential pamphlets at the start of the American Revolution , and he helped to inspire the colonial era patriots in 1776 to declare independence from Great Britain.

[ 4 ] His ideas reflected Enlightenment-era ideals of human rights .

[ 5 ] Paine was born in Thetford , Norfolk, and immigrated to the British American colonies in 1774 with the help of Benjamin Franklin , arriving just in time to participate in the American Revolution. Virtually every American Patriot read his 47-page pamphlet Common Sense , [ 6 ] [ 7 ] which catalyzed the call for independence from Great Britain.

The American Crisis was a pro-independence pamphlet series. He returned to Britain in 1787, where he wrote Rights of Man (1791), in part a defense of the French Revolution against its critics, particularly the Anglo-Irish conservative writer Edmund Burke . His authorship of the tract led to a trial and conviction in absentia in England in 1792 for the crime of seditious libel .

The British government of William Pitt the Younger was worried by the possibility that the French Revolution might spread to Britain and had begun suppressing works that espoused radical philosophies. Paine's work advocated the right of the people to overthrow their government and was therefore targeted with a writ for his arrest issued in early 1792. Paine fled to France in September, despite not being able to speak French, but he was quickly elected to the French National Convention . The Girondins regarded him as an ally; consequently, the Montagnards regarded him as an enemy, especially Marc-Guillaume Alexis Vadier , the powerful president of the Committee of General Security .

[ 8 ] In December 1793, Vadier arrested Paine and took him to Luxembourg Prison in Paris. He completed the first part of The Age of Reason just before he was arrested. Mark Philp notes that "In prison Paine managed to produce (and to convey to Daniel Isaac Eaton, the radical London publisher) a dedication for The Age of Reason and a new edition of the Rights of Man with a new preface." James Monroe used his diplomatic connections to get Paine released in November 1794.

[ 9 ] Paine became notorious because of his pamphlets and attacks on his former allies, who he felt had betrayed him. In The Age of Reason and other writings, he advocated Deism , promoted reason and freethought , and argued against religion in general and Christian doctrine in particular.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] In 1796, he published a bitter open letter to George Washington , whom he denounced as an incompetent general and a hypocrite. He published the pamphlet Agrarian Justice (1797), discussing the origins of property and introducing the concept of a guaranteed minimum income through a one-time inheritance tax on landowners. In 1802, he returned to the U.S. He died on June 8, 1809. Only six people attended his funeral, as he had been ostracized for his ridicule of Christianity [ 14 ] and his attacks on the nation's leaders.

Early life and education [ edit ] Paine was born on January 29, 1736 ( NS February 9, 1737), [ Note 1 ] the son of Joseph Pain (1708–1787), a tenant farmer and stay-maker , [ 15 ] and Frances ( née Cocke ) Pain, in Thetford , Norfolk, England. Joseph was a Quaker and Frances an Anglican .

[ 16 ] Despite claims that Paine changed the spelling of his family name upon his emigration to America in 1774, [ 1 ] he was using "Paine" in 1769, while still in Lewes , Sussex.

[ 17 ] Old School at Thetford Grammar School , where Paine was educated He attended Thetford Grammar School (1744–1749), at a time when there was no compulsory education.

[ 18 ] At the age of 13, he was apprenticed to his father.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Following his apprenticeship, aged 19, Paine enlisted and served as a privateer , [ 21 ] aboard the ship King of Prussia. Upon returning to Britain in 1759, he became a master staymaker , establishing a shop in Sandwich, Kent .

[ 22 ] On September 27, 1759, Paine married Mary Lambert. His business collapsed soon after. Mary became pregnant; and, after they moved to Margate , she went into early labour, in which she and their child died.

[ 23 ] In July 1761, Paine returned to Thetford to work as a supernumerary officer. In December 1762, he became an Excise Officer in Grantham , Lincolnshire; in August 1764, he was transferred to Alford , also in Lincolnshire, at a salary of £50 per annum. On August 27, 1765, he was dismissed as an Excise Officer for "claiming to have inspected goods he did not inspect". On July 31, 1766, he requested his reinstatement from the Board of Excise, which they granted the next day, upon vacancy. While awaiting that, he worked as a staymaker.

[ 24 ] Thomas Paine's house in Lewes In 1767, he was appointed to a position in Grampound , Cornwall. Later he asked to leave this post to await a vacancy, and he became a school teacher in London.

[ 25 ] On February 19, 1768, he was appointed to Lewes in Sussex , a town with a tradition of opposition to the monarchy and pro-republican sentiments since the revolutionary decades of the 17th century.

[ 26 ] Here he lived above the 15th-century Bull House, the tobacco shop of Samuel Ollive and Esther Ollive.

[ 27 ] Paine first became involved in civic matters when he was based in Lewes. He appears in the Town Book as a member of the Court Leet, the governing body for the town. He was also a member of the parish vestry , an influential local Anglican church group whose responsibilities for parish business would include collecting taxes and tithes to distribute among the poor. On March 26, 1771, at age 34, Paine married Elizabeth Ollive, the daughter of his recently deceased landlord, whose business as a grocer and tobacconist he then entered into.

[ 28 ] Plaque at the White Hart Hotel, Lewes , East Sussex, south east England From 1772 to 1773, Paine joined excise officers asking Parliament for better pay and working conditions, publishing, in summer of 1772, The Case of the Officers of Excise , a 12-page article, and his first political work, spending the London winter distributing the 4,000 copies printed to the Parliament and others. In spring 1774, he was again dismissed from the excise service for being absent from his post without permission. The tobacco shop failed. On April 14, to avoid debtors' prison , he sold his household possessions to pay debts. He formally separated from his wife Elizabeth on June 4, 1774, and moved to London. In September, mathematician, Fellow of the Royal Society, and Commissioner of the Excise George Lewis Scott introduced him to Benjamin Franklin , [ 29 ] who was there as a voice for colonial opposition to British colonial rule, especially as it related to the Stamp Act , and the Townshend Acts . He was publisher and editor of the largest American newspaper, The Pennsylvania Gazette and suggested emigration to Philadelphia. He gave a letter of recommendation to Paine, who emigrated in October to the American colonies, arriving in Philadelphia on November 30, 1774.

[ 30 ] In Pennsylvania Magazine [ edit ] Paine barely survived the transatlantic voyage. The ship's water supplies were bad and typhoid fever killed five passengers. On arriving at Philadelphia, he was too sick to disembark. Benjamin Franklin's physician, there to welcome Paine to America, had him carried off ship; Paine took six weeks to recover. He became a citizen of Pennsylvania "by taking the oath of allegiance at a very early period".

[ 31 ] In March 1775, he became editor of the Pennsylvania Magazine , a position he conducted with considerable ability.

[ 32 ] Before Paine's arrival in America, sixteen magazines had been founded in the colonies and ultimately failed, each featuring substantial content and reprints from England. In late 1774, Philadelphia printer Robert Aitken announced his plan to create what he called an "American Magazine" with content derived from the colonies.

[ 32 ] Paine contributed two pieces to the magazine's inaugural issue dated January 1775, and Aitken hired Paine as the Magazine's editor one month later. Under Paine's leadership, the magazine's readership rapidly expanded, achieving a greater circulation in the colonies than any American magazine up until that point.

[ 32 ] While Aitken had conceived of the magazine as nonpolitical, Paine brought a strong political perspective to its content, writing in its first issue that "every heart and hand seem to be engaged in the interesting struggle for American Liberty.

" [ 32 ] Paine wrote in the Pennsylvania Magazine that such a publication should become a "nursery of genius" for a nation that had "now outgrown the state of infancy", exercising and educating American minds, and shaping American morality.

[ 32 ] On March 8, 1775, the Pennsylvania Magazine published an unsigned abolitionist essay titled African Slavery in America .

[ 33 ] The essay is often attributed to Paine on the basis of a letter by Benjamin Rush , recalling Paine's claim of authorship to the essay.

[ 33 ] The essay attacked slavery as an "execrable commerce" and "outrage against Humanity and Justice." [ 33 ] Consciously appealing to a broader and more working-class audience, Paine also used the magazine to discuss worker rights to production. This shift in the conceptualization of politics has been described as a part of "the 'modernization' of political consciousness", and the mobilization of ever greater sections of society into political life.

[ 32 ] [ 34 ] American Revolution [ edit ] Common Sense , published in 1776 Common Sense (1776) [ edit ] Main article: Common Sense Paine has a claim to the title The Father of the American Revolution , [ 35 ] [ 36 ] which rests on his pamphlets, especially Common Sense, which crystallized sentiment for independence in 1776. It was published in Philadelphia on January 10, 1776, and signed anonymously "by an Englishman". It was an immediate success, with Paine estimating it sold 100,000 copies in three months to the two million residents of the 13 colonies. During the course of the American Revolution, one biographer estimated a total of about 500,000 copies were sold, including unauthorized editions.

[ 6 ] [ 37 ] However, some historians dispute these numbers.

[ 38 ] Paine's original title for the pamphlet was Plain Truth , but Paine's friend, pro-independence advocate Benjamin Rush , suggested Common Sense instead.

[ 39 ] Finding a printer who was daring enough to commit his print shop to the printing of Common Sense was not easy. At the advice of Rush, Paine commissioned Robert Bell to print his work.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] The pamphlet came into circulation in January 1776, [ 42 ] after the Revolution had started. It was passed around and often read aloud in taverns, contributing significantly to spreading the idea of republicanism, bolstering enthusiasm for separation from Britain, and encouraging recruitment for the Continental Army . Paine provided a new and convincing argument for independence by advocating a complete break with history.

Common Sense is oriented to the future in a way that compels the reader to make an immediate choice. It offers a solution for Americans disgusted with and alarmed at the threat of tyranny.

[ 43 ] Paine's attack on monarchy in Common Sense was essentially an attack on King George III . Whereas colonial resentments were originally directed primarily against the king's ministers and Parliament, Paine laid the responsibility firmly at the king's door.

Common Sense was the most widely read pamphlet of the American Revolution. It was a clarion call for unity against the corrupt British court, so as to realize America's providential role in providing an asylum for liberty. Written in a direct and lively style, it denounced the decaying despotisms of Europe and pilloried hereditary monarchy as an absurdity. At a time when many still hoped for reconciliation with Britain, Common Sense demonstrated to many the inevitability of separation.

[ 44 ] Paine was not on the whole expressing original ideas in Common Sense , but rather employing rhetoric as a means to arouse resentment of the Crown. To achieve these ends, he pioneered a style of political writing suited to the democratic society he envisioned, with Common Sense serving as a primary example. Part of Paine's work was to render complex ideas intelligible to average readers of the day, with clear, concise writing unlike the formal, learned style favored by many of Paine's contemporaries.

[ 45 ] Scholars have put forward various explanations to account for its success, including the historic moment, Paine's easy-to-understand style, his democratic ethos, and his use of psychology and ideology.

[ 46 ] Common Sense was immensely popular in disseminating to a very wide audience ideas that were already in common use among the elite who comprised Congress and the leadership cadre of the emerging nation, who rarely cited Paine's arguments in their public calls for independence.

[ 47 ] The pamphlet probably had little direct influence on the Continental Congress' decision to issue a Declaration of Independence , since that body was more concerned with how declaring independence would affect the war effort.

[ 48 ] One distinctive idea in Common Sense is Paine's beliefs regarding the peaceful nature of republics; his views were an early and strong conception of what scholars would come to call the democratic peace theory .

[ 49 ] Loyalists vigorously attacked Common Sense ; one attack, titled Plain Truth (1776), by Marylander James Chalmers , said Paine was a political quack [ 50 ] and warned that without monarchy, the government would "degenerate into democracy".

[ 51 ] Even some American revolutionaries objected to Common Sense ; late in life John Adams called it a "crapulous mass". Adams disagreed with the type of radical democracy promoted by Paine (that men who did not own property should still be allowed to vote and hold public office) and published Thoughts on Government in 1776 to advocate a more conservative approach to republicanism.

[ 52 ] Sophia Rosenfeld argues that Paine was highly innovative in his use of the commonplace notion of "common sense". He synthesized various philosophical and political uses of the term in a way that permanently impacted American political thought. He used two ideas from Scottish Common Sense Realism : that ordinary people can indeed make sound judgments on major political issues, and that there exists a body of popular wisdom that is readily apparent to anyone. Paine also used a notion of "common sense" favored by philosophes in the Continental Enlightenment. They held that common sense could refute the claims of traditional institutions. Thus, Paine used "common sense" as a weapon to de-legitimize the monarchy and overturn prevailing conventional wisdom. Rosenfeld concludes that the phenomenal appeal of his pamphlet resulted from his synthesis of popular and elite elements in the independence movement.

[ 53 ] According to historian Robert Middlekauff , Common Sense became immensely popular mainly because Paine appealed to widespread convictions. Monarchy, he said, was preposterous and it had a heathenish origin. It was an institution of the devil. Paine pointed to the Old Testament , where almost all kings had seduced the Israelites to worship idols instead of God. Paine also denounced aristocracy, which together with monarchy were "two ancient tyrannies". They violated the laws of nature, human reason, and the "universal order of things", which began with God. This was, Middlekauff says, exactly what most Americans wanted to hear. He calls the Revolutionary generation "the children of the twice-born" [ 54 ] because in their childhood they had experienced the Great Awakening , which, for the first time, had tied Americans together, transcending denominational and ethnic boundaries and giving them a sense of patriotism.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] Possible involvement in drafting the Declaration of Independence [ edit ] The Committee of Five working draft of the Declaration of Independence , dated June 24, 1776, copied from the original draft by John Adams for Roger Sherman 's review and approval Inscription on reverse of Sherman Copy of the Declaration of Independence referencing "T.P." during the drafting process While there is no historical record of Paine's involvement in drafting the Declaration of Independence , some scholars of Early American History have suspected his involvement. As noted by the Thomas Paine National Historical Association, multiple authors have hypothesized and written on the subject, including Moody (1872), Van der Weyde (1911), Lewis (1947), and more recently, Smith & Rickards (2007).

[ 57 ] In 2018, the Thomas Paine National Historical Association introduced an early draft of the Declaration that contained evidence of Paine's involvement based on an inscription of "T.P." on the back of the document. During the early deliberations of the Committee of Five members chosen by Congress to draft the Declaration of Independence, John Adams made a hastily written manuscript copy of the original draft of the Declaration of Independence on June 24, 1776, known as the Sherman Copy. Adams made this copy shortly before preparing another neater, fair copy that is held in the Adams Family Papers collection at the Massachusetts Historical Society. The Sherman copy of the Declaration of Independence is one of several working drafts of the Declaration, made for Roger Sherman 's review and approval before the Committee of Five submitted a finalized draft to Congress. The Sherman Copy of the Declaration of Independence contains an inscription on the back of the document that states: "A beginning perhaps – Original with Jefferson – Copied from Original with T.P.'s permission." According to the Thomas Paine National Historical Association, the individual referenced as "T.P." in the inscription appears to be Thomas Paine.

[ 57 ] The degree to which Paine was involved in formulating the text of the Declaration is unclear, as the original draft referenced in the Sherman Copy inscription is presumed lost or destroyed. However, John Adams' request for permission of "T.P." to copy the original draft may suggest that Paine had a role either assisting Jefferson with organizing ideas within the Declaration, or contributing to the text of the original draft itself.

[ 58 ] The American Crisis (1776) [ edit ] Main article: The American Crisis In late 1776, Paine published The American Crisis pamphlet series to inspire the Americans in their battles against the British army. He juxtaposed the conflict between the good American devoted to civic virtue and the selfish provincial man.

[ 59 ] To inspire his soldiers, General George Washington had The American Crisis , first Crisis pamphlet, read aloud to them.

[ 60 ] It begins: These are the times that try men's souls: The summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will, in this crisis, shrink from the service of their country; but he that stands it now, deserves the love and thanks of man and woman. Tyranny, like Hell, is not easily conquered; yet we have this consolation with us, that the harder the conflict, the more glorious the triumph. What we obtain too cheap, we esteem too lightly: it is dearness only that gives every thing its value. Heaven knows how to put a proper price upon its goods; and it would be strange indeed if so celestial an article as freedom should not be highly rated.

Foreign affairs [ edit ] In 1777, Paine became secretary of the Congressional Committee on Foreign Affairs. The following year, he alluded to secret negotiation underway with France in his pamphlets. His enemies denounced his indiscretions. There was scandal; together with Paine's conflict with Robert Morris and Silas Deane , it led to Paine's expulsion from the Committee in 1779.

[ 61 ] However, in 1781, he accompanied John Laurens on his mission to France. Eventually, after much pleading from Paine, New York State recognized his political services by presenting him with an estate at New Rochelle , New York and Paine received money from Pennsylvania and from Congress at Washington's suggestion. During the Revolutionary War, Paine served as an aide-de-camp to the important general, Nathanael Greene .

[ 62 ] Silas Deane Affair [ edit ] In what may have been an error, and perhaps even contributed to his resignation as the secretary to the Committee of Foreign Affairs, Paine was openly critical of Silas Deane, an American diplomat who had been appointed in March 1776 by the Congress to travel to France in secret. Deane's goal was to influence the French government to finance the colonists in their fight for independence. Paine largely saw Deane as a war profiteer who had little respect for principle, having been under the employ of Robert Morris, one of the primary financiers of the American Revolution and working with Pierre Beaumarchais , a French royal agent sent to the colonies by King Louis to investigate the Anglo-American conflict. Paine uncovered the financial connection between Morris, who was Superintendent for Finance of the Continental Congress, and Deane.

[ 63 ] Wealthy men, such as Robert Morris, John Jay and powerful merchant bankers , were leaders of the Continental Congress and defended holding public positions while at the same time profiting off their own personal financial dealings with governments.

[ 63 ] Amongst Paine's criticisms, he had written in the Pennsylvania Packet that France had " prefaced [their] alliance by an early and generous friendship ", referring to aid that had been provided to American colonies prior to the recognition of the Franco-American treaties. This was alleged to be effectively an embarrassment to France, which potentially could have jeopardized the alliance. John Jay, the President of the Congress, who had been a fervent supporter of Deane, immediately spoke out against Paine's comments. The controversy eventually became public, and Paine was then denounced as unpatriotic for criticizing an American revolutionary. He was even physically assaulted twice in the street by Deane supporters. This much-added stress took a large toll on Paine, who was generally of a sensitive character and he resigned as secretary to the Committee of Foreign Affairs in 1779.

[ 64 ] Paine left the Committee without even having enough money to buy food for himself.

[ 65 ] Much later, when Paine returned from his mission to France, Deane's corruption had become more widely acknowledged. Many, including Robert Morris, apologized to Paine, and Paine's reputation in Philadelphia was restored.

[ 66 ] "Public Good" [ edit ] In 1780, Paine published a pamphlet entitled "Public Good", in which he made the case that territories west of the 13 colonies that had been part of the British Empire belonged after the Declaration of Independence to the American government, and did not belong to any of the 13 states or to any individual speculators . A royal charter of 1609 had granted to the Virginia Company land stretching to the Pacific Ocean. A small group of wealthy Virginia land speculators, including the Washington, Lee, and Randolph families, had taken advantage of this royal charter to survey and to claim title to huge swaths of land, including much land west of the 13 colonies. In "Public Good", Paine argued that these lands belonged to the American government as represented by the Continental Congress. This angered many of Paine's wealthy Virginia friends, including Richard Henry Lee of the powerful Lee family, who had been Paine's closest ally in Congress, George Washington , Thomas Jefferson and James Madison , all of whom had claims to huge wild tracts that Paine was advocating should be government owned. The view that Paine had advocated eventually prevailed when the Northwest Ordinance of 1787 was passed.

The animosity Paine felt as a result of the publication of "Public Good" fueled his decision to embark with Lieutenant Colonel John Laurens on a mission to travel to Paris to obtain funding for the American war effort.

[ 67 ] Funding the Revolution [ edit ] Paine accompanied Col. John Laurens to France and is credited with initiating the mission.

[ 68 ] It landed in France in March 1781 and returned to America in August with 2.5 million livres in silver, as part of a "present" of 6 million and a loan of 10 million. The meetings with the French king were most likely conducted in the company and under the influence of Benjamin Franklin . Upon returning to the United States with this highly welcomed cargo, Paine and probably Col. Laurens, "positively objected" that General Washington should propose that Congress remunerate him for his services, for fear of setting "a bad precedent and an improper mode". Paine made influential acquaintances in Paris and helped organize the Bank of North America to raise money to supply the army.

[ 69 ] In 1785, he was given $3,000 by the U.S. Congress in recognition of his service to the nation.

[ 70 ] Henry Laurens (father of Col.

John Laurens ) had been the ambassador to the Netherlands , but he was captured by the British on his return trip there. When he was later exchanged for the prisoner Lord Cornwallis in late 1781, Paine proceeded to the Netherlands to continue the loan negotiations. There remains some question as to the relationship of Henry Laurens and Paine to Robert Morris as the Superintendent of Finance and his business associate, Thomas Willing, who became the first president of the Bank of North America in January 1782. They had accused Morris of profiteering in 1779 and Willing had voted against the Declaration of Independence. Although Morris did much to restore his reputation in 1780 and 1781, the credit for obtaining these critical loans to "organize" the Bank of North America for approval by Congress in December 1781 should go to Henry or John Laurens and Paine more than to Morris.

[ 71 ] In Fashion before Ease;  – or, –  A good Constitution sacrificed for a Fantastick Form (1793), James Gillray caricatured Paine tightening the corset of Britannia and protruding from his coat pocket is a measuring tape inscribed "Rights of Man".

Paine bought his only house in 1783 on the corner of Farnsworth Avenue and Church Streets in Bordentown City , New Jersey and he lived in it periodically until his death in 1809. This is the only place in the world where Paine purchased real estate.

[ 72 ] In 1785, Paine was elected a member of the American Philosophical Society .

[ 73 ] In 1787, Paine proposed an iron bridge design for crossing the Schuylkill River at Philadelphia. Having little success in acquiring funding, Paine returned to Paris, France seeking investors or other opportunities to implement his, at the time, novel iron bridge design.

[ citation needed ] Because Paine had few friends when arriving in France aside from Lafayette and Jefferson, he continued to correspond heavily with Benjamin Franklin, a long time friend and mentor. Franklin provided letters of introduction for Paine to use to gain associates and contacts in France.

[ 74 ] Later that year, Paine returned to London from Paris. He then released a pamphlet on August 20 called Prospects on the Rubicon: or, an investigation into the Causes and Consequences of the Politics to be Agitated at the Meeting of Parliament . Tensions between England and France were increasing, and this pamphlet urged the British Ministry to reconsider the consequences of war with France. Paine sought to turn the public opinion against the war to create better relations between the countries, avoid the taxes of war upon the citizens, and not engage in a war he believed would ruin both nations.

[ 75 ] France and Rights of Man [ edit ] Thomas Paine Author of the Rights of Man from John Baxter's Impartial History of England, 1796 Main article: Rights of Man See also: Revolution Controversy and Trial of Thomas Paine Back in London by 1787, Paine would become engrossed in the French Revolution that began two years later and decided to travel to France in 1790. Meanwhile, conservative intellectual Edmund Burke launched a counterrevolutionary blast against the French Revolution, entitled Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790), which strongly appealed to the landed class, and sold 30,000 copies. Paine set out to refute it in his Rights of Man (1791). He wrote it not as a quick pamphlet, but as a long, abstract political tract of 90,000 words which tore apart monarchies and traditional social institutions. On January 31, 1791, he gave the manuscript to publisher Joseph Johnson . A visit by government agents dissuaded Johnson, so Paine gave the book to publisher J. S. Jordan, then went to Paris, on William Blake 's advice. He charged three good friends, William Godwin , Thomas Brand Hollis , and Thomas Holcroft , with handling publication details. The book appeared on March 13, 1791, and sold nearly a million copies. It was "eagerly read by reformers, Protestant dissenters, democrats, London craftsmen, and the skilled factory-hands of the new industrial north".

[ 76 ] English satirist James Gillray ridicules Paine in Paris awaiting sentence of execution from three hanging judges.

Undeterred by the government campaign to discredit him, Paine issued his Rights of Man, Part the Second, Combining Principle and Practice in February 1792. Detailing a representative government with enumerated social programs to remedy the numbing poverty of commoners through progressive tax measures, Paine went much farther than such contemporaries as James Burgh , Robert Potter, John Scott, John Sinclair or Adam Smith .

[ 77 ] Radically reduced in price to ensure unprecedented circulation, it was sensational in its impact and gave birth to reform societies. An indictment for seditious libel followed, for both publisher and author, while government agents followed Paine and instigated mobs, hate meetings, and burnings in effigy. A fierce pamphlet war also resulted, in which Paine was defended and assailed in dozens of works.

[ 78 ] The authorities aimed, with ultimate success, to force Paine out of Great Britain. He was then tried in absentia and found guilty, but he was beyond the reach of British law. The French translation of Rights of Man, Part II was published in April 1792. The translator, François Lanthenas, eliminated the dedication to Lafayette, as he believed Paine thought too highly of Lafayette, who was seen as a royalist sympathizer at the time.

[ 79 ] The Friends of the People caricatured by Isaac Cruikshank , November 15, 1792.

Joseph Priestley and Thomas Paine are surrounded by incendiary items.

In summer of 1792, he answered the sedition and libel charges thus: "If, to expose the fraud and imposition of monarchy ... to promote universal peace, civilization, and commerce, and to break the chains of political superstition, and raise degraded man to his proper rank; if these things be libellous ... let the name of libeller be engraved on my tomb." [ 80 ] Paine was an enthusiastic supporter of the French Revolution and was granted honorary French citizenship alongside prominent contemporaries such as Alexander Hamilton , George Washington , Benjamin Franklin and others. Paine's honorary citizenship was in recognition of the publishing of his Rights of Man, Part II and the sensation it created within France.

[ 81 ] Despite his inability to speak French, he was elected to the National Convention , representing the district of Pas-de-Calais .

[ 82 ] Several weeks after his election to the National Convention, Paine was selected as one of nine deputies to be part of the convention's Constitutional Committee, charged to draft a suitable constitution for the French Republic .

[ 83 ] He subsequently participated in the Constitutional Committee in drafting the Girondin constitutional project . He voted for the French Republic, but argued against the execution of Louis XVI , referred to as Louis Capet following his deposition, saying the monarch should instead be exiled to the United States: firstly, because of the way royalist France had come to the aid of the American Revolution; and secondly, because of a moral objection to capital punishment in general and to revenge killings in particular.

[ 84 ] Paine's speech in defense of Louis XVI was interrupted by Jean-Paul Marat , who claimed that, as a Quaker, Paine's religious beliefs ran counter to inflicting capital punishment and thus he should be ineligible to vote. Marat interrupted a second time, stating that the interpreter was deceiving the convention by distorting the meanings of Paine's words, prompting Paine to provide a copy of the speech as proof that he was being correctly interpreted.

[ 85 ] Paine wrote the second part of Rights of Man on a desk in Thomas 'Clio' Rickman 's house, with whom he was staying in 1792 before he fled to France. This desk is currently on display in the People's History Museum in Manchester .

[ 86 ] Regarded as an ally of the Girondins , he was seen with increasing disfavor by the Montagnards , who were now in power after the Insurrection of 31 May – 2 June 1793 . Paine was under scrutiny by the authorities also because he was a personal adversary of Gouverneur Morris , who was the American ambassador in France and a friend of George Washington .

[ 87 ] The revolutionary government, both the Committee of Public Safety and the Committee of General Security , sought to gain the favor of the American ambassador, not wanting to risk the alliance with the United States ; therefore, they were more inclined to focus on Paine.

[ 8 ] [ 87 ] The Age of Reason [ edit ] Main article: The Age of Reason Title page from the first English edition of Part I Oil painting by Laurent Dabos , c. 1791 Paine was arrested in France on December 28, 1793, [ 88 ] [ 89 ] following the orders of Vadier .

[ 8 ] [ 90 ] Joel Barlow was unsuccessful in securing Paine's release by circulating a petition among American residents in Paris.

[ 91 ] He was treated as a political prisoner by the Committee of General Security.

[ 92 ] Sixteen American citizens were allowed to plead for Paine's release to the convention, yet President Marc-Guillaume Alexis Vadier of the Committee of General Security refused to acknowledge Paine's American citizenship, stating he was an Englishman and therefore a citizen of a country at war with France.

[ 8 ] [ 92 ] [ 93 ] [ 94 ] Paine protested and claimed that he was a citizen of the U.S. However, Ambassador Morris did not press his claim, and Paine later wrote that Morris had connived at his imprisonment.

Paine narrowly escaped execution. A chalk mark was supposed to be left by the jailer on the door of a cell to denote that the prisoner inside was due to be removed for execution. In Paine's case, the mark had accidentally been made on the inside of his door rather than the outside because the door had been left open when the jailer was making his rounds that day, since Paine had been receiving official visitors. But for this quirk of fate, Paine would have been executed the following morning. He thus survived the few vital days needed to be spared by the fall of Robespierre on 9 Thermidor (July 27, 1794).

[ 95 ] Paine was released in November 1794 largely because of the work of the new American ambassador to France, James Monroe , [ 96 ] who successfully argued the case for Paine's U.S. citizenship.

[ 97 ] In July 1795, he was re-admitted into the convention, as were other surviving Girondins. Paine, depressed and ill as a result of his imprisonment, had stayed silent in the period immediately following his release but on 8 July, with the encouragement of Lanthenas , he spoke in the convention.

[ 98 ] Paine was one of only three députés to oppose the adoption of the new 1795 constitution , because it eliminated universal suffrage , which had been proclaimed, at least for men, by the Montagnard Constitution of 1793 .

[ 99 ] In addition to receiving a British patent for a single-span iron bridge, Paine developed a smokeless candle [ 100 ] and worked with inventor John Fitch in developing steam engines.

In 1797, Paine lived in Paris with Nicholas Bonneville and his wife, Marguerite Brazier . As well as Bonneville's other controversial guests, Paine aroused the suspicions of authorities. Bonneville hid the Royalist Antoine Joseph Barruel-Beauvert at his home. Beauvert had been outlawed following the coup of 18 Fructidor on September 4, 1797. Paine believed that the United States under President John Adams had betrayed revolutionary France.

[ 101 ] In 1800, still under police surveillance, Bonneville took refuge with his father in Evreux . Paine stayed on with him, helping Bonneville with the burden of translating the "Covenant Sea". The same year, Paine purportedly had a meeting with Napoleon Bonaparte . Napoleon claimed he slept with a copy of Rights of Man ( French : Les Droits de l'Homme ) under his pillow and went so far as to say to Paine that "a statue of gold should be erected to you in every city in the universe".

[ 102 ] [ 103 ] Paine discussed with Napoleon how best to invade England. In December 1797, he had written two essays, one of which was pointedly named Observations on the Construction and Operation of Navies with a Plan for an Invasion of England and the Final Overthrow of the English Government , [ 104 ] in which he promoted the idea to finance 1,000 gunboats to carry a French invading army across the English Channel. In 1804, Paine returned to the subject, writing To the People of England on the Invasion of England advocating the idea.

[ 101 ] However, upon noting Napoleon's progress towards dictatorship, he condemned him as "the completest charlatan that ever existed".

[ 105 ] Criticism of George Washington [ edit ] Upset that President Washington, a friend since the Revolutionary War, did nothing during Paine's imprisonment in France, Paine believed Washington had betrayed him and conspired with Robespierre. While staying with Monroe, Paine planned to send Washington a letter of grievance on the president's birthday. Monroe stopped the letter from being sent, and after Paine's criticism of the Jay Treaty , which was supported by Washington, Monroe suggested that Paine live elsewhere.

[ 106 ] Paine then sent a stinging letter to Washington, in which he described him as an incompetent commander and a vain and ungrateful person. Having received no response, Paine contacted his longtime publisher Benjamin Bache , the Jeffersonian democrat , to publish his Letter to George Washington of 1796 in which he derided Washington's reputation by describing him as a treacherous man who was unworthy of his fame as a military and political hero. Paine wrote that "the world will be puzzled to decide whether you are an apostate or an impostor; whether you have abandoned good principles or whether you ever had any".

[ 107 ] He declared that without France's aid Washington could not have succeeded in the American Revolution and had "but little share in the glory of the final event". He also commented on Washington's character, saying that Washington had no sympathetic feelings and was a hypocrite.

[ 108 ] Later years [ edit ] Portrait by John Wesley Jarvis , c.

1806–1807 Paine remained in France until 1802, returning to the United States only at President Jefferson's invitation.

[ 109 ] Paine also paid for the passage for Bonneville's wife Marguerite Brazier and the couple's three sons, Benjamin , Louis, and Thomas Bonneville, to whom Paine was godfather. Paine returned to the U.S. in the early stages of the Second Great Awakening and a time of great political partisanship. The Age of Reason gave ample excuse for the religiously devout to dislike him, while the Federalists attacked him for his ideas of government stated in Common Sense, for his association with the French Revolution, and for his friendship with President Jefferson. Also, still fresh in the minds of the public was his Letter to Washington, published six years before his return. This was compounded when his right to vote was denied in New Rochelle on the grounds that Gouverneur Morris did not recognize him as an American and Washington had not aided him.

[ 110 ] Brazier took care of Paine at the end of his life and buried him after his death. In his will, Paine left the bulk of his estate to her, including 100 acres (40.5 ha) of his farm so she could maintain and educate Benjamin and his brother Thomas.

[ 111 ] Death [ edit ] Paine's death mask This plaque hangs on the site where Thomas Paine died, on Grove Street in Greenwich Village On the morning of June 8, 1809, Paine died, aged 72, at 59 Grove Street in Greenwich Village , New York City.

[ 112 ] Although the original building no longer exists, the present building has a plaque noting that Paine died at this location.

[ 113 ] After his death, Paine's body was brought to New Rochelle , but the Quakers would not allow it to be buried in their graveyard as per his last will, so his remains were buried under a walnut tree on his farm. In 1819, English agrarian radical journalist William Cobbett , who in 1793 had published a hostile continuation [ 114 ] of Francis Oldys (George Chalmer)'s The Life of Thomas Paine , [ 115 ] dug up his bones and transported them back to England with the intention to give Paine a heroic reburial on his native soil, but this never came to pass. The bones were still among Cobbett's effects when he died over fifteen years later but were later lost. There is no confirmed story about what happened to them after that, although various people have claimed throughout the years to own parts of Paine's remains, such as his skull and right hand.

[ 116 ] [ 117 ] [ 118 ] At the time of his death, most American newspapers reprinted Paine's obituary notice from the New York Evening Post that was in turn quoting from The American Citizen , [ 119 ] which read in part: "He had lived long, did some good, and much harm". Only six mourners came to his funeral, two of whom were black, most likely freedmen . Months later appeared a hostile biography by James Cheetham, who had admired him since the latter's days as a young radical in Manchester, and who had been friends with Paine for a short time before the two fell out. Many years later the writer and orator Robert G. Ingersoll wrote: Thomas Paine had passed the legendary limit of life. One by one most of his old friends and acquaintances had deserted him. Maligned on every side, execrated, shunned and abhorred – his virtues denounced as vices – his services forgotten – his character blackened, he preserved the poise and balance of his soul. He was a victim of the people, but his convictions remained unshaken. He was still a soldier in the army of freedom, and still tried to enlighten and civilize those who were impatiently waiting for his death. Even those who loved their enemies hated him, their friend – the friend of the whole world – with all their hearts. On the 8th of June 1809, death came – Death, almost his only friend. At his funeral no pomp, no pageantry, no civic procession, no military display. In a carriage, a woman and her son who had lived on the bounty of the dead – on horseback, a Quaker, the humanity of whose heart dominated the creed of his head – and, following on foot, two negroes filled with gratitude – constituted the funeral cortege of Thomas Paine.

[ 120 ] Ideas and views [ edit ] Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e Biographer Eric Foner identifies a utopian thread in Paine's thought, writing: "Through this new language he communicated a new vision – a utopian image of an egalitarian, republican society".

[ 121 ] Paine's utopianism combined civic republicanism , belief in the inevitability of scientific and social progress and commitment to free markets and liberty generally. The multiple sources of Paine's political theory all pointed to a society based on the common good and individualism. Paine expressed a redemptive futurism or political messianism.

[ 122 ] Writing that his generation "would appear to the future as the Adam of a new world", Paine exemplified British utopianism.

[ 123 ] Later, his encounters with the Indigenous peoples of the Americas made a deep impression. The ability of the Iroquois to live in harmony with nature while achieving a democratic decision-making process helped him refine his thinking on how to organize society.

[ 124 ] Portrait of Thomas Paine by Matthew Pratt , 1785–1795 Slavery [ edit ] Paine was critical of slavery and declared himself to be an abolitionist .

[ 125 ] As secretary to the Pennsylvania legislature, he helped draft legislation to outlaw Patriot involvement in the international slave trade .

[ 126 ] Paine's statement, "Man has no property in man", although used by him in Rights of Man to deny the right of any generation to bind future ones, has also been interpreted as an argument against slavery.

[ 127 ] [ 128 ] In the book, Paine also describes his mission, among other things, as to "break the chains of slavery and oppression".

[ 129 ] On March 8, 1775, one month after Paine became the editor of The Pennsylvania Magazine , the magazine published an anonymous article titled "African Slavery in America", the first prominent piece in the colonies proposing the emancipation of African-American slaves and the abolition of slavery.

[ 130 ] Paine is often credited with writing the piece, [ 130 ] on the basis of later testimony by Benjamin Rush, cosigner of the Declaration of Independence.

[ 33 ] During the American Revolutionary War, the British implemented several policies that allowed fugitive slaves fleeing from American enslavers to find refuge within British lines. Writing in response to these policies, Paine wrote in Common Sense that Britain "hath stirred up the Indians and the Negroes to destroy us".

[ 131 ] Paine, together with Joel Barlow , unsuccessfully tried to convince President Jefferson not to import the institution of slavery to the territory acquired in the Louisiana Purchase , suggesting he rather settle it with free Black families and German immigrants .

[ 132 ] State funded social programs [ edit ] In his Rights of Man, Part Second , Paine advocated a comprehensive program of state support for the population to ensure the welfare of society, including state subsidy for poor people, state-financed universal public education, and state-sponsored prenatal care and postnatal care , including state subsidies to families at childbirth. Recognizing that a person's "labor ought to be over" before old age, Paine also called for a state pension to all workers starting at age 50, which would be doubled at age 60.

[ 133 ] Agrarian Justice [ edit ] His last pamphlet, Agrarian Justice , published in the winter of 1795, opposed agrarian law and agrarian monopoly and further developed his ideas in the Rights of Man about how land ownership separated the majority of people from their rightful, natural inheritance and means of independent survival. The U.S.

Social Security Administration recognizes Agrarian Justice as the first American proposal for an old-age pension and basic income or citizen's dividend . Per Agrarian Justice : In advocating the case of the persons thus dispossessed, it is a right, and not a charity ... [Government must] create a national fund, out of which there shall be paid to every person, when arrived at the age of twenty-one years, the sum of fifteen pounds sterling, as a compensation in part, for the loss of his or her natural inheritance, by the introduction of the system of landed property. And also, the sum of ten pounds per annum, during life, to every person now living, of the age of fifty years, and to all others as they shall arrive at that age.

In this pamphlet he argued "All accumulation of personal property, beyond what a man's own hands produce, is derived to him by living in society; and he owes on every principle of justice, of gratitude, and of civilization, a part of that accumulation back again to society from whence the whole came".

[ 134 ] Lamb argues that Paine's analysis of property rights marks a distinct contribution to political theory. His theory of property defends a libertarian concern with private ownership that shows an egalitarian commitment. Paine's new justification of property sets him apart from previous theorists such as Hugo Grotius , Samuel von Pufendorf and John Locke . Lamb says it demonstrates Paine's commitment to foundational liberal values of individual freedom and moral equality.

[ 135 ] In response to Paine's "Agrarian Justice", Thomas Spence wrote " The Rights of Infants " wherein he argued that Paine's plan was not beneficial to impoverished people because landlords would just keep raising land prices, further enriching themselves rather than giving the commonwealth an equal chance.

[ 136 ] Fiat currency [ edit ] Paine was strongly opposed to fiat money , which he viewed as counterfeiting by the state. He said "The punishment of a member [of a legislature] who should move for such a law ought to be death".

[ 137 ] As part of his essay Dissertations on Government, etc.

, published in February, 1786, Paine included a scathing condemnation of paper money emphasizing "The pretense for paper money has been, that there was not a sufficiency of gold and silver. This, so far from being a reason for paper emissions, is a reason against them." [ 138 ] Religious views [ edit ] Before his arrest and imprisonment in France, knowing that he would probably be arrested and executed, following in the tradition of early 18th-century English Deism Paine wrote the first part of The Age of Reason (1793–1794). Paine's religious views as expressed in The Age of Reason caused quite a stir in religious society, effectively splitting the religious groups into two major factions: those who wanted church disestablishment , and the Christians who wanted Christianity to continue having a strong social influence.

[ 139 ] About his own religious beliefs, Paine wrote in The Age of Reason : I believe in one God , and no more; and I hope for happiness beyond this life.

I do not believe in the creed professed by the Jewish church , by the Roman church , by the Greek church , by the Turkish church , by the Protestant church , nor by any church that I know of. My own mind is my own church. All national institutions of churches, whether Jewish, Christian or Turkish, appear to me no other than human inventions, set up to terrify and enslave mankind, and monopolize power and profit.

Whenever we read the obscene stories, the voluptuous debaucheries, the cruel and tortuous executions, the unrelenting vindictiveness with which more than half the Bible is filled, it would be more consistent that we call it the word of a demon than the word of God. It is a history of wickedness that has served to corrupt and brutalize mankind; and, for my part, I sincerely detest it, as I detest everything that is cruel.

[ 140 ] Though there is no definitive evidence Paine himself was a Freemason , [ 141 ] [ 142 ] upon his return to America from France he penned "An Essay on the Origin of Free-Masonry" (1803–1805) about Freemasonry being derived from the religion of the ancient Druids .

[ 141 ] Marguerite de Bonneville published the essay in 1810 after Paine's death, but she chose to omit certain passages from it that were critical of Christianity , most of which were restored in an 1818 printing.

[ 141 ] In the essay, Paine stated that "the Christian religion is a parody on the worship of the Sun, in which they put a man whom they call Christ, in the place of the Sun, and pay him the same adoration which was originally paid to the Sun." [ 141 ] Paine also had a negative attitude toward Judaism .

[ 143 ] While never describing himself as a Deist , he openly advocated Deism in his writings, [ 10 ] and called Deism "the only true religion": The opinions I have advanced ... are the effect of the most clear and long-established conviction that the Bible and the Testament are impositions upon the world, that the fall of man, the account of Jesus Christ being the Son of God, and of his dying to appease the wrath of God, and of salvation, by that strange means, are all fabulous inventions, dishonorable to the wisdom and power of the Almighty; that the only true religion is Deism , by which I then meant, and mean now, the belief of one God, and an imitation of his moral character, or the practice of what are called moral virtues – and that it was upon this only (so far as religion is concerned) that I rested all my hopes of happiness hereafter. So say I now – and so help me God.

[ 71 ] Legacy [ edit ] Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e In 1969, a Prominent Americans series stamp honoring Paine, with his signature at top, was issued.

Historian Jack P. Greene stated: In a fundamental sense, we are today all Paine's children. It was not the British defeat at Yorktown, but Paine and the new American conception of political society he did so much to popularize in Europe that turned the world upside down.

[ 144 ] Harvey J. Kaye wrote that through Paine, through his pamphlets and catchphrases such as "The sun never shined on a cause of greater worth", "We have it in our power to begin the world over again", and "These are the times that try men's souls" did more than move Americans to declare their independence: [H]e also imbued the nation they were founding with democratic impulse and aspiration and exceptional – indeed, world-historic – purpose and promise. For 230 years Americans have drawn ideas, inspiration, and encouragement from Paine and his work.

[ 145 ] John Stevenson argues that in the early 1790s, numerous radical political societies were formed throughout England and Wales in which Paine's writings provided "a boost to the self-confidence of those seeking to participate in politics for the first time." [ 146 ] In its immediate effects, Gary Kates argues, "Paine's vision unified Philadelphia merchants, British artisans, French peasants, Dutch reformers, and radical intellectuals from Boston to Berlin in one great movement." [ 147 ] Since its founding in 1873, the American freethought periodical – The Truth Seeker – has championed Thomas Paine.

His writings in the long term inspired philosophic and working-class radicals in Britain and United States.

Liberals , libertarians , left-libertarians , feminists , democratic socialists , social democrats , anarchists , free thinkers and progressives often claim him as an intellectual ancestor. Paine's critique of institutionalized religion and advocacy of rational thinking influenced many British freethinkers in the 19th and 20th centuries, such as William Cobbett , George Holyoake , Charles Bradlaugh , Christopher Hitchens and Bertrand Russell .

[ 148 ] The quote "Lead, follow, or get out of the way" is widely but incorrectly attributed to Paine. It can be found nowhere in his published works.

[ 149 ] Abraham Lincoln [ edit ] In 1835, when he was 26 years old, Abraham Lincoln wrote a defense of Paine's deism.

[ 150 ] A political associate, Samuel Hill, burned the manuscript to save Lincoln's political career.

[ 151 ] Historian Roy Basler , the editor of Lincoln's papers, said Paine had a strong influence on Lincoln's style: No other writer of the eighteenth century, with the exception of Jefferson, parallels more closely the temper or gist of Lincoln's later thought. In style, Paine above all others affords the variety of eloquence which, chastened and adapted to Lincoln's own mood, is revealed in Lincoln's formal writings.

[ 152 ] Thomas Edison [ edit ] The inventor Thomas Edison said: I have always regarded Paine as one of the greatest of all Americans. Never have we had a sounder intelligence in this republic.... It was my good fortune to encounter Thomas Paine's works in my boyhood... it was, indeed, a revelation to me to read that great thinker's views on political and theological subjects. Paine educated me, then, about many matters of which I had never before thought. I remember, very vividly, the flash of enlightenment that shone from Paine's writings, and I recall thinking, at that time, 'What a pity these works are not today the schoolbooks for all children!' My interest in Paine was not satisfied by my first reading of his works. I went back to them time and again, just as I have done since my boyhood days.

[ 153 ] South America [ edit ] In 1811, Venezuelan translator Manuel Garcia de Sena published a book in Philadelphia that consisted mostly of Spanish translations of several of Paine's most important works.

[ 154 ] The book also included translations of the Declaration of Independence, the Articles of Confederation, the U.S. Constitution and the constitutions of five U.S. states.

[ 154 ] It subsequently circulated widely in South America and through it Uruguayan national hero José Gervasio Artigas became familiar with and embraced Paine's ideas. In turn, many of Artigas's writings drew directly from Paine's, including the Instructions of 1813 , which Uruguayans consider to be one of their country's most important constitutional documents, and was one of the earliest writings to articulate a principled basis for an identity independent of Buenos Aires.

[ 154 ] Monument, Kings Street, Thetford Memorials [ edit ] Main article: Memorials to Thomas Paine The Thomas Paine Monument The first and longest-standing memorial to Paine is the carved and inscribed 12-foot marble column in New Rochelle, New York , organized and funded by publisher, educator and reformer Gilbert Vale (1791–1866) and raised in 1839 by the American sculptor and architect John Frazee , the Thomas Paine Monument (see image below).

[ 155 ] New Rochelle is also the original site of Thomas Paine's Cottage , which along with a 320-acre (130 ha) farm were presented to Paine in 1784 by act of the New York State Legislature for his services in the American Revolution.

[ 156 ] The same site is the home of the Thomas Paine Memorial Museum .

[ 157 ] Statue of Thomas Paine in Parc Montsouris, Paris, dedicated in 1948 In the 20th century, Joseph Lewis , longtime president of the Freethinkers of America and an ardent Paine admirer, was instrumental in having larger-than-life-sized statues of Paine erected in each of the three countries with which the revolutionary writer was associated. The first, created by Mount Rushmore sculptor Gutzon Borglum , was erected in the Parc Montsouris , Paris , just before World War II began but not formally dedicated until 1948. It depicts Paine standing before the French National Convention to plead for the life of King Louis XVI . The second, sculpted in 1950 by Georg J. Lober , was erected near Paine's one-time home in Morristown, New Jersey . It shows a seated Paine using a drumhead as a makeshift table. The third, sculpted by Sir Charles Wheeler , President of the Royal Academy, was erected in 1964 in Paine's birthplace, Thetford , England. With a quill pen in his right hand and an inverted copy of The Rights of Man in his left, it occupies a prominent location on King Street. Thomas Paine was ranked No. 34 in the 100 Greatest Britons 2002 extensive Nationwide poll conducted by the BBC .

[ 158 ] In popular culture [ edit ] In 1987, Richard Thomas appeared on stage in Philadelphia and Washington, DC, in the one-man play Citizen Tom Paine (an adaptation of Howard Fast 's 1943 novel of the same title), playing Paine "like a star-spangled tiger, ferocious about freedom and ready to savage anyone who stands in his way", in a staging of the play in the bicentennial year of the United States Constitution .

[ 159 ] In 1995, the English folk singer Graham Moore released a song called Tom Paine's Bones on an album of the same name.

[ 160 ] The song has since been covered by a number of other artists, including Dick Gaughan , Grace Petrie and Trials of Cato .

[ citation needed ] In 2005, Trevor Griffiths published These are the Times: A Life of Thomas Paine , originally written as a screenplay for Richard Attenborough Productions . Although the film was not made, the play was broadcast as a two-part drama on BBC Radio 4 in 2008, [ 161 ] with a repeat in 2012.

[ 162 ] In 2009, Paine's life was dramatized in the play Thomas Paine Citizen of the World , [ 163 ] produced for the "Tom Paine 200 Celebrations" festival [ 164 ] See also [ edit ] History portal Liberalism portal Libertarianism portal Philosophy portal Politics portal United States portal Asset-based egalitarianism British philosophy Contributions to liberal theory Liberty List of American philosophers List of British philosophers List of civil rights leaders Society of the Friends of Truth Early American publishers and printers Influence of the American Revolution on the French Revolution Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Conway, Moncure D.

(1908).

The Life of Thomas Paine . Vol. 1.

Cobbett, William , Illustrator.

G. P. Putnam's Sons . p. 3.

Archived from the original on June 12, 2020 . Retrieved October 2, 2013 .

– In the contemporary record as noted by Conway, Paine's birth date is given as January 29, 1736–37. Common practice was to use a dash or a slash to separate the old-style year from the new-style year. In the old calendar, the new year began on March 25, not January 1. Paine's birth date, therefore, would have been before New Year, 1737. In the new style, his birth date advances by eleven days and his year increases by one to February 9, 1737. The O.S.

link gives more detail if needed.

Citations [ edit ] ^ a b Ayer, Alfred Jules (1990).

Thomas Paine .

University of Chicago Press . p. 1.

ISBN 978-0226033396 .

Archived from the original on February 5, 2021 . Retrieved October 29, 2020 .

^ Kreitner, Richard (February 9, 2015).

"February 9, 1737: Thomas Paine Is Born" .

The Almanac .

Archived from the original on October 1, 2022 . Retrieved October 1, 2022 .

^ Van Doren, Carl (February 8, 1922).

"Book critic: Religion and Belief by Thomas Paine, The Roving Critic" .

The Nation .

Archived from the original on October 1, 2022 . Retrieved October 1, 2022 .

^ Henretta, James A.; et al. (2011).

America's History, Volume 1: To 1877 . Macmillan. p. 165.

ISBN 978-0312387914 .

Archived from the original on October 16, 2015 . Retrieved July 1, 2015 .

^ Solinger, J.D. (2010). " Thomas Paine's Continental Mind Archived February 24, 2021, at the Wayback Machine ." Early American Literature 45 (3), 593-617.

^ a b Hitchens, Christopher (2008).

Thomas Paine's Rights of Man . Grove Press. p. 37.

ISBN 978-0802143839 .

^ Kaye, Harvey J.

(2005).

Thomas Paine and the Promise of America .

New York City : Hill & Wang . p.

43 .

ISBN 978-0809093441 .

Within just a few months 150,000 copies of one or another edition were distributed in America alone. The equivalent sales today would be fifteen million, making it, proportionally, the nation's greatest best-seller ever.

^ a b c d Lessay, Jean (1987).

L' Américain de la convention: Thomas Paine, professeur de révolutions, député du Pas-de-Calais . Paris: Libr. Acad. Perrin.

ISBN 978-2262004538 .

^ "Paine, Thomas (1737–1809), author and revolutionary" .

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. 2004.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/21133 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) ^ a b Paine, Thomas (2014).

"Of the Religion of Deism Compared with the Christian Religion, and the Superiority of the Former over the Latter (1804)" . In Calvert, Jane E.; Shapiro, Ian (eds.).

Selected Writings of Thomas Paine . Rethinking the Western Tradition.

New Haven : Yale University Press . pp.

568– 574.

doi : 10.12987/9780300210699-018 .

ISBN 978-0300167450 .

S2CID 246141428 .

Archived from the original on August 27, 2016 . Retrieved August 7, 2021 .

^ Fischer, Kirsten (2010). Manning, Nicholas; Stefani, Anne (eds.).

" 'Religion Governed by Terror': A Deist Critique of Fearful Christianity in the Early American Republic" .

Revue Française d'Études Américaines .

125 (3).

Paris : Belin: 13– 26.

doi : 10.3917/rfea.125.0013 .

eISSN 1776-3061 .

ISSN 0397-7870 .

LCCN 80640131 – via Cairn.info .

^ Gelpi, Donald L. (2007) [2000].

"Part 1: Enlightenment Religion – Chapter 3: Militant Deism" .

Varieties of Transcendental Experience: A Study in Constructive Postmodernism .

Eugene, Oregon : Wipf and Stock . pp.

47– 48.

ISBN 978-1725220294 .

Archived from the original on January 22, 2023 . Retrieved January 22, 2023 .

^ Claeys, Gregory (1989).

"Revolution in heaven: The Age of Reason (1794–95)" .

Thomas Paine: Social and Political Thought (1st ed.).

New York and London : Routledge . pp.

177– 195.

ISBN 978-0044450900 .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2023 . Retrieved December 23, 2021 .

^ Conway, Moncure D.

(1892).

The Life of Thomas Paine Archived September 4, 2015, at the Wayback Machine . Vol. 2, pp. 417–418.

^ "Paine, Thomas (1737–1809), author and revolutionary" .

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. 2004.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/21133 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) ^ Crosby, Alan (1986).

A History of Thetford (1st ed.). Chichester, Sussex: Phillimore & Co. pp.

44– 84.

ISBN 978-0850336047 .

^ "National Archives" . UK National Archives. Archived from the original on December 15, 2019 . Retrieved April 6, 2009 .

Acknowledgement dated March 2, 1769, document NU/1/3/3.

^ School History Archived December 5, 2010, at the Wayback Machine Thetford Grammar School; accessed January 3, 2008, ^ Keane, John (1995).

Tom Paine, A Political Life (First ed.). London: Bloomsbury. p. 30.

ISBN 0802139647 .

^ Bell, J.L.

"The Evidence for Paine as a Staymaker" .

Boston 1775 .

Archived from the original on October 3, 2019 . Retrieved October 3, 2019 .

^ Keane, John (1995).

Tom Paine, A Political Life (First ed.). London: Bloomsbury. p. 38.

ISBN 0802139647 .

^ "Thomas Paine" .

Sandwich People & History . Open Sandwich.

Archived from the original on April 11, 2009 . Retrieved April 2, 2010 .

^ "Thomas Paine, 1737–1809" .

historyguide.org .

Archived from the original on March 17, 2019 . Retrieved March 28, 2019 .

^ Conway, Moncure Daniel (1892).

"The Life of Thomas Paine: With a History of Literary, Political, and Religious Career in America, France, and England" .

Thomas Paine National Historical Association . p. 20, vol. I. Archived from the original on April 18, 2009 . Retrieved July 18, 2009 .

^ Conway, Moncure Daniel.

"The Life Of Thomas Paine, Vol. I. (of II) With A History of His Literary, Political and Religious Career in America France, and England" .

Archived from the original on March 5, 2022 . Retrieved October 25, 2021 .

^ Kaye, Harvey J. (2000).

Thomas Paine: Firebrand of the Revolution .

Oxford University Press . p. 36.

ISBN 978-0195116274 .

^ Martin, David; Clubb, Jane (2009).

"An Archaeological Interpretative Survey of Bull House, 92 High Street, Lewes, East Sussex" (PDF) .

Sussex Archaeological Society .

Archived (PDF) from the original on March 7, 2021 . Retrieved August 20, 2019 .

^ Rickman, Thomas Clio (1899).

The Life of Thomas Paine, Author of "Common Sense," "Rights of Man," "Age of Reason," "Letters to the Addresser[!]," &c., &c . B.D. Cousins.

OCLC 424874 .

Archived from the original on February 5, 2021 . Retrieved October 29, 2020 .

^ "Letter to the Honorable Henry Laurens" in Philip S. Foner's The Complete Writings of Thomas Paine (New York: Citadel Press, 1945), 2:1160–1165.

^ "Thomas Paine | British-American author" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

Archived from the original on September 15, 2017 . Retrieved September 15, 2017 .

^ Conway, Moncure Daniel, 1892.

The Life of Thomas Paine vol. 1, p. 209.

^ a b c d e f Larkin, Edward (2005).

Thomas Paine and the Literature of Revolution . Cambridge University Press. pp.

31– 40.

ISBN 978-1139445986 .

Archived from the original on February 4, 2021 . Retrieved December 1, 2018 .

^ a b c d American Antislavery Writings: Colonial Beginnings to Emancipation . Library of America. 2012.

ISBN 978-1598532142 .

Archived from the original on August 19, 2020 . Retrieved December 1, 2018 .

^ Green, Jack (1978). "Paine, America, and the "Modernization" of Political Consciousness".

Political Science Quarterly .

93 (1): 73– 92.

doi : 10.2307/2149051 .

ISSN 0032-3195 .

JSTOR 2149051 .

^ K. M. Kostyal.

Funding Fathers: The Fight for Freedom and the Birth of American Liberty (2014) ch. 2 ^ David Braff, "Forgotten Founding Father: The Impact of Thomas Paine", in Joyce Chumbley, ed., Thomas Paine: In Search of the Common Good (2009).

^ Oliphant, John.

"Paine, Thomas" .

Encyclopedia of the American Revolution: Library of Military History .

Archived from the original on May 27, 2021 . Retrieved April 10, 2007 – via Gale Virtual Library.

^ Raphael, Ray (March 20, 2013).

"Thomas Paine's Inflated Numbers" .

Journal of the American Revolution . Retrieved March 13, 2024 .

^ Scharf, T.

History of Philadelphia . Рипол Классик. p. 310.

ISBN 978-5883517104 .

Archived from the original on February 4, 2021 . Retrieved October 29, 2020 .

^ Butterfield (ed.), 2019 , Vol II, p. 1008 ^ Conway & Cobbett, 1892 , Vol I, p. 68 ^ Ferguson, Robert A. (July 2000).

"The Commonalities of Common Sense" .

The William and Mary Quarterly .

57 (3): 465– 504.

doi : 10.2307/2674263 .

JSTOR 2674263 .

Archived from the original on October 17, 2021 . Retrieved September 21, 2021 .

^ Robert A. Ferguson (July 2000). "The Commonalities of Common Sense".

William and Mary Quarterly .

57 (3): 465– 504.

doi : 10.2307/2674263 .

JSTOR 2674263 .

^ Philp, Mark (2013).

"Thomas Paine" . In Edward N. Zalta (ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2013 Edition) .

Archived from the original on January 28, 2015 . Retrieved January 24, 2015 .

^ Merrill Jensen, The Founding of a Nation: A History of the American Revolution, 1763–1776 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1968), 668.

^ David C. Hoffman, "Paine and Prejudice: Rhetorical Leadership through Perceptual Framing in Common Sense." Rhetoric and Public Affairs , Fall 2006, Vol. 9, Issue 3, pp. 373–410.

^ Pauline Maier, American Scripture: Making the Declaration of Independence (New York: Knopf, 1997), 90–91.

^ Jack N. Rakove, The Beginnings of National Politics: An Interpretive History of the Continental Congress (New York: Knopf, 1979), 89.

^ Jack S. Levy, William R. Thompson, Causes of War (John Wiley & Sons, 2011).

^ New, M. Christopher.

"James Chalmers and Plain Truth A Loyalist Answers Thomas Paine" . Archiving Early America.

Archived from the original on September 28, 2007 . Retrieved October 3, 2007 .

^ Jensen, Founding of a Nation , 669.

^ "Adams Papers Digital Edition – Massachusetts Historical Society" .

www.masshist.org .

Archived from the original on December 5, 2018 . Retrieved December 5, 2018 .

^ Rosenfeld, Sophia (2008). "Tom Paine's Common Sense and Ours".

The William and Mary Quarterly .

65 (4): 633– 668.

JSTOR 40212021 .

^ Robert Middlekauff (2005).

The Glorious Cause: The American Revolution, 1763–1789 , Revised and Expanded Edition, Oxford University Press, New York; ISBN 978-0195315882 , pp. 30–53.

^ Robert Middlekauff, The Glorious Cause , pp. 4–5, 324–326.

ISBN 978-0195315882 ^ Cf. Clifton E. Olmstead (1960), History of Religion in the United States , Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, p. 178.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ a b "Thomas Paine National Historical Association" .

www.thomaspaine.org .

Archived from the original on April 3, 2021 . Retrieved March 17, 2021 .

^ "Uncovering the Trail of Communication of the Committee of Five: Roger Sherman's Draft Copy of the Declaration of Independence" .

^ Martin Roth, "Tom Paine and American Loneliness." Early American Literature , September 1987, Vol. 22, Issue 2, pp. 175–182.

^ "Thomas Paine. The American Crisis. Philadelphia, Styner and Cist, 1776–77" . Indiana University.

Archived from the original on October 20, 2019 . Retrieved November 15, 2007 .

^ Nelson, Craig (2007).

Thomas Paine: Enlightenment, Revolution, and the Birth of Modern Nations . Penguin. pp.

174– 175.

ISBN 978-1101201787 .

Archived from the original on September 4, 2015 . Retrieved July 1, 2015 .

^ Blakemore, Steve (1997).

Crisis in representation: Thomas Paine, Mary Wollstonecraft, Helen Maria Williams, and the rewriting of the French Revolution . Fairleigh Dickinson University Press.

^ a b Harlow Giles Unger , "Thomas Paine and the Clarion Call for American Independence", (New York: Da Capo Press, 2019), p. 89 ^ Craig Nelson (2006).

Thomas Paine . New York : Viking. pp.

134–138 .

ISBN 978-0670037889 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Harlow Giles Unger, "Thomas Paine and the Clarion Call for American Independence", (New York: Da Capo Press, 2019), p. 93 ^ Harlow Giles Unger, "Thomas Paine and the Clarion Call for American Independence", (New York: Da Capo Press, 2019), pp. 102–103 ^ Harlow Giles Unger, "Thomas Paine and the Clarion Call for American Independence", (New York: Da Capo Press, 2019), pp. 100–101 ^ Daniel Wheeler's Life and Writings of Thomas Paine Vol. 1 (1908) pp. 26–27.

^ Daniel Wheeler, Life and Writings of Thomas Paine Vol. 1 (1908), p. 314.

^ Paine, Thomas (2005).

Common Sense and Other Writings . Barnes & Noble Classics. p.

xiii .

ISBN 978-0672600043 .

^ a b Thomas Paine (1824), The Theological Works of Thomas Paine , R. Carlile, p. 138, archived from the original on October 16, 2015 , retrieved July 1, 2015 ^ Chaplin, Philippa J. (August 1, 2004). "Revolution Echoes Yet in Bordentown: The Place Patriot Thomas Paine Once Called Home Still Honors Him".

The Philadelphia Inquirer .

^ "APS Member History" .

search.amphilsoc.org .

Archived from the original on February 5, 2021 . Retrieved December 14, 2020 .

^ Ziesche, Philipp (2013).

Paine and Jefferson in the Age of Revolutions . University of Virginia Press. p. 124.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Aldridge, Alfred (1959).

Man Of Reason: The Life Of Thomas Paine . Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott & Co. pp.

120– 121.

^ George Rudé, Revolutionary Europe: 1783–1815 (1964), p. 183.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Chiu, Frances A.

The Routledge Guidebook to Paine's Rights of Man . Routledge, 2020, pp. 203–247.

^ Many of these are reprinted in Political Writings of the 1790s , ed. G. Claeys (8 vols, London: Pickering and Chatto, 1995).

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Ziesche, Phillipp (2010).

Cosmopolitan Patriots: Americans in Paris in the Age of Revolution . University of Virginia Press. p. 63.

^ Thomas Paine, Letter Addressed To The Addressers On The Late Proclamation, in Michael Foot, Isaac Kramnick (ed.), The Thomas Paine Reader, p. 374 [ ISBN missing ] ^ Ziesche, Philipp (2010).

Cosmopolitan Patriots: Americans in Paris in the Age of Revolution . University of Virginia Press. p. 62.

^ Fruchtman, Jack (2009).

The Political Philosophy of Thomas Paine . Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. p.

192 .

ISBN 978-0801892844 .

^ Munck, Thomas (2013).

Paine and Jefferson in the Age of Revolutions . University of Virginia Press. p. 165.

^ Vincent, Bernard (2005).

The transatlantic republican : Thomas Paine and the age of revolutions . Amsterdam: Rodopi.

ISBN 1417591021 .

OCLC 60158208 .

^ Hawke, David (1974).

Paine . New York: Harper & Row Publishers. pp.

275– 276.

^ Collection highlights, Tom Paine's Desk , People's History Museum, archived from the original on January 13, 2015 , retrieved January 13, 2015 ^ a b Sagnac, Philippe (1900).

"Moncure Daniel Conway, Thomas Paine (1737–1809) et la Révolution dans les deux mondes, Paris, 1900 (in French)" .

Revue d'Histoire Moderne & Contemporaine .

2 (4): 429– 436.

Archived from the original on October 23, 2022 . Retrieved October 4, 2023 .

^ Nathalie Caron (2006).

"Thomas Paine et l'éloge des révolutions" .

Transatlantica (in French) (2).

doi : 10.4000/transatlantica.1145 .

Archived from the original on July 15, 2012 . Retrieved October 3, 2023 .

.

^ Vikki Vickers (2008).

My Pen and My Soul Have Ever Gone Together: Thomas Paine and the American Revolution . Routledge. pp. 2–.

ISBN 978-1135921576 .

Archived from the original on August 19, 2020 . Retrieved December 5, 2018 .

^ "Thomas Paine: Age of Reason" .

www.ushistory.org .

Archived from the original on October 4, 2023 . Retrieved October 3, 2023 .

^ Ziesche, Philipp (2010).

Cosmopolitan Patriots: Americans in Paris in the Age of Revolution . University of Virginia Press. p. 86.

^ a b Lounissi, Carine (July 28, 2022), Faucquez, Anne-Claire; Garbaye, Linda (eds.), "Les Américains en France de 1792 à 1799 : Citoyenneté et nationalité républicaines" , Citoyenneté et liberté : Dans l'Empire britannique et les jeunes États-Unis (xviie-xixe siècle) , Civilisations étrangères (in French), Tours: Presses universitaires François-Rabelais, pp.

195– 214, ISBN 978-2869067936 , archived from the original on September 15, 2023 , retrieved October 4, 2023 ^ Hawke, David (1974).

Paine . New York: Harper & Row Publishers. pp.

297– 298.

^ Clark, J. C. D. (February 15, 2018).

"The Unexpected Revolution" .

Oxford Scholarship Online .

1 .

doi : 10.1093/oso/9780198816997.003.0006 .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2023 . Retrieved October 3, 2023 .

^ Paine, Thomas; Rickman, Thomas Clio (1908).

The Life and Writings of Thomas Paine: Containing a Biography . Vincent Parke & Co. pp.

261 –262 . Retrieved February 21, 2008 .

thomas paine jailer door.

^ Foot, Michael, and Kramnick, Isaac. 1987.

The Thomas Paine Reader , p. 16 ^ Eric Foner, 1976.

Tom Paine and Revolutionary America , p. 244.

^ Jonathan Israel, Revolutionary Ideas: An Intellectual History of the French Revolution from the Rights of Man to Robespierre , p. 590.

^ Aulard, Alphonse . 1901.

Histoire politique de la Révolution française , p. 555.

^ See Thomas Paine Archived September 29, 2006, at the Wayback Machine , Independence Hall Association; accessed online November 4, 2006.

^ a b Mark Philp (2004).

"Paine, Thomas (1737–1809)" .

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/21133 . Retrieved July 26, 2008 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) ^ O'Neill, Brendan (June 8, 2009).

"Who was Thomas Paine?" . BBC.

Archived from the original on June 12, 2018 . Retrieved June 10, 2018 .

^ "Seventh Day in Paris Following Thomas Paine, Mary Wollstonecraft, and Thomas Jefferson" . September 6, 2015.

^ Papers of James Monroe ... from the original manuscripts in the Library of Congress . Washington : Government Printing Office. 1904.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Craig Nelson (2006).

Thomas Paine . New York : Viking. p.

299 .

ISBN 978-0670037889 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Craig Nelson (2006).

Thomas Paine . New York: Viking. p.

291 .

ISBN 978-0670037889 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ "Founders Online: To George Washington from Thomas Paine, 30 July 1796" .

founders.archives.gov . Retrieved February 25, 2024 .

^ Craig Nelson (2006).

Thomas Paine . New York: Viking. pp.

292–294 .

ISBN 978-0670037889 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ "Founders Online: From Thomas Jefferson to Thomas Paine, 18 March 1801" .

founders.archives.gov .

Archived from the original on August 20, 2019 . Retrieved August 20, 2019 .

^ Claeys, Gregory, 1989.

Thomas Paine, Social and Political Thought .

[ ISBN missing ] [ page needed ] ^ Paine, T.; Wheeler, D.E.; Rickman, T.C. (1908).

"The Will of Thomas Paine" .

The Life and Writings of Thomas Paine: Containing a Biography . Vincent Parke. p.

368 .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2023 . Retrieved April 21, 2022 .

^ "Thomas Paine" .

ushistory.org .

Archived from the original on September 15, 2017 . Retrieved September 15, 2017 .

^ Walsh, Kevin (May 1999).

"A Paine in the Village – Forgotten New York" .

Archived from the original on April 17, 2020 . Retrieved March 12, 2019 .

^ William Cobbett, The Life of Thomas Paine, Interspersed with Remarks and Reflections (London: J. Wright, 1797) ^ "Francis Oldys" [George Chalmers], The Life of Thomas Paine. One Penny-Worth of Truth, from Thomas Bull to His Brother John (London: Stockdale, 1791) ^ "The Paine Monument at Last Finds a Home" .

The New York Times . October 15, 1905.

Archived from the original on February 26, 2018 . Retrieved February 23, 2008 .

^ Chen, David W.

"Rehabilitating Thomas Paine, Bit by Bony Bit" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on May 16, 2007 . Retrieved February 23, 2008 .

^ Burrows, Edwin G.

and Wallace, Mike .

Gotham: A History of New York City to 1898 . New York: Oxford University Press, 1999, p. 510.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ "Paine's Obituary (click the "1809" link; it is 1/3 way down the 4th column)" .

New York Evening Post . June 10, 1809.

Archived from the original on October 19, 2014 . Retrieved November 22, 2013 .

^ Robert G. Ingersoll (1892).

Thomas Paine (1892) . Thomas Paine National Historical Association.

Archived from the original on October 26, 2017 . Retrieved December 3, 2017 .

^ Eric Foner (2005).

Tom Paine and Revolutionary America (2nd ed.). Oxford University Press. pp. xxxii, 16.

ISBN 978-0195174861 .

Archived from the original on October 16, 2015 . Retrieved July 1, 2015 .

^ Jendrysik, Mark (2007).

"Tom Paine: Utopian?" .

Utopian Studies .

18 (2): 139– 157.

doi : 10.5325/utopianstudies.18.2.0139 .

S2CID 149860226 .

^ Gregory Claeys, ed. (2010).

The Cambridge Companion to Utopian Literature . Cambridge University Press. pp.

11– 12.

ISBN 978-1139828420 .

Archived from the original on October 16, 2015 . Retrieved July 1, 2015 .

^ Weatherford, Jack (2010).

Indian givers : how Native Americans transformed the world . New York: Three Rivers Press.

ISBN 978-0307717153 .

OCLC 656265477 .

^ Hitchens (2007), pp. 28–29 ^ Hitchens (2007), pp. 43–44 ^ Hitchens, Christopher (2012).

Arguably . Hachette. p. 162.

ISBN 978-1455502783 .

^ Kaye, Harvey J. (2007).

Thomas Paine and the Promise of America: A History & Biography . Farrar, Straus and Giroux. p. 147.

ISBN 978-0374707064 .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2023 . Retrieved August 14, 2022 .

^ Paine, Thomas (2008).

Rights of Man, Common Sense, and Other Political Writings . Oxford University Press. p. 324.

ISBN 978-0199538003 .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2023 . Retrieved September 9, 2022 .

^ a b Rodriguez, Junius P. (2007).

Slavery in the United States: A Social, Political, and Historical Encyclopedia . ABC-CLIO. p. 279.

ISBN 978-1851095445 .

Archived from the original on September 4, 2015 . Retrieved July 1, 2015 .

^ Common Sense & the Rights of Man: Words of a Visionary That Sparked the Revolution and Remained the Core of American Democratic Principles . E-artnow. 2018.

ISBN 978-8027241521 .

Archived from the original on April 8, 2023 . Retrieved March 19, 2023 .

^ Hitchens (2007), p. 139.

^ Harlow Giles Unger , "Thomas Paine and the Clarion Call for American Independence" (New York: Da Capo Press, 2019), p. 154 ^ Thomas Paine: Collected Writings . Library of America. 1995. p. 408.

^ Lamb, Robert. "Liberty, Equality, and the Boundaries of Ownership: Thomas Paine's Theory of Property Rights." Review of Politics (2010), 72#3, pp. 483–511.

^ Marangos, John (April 11, 2008).

"Thomas Paine (1737–1809) and Thomas Spence (1750–1814) on land ownership, land taxes and the provision of citizens' dividend" .

International Journal of Social Economics .

35 (5): 313– 325.

doi : 10.1108/03068290810861576 .

ISSN 0306-8293 .

Archived from the original on May 8, 2021 . Retrieved March 11, 2021 .

^ Griffin, G. Edward The Creature from Jekyll Island (1994) ^ Smith, George Ford "Thomas Paine on Paper Money and Morality" Mises.org ^ Noll, Mark A. (November 2017).

"Religion in the Early Republic: A Second Tom Paine Effect" .

Modern Intellectual History .

14 (3): 883– 898.

doi : 10.1017/S1479244316000287 .

ISSN 1479-2443 .

S2CID 152274951 .

Archived from the original on May 27, 2021 . Retrieved March 11, 2021 .

^ Thomas Paine; et al. (1824).

The Theological Works of Thomas Paine . R. Carlile. p. 31.

Archived from the original on October 16, 2015 . Retrieved July 1, 2015 .

^ a b c d Shai Afsai, " Thomas Paine, Deism, and the Masonic Fraternity " Archived April 20, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , Journal of the American Revolution , November 7, 2016.

^ United States. Congress (June 14, 1956).

Congressional Record. Proceedings and Debates of the ... Congress . U.S. Government Printing Office. p. 4791.

Archived from the original on April 4, 2023 . Retrieved March 19, 2023 .

Quote: "Tom Paine, Patrick Henry, James Otis, and John Paul Jones were all Masons." ^ Michael, Robert .

A Concise History of American Antisemitism Archived May 27, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , p. 70 ( Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2005).

^ Jack P. Greene, "Paine, America, and the 'Modernization' Of Political Consciousness", Political Science Quarterly 93#1 (1978) pp. 73–92 [92] Online Archived December 2, 2018, at the Wayback Machine .

^ Harvey J. Kaye (2007).

Thomas Paine and the Promise of America: A History & Biography . Farrar, Straus and Giroux. p. 258.

ISBN 978-0374707064 .

Archived from the original on August 19, 2020 . Retrieved June 8, 2019 .

^ Stevenson, John (1989). " 'Paineites to a Man'? The English Popular Radical Societies in the 1790s".

Bulletin – Society for the Study of Labour History .

54 (1): 14– 25.

^ Gary Kates. "From Liberalism to Radicalism " (1989) p. 569.

^ Kates, Gary (1989). "From liberalism to radicalism: Tom Paine's Rights of Man".

Journal of the History of Ideas .

50 (4): 569– 587.

doi : 10.2307/2709798 .

JSTOR 2709798 .

^ Gray, Rosie (February 1, 2012).

"Mitt Romney Misquoted Thomas Paine In Victory Speech" .

BuzzFeed News .

Archived from the original on April 26, 2019 . Retrieved April 26, 2019 .

^ Robert Havlik, "Some Influences of Thomas Paine's Age of Reason Upon
Abraham Lincoln", Lincoln Herald, 104 (Summer 2002): 61–70.

^ Michael Burlingame, Abraham Lincoln: a Life (2008), vol. 2, p. 83.

^ Roy P. Basler (ed.), Abraham Lincoln: His Speeches and Writings (1946), p. 6.

^ Thomas Edison, Introduction to The Life and Works of Thomas Paine , New York: Citadel Press, 1945, Vol. I, pp. vii–ix.

Reproduced online Archived November 10, 2004, at the Wayback Machine on thomaspaine.org, accessed November 4, 2006.

^ a b c John Street, Artigas and the Emancipation of Uruguay (London: Cambridge University Press, 1959), 178–186.

^ See Frederick S. Voss, John Frazee 1790–1852 Sculptor (Washington City and Boston: The National Portrait Gallery and The Boston Athenaeum, 1986), pp. 46–47.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ See Alfred Owen Aldridge, Man of Reason (Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott & Co., 1959), p. 103.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ "Academics: Libraries" .

Iona College . Archived from the original on May 29, 2013.

^ "BBC – 100 Great British Heroes" .

BBC News . August 21, 2002.

Archived from the original on November 4, 2010 . Retrieved December 26, 2011 .

^ Louise Sweeney (1987). "On stage: reliving historic turning points. Howard Fast's 'Citizen Tom Paine'." The Christian Science Monitor . March 12, 1987.

^ "Tom Paine's Bones [Graham Moore]" .

mainlynorfolk.info .

Archived from the original on August 9, 2021 . Retrieved August 9, 2021 .

^ "BBC Radio 4 – Saturday Drama – Episodes by" . Bbc.co.uk. August 2008.

Archived from the original on September 4, 2015 . Retrieved May 7, 2014 .

^ "BBC Radio 4 – Saturday Drama – Episodes by" . Bbc.co.uk. August 2012.

Archived from the original on October 16, 2015 . Retrieved May 7, 2014 .

^ "Thomas Paine – "Citizen Of The World" " . Keystage-company.co.uk.

Archived from the original on April 7, 2014 . Retrieved May 7, 2014 .

^ Tom Paine Legacy Archived January 17, 2012, at the Wayback Machine , Programme for bicentenary celebrations in Thetford , the town of his birth.

Bibliography [ edit ] Afsai, Shai (November 7, 2016).

"Thomas Paine, Deism, and the Masonic Fraternity" .

Journal of the American Revolution .

Archived from the original on April 20, 2021 . Retrieved March 11, 2021 .

Aldridge, A. Owen (1959).

Man of Reason: The Life of Thomas Paine . Lippincott.

Aldridge, A. Owen (1984).

Thomas Paine's American Ideology .

University of Delaware Press .

ISBN 978-0874132601 .

Archived from the original on February 7, 2021 . Retrieved October 29, 2020 .

Ayer, A. J.

(1988).

Thomas Paine .

University of Chicago Press .

Bailyn, Bernard (1990). "Common Sense". In Bailyn, Bernard (ed.).

Faces of Revolution: Personalities and Themes in the Struggle for American Independence .

Alfred A. Knopf .

Bernstein, R. B.

(1994). "Review Essay: Rediscovering Thomas Paine".

New York Law School Law Review .

Butler, Marilyn (1984).

Burke Paine and Godwin and the Revolution Controversy .

Chiu, Frances (2020).

The Routledge Guidebook to Paine's Rights of Man . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0415703925 .

Claeys, Gregory (1989).

Thomas Paine, Social and Political Thought . London: Unwin Hyman.

ISBN 978-0203193204 .

Archived from the original on February 4, 2021 . Retrieved October 29, 2020 .

Conway, Moncure Daniel (1892).

The Life of Thomas Paine . G.P. Putnam's Sons.

Ferguson, Robert A. (July 2000). "The Commonalities of Common Sense".

William and Mary Quarterly .

57 (3): 465– 504.

doi : 10.2307/2674263 .

JSTOR 2674263 .

Fitzsimons, David (2008).

"Paine, Thomas (1737–1809)" . In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism . Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE , Cato Institute . pp.

369– 370.

doi : 10.4135/9781412965811.n226 .

ISBN 978-1412965804 .

LCCN 2008009151 .

OCLC 750831024 .

Archived from the original on February 21, 2022 . Retrieved February 21, 2022 .

Foner, Eric (1976).

Tom Paine and Revolutionary America .

Oxford University Press .

Foner, Eric (2000).

Thomas Paine . American National Biography Online.

Archived from the original on September 18, 2019 . Retrieved November 6, 2016 .

Rush, Benjamin (2019). Butterfield, Lyman Henry (ed.).

Letters of Benjamin Rush . Vol. II. Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0691655918 .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2023 . Retrieved November 4, 2021 .

Greene, Jack P. "Paine, America, and the 'Modernization' Of Political Consciousness", Political Science Quarterly 93#1 (1978) pp. 73–92 Online Archived December 2, 2018, at the Wayback Machine .

Griffiths, Trevor (2005).

These Are the Times: A Life of Thomas Paine . Spokesman Books.

Hawke, David Freeman (1974).

Paine . New York: Harper & Row.

Hitchens, Christopher (2007).

Thomas Paine's Rights of Man: A Biography . London: Atlantic Books.

ISBN 978-1843546283 .

Kates, Gary (1989). "From Liberalism to Radicalism: Tom Paine's Rights of Man".

Journal of the History of Ideas .

50 (4): 569– 587.

doi : 10.2307/2709798 .

JSTOR 2709798 .

Kaye, Harvey J.

(2005).

Thomas Paine and the Promise of America .

New York City : Hill & Wang .

Keane, John (1995).

Tom Paine: A Political Life . London: Bloomsbury.

Lamb, Robert (2010). "Liberty, Equality, and the Boundaries of Ownership: Thomas Paine's Theory of Property Rights".

Review of Politics .

72 (3): 483– 511.

doi : 10.1017/S0034670510000331 .

hdl : 10871/9896 .

S2CID 55413082 .

Larkin, Edward (2005).

Thomas Paine and the Literature of Revolution . Cambridge University Press.

[ permanent dead link ] Lessay, Jean (1987).

L'américain de la Convention, Thomas Paine: Professeur de révolutions [ The National Convention's American, Thomas Paine, professor of revolution ] (in French). Paris: Éditions Perrin. p. 241.

Levin, Yuval (2013).

The Great Debate: Edmund Burke, Thomas Paine, and the Birth of Right and Left . Basic Books.

ISBN 978-0465062980 .

Lewis, Joseph L.

(1947).

Thomas Paine: The Author of the Declaration of Independence . New York: Freethought Press Association.

Nelson, Craig (2006).

Thomas Paine: Enlightenment, Revolution, and the Birth of Modern Nations . Viking.

ISBN 978-0670037889 .

Phillips, Mark (May 2008). "Paine, Thomas (1737–1809)".

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/21133 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) Powell, David (1985).

Tom Paine, The Greatest Exile . Hutchinson.

ISBN 978-0367271343 .

Russell, Bertrand (1934).

"The Fate of Thomas Paine" . Thomas Paine National Historical Association.

Archived from the original on February 21, 2022 . Retrieved February 21, 2022 .

Solinger, Jason D. (November 2010). "Thomas Paine's Continental Mind".

Early American Literature .

45 (3): 593– 617.

doi : 10.1353/eal.2010.0029 .

S2CID 161742555 .

Vincent, Bernard (2005).

The Transatlantic Republican: Thomas Paine and the age of revolutions . Rodopi.

ISBN 978-9042016149 .

Archived from the original on February 4, 2021 . Retrieved October 29, 2020 .

Wilensky, Mark (2008).

The Elementary Common Sense of Thomas Paine. An Interactive Adaptation for All Ages .

Casemate .

ISBN 978-1932714364 .

Washburne, E. B. (May 1880).

"Thomas Paine and the French Revolution" .

Scribner's Monthly .

XX .

Primary sources [ edit ] Paine, Thomas (1896). Conway, Moncure Daniel (ed.).

The Writings of Thomas Paine, Volume 4 . New York: G. P. Putnam's sons. p. 521.

E'book Foot, Michael ; Kramnick, Isaac (1987).

The Thomas Paine Reader . Penguin Classics.

ISBN 978-0140444964 .

Paine, Thomas (1993).

Foner, Eric (ed.).

Writings . Philadelphia: Library of America.

. Authoritative and scholarly edition containing Common Sense, the essays comprising the American Crisis series, Rights of Man , The Age of Reason , Agrarian Justice , and selected briefer writings, with authoritative texts and careful annotation.

Paine, Thomas (1944).

Foner, Philip S.

(ed.).

The Complete Writings of Thomas Paine . Citadel Press.

A complete edition of Paine's writings, on the model of Eric Foner's edition for the Library of America, is badly needed. Until then Philip Foner's two-volume edition is a serviceable substitute. Volume I contains the major works, and volume II contains shorter writings, both published essays and a selection of letters, but confusingly organized; in addition, Foner's attributions of writings to Paine have come in for some criticism in that Foner may have included writings that Paine edited but did not write and omitted some writings that later scholars have attributed to Paine.

Thomas Clio Rickman (1819) The Life of Thomas Paine via Internet Archive Fiction [ edit ] Fast, Howard (1946).

Citizen Tom Paine .

(historical novel, though sometimes mistaken as biography).

External links [ edit ] Thomas Paine at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Thomas Paine Society (UK) Thomas Paine Society (US) The Thomas Paine National Historical Association (TPNHA) "Archival material relating to Thomas Paine" .

UK National Archives .

Portraits of Thomas Paine at the National Portrait Gallery, London Office location while in Alford Archived May 7, 2019, at the Wayback Machine Works by Thomas Paine [ edit ] Works by Thomas Paine in eBook form at Standard Ebooks Works by Thomas Paine at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Thomas Paine at the Internet Archive Writings and Timeline Archived January 9, 2023, at the Wayback Machine from the TPNHA Works by Thomas Paine at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Deistic and Religious Works of Thomas Paine Archived March 30, 2015, at the Wayback Machine The theological works of Thomas Paine The theological works of Thomas Paine to which are appended the profession of faith of a savoyard vicar by J.J. Rousseau v t e Thomas Paine Writings Common Sense (January 1776) The American Crisis (December 1776) Rights of Man (March 1791, February 1792) The Age of Reason (1794, 1795, 1807) Agrarian Justice (1797) Life 1792 Rights of Man trial Wearmouth Bridge Thomas Paine Cottage Legacy Thomas Paine National Historical Association Thomas Paine Monument, New Rochelle, New York Institute of Thomas Paine Studies That Night in Varennes In Lambeth Liberty!

A New World: A Life of Thomas Paine Related Headstrong Club Articles related to Thomas Paine v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e Liberalism Ideas Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history Schools Classical Economic Fiscal Neo Equity feminism Georgist Radical Anti-clerical Civic nationalism Republican Utilitarian Whig Physiocratic Encyclopaedist Conservative Liberal conservatism National Ordo Social Green Liberal feminism Ecofeminism Liberal socialism Social democracy Progressivism Third Way Other Constitutional Constitutional patriotism Cultural Corporate International Libertarianism Left-libertarianism Geolibertarianism Neoclassical liberalism Paleolibertarianism Right-libertarianism Radical centrism Religious Christian Islamic Secular Techno By region Africa Egypt Nigeria Senegal South Africa Tunisia Zimbabwe Asia China Hong Kong India Iran Israel Japan South Korea Anti- Chinilpa Centrist reformist Progressive Philippines Turkey Europe Albania Armenia Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech lands Denmark Estonia Finland France Orléanist Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Italy Berlusconism Liberism Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia Moldova Montenegro Netherlands Norway Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Gladstonian Libertarian Manchester Muscular Radical Whiggist Latin America and the Caribbean Bolivia Brazil Lulism Chile Colombia Cuba Ecuador Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Uruguay North America Canada United States Jacksonian Jeffersonian Libertarian Modern Progressive Oceania Australia Small-l New Zealand Philosophers Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organisations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism Portal v t e French Revolution Causes Timeline Ancien Régime Revolution Constitutional monarchy Republic Directory Consulate Glossary Journals Museum Significant civil and political events by year 1788 Day of the Tiles (7 Jun 1788) Assembly of Vizille (21 Jul 1788) 1789 What Is the Third Estate?

(Jan 1789) Réveillon riots (28 Apr 1789) Convocation of the Estates General (5 May 1789) Death of the Dauphin (4 June 1789) National Assembly (17 Jun – 9 Jul 1790) Tennis Court Oath (20 Jun 1789) National Constituent Assembly (9 Jul – 30 Sep 1791) Storming of the Bastille (14 Jul 1789) Great Fear (20 Jul – 5 Aug 1789) Abolition of Feudalism (4–11 Aug 1789) Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen (26 Aug 1789) Women's March on Versailles (5 Oct 1789) Nationalization of the Church properties (2 Nov 1789) 1790 Abolition of the Parlements (Feb–Jul 1790) Avignon–Comtat Venaissin War (Jun 1790 – 1791) Abolition of the Nobility (23 Jun 1790) Civil Constitution of the Clergy (12 Jul 1790) Fête de la Fédération (14 Jul 1790) 1791 Flight to Varennes (20–21 Jun 1791) Champ de Mars massacre (17 Jul 1791) Declaration of Pillnitz (27 Aug 1791) The Constitution of 1791 (3 Sep 1791) National Legislative Assembly (1 Oct 1791 – Sep 1792) 1792 France declares war (20 Apr 1792) Brunswick Manifesto (25 Jul 1792) Paris Commune becomes insurrectionary (Jun 1792) 10th of August (10 Aug 1792) September Massacres (Sep 1792) National Convention (20 Sep 1792 – 26 Oct 1795) First republic declared (22 Sep 1792) 1793 Execution of Louis XVI (21 Jan 1793) Revolutionary Tribunal (9 Mar 1793 – 31 May 1795) Reign of Terror (27 Jun 1793 – 27 Jul 1794) Committee of Public Safety Committee of General Security Fall of the Girondists (2 Jun 1793) Assassination of Marat (13 Jul 1793) Levée en masse (23 Aug 1793) The Death of Marat (painting) Law of Suspects (17 Sep 1793) Marie Antoinette is guillotined (16 Oct 1793) Anti-clerical laws (throughout the year) 1794 Danton and Desmoulins guillotined (5 Apr 1794) Law of 22 Prairial (10 Jun 1794) Thermidorian Reaction (27 Jul 1794) Robespierre guillotined  (28 Jul 1794) White Terror (Fall 1794) Closing of the Jacobin Club (11 Nov 1794) 1795–6 Insurrection of 12 Germinal Year III (1 Apr 1795) Constitution of the Year III (22 Aug 1795) Directoire (1795–99) Council of Five Hundred Council of Ancients 13 Vendémiaire (5 Oct 1795) Conspiracy of the Equals (May 1796) 1797 Coup of 18 Fructidor (4 Sep 1797) Second Congress of Rastatt (Dec 1797) 1798 Law of 22 Floréal Year VI (11 May 1798) 1799 Coup of 30 Prairial VII (18 Jun 1799) Coup of 18 Brumaire (9 Nov 1799) Constitution of the Year VIII (24 Dec 1799) Consulate Revolutionary campaigns 1792 Verdun Thionville Valmy Royalist Revolts Chouannerie Vendée Dauphiné Lille Siege of Mainz Jemappes Namur 1793 First Coalition War in the Vendée Battle of Neerwinden Battle of Famars (23 May 1793) Expedition to Sardinia (21 Dec 1792 – 25 May 1793) Battle of Kaiserslautern Siege of Mainz Battle of Wattignies Battle of Hondschoote Siege of Bellegarde Battle of Peyrestortes (Pyrenees) Siege of Toulon (18 Sep – 18 Dec 1793) First Battle of Wissembourg (13 Oct 1793) Battle of Truillas (Pyrenees) Second Battle of Wissembourg (26–27 Dec 1793) 1794 Battle of Villers-en-Cauchies (24 Apr 1794) Second Battle of Boulou (Pyrenees)  (30 Apr – 1 May 1794) Battle of Tourcoing (18 May 1794) Battle of Tournay (22 May 1794) Glorious First of June (1 Jun 1794) Battle of Fleurus (26 Jun 1794) Chouannerie Battle of Aldenhoven (2 Oct 1794) Siege of Luxembourg (22 Nov 1794 – 7 Jun 1795) 1795 Siege of Luxembourg (22 Nov 1794 – 7 Jun 1795) Peace of Basel 1796 Italian campaign (1796) Battle of Lonato (3–4 Aug 1796) Battle of Castiglione (5 Aug 1796) Battle of Theiningen Battle of Neresheim (11 Aug 1796) Battle of Amberg (24 Aug 1796) Battle of Würzburg (3 Sep 1796) Battle of Rovereto (4 Sep 1796) First Battle of Bassano (8 Sep 1796) Battle of Emmendingen (19 Oct 1796) Battle of Schliengen (26 Oct 1796) Second Battle of Bassano (6 Nov 1796) Battle of Calliano (6–7 Nov 1796) Battle of Arcole (15–17 Nov 1796) Ireland expedition (Dec 1796) 1797 Italian campaign (1797) Naval Engagement off Brittany (13 Jan 1797) Battle of Rivoli (14–15 Jan 1797) Battle of the Bay of Cádiz (25 Jan 1797) Treaty of Leoben (17 Apr 1797) Battle of Neuwied (18 Apr 1797) Treaty of Campo Formio (17 Oct 1797) 1798 French invasion of Switzerland (28 January – 17 May 1798) French Invasion of Egypt (1798–1801) Irish Rebellion of 1798 (23 May – 23 Sep 1798) Quasi-War (1798–1800) Peasants' War (12 Oct – 5 Dec 1798) 1799 Second Coalition (1798–1802) Siege of Acre (20 Mar – 21 May 1799) Battle of Ostrach (20–21 Mar 1799) Battle of Stockach (25 Mar 1799) Battle of Magnano (5 Apr 1799) Battle of Cassano (27–28 Apr 1799) First Battle of Zurich (4–7 Jun 1799) Battle of Trebbia (17–20 Jun 1799) Battle of Novi (15 Aug 1799) Second Battle of Zurich (25–26 Sep 1799) 1800 Battle of Marengo (14 Jun 1800) Convention of Alessandria (15 Jun 1800) Battle of Hohenlinden (3 Dec 1800) League of Armed Neutrality (1800–02) 1801 Treaty of Lunéville (9 Feb 1801) Treaty of Florence (18 Mar 1801) Algeciras campaign (8 Jul 1801) 1802 Treaty of Amiens (25 Mar 1802) Treaty of Paris (25 Jun 1802) Military leaders France French Army Eustache Charles d'Aoust Charles-Pierre Augereau Alexandre de Beauharnais Jean-Baptiste Bernadotte Louis-Alexandre Berthier Jean-Baptiste Bessières Napoléon Bonaparte Guillaume Brune Jean François Carteaux Jean-Étienne Championnet Chapuis de Tourville Adam Philippe, Comte de Custine Louis-Nicolas Davout Louis Desaix Jacques François Dugommier Thomas-Alexandre Dumas Charles François Dumouriez Pierre Marie Barthélemy Ferino Louis-Charles de Flers Paul Grenier Emmanuel de Grouchy Jacques Maurice Hatry Lazare Hoche Jean-Baptiste Jourdan François Christophe de Kellermann Jean-Baptiste Kléber Pierre Choderlos de Laclos Jean Lannes Charles Leclerc Claude Lecourbe François Joseph Lefebvre Étienne Macdonald Jean-Antoine Marbot Marcellin Marbot François Séverin Marceau Auguste de Marmont André Masséna Bon-Adrien Jeannot de Moncey Jean Victor Marie Moreau Édouard Mortier, Duke of Trévise Joachim Murat Michel Ney Pierre-Jacques Osten [ fr ] Nicolas Oudinot Catherine-Dominique de Pérignon Jean-Charles Pichegru Józef Poniatowski Laurent de Gouvion Saint-Cyr Barthélemy Louis Joseph Schérer Jean-Mathieu-Philibert Sérurier Joseph Souham Jean-de-Dieu Soult Louis-Gabriel Suchet Belgrand de Vaubois Claude Victor-Perrin, Duc de Belluno French Navy Charles-Alexandre Linois Opposition Austria József Alvinczi Archduke Charles, Duke of Teschen Count of Clerfayt  (Walloon) Karl Aloys zu Fürstenberg Friedrich Freiherr von Hotze  (Swiss) Friedrich Adolf, Count von Kalckreuth Pál Kray  (Hungarian) Charles Eugene, Prince of Lambesc  (French) Maximilian Baillet de Latour  (Walloon) Karl Mack von Leiberich Rudolf Ritter von Otto  (Saxon) Prince Josias of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld Peter Vitus von Quosdanovich Prince Heinrich XV of Reuss-Plauen Johann Mészáros von Szoboszló  (Hungarian) Karl Philipp Sebottendorf Dagobert von Wurmser Britain Sir Ralph Abercromby James Saumarez, 1st Baron de Saumarez Edward Pellew, 1st Viscount Exmouth Prince Frederick, Duke of York and Albany Netherlands William V, Prince of Orange Prussia Charles William Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick Frederick Louis, Prince of Hohenlohe-Ingelfingen Russia Alexander Korsakov Alexander Suvorov Andrei Rosenberg Spain Luis Firmin de Carvajal Antonio Ricardos Other significant figures and factions Patriotic Society of 1789 Jean Sylvain Bailly Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette François Alexandre Frédéric, duc de la Rochefoucauld-Liancourt Isaac René Guy le Chapelier Honoré Gabriel Riqueti, comte de Mirabeau Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord Nicolas de Condorcet Feuillants and monarchiens Grace Elliott Arnaud de La Porte Jean-Sifrein Maury François-Marie, marquis de Barthélemy Guillaume-Mathieu Dumas Antoine Barnave Lafayette Alexandre-Théodore-Victor, comte de Lameth Charles Malo François Lameth André Chénier Jean-François Rewbell Camille Jordan Madame de Staël Boissy d'Anglas Jean-Charles Pichegru Pierre Paul Royer-Collard Bertrand Barère de Vieuzac Girondins Jacques Pierre Brissot Jean-Marie Roland de la Platière Madame Roland Father Henri Grégoire Étienne Clavière Marquis de Condorcet Charlotte Corday Marie Jean Hérault Jean Baptiste Treilhard Pierre Victurnien Vergniaud Jérôme Pétion de Villeneuve Jean Debry Olympe de Gouges Jean-Baptiste Robert Lindet Louis Marie de La Révellière-Lépeaux The Plain Abbé Sieyès de Cambacérès Charles-François Lebrun Pierre-Joseph Cambon Bertrand Barère Lazare Nicolas Marguerite Carnot Philippe Égalité Louis Philippe I Mirabeau Antoine Christophe Merlin de Thionville Jean Joseph Mounier Pierre Samuel du Pont de Nemours François de Neufchâteau Montagnards Maximilien Robespierre Georges Danton Jean-Paul Marat Camille Desmoulins Louis Antoine de Saint-Just Paul Barras Louis Philippe I Louis Michel le Peletier de Saint-Fargeau Jacques-Louis David Marquis de Sade Georges Couthon Roger Ducos Jean-Marie Collot d'Herbois Jean-Henri Voulland Philippe-Antoine Merlin de Douai Antoine Quentin Fouquier-Tinville Philippe-François-Joseph Le Bas Marc-Guillaume Alexis Vadier Jean-Pierre-André Amar Prieur de la Côte-d'Or Prieur de la Marne Gilbert Romme Jean Bon Saint-André Jean-Lambert Tallien Pierre Louis Prieur Antoine Christophe Saliceti Hébertists and Enragés Jacques Hébert Jacques-Nicolas Billaud-Varenne Pierre Gaspard Chaumette Charles-Philippe Ronsin Antoine-François Momoro François-Nicolas Vincent François Chabot Jean Baptiste Noël Bouchotte Jean-Baptiste-Joseph Gobel François Hanriot Jacques Roux Stanislas-Marie Maillard Charles-Philippe Ronsin Jean-François Varlet Theophile Leclerc Claire Lacombe Pauline Léon Gracchus Babeuf Sylvain Maréchal Others Figures Charles X Louis XVI Louis XVII Louis XVIII Louis Antoine, Duke of Enghien Louis Henri, Prince of Condé Louis Joseph, Prince of Condé Marie Antoinette Napoléon Bonaparte Lucien Bonaparte Joseph Bonaparte Joseph Fesch Joséphine de Beauharnais Joachim Murat Jean Sylvain Bailly Jacques-Donatien Le Ray Guillaume-Chrétien de Malesherbes Talleyrand Thérésa Tallien Gui-Jean-Baptiste Target Catherine Théot Madame de Lamballe Madame du Barry Louis de Breteuil de Chateaubriand Jean Chouan Loménie de Brienne Charles Alexandre de Calonne Jacques Necker Jean-Jacques Duval d'Eprémesnil List of people associated with the French Revolution Factions Jacobins Cordeliers Panthéon Club Social Club Influential thinkers Les Lumières Beaumarchais Edmund Burke Anacharsis Cloots Charles-Augustin de Coulomb Pierre Claude François Daunou Diderot Benjamin Franklin Thomas Jefferson Antoine Lavoisier Montesquieu Thomas Paine Jean-Jacques Rousseau Abbé Sieyès Voltaire Mary Wollstonecraft Cultural impact La Marseillaise Cockade of France Flag of France Liberté, égalité, fraternité Marianne Muscadin Bastille Day Panthéon French Republican calendar Metric system Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen Cult of the Supreme Being Cult of Reason Temple of Reason Sans-culottes Phrygian cap Women in the French Revolution Incroyables and merveilleuses Symbolism in the French Revolution Historiography of the French Revolution Influence of the French Revolution Films v t e Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees John Adams John Quincy Adams Jane Addams Louis Agassiz Susan B. Anthony John James Audubon George Bancroft Clara Barton Henry Ward Beecher Alexander Graham Bell Daniel Boone Edwin Booth Louis Brandeis Phillips Brooks William Cullen Bryant Luther Burbank Andrew Carnegie George Washington Carver William Ellery Channing Rufus Choate Henry Clay Grover Cleveland James Fenimore Cooper Peter Cooper Charlotte Cushman James Buchanan Eads Thomas Alva Edison Jonathan Edwards Ralph Waldo Emerson David Farragut Stephen Foster Benjamin Franklin Robert Fulton Josiah W. Gibbs William C. Gorgas Ulysses S. Grant Asa Gray Alexander Hamilton Nathaniel Hawthorne Joseph Henry Patrick Henry Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr.

Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.

Mark Hopkins Elias Howe Washington Irving Andrew Jackson Thomas J. Jackson Thomas Jefferson John Paul Jones James Kent Sidney Lanier Robert E. Lee Abraham Lincoln Henry Wadsworth Longfellow James Russell Lowell Mary Lyon Edward MacDowell James Madison Horace Mann John Marshall Matthew Fontaine Maury Albert A. Michelson Maria Mitchell James Monroe Samuel F. B. Morse William T. G. Morton John Lothrop Motley Simon Newcomb Thomas Paine Alice Freeman Palmer Francis Parkman George Peabody William Penn Edgar Allan Poe Walter Reed Franklin D. Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Augustus Saint-Gaudens William Tecumseh Sherman John Philip Sousa Joseph Story Harriet Beecher Stowe Gilbert Stuart Sylvanus Thayer Henry David Thoreau Mark Twain Lillian Wald Booker T. Washington George Washington Daniel Webster George Westinghouse James McNeill Whistler Walt Whitman Eli Whitney John Greenleaf Whittier Emma Willard Frances Willard Roger Williams Woodrow Wilson Orville Wright Wilbur Wright v t e Universal basic income topics Topics Basic income models Citizen's dividend Economic security Freedom dividend Guaranteed minimum income Jobless recovery Mincome Negative income tax Real freedom Right to an adequate standard of living Technological unemployment Universal basic income pilots Universal inheritance Organizations Basic Income Alliance Basic Income Earth Network Basic Income Party Breakthrough Party Enhet Five Star Movement Forward Party Fusion Party Génération.s Green Party Left Alliance LIVRE Mein Grundeinkommen MERA25 Party of Humanists People Animals Nature Pirate Party Podemos Political Party for Basic Income ReCivitas Sustainable Australia Party Vivant Volt Europa Advocates Historic Tony Atkinson C. H. Douglas Milton Friedman Stephen Hawking Ailsa McKay James Meade Thomas Paine Juliet Rhys-Williams Anthony Barber Contemporary Rutger Bregman Étienne Chouard Harry F. Dahms Uffe Elbæk André Gorz Sepp Kusstatscher Guy Standing Eduardo Suplicy Philippe Van Parijs Carole Pateman Christopher Pissarides Claus Offe Katja Kipping Götz Werner Richard David Precht Valter Mutt Annika Lillemets Osmo Soininvaara Li Andersson Susanne Wiest Birger Schlaug Christian Engström Benoît Hamon Björn Wahlroos Andrew Yang Related programs Alaska Permanent Fund Asignación Universal por Hijo Brazil ( Bolsa Família , Auxílio Brasil ) Iranian subsidy reform plan Omitara Quatinga Velho Social dividend By region Brazil Canada Germany India Japan Netherlands Nordic countries United Kingdom United States Global Works Agrarian Justice (pamphlet) Bullshit Jobs (book) Inventing the Future: Postcapitalism and a World Without Work (monograph) The War on Normal People (book) Utopia for Realists (book) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy 2 Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile 2 Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz People Netherlands Sycomore Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef NARA SNAC RISM Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thomas_Paine&oldid=1303697590 " Categories : Thomas Paine Founding Fathers of the United States 1737 births 1809 deaths 18th-century American inventors 18th-century American male writers 18th-century American philosophers 18th-century American writers 18th-century English male writers 18th-century English people 18th-century English writers 19th-century American writers 19th-century English writers 19th-century American philosophers 19th-century American male writers Activists from New Rochelle, New York Abolitionists from New York City American critics of religions American deists American foreign policy writers American libertarians American male non-fiction writers American nationalists American pamphleteers American philosophers of culture American philosophers of education American philosophers of religion American political philosophers American religious skeptics American revolutionaries Anti-monarchists British deists British emigrants to the Thirteen Colonies British people of the American Revolution British radicals Classical liberalism Deist philosophers Deputies to the French National Convention English businesspeople English inventors English libertarians English privateers English republicans Enlightenment philosophers Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees Members of the American Philosophical Society Naturalized citizens of France Patriots in the American Revolution People convicted in absentia People educated at Thetford Grammar School People from Bordentown, New Jersey People from Greenwich Village People from Thetford People of the American Enlightenment Philosophers of history Political activists from Pennsylvania Political leaders of the American Revolution Prisoners sentenced to death by France Social philosophers Theorists on Western civilization Universal basic income writers Victims of body snatching Writers about activism and social change Writers from New Rochelle, New York Writers from Norfolk Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNB Pages with missing ISBNs CS1 maint: publisher location CS1 French-language sources (fr) Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2021 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from January 2021 Use American English from April 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Biography with signature Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 Articles containing French-language text Articles with excerpts Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Pages using Sister project links with default search Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 14:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Thomas Paine 86 languages Add topic

