Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Surface melting 2 Examples of regelation 3 Misconceptions 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Regelation 15 languages Català Čeština Deutsch Español Italiano 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Slovenščina Svenska தமிழ் Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Physical phenomenon Not to be confused with Relegation .

This article or section appears to contradict itself .

Please see the talk page for more information.

( March 2024 ) Classic experiment involving regelation of an ice block as a tensioned wire passes through it.

Regelation is the phenomenon of ice melting under pressure and refreezing when the pressure is reduced. This can be demonstrated by looping a fine wire around a block of ice, with a heavy weight attached to it. The pressure exerted on the ice slowly melts it locally, permitting the wire to pass through the entire block. The wire's track will refill as soon as pressure is relieved, so the ice block will remain intact even after wire passes completely through. This experiment is possible for ice at −10 °C or cooler, and while essentially valid, the details of the process by which the wire passes through the ice are complex.

[ 1 ] The phenomenon works best with high thermal conductivity materials such as copper, since latent heat of fusion from the top side needs to be transferred to the lower side to supply latent heat of melting. In short, the phenomenon in which ice converts to liquid due to applied pressure and then re-converts to ice once the pressure is removed is called regelation.

Regelation was discovered by Michael Faraday . It occurs only for substances such as ice, that have the property of expanding upon freezing, for the melting points of those substances decrease with the increasing external pressure. The melting point of ice falls by 0.0072 °C for each additional atm of pressure applied. For example, a pressure of 500 atmospheres is needed for ice to melt at −4 °C.

[ 2 ] Surface melting [ edit ] Melting curve of ice Molecular structure of ice near the surface For a normal crystalline ice far below its melting point, there will be some relaxation of the atoms near the surface. Simulations of ice near to its melting point show that there is significant melting of the surface layers rather than a symmetric relaxation of atom positions.

Nuclear magnetic resonance provided evidence for a liquid layer on the surface of ice. In 1998, using atomic force microscopy , Astrid Döppenschmidt and Hans-Jürgen Butt measured the thickness of the liquid-like layer on ice to be roughly 32 nm at −1 °C, and 11 nm at −10 °C.

[ 3 ] The surface melting can account for the following: Low coefficient of friction of ice, as experienced by skaters.

Ease of compaction of ice High adhesion of ice surfaces Examples of regelation [ edit ] A glacier can exert a sufficient amount of pressure on its lower surface to lower the melting point of its ice. The melting of the ice at the glacier's base allows it to move from a higher elevation to a lower elevation. Liquid water may flow from the base of a glacier at lower elevations when the temperature of the air is above the freezing point of water.

Misconceptions [ edit ] At least one 1992 article suggests it is a slightly misconceived misconception to ascribe regelation to ice skating .

[ 4 ] The problem with matching the (large) magnitude of the water-ice p-V gradient above the triple point boundary with the magnitudes of prevailing temperature and pressure in the case of the ice skating context applies equally in the context of the classic lab experiment with a copper wire cutting through an 10cm ice block with say a 28 swg wire. The misconception is not that these observations fail to be regelation but that regelation can be explained (solely) in terms of the magnitude of p-V gradient above the triple point. There is much more going on. Regelation is empirical—it is a phenomenon as was, for example, Brownian Motion before, during, and arguably even after Einstein modelled it. It has been so widely observed and described that we generalise to describing it in terms of pressure causing increased surface melting. The recognition of this phenomenon in all the mentioned contexts is not in doubt. Car tyres work in snow even though there is some increased surface melting because they have tread which allows water to be liberated.

Ice skating is given as an example of regelation; however, the pressure required is much greater than the weight of a skater.  Additionally, regelation does not explain how one can ice skate at sub-zero (0°C) temperatures.

[ 5 ] Compaction and creation of snow balls is another example from old texts. Here, the pressure required is far greater than the pressure that can be applied by hand. A counter example is that cars do not melt snow as they run over it.

See also [ edit ] Premelting References [ edit ] ^ Drake, L. D.; Shreve, R. L. (1973). "Pressure Melting and Regelation of Ice by Round Wires".

Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences .

332 (1588): 51.

Bibcode : 1973RSPSA.332...51D .

doi : 10.1098/rspa.1973.0013 .

S2CID 137274632 .

^ Glossary of Meteorology: Regelation Archived 2006-02-25 at the Wayback Machine , American Meteorological Society, 2000 ^ Döppenschmidt, Astrid; Butt, Hans-Jürgen (2000-07-11). "Measuring the Thickness of the Liquid-like Layer on Ice Surfaces with Atomic Force Microscopy".

Langmuir .

16 (16): 6709– 6714.

doi : 10.1021/la990799w .

^ White, James D. (1992).

"The role of surface melting in ice skating" .

The Physics Teacher .

30 (8): 495– 497.

Bibcode : 1992PhTea..30..495W .

doi : 10.1119/1.2343616 .

^ White, James. The Physics Teacher, 30, 495 (1992).

v t e States of matter ( list , timeline ) State Solid Liquid Gas / Vapor Supercritical fluid Plasma Low energy Bose–Einstein condensate Fermionic condensate Degenerate matter Quantum Hall Rydberg matter Strange matter Superfluid Supersolid Photonic molecule High energy QCD matter Quark–gluon plasma Color-glass condensate Other states Colloid Crystal Liquid crystal Time crystal Quantum spin liquid Exotic matter Programmable matter Dark matter Antimatter Magnetically ordered Antiferromagnet Ferrimagnet Ferromagnet String-net liquid Superglass Phase transitions Boiling Boiling point Condensation Critical line Critical point Crystallization Deposition Evaporation Flash evaporation Freezing Chemical ionization Ionization Lambda point Melting Melting point Recombination Regelation Saturated fluid Sublimation Supercooling Triple point Vaporization Vitrification Quantities Enthalpy of fusion Enthalpy of sublimation Enthalpy of vaporization Latent heat Latent internal energy Trouton's rule Volatility Concepts Baryonic matter Binodal Compressed fluid Cooling curve Equation of state Leidenfrost effect Macroscopic quantum phenomena Mpemba effect Order and disorder (physics) Spinodal Superconductivity Superheated vapor Superheating Thermo-dielectric effect Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Regelation&oldid=1296844111 " Category : Thermodynamics Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Self-contradictory articles from March 2024 All self-contradictory articles This page was last edited on 22 June 2025, at 17:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Regelation 15 languages Add topic

