Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 By industry Toggle By industry subsection 1.1 Financial asset management 1.2 Physical and Infrastructure asset management 1.3 Engineering asset management 1.4 Natural asset management 2 See also Toggle See also subsection 2.1 Software asset management 2.2 ISO standard for asset management 2.3 Enterprise asset management 2.4 Public asset management 3 Intellectual and non-physical asset management 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Asset management 30 languages العربية Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Čeština Dansk Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu Italiano Lietuvių Magyar Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenščina کوردی Türkçe Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Systematic method of maintaining assets Business administration Accounting Management accounting Financial accounting Audit Business entity ( list ) Corporate group Corporation sole Company Conglomerate Holding company Cooperative Corporation Joint-stock company Limited liability company Partnership Privately held company Sole proprietorship State-owned enterprise Corporate governance Annual general meeting Board of directors Supervisory board Advisory board Audit committee Corporate law Commercial law Constitutional documents Contract Corporate crime Corporate liability Insolvency law International trade law Mergers and acquisitions Corporate title Chairman Chief business officer / Chief brand officer Chief executive officer / Chief operating officer Chief financial officer Chief human resources officer Chief information officer / Chief marketing officer Chief product officer / Chief technology officer Economics Commodity Public economics Labour economics Development economics International economics Mixed economy Planned economy Econometrics Environmental economics Open economy Market economy Knowledge economy Microeconomics Macroeconomics Economic development Economic statistics Finance Financial statement Insurance Factoring Cash conversion cycle Insider dealing Capital budgeting Commercial bank Derivative Financial statement analysis Financial risk Public finance Corporate finance Managerial finance International finance Liquidation Stock market Financial market Tax Financial institution Capital management Venture capital Types of management Asset Brand Business intelligence Business development Capacity Capability Change innovation Commercial Marketing Communications Configuration Conflict Content Customer relationship Distributed Earned value Electronic business Enterprise resource planning management information system Financial Human resource development Incident Knowledge Legal Materials Network administrator Office Operations services Performance Power Process Product life-cycle Product Project Property Quality Records Resource Risk crisis Sales Security Service Strategic Supply chain Systems administrator Talent Technology Organization Architecture Behavior Communication Culture Conflict Development Engineering Hierarchy Patterns Space Structure Trade Business analysis Business ethics Business plan Business judgment rule Consumer behaviour International business Business model International trade Trade route Business process Business statistics Business and economics portal v t e Modern portfolio theory suggests a diversified portfolio of shares and other asset classes (such as debt in corporate bonds , treasury bonds , or money market funds ) will realise more predictable returns if there is prudent market regulation.

Asset management is a systematic approach to the governance and realization of all value for which a group or entity is responsible. It may apply both to tangible assets (physical objects such as complex process or manufacturing plants, infrastructure, buildings or equipment) and to intangible assets (such as intellectual property , goodwill or financial assets ). Asset management is a systematic process of developing, operating, maintaining, upgrading, and disposing of assets in the most cost-effective manner (including all costs, risks, and performance attributes).

[ 1 ] Theory of asset management primarily deals with the periodic matter of improving, maintaining or in other circumstances assuring the economic and capital value of an asset over time.

[ 2 ] The term is commonly used in engineering, the business world, and public infrastructure sectors to ensure a coordinated approach to the optimization of costs, risks, service/performance, and sustainability. The term has traditionally been used in the financial sector to describe people and companies who manage investments on behalf of others. Those include, for example, investment managers who manage the assets of a pension fund .

The ISO 55000 series of standards, developed by ISO TC 251 , are the international standards for Asset Management.

ISO 55000 provides an introduction and requirements specification for a management system for asset management. The ISO 55000 standard defines an asset as an "item, thing or entity that has potential or actual value to an organization". ISO 55001 specifies requirements for an asset management system within the context of the organization, and ISO 55002 gives guidelines for the application of an asset management system, in accordance with the requirements of ISO 55001.

By industry [ edit ] Financial asset management [ edit ] The most frequent usage of the term portfolio manager (asset manager) refers to investment management , the sector of the financial services industry that manages investment funds and segregated client accounts . Asset management is part of a financial company that employs experts who manage money and handle the investments of clients. This is done either actively or passively.

Active asset management : involves active tasks such as studying the client's assets to plan and look after the investments, all things are looked after by the asset managers, and recommendations are provided based on the financial health of each client. Active asset management comes at a higher price to investors because more work is involved.

Passive asset management : assets are allocated to mirror a market or a sector index. Unlike active asset management, passive asset management is a lot less laborious. It is also less tailored, requires less looking after, and consequently is cheaper for investors. Benjamin Braun [ 3 ] suggests that, since American stock ownership is concentrated on few big asset managers which are very diversified and do not have a direct interest in the performance of the companies, this emerging "asset manager capitalism" is distinct from the earlier shareholder primacy .

Physical and Infrastructure asset management [ edit ] Main article: Infrastructure asset management Physical and Infrastructure asset management is the combination of management, financial, economic, engineering, and other practices applied to physical assets to provide the best value level of service for the costs involved. It includes the management of the entire life cycle—including design, construction, commissioning, operating, maintaining, repairing, modifying, replacing, and decommissioning/disposal—of physical and infrastructure assets.

[ 4 ] Operation and maintenance of assets in a constrained budget environment require a prioritization scheme. As a way of illustration, the recent development of renewable energy has seen the rise of effective asset managers involved in the management of solar systems (solar parks, rooftops, and windmills). These teams often collaborate with financial asset managers in order to offer turnkey solutions to investors.

Infrastructure asset management became very important in most of the developed countries in the 21st century, since their infrastructure network was almost completed in the 20th century and they have to manage to operate and maintain them cost-effectively.

[ 5 ] Physical, or Infrastructure Asset Management is a growing specialist engineering discipline, with many international technical societies now established to advance knowledge in this area, including the Engineers Australia technical society of the Asset Management Council (AMC), [ 6 ] the World Partners in Asset Management (WPiAM), [ 7 ] Society for Maintenance and Reliability Professionals (SMRP), [ 8 ] the Institute of Asset Management (IAM), [ 9 ] the International Society of Engineering Asset Management (ISEAM), [ 10 ] and the Global Forum on Maintenance and Asset Management (GFMAM).

[ 11 ] Engineering asset management [ edit ] Engineering asset management [ 12 ] is a more recent term that is used to describe the management of complex physical assets, a specific engineering practice that is concerned with optimizing assets, in the context of the organizations goals and objectives, through using multidiscipline engineering methodologies, and Terotechnology (which includes management, engineering, and financial expertise), to balance cost, risk, and performance. Engineering asset management includes multiple engineering disciplines, including but not limited to maintenance engineering , systems engineering , reliability engineering , process safety management , industrial engineering , and risk analysis . Engineering asset management is a term synonymous with physical and infrastructure asset management, it is used to describe management of more complex physical assets which require the application of specialist asset management engineering methods over their life-cycles in order to maximize value for their owners, whilst keeping risk to an acceptable level.

Natural asset management [ edit ] On October 28, 2021, political leaders in the Malaysian state of Sabah on the island of Borneo signed an agreement with the Singapore shell company Hoch Standard, without the knowledge of Indigenous communities, giving the company title to the management and marketing of “natural capital/ecosystem services” on two million hectares of a forest ecosystem for one hundred to two hundred years.

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Natural capital Ecosystem service Natural assets include things such as forests , marine areas , peatlands , and farmland . To manage and invest in these assets, Natural asset companies (NACs) are a new type of company designed to give private investors a vehicle for direct investment in conservation and regenerative land management . NACs license rights to the value of natural assets, including ecosystem services such as carbon retention, freshwater generation, groundwater storage, pollination, and erosion prevention. They are intended to manage designated areas, such as forests, grasslands, marine areas, or farms and ranches. NACs have an equity capital structure.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] In September 2021, the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) and Intrinsic Exchange Group (IEG) jointly announced plans to introduce NACs as a publicly listed asset class.

[ 14 ] The NYSE filed a listing proposal with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) , intending to allow NACs to be traded publicly, but withdrew the proposal in January 2024 amid political backlash. IEG continues to advance NACs in private markets and to assist landowners and companies in setting up natural asset companies.

[ 13 ] Criticisms of these newly emerging forms of asset question have come from the political left and right. Right-wing critics argue NACs could be used to lock up public lands. Opposition from the left has reflected concerns that market solutions are not a responsible mode of stewardship for natural assets.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Supporters argue that NACs incentivize landowners to conserve and improve the natural capital as it correlates to the value of the company, and investors are rewarded for gains in the value of the underlying natural assets.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Software asset management [ edit ] Main article: Software asset management SAM is a sub-discipline of IT asset management .

ISO standard for asset management [ edit ] The International Organization for Standardization published its management system standard for asset management in 2014.

[ 18 ] The ISO 55000 series provides terminology, requirements, and guidance for implementing, maintaining and improving an effective asset management system. The key to forming a structure of this sort is directly connected to local governance.

Physical asset management: the practice of managing the entire life cycle (design, construction, commissioning, operating, maintaining, repairing, modifying, replacing, and decommissioning/disposal) of physical and infrastructure assets such as structures, production, and service plant, power, water, and waste treatment facilities, distribution networks, transport systems, buildings, and other physical assets.  The increasing availability of data from asset systems is allowing the principles of Total Cost of Ownership to be applied to facility management of an individual system, a building, or across a campus.  Physical asset management is related to asset health management .

Infrastructure asset management expands on this theme in relation primarily to the public sector, utilities , property, and transport systems. Additionally, Asset Management can refer to shaping the future interfaces between the human, built, and natural environments through collaborative and evidence-based decision processes Fixed assets management : an accounting process that seeks to track fixed assets for financial accounting IT asset management : the set of business practices that join financial, contractual, and inventory functions to support life cycle management and strategic decision making for the IT environment.

Digital asset management : a form of electronic media content management that includes digital assets Enterprise asset management [ edit ] Enterprise asset management (EAM) systems are asset information systems that support the management of an organization's assets.   An EAM includes an asset registry (inventory of assets and their attributes) combined with a computerized maintenance management system (CMMS) and other modules (such as inventory or materials management). Assets that are geographically distributed, interconnected or networked, are often also represented through the use of geographic information systems (GIS) .

GIS-centric asset registry standardizes data and improves interoperability, providing users the capability to reuse, coordinate, and share information efficiently and effectively. A GIS platform combined with information of both the "hard" and "soft" assets helps to remove the traditional silos of departmental functions. While the hard assets are the typical physical assets or infrastructure assets, the soft assets might include permits, licenses, brands, patents, right-of-ways, and other entitlements or valued items.

The EAM system is only one of the 'enablers' of good asset management.  Asset managers need to make informed decisions to fulfill their organizational goals, this requires good asset information but also leadership, clarity of strategic priorities, competencies, inter-departmental collaboration and communications, workforce, and supply chain engagement, risk and change management systems, performance monitoring, and continual improvement.

Public asset management [ edit ] Public asset management expands the definition of enterprise asset management (EAM) by incorporating the management of all things of value to a municipal jurisdiction and its citizens' expectations. An example in which public asset management is used is land-use development and planning.

Intellectual and non-physical asset management [ edit ] Increasingly both consumers and organizations use assets, e.g. software, music, books, etc. where the user's rights are constrained by a license agreement. An asset management system would identify the constraints upon such licenses, e.g. a period. If, for example, one licenses software, often the license is for a given period. Adobe and Microsoft both offer time-based software licenses. In both the corporate and consumer worlds, there is a distinction between software ownership and the updating of software. One may own a version of the software, but not newer versions of the software. Cellular phones are often not updated by vendors, in an attempt to force a purchase of newer hardware. Large companies such as Oracle , that license software to clients distinguish between the right to use and the right to receive maintenance/support.

[ 19 ] See also [ edit ] Asset management firm Capital management Chief investment officer Industrial engineering Institutional investor ISO 55000 IT asset management List of asset management firms Maintenance engineering Mutual fund P2P asset management Process safety management Reliability engineering Risk analysis (engineering) Real estate management Outline of management Software asset management Systems engineering Terotechnology References [ edit ] ^ Vanier, D. J. "Dana" (2001).

"Why Industry Needs Asset Management Tools" .

Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering .

15 . American Society of Civil Engineers: 35– 43.

doi : 10.1061/(ASCE)0887-3801(2001)15:1(35) .

S2CID 110643751 .

^ Schneider, Joachim; Gaul, Armin J.; Neumann, Claus; Hogräfer, Jürgen; Wellßow, Wolfram; Schwan, Michael; Schnettler, Armin (2006).

"Asset management techniques" (PDF) .

International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems .

28 (9): 643– 654.

doi : 10.1016/j.ijepes.2006.03.007 . Retrieved 15 March 2023 .

^ Braun, Benjamin (18 June 2020). Hacker, J. S.; Hertel-Fernandez, A.; Pierson, P.; Thelen, K. (eds.).

"Asset Manager Capitalism as a Corporate Governance Regime" .

American Political Economy:  Politics, Markets, and Power . SocArXiv.

doi : 10.31235/osf.io/v6gue . Retrieved 7 August 2024 .

^ "What is Asset Management" .

amcouncil.com.au .

^ Vanier, D. (2001) Why Industry Needs Asset Management Tools. ASCE Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering. Vol 15(1) ^ "The Asset Management Council" .

amcouncil.com.au .

^ "World Partners in Asset Management" .

wpiam.com .

^ "Society for Maintenance and Reliability Professionals" .

smrp.org .

^ "The Institute of Asset Management" .

theiam.org .

^ "The International Society on Engineering Asset Management" .

iseam.org .

^ "Global Forum on Maintenance and Asset Management" .

gfmam.org .

^ "World Congress on Engineering Asset Management" .

wceam.com .

^ a b Foster, John Bellamy (March 2022).

"The Defense of Nature: Resisting the Financializaton of the Earth" .

Monthly Review .

73 (10): np – via Monthly Review website.

^ a b c IEG.

"How NAC's Work" .

Intrinsic Exchange Group . Retrieved Jan 17, 2024 .

^ a b United Nations Capital Development Fund, (UNCDF).

"Nature Asset" .

UNCDF.ORG . Retrieved January 18, 2024 .

^ Fries, Lynn (July 8, 2022).

"The Capitalist Solution to 'Save' the Planet: Make It an Asset Class & Sell it" .

GPENewsdocs . pp. np . Retrieved Jan 18, 2024 .

John Bellamy Foster explains the 'solution' master-minded by global finance to resolve the imminent environmental crisis: create a multi-quadrillion dollars' worth of assets on the back of everything nature does and expropriate it from the global commons to make a profit. Worse still: it is already happening.

^ Foster, John Bellamy (Mar 1, 2022).

"Nature as a Mode of Accumulation: Capitalism and the Financialization of the Earth" .

Monthly Review .

73 (10). Monthly Review (published March 2022) – via Monthly Review website.

^ "ISO 55000:2014 – Asset management — Overview, principles, and Terminology" . International Organization for Standardization . Retrieved August 21, 2019 .

^ "The Best Asset Management Software of 2018" .

pcmag.com .

Further reading [ edit ] Baird, G. "Defining Public Asset Management for Municipal Water Utilities".

Journal American Water Works Association May 2011, 103:5:30, www.awwa.org Global Forum on Maintenance and Asset Management "The asset Management Landscape - Second Edition".

Gfmam.org March 2014, gfmam.org/webform/download-the-am-landscape-v2 SEBOK.org, Systems Engineering Body of Knowledge (SEBoK) External links [ edit ] Library resources about Asset management Resources in your library ISO/TC 251 - ISO Asset Management Information ISO page for ISO 55000 IAM page for an introduction to Asset Management Stages in IT Asset Lifecycle Management v t e General areas of finance Alternative investment Angel investor Super angel Asset (economics) Asset allocation Bad debt Bond (finance) Bull (stock market speculator) Asset growth Capital asset Capital management Capital structure Climate finance Computational finance Corporate finance Cost of capital Debt Disinvestment Diversification (finance) Divestment Eco-investing Enterprise risk management Environmental finance Equity (finance) ESG Exchange-traded fund Experimental finance Financial analysis analyst asset crime deepening economics engineering inclusion institutions management market plan planner regulation risk services social work system Financial technology Fundamental analysis Government bond Greater fool theory Growth investing Growth stock Hedge (finance) History of banking History of money Impact investing International finance Investment advisory Investment banking Investment management Investment performance Investor profile Market risk Mathematical finance Mutual fund Over-the-counter Pension fund Personal finance Position of trust Public finance Quantitative behavioral finance Quantum finance Risk–return spectrum Social finance Speculation Statistical finance Stock exchange Stockbroker Strategic financial management Statistical finance Stock Structured finance Structured product Sustainability Sustainable Development Goals Sustainable finance Swap (finance) Systematic risk Too big to fail Toxic asset Valuation using discounted cash flows Watered stock v t e Financial risk and financial risk management Categories Credit risk Consumer credit risk Sovereign credit risk Settlement risk Default risk Concentration risk Credit derivative Securitization Market risk Commodity risk (e.g.

Volume risk , Basis risk , Shape risk , Holding period risk , Price area risk ) Equity risk Valuation risk FX risk Margining risk Interest rate risk Inflation risk Volatility risk Liquidity risk (e.g.

Refinancing risk , Deposit risk ) Operational risk Operational risk management Business risk Model risk Reputational risk Country risk Political risk Legal risk Other Execution risk Profit risk Systemic risk Non-financial risk Modeling Arbitrage pricing theory Black–Scholes model Replicating portfolio Cash flow matching Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR) Copula Drawdown First-hitting-time model Interest rate immunization Market portfolio Modern portfolio theory Omega ratio RAROC Risk-free rate Risk parity Sharpe ratio Sortino ratio Survival analysis ( Proportional hazards model ) Tracking error Value-at-Risk (VaR) and extensions ( Profit at risk , Margin at risk , Liquidity at risk , Cash flow at risk , Earnings at risk ) Basic concepts Asset allocation Asset and liability management Asset pricing Bad debt Capital asset Capital structure Corporate finance Cost of capital Diversification Economic bubble Enterprise value ESG Exchange traded fund Expected return Financial adviser analysis analyst asset betting crime engineering law risk social work Fundamental analysis Growth investing Hazard Hedge Investment management Risk Risk pool Risk of ruin Systematic risk Mathematical finance Moral hazard Risk-return spectrum Speculation Speculative attack Statistical finance Strategic financial management Stress test (financial) Structured finance Structured product Systemic risk Toxic asset Financial economics Investment management Mathematical finance Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐27pc9
Cached time: 20250812003608
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.477 seconds
Real time usage: 0.652 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1842/1000000
Revision size: 20515/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 92819/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1136/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 95784/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.304/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6038947/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  536.516      1 -total
 44.88%  240.778      1 Template:Reflist
 20.71%  111.138     12 Template:Cite_web
 19.42%  104.176      5 Template:Cite_journal
 16.93%   90.810      1 Template:Business_administration
 16.53%   88.675      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 13.67%   73.318      1 Template:Short_description
  6.97%   37.372      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.87%   36.856      1 Template:Authority_control
  6.81%   36.554      3 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:6570919:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812003608 and revision id 1305203218. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Asset_management&oldid=1305203218 " Categories : Asset management Management accounting Valuation (finance) Engineering Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 17:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Asset management 30 languages Add topic

