Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 How singularities may arise 2 Singularities in algebraic geometry Toggle Singularities in algebraic geometry subsection 2.1 Algebraic curve singularities 2.2 The general position of singularities in algebraic geometry 3 The smooth theory and catastrophes Toggle The smooth theory and catastrophes subsection 3.1 Arnold's view 3.2 Duality 4 Other possible meanings 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References Toggle the table of contents Singularity theory 7 languages Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article is about the mathematical discipline. For other geometric uses, see Singular point of a curve . For other mathematical uses, see Singularity (mathematics) . For non-mathematical uses, see Singularity (disambiguation) .

Mathematical theory This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( October 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Singularity theory" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In mathematics , singularity theory studies spaces that are almost manifolds , but not quite. A string can serve as an example of a one-dimensional manifold, if one neglects its thickness. A singularity can be made by balling it up, dropping it on the floor, and flattening it. In some places the flat string will cross itself in an approximate "X" shape. The points on the floor where it does this are one kind of singularity , the double point: one bit of the floor corresponds to more than one bit of string. Perhaps the string will also touch itself without crossing, like an underlined " U ". This is another kind of singularity. Unlike the double point, it is not stable , in the sense that a small push will lift the bottom of the "U" away from the "underline".

Vladimir Arnold defines the main goal of singularity theory as describing how objects depend on parameters, particularly in cases where the properties undergo sudden change under a small variation of the parameters. These situations are called perestroika ( Russian : перестройка ), bifurcations or catastrophes. Classifying the types of changes and characterizing sets of parameters which give rise to these changes are some of the main mathematical goals. Singularities can occur in a wide range of mathematical objects, from matrices depending on parameters to wavefronts.

[ 1 ] How singularities may arise [ edit ] In singularity theory the general phenomenon of points and sets of singularities is studied, as part of the concept that manifolds (spaces without singularities) may acquire special, singular points by a number of routes.

Projection is one way, very obvious in visual terms when three-dimensional objects are projected into two dimensions (for example in one of our eyes ); in looking at classical statuary the folds of drapery are amongst the most obvious features. Singularities of this kind include caustics , very familiar as the light patterns at the bottom of a swimming pool.

Other ways in which singularities occur is by degeneration of manifold structure. The presence of symmetry can be good cause to consider orbifolds , which are manifolds that have acquired "corners" in a process of folding up, resembling the creasing of a table napkin.

Singularities in algebraic geometry [ edit ] Algebraic curve singularities [ edit ] A curve with double point A curve with a cusp Historically, singularities were first noticed in the study of algebraic curves . The double point at (0, 0) of the curve y 2 = x 2 + x 3 {\displaystyle y^{2}=x^{2}+x^{3}} and the cusp there of y 2 = x 3 {\displaystyle y^{2}=x^{3}\ } are qualitatively different, as is seen just by sketching.

Isaac Newton carried out a detailed study of all cubic curves , the general family to which these examples belong. It was noticed in the formulation of Bézout's theorem that such singular points must be counted with multiplicity (2 for a double point, 3 for a cusp), in accounting for intersections of curves.

It was then a short step to define the general notion of a singular point of an algebraic variety ; that is, to allow higher dimensions.

The general position of singularities in algebraic geometry [ edit ] Such singularities in algebraic geometry are the easiest in principle to study, since they are defined by polynomial equations and therefore in terms of a coordinate system . One can say that the extrinsic meaning of a singular point isn't in question; it is just that in intrinsic terms the coordinates in the ambient space don't straightforwardly translate the geometry of the algebraic variety at the point. Intensive studies of such singularities led in the end to Heisuke Hironaka 's fundamental theorem on resolution of singularities (in birational geometry in characteristic 0). This means that the simple process of "lifting" a piece of string off itself, by the "obvious" use of the cross-over at a double point, is not essentially misleading: all the singularities of algebraic geometry can be recovered as some sort of very general collapse (through multiple processes). This result is often implicitly used to extend affine geometry to projective geometry : it is entirely typical for an affine variety to acquire singular points on the hyperplane at infinity , when its closure in projective space is taken. Resolution says that such singularities can be handled rather as a (complicated) sort of compactification , ending up with a compact manifold (for the strong topology, rather than the Zariski topology , that is).

The smooth theory and catastrophes [ edit ] At about the same time as Hironaka's work, the catastrophe theory of René Thom was receiving a great deal of attention. This is another branch of singularity theory, based on earlier work of Hassler Whitney on critical points . Roughly speaking, a critical point of a smooth function is where the level set develops a singular point in the geometric sense. This theory deals with differentiable functions in general, rather than just polynomials. To compensate, only the stable phenomena are considered. One can argue that in nature, anything destroyed by tiny changes is not going to be observed; the visible is the stable. Whitney had shown that in low numbers of variables the stable structure of critical points is very restricted, in local terms. Thom built on this, and his own earlier work, to create a catastrophe theory supposed to account for discontinuous change in nature.

Arnold's view [ edit ] While Thom was an eminent mathematician, the subsequent fashionable nature of elementary catastrophe theory as propagated by Christopher Zeeman caused a reaction, in particular on the part of Vladimir Arnold .

[ 2 ] He may have been largely responsible for applying the term singularity theory to the area including the input from algebraic geometry, as well as that flowing from the work of Whitney, Thom and other authors. He wrote in terms making clear his distaste for the too-publicised emphasis on a small part of the territory. The foundational work on smooth singularities is formulated as the construction of equivalence relations on singular points, and germs . Technically this involves group actions of Lie groups on spaces of jets ; in less abstract terms Taylor series are examined up to change of variable, pinning down singularities with enough derivatives . Applications, according to Arnold, are to be seen in symplectic geometry , as the geometric form of classical mechanics .

Duality [ edit ] An important reason why singularities cause problems in mathematics is that, with a failure of manifold structure, the invocation of Poincaré duality is also disallowed. A major advance was the introduction of intersection cohomology , which arose initially from attempts to restore duality by use of strata. Numerous connections and applications stemmed from the original idea, for example the concept of perverse sheaf in homological algebra .

Other possible meanings [ edit ] The theory mentioned above does not directly relate to the concept of mathematical singularity as a value at which a function is not defined. For that, see for example isolated singularity , essential singularity , removable singularity . The monodromy theory of differential equations , in the complex domain, around singularities, does however come into relation with the geometric theory. Roughly speaking, monodromy studies the way a covering map can degenerate, while singularity theory studies the way a manifold can degenerate; and these fields are linked.

See also [ edit ] Tangent Zariski tangent space General position Contact (mathematics) Singular solution Stratification (mathematics) Intersection homology Mixed Hodge structure Whitney umbrella Round function Victor Goryunov Notes [ edit ] ^ Arnold, V. I. (2000).

"Singularity Theory" .

www.newton.ac.uk . Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences . Retrieved 31 May 2016 .

^ Arnold 1992 References [ edit ] V.I. Arnold (1992).

Catastrophe Theory . Springer-Verlag.

ISBN 978-3540548119 .

E. Brieskorn; H. Knörrer (1986).

Plane Algebraic Curves . Birkhauser-Verlag.

ISBN 978-3764317690 .

R. Abraham and J. Marsden (1987).

Foundations of Mechanics, Second Edition . Benjamin/Cummings Publishing Company.

v t e Manifolds ( Glossary , List , Category ) Basic concepts Topological manifold Atlas Differentiable/Smooth manifold Differential structure Smooth atlas Submanifold Riemannian manifold Smooth map Submersion Pushforward Tangent space Differential form Vector field Main results (list) Atiyah–Singer index Darboux's De Rham's Frobenius Generalized Stokes Hopf–Rinow Noether's Sard's Whitney embedding Maps Curve Diffeomorphism Local Geodesic Exponential map in Lie theory Foliation Immersion Integral curve Lie derivative Section Submersion Types of manifolds Closed Collapsing Complete ( Almost ) Complex ( Almost ) Contact Fibered Finsler ( Almost ) Flat G-structure Hadamard Hermitian Hyperbolic Kähler Kenmotsu Lie group Lie algebra Manifold with boundary Nilmanifold Oriented Parallelizable Poisson Prime Quaternionic Hypercomplex ( Pseudo- , Sub- ) Riemannian Rizza Stein ( Almost ) Symplectic Tame Tensors Vectors Distribution Lie bracket Pushforward Tangent space bundle Torsion Vector field Vector flow Covectors Closed/Exact Covariant derivative Cotangent space bundle De Rham cohomology Differential form Vector-valued Exterior derivative Interior product Pullback Ricci curvature flow Riemann curvature tensor Tensor field density Volume form Wedge product Bundles Adjoint Affine Associated Cotangent Dual Fiber ( Co- ) Fibration Jet Lie algebra ( Stable ) Normal Principal Spinor Subbundle Tangent Tensor Vector Connections Affine Cartan Ehresmann Form Generalized Koszul Levi-Civita Principal Vector Parallel transport Related Classification of manifolds Gauge theory History Morse theory Moving frame Singularity theory Generalizations Banach manifold Diffeology Diffiety Fréchet manifold K-theory Orbifold Secondary calculus over commutative algebras Sheaf Stratifold Supermanifold Stratified space Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Singularity_theory&oldid=1253019176 " Category : Singularity theory Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles with style issues from October 2021 All articles with style issues Articles needing additional references from October 2021 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing Russian-language text This page was last edited on 24 October 2024, at 00:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Singularity theory 7 languages Add topic

