Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Early career 3 As a bureaucrat 4 Controversy 5 Personal life 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents N. Gopalaswami 5 languages অসমীয়া हिन्दी മലയാളം தமிழ் తెలుగు Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indian civil servant (born 1944) This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification .

Please help by adding reliable sources .

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .

Find sources: "N. Gopalaswami" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) N. Gopalaswami N. Gopalaswami taking over as the Election Commissioner in New Delhi on 8 February 2004 15th Chief Election Commissioner of India In office 30 June 2006 – 20 April 2009 President Dr. A. P. J. Abdul Kalam Pratibha Patil Prime Minister Manmohan Singh Preceded by Brij Bihari Tandon Succeeded by Navin Chawla Personal details Born ( 1944-04-21 ) 21 April 1944 (age 81) Nationality Indian Alma mater Delhi University St. Joseph's College, Tiruchirappalli Occupation Retired IAS officer N. Gopalaswami (born 21 April 1944), served as 15th Chief Election Commissioner of India (CEC) and has been awarded the Padma Bhushan in 2015. He is a 1966 batch Indian Administrative Services officer belonging to the Gujarat cadre. He took over the charge of CEC on 30 June 2006 and retired in April 2009. He is currently the president of Vivekananda Educational Society which runs a group of schools in and around Chennai.

[ 1 ] He was appointed as the Chairman of Kalakshetra for a term of five years starting from 22 October 2014, until 2019.

[ 2 ] Early life and education [ edit ] Gopalaswami is from Needamangalam , Tiruvarur district , Tamil Nadu. He attended school in Mannargudi and his graduation in Chemistry from St. Joseph's College, Tiruchirappalli . Gopalaswamy is a post-graduate gold medalist in Chemistry from Delhi University and is a diploma holder in Urban Development Planning from University of London .

Early career [ edit ] Gopalaswami joined the Indian Administrative Service in 1966 and worked in various capacities in Gujarat . From 1967 to 1992, he held various top-level posts including that of the managing director, Gujarat Communication and Electronics Limited; as member (administration and purchase) in the Gujarat Electricity Board; secretary to Government (science & technology) in technical education and Secretary, Department of Revenue.

[ citation needed ] Earlier he was district magistrate in the districts of Kutch and Kheda ; municipal commissioner Surat ; director of relief; director of higher education and joint secretary (Home Department), Government of Gujarat.

[ citation needed ] As a bureaucrat [ edit ] Gopalaswami served the Government of India between 1992 and 2004. Prior to his appointment in the Election Commission of India , he was the Union Home Secretary and prior to that, he held the post of Secretary in the Department of Culture and Secretary General in the National Human Rights Commission .

[ citation needed ] Gopalaswami had also worked as an adviser (education) in the Planning Commission of India , joint secretary, department of electronics, in charge of the software development and industry promotion division and also the head of Software Technology Park of India (STPI) Society and SATCOMM India Society.

[ citation needed ] Gopalaswami was appointed as a Chancellor for Rashtriya Sanskrit Vidyapeetha, Deemed University, Tirupati on 21 October 2015 for a term of five years.

[ citation needed ] Controversy [ edit ] During his tenure as the Chief Election Commissioner N Gopalaswami on 31 January 2009 sent his recommendation for removal of Election Commissioner Navin Chawla to the President of India .

[ 3 ] He alleged that Chawla had discharged his duties as Election Commissioner in a partisan manner, seeking to further the interests of "one party." The CEC report contended that Chawla would take breaks during crucial meetings and secretly talk to functionaries of the Congress party and leak confidential details of the Election Commission.

[ 4 ] Chawla is also reported to have opposed the Election Commission's notice to Sonia Gandhi for her accepting foreign honours from Belgium.

[ 5 ] N Gopalaswami's recommendation against Chawla has been politically controversial.

[ 6 ] However, the Indian government led by Congress Party (to which Chawla is accused of being favourable), rejected the CEC recommendation against Chawla on 1 March 2009. Thereafter, Navin Chawla took over as CEC of India on 20 April 2009 and concluded the 2009 General Elections to the Parliament of India .

[ citation needed ] N Gopalaswami moved to Supreme Court in April 2012 alleging a "communal conspiracy" behind the rejection of Army chief General VK Singh 's claim for revision of his date of birth. The PIL, filed by retired Navy chief L Ramdas , former chief election commissioner N Gopalaswami, three senior former Army officials and others, said that ex-Army chief JJ Singh, currently the governor of Arunachal Pradesh, masterminded "Operation Moses" to clear the way for Lieutenant Gen Bikram Singh to succeed Gen Vijay Kumar Singh (missing reference, likely an incorrect conspiracy theory) .

Personal life [ edit ] When the Election Commission started the process of delimitations of constituencies, he (as CEC) suggested that Google maps be used for the arduous exercise. Gopalaswami played a key role in obtaining a grant of Rs 5 crore (Rs 50 million) from UNESCO for the preservation of Vedas , the ancient Hindu scriptures.

[ 7 ] References [ edit ] ^ "About us – Vivekananda Educational Society" .

^ "Ex-CEC Gopalaswami new chairman of Kalakshetra Foundation" .

The Hindu . 22 October 2014.

ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 26 May 2015 .

^ "Connecting News with Views" . Archived from the original on 7 February 2009 . Retrieved 2 February 2011 .

^ "Chawla's loo breaks led to Cong phone calls: CEC" .

Rediff.com . Retrieved 17 November 2012 .

^ Bharti Jain (1 February 2009).

"CEC accuses Chawla of siding with one party" .

The Economic Times . Retrieved 17 November 2012 .

^ [1] Archived 2 April 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ "He lives by the give-nothing-take-nothing rule" .

Rediff.com . 31 December 2004 . Retrieved 17 November 2012 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to N. Gopalaswami .

Chief Election Commissioner of India He lives by the give-nothing-take-nothing principle New article dated 30 June 2006 Archived 20 September 2012 at the Wayback Machine The Hindu – Saturday, 31 January 2009 – Chief Election Commissioner Gopalaswami ‘recommends’ removal of Navin Chawla-Suo motu act is constitutionally and democratically out of line, will damage institution –  N.Ram N Gopalaswami's response to N. Ram and more  Thursday, 12 February 2009 Exclusive podcast interview on his values, post-retirement plans, etc v t e Chief election commissioners of India 1950–2000 Sukumar Sen Kalyan Sundaram S. P. Sen Verma Nagendra Singh T. Swaminathan S. L. Shakdhar R. K. Trivedi R. V. S. Peri Sastri V. S. Ramadevi T. N. Seshan M. S. Gill 2001–2050 J. M. Lyngdoh T. S. Krishnamurthy B. B. Tandon N. Gopalaswami Navin Chawla S. Y. Quraishi V. S. Sampath H. S. Brahma Nasim Zaidi A. K. Jyoti O. P. Rawat Sunil Arora Sushil Chandra Rajiv Kumar v t e Padma Bhushan award recipients (2010–2019) 2010 Satya Paul Agarwal Mohammad Amin Sailesh Kumar Bandopadhyay M. S. Banga Anil Bordia Bipan Chandra B. K. Chaturvedi Sant Singh Chatwal G. P. Chopra Tan Chung Madhusudan Dhaky P. R. Dubhashi Puttaraj Gawai Belle Monappa Hegde Ilaiyaraaja Jagdish Chandra Kapur Shrinivas Khale Aamir Khan Sultan Khan Ram Kumar Kumudini Lakhia Kuzhur Narayana Marar Chhannulal Mishra Eledath Thaikkattu Narayanan Mooss C. P. Krishnan Nair S. P. Oswal Akbar Padamsee Ramakanta Panda Balasaheb Vikhe Patil Arogyaswami Paulraj A. R. Rahman Moosa Raza Mallika Sarabhai Nookala Chinna Satyanarayana Abhijit Sen Satya Vrat Shastri Noshir M. Shroff Kushal Pal Singh Bikash Sinha Balagangadharanatha Swamiji Narayanan Vaghul P. K. Warrier Fareed Zakaria 2011 S. P. Balasubrahmanyam Rajashree Birla M. N. Buch C. V. Chandrasekhar Ajai Chowdhry Yogesh Chander Deveshwar Satyadev Dubey T. J. S. George Shankha Ghosh Kris Gopalakrishnan Keki Byramjee Grant Shashi Kapoor Krishen Khanna Khayyam Chanda Kochhar Dwijen Mukhopadhyay Madavoor Vasudevan Nair Ramdas Pai Dashrath Patel Rajendra Singh Pawar Suryanarayanan Ramachandran Shobhana Ranade Gunupati Venkata Krishna Reddy Kallam Anji Reddy Waheeda Rehman Shyam Saran Analjit Singh Arpita Singh Surendra Singh R. K. Srikantan Raghavan Thirumulpad 2012 Suresh H. Advani Shabana Azmi Homi K. Bhabha Shashikumar Chitre Khaled Choudhury Jatin Das Vidya Dehejia Dharmendra S. N. Goenka M. S. Gopalakrishnan T. V. Gopalakrishnan Buddhadev Das Gupta Sunil Janah Anish Kapoor S. B. Mujumdar B. Muthuraman Mira Nair Arvind Panagariya José Pereira Mata Prasad M. S. Raghunathan P. Chandrasekhara Rao Ronen Sen Devi Shetty M. V. Subbiah N. Vittal N. H. Wadia George Yeo 2013 Satya N. Atluri Maharaj Kishan Bhan Jaspal Bhatti Rahul Dravid Adi Godrej Abdul Rashid Khan Rajesh Khanna Mary Kom Nandkishore Shamrao Laud Mangesh Padgaonkar Hemendra Singh Panwar Jogesh Pati Shivajirao Girdhar Patil A. Sivathanu Pillai D. Ramanaidu Kanak Rele V. K. Saraswat Ashoke Sen Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak B. N. Suresh Sharmila Tagore Ramamurthy Thyagarajan Saroja Vaidyanathan 2014 Anisuzzaman Mrityunjay Athreya Padmanabhan Balaram Dalveer Bhandari Ruskin Bond Anita Desai Pullela Gopichand Kamal Haasan Jyeshtharaj Joshi V. N. Kaul Neelam Kler M. Mahadevappa Leander Paes Koppillil Radhakrishnan Anumolu Ramakrishna Thirumalachari Ramasami Lloyd Rudolph Susanne Hoeber Rudolph Vinod Prakash Sharma Gulam Mohammed Sheikh Parween Sultana Dhirubhai Thaker Vairamuthu J. S. Verma T. H. Vinayakram 2015 Jahnu Barua Manjul Bhargava Vijay P. Bhatkar Swapan Dasgupta David Frawley Bill Gates Melinda French Gates Swami Satyamitranand N. Gopalaswami Subhash C. Kashyap Gokulotsavji Maharaj Saichiro Misumi Ambrish Mithal Sudha Ragunathan Harish Salve Ashok Seth Rajat Sharma Satpal Singh Shivakumara Swami Khadg Singh Valdiya 2016 Ravindra Chandra Bhargava Robert D. Blackwill Hafeez Contractor Indu Jain Heisnam Kanhailal Anupam Kher Sania Mirza Pallonji Mistry Udit Narayan Saina Nehwal Yarlagadda Lakshmi Prasad Vinod Rai N. S. Ramanuja Tatacharya A. V. Rama Rao D. Nageshwara Reddy Dayananda Saraswati Barjinder Singh Hamdard Ram V. Sutar Tejomayananda 2017 Vishwa Mohan Bhatt Deviprasad Dwivedi Ratnasundarsuri Niranjanananda Saraswati Cho Ramaswamy Maha Chakri Sirindhorn Tehemton Erach Udwadia 2018 Pankaj Advani Philipose Mar Chrysostom Mahendra Singh Dhoni Alexander Kadakin Ramachandran Nagaswamy Laxman Pai Arvind Parikh Sharda Sinha 2019 John T. Chambers Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa Pravin Gordhan Dharampal Gulati Darshan Lal Jain Ashok Laxmanrao Kukade Kariya Munda Budhaditya Mukherjee Mohanlal Nambi Narayanan Kuldip Nayar Bachendri Pal V. K. Shunglu Hukmdev Narayan Yadav # Posthumous conferral 1954–1959 1960–1969 1970–1979 1980–1989 1990–1999 2000–2009 2010–2019 2020–2029 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=N._Gopalaswami&oldid=1301692617 " Categories : Chief election commissioners of India Living people St Joseph's College, Tiruchirappalli alumni Recipients of the Padma Bhushan in civil service Indian Administrative Service officers Indian Home Secretaries Delhi University alumni Alumni of the University of London People from Tiruvarur district 1944 births Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from September 2014 Use dmy dates from June 2024 BLP articles lacking sources from November 2012 All BLP articles lacking sources All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2022 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 05:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents N. Gopalaswami 5 languages Add topic

