Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Pre-Dacian periods 3 Classical Dacian periods 4 Gallery 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Dacian art 1 language Română Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Art associated with the Dacians or North Thracians Dacian art is the art associated with the peoples known as Dacians or North Thracians; The Dacians created an art style in which the influences of Scythians and the Greeks can be seen. They were highly skilled in gold and silver working and in pottery making. Pottery was white with red decorations in floral, geometric, and stylized animal motifs. Similar decorations were worked in metal, especially the figure of a horse, which was common on Dacian coins.

[ 1 ] Background [ edit ] Dacians regions cf.

Strabo (ca. 20 AD) by Muller (1877) [ 2 ] Dacian gold bowl found in Transylvania (Vienna Museum) The Geto-Dacians lived in a very large territory, stretching from the Balkans to the northern Carpathians and from the Black Sea and the river Tyras to the Tisa plain, sometimes even to the Middle Danube .

[ 3 ] Between 15th-12th century, the Dacian-Getae culture was influenced by the Bronze Age Tumulus-Urnfield warriors.

[ 4 ] Dacian civilization went through several stages of development, from the Thracian stage in the Bronze Age to the classical period of the Geto-Dacians (the first century BC to the first century AD).

[ 5 ] In the Bronze Age , proto-Thracian populations emerged from the fusion of the local Eneolithic (Chalcolithic) stock with the intruders of the transitional Indo-Europeanization Period . From these proto-Thracians, in the Iron Age , there were developed the Dacians of the Danubian-Carpathian Area on the one hand and the Thracians of the eastern Balkan Peninsula on the other.

[ 6 ] Pre-Dacian periods [ edit ] North Thracian population was chiefly an Early Bronze Age mix of the descendants of intrusive stockbreeding people and of survivors of the autochthonous Chalcolithic culture that the newcomers had destroyed. In this ethnic synthesis which gave birth to the Thracian people, the former predominated but, especially in the more mountainous areas, vestiges of Chalcolithic traditions survived through the Early and into the Middle Bronze Age.

[ 7 ] The local, Daco-Thracian art should not be mistaken for the art of the Thracians south of the Balkans although mutual influences had undoubtedly appeared.

[ 8 ] Thracian art was typically geometric in its decoration, a taste which was a remnant of Late Bronze Age traditions.

[ 9 ] While the Thracian tribes adopted-no doubt from the Scythians-some aspects of mounted nomadism in the first millennium B.C., they also preserved many traditions of the European Bronze Age and belonged more to the world of European cultures than to that of the East.

[ 10 ] Classical Dacian periods [ edit ] The 1st century BC silver work from the lower Danube region consists mostly of bracelets and fibulae alongside of a small number of decorative disks, plaques, and bowls. To distinguish it from earlier Thracian silver work, one might label this later silver work as Geto-Dacian or Geto-Thracian depending on whether is found above or below the lower Danube.

[ 11 ] The design of Geto-Dacian helmets (i.e. Ciumesti, Iron Gate) is sufficiently unusual in ancient art to offer the opportunity to trace it to its origin, and, thereby, provide some insight into the Scythian elements that went into the formation of early Dacian art and the means by which ancient Oriental motifs survived and were transmitted into Europe [ 12 ] Almost identical in decoration and details of craftsmanship are the two silver beakers, now in Bucharest and New York and unquestionably were made in the same metalsmith shop as the helmet.

[ 12 ] Gallery [ edit ] See also [ edit ] Thracian treasure Scythian art Notes [ edit ] ^ Waldman & Mason 2006 , p. 208.

^ Müller 1877 , tabulae XV.

^ MacKenzie 1986 , p. 25.

^ Mountain 1998 , p. 59.

^ Giurescu & Nestorescu 1981 , p. 47.

^ Dumitrescu & Boardman 1982 , p. 53.

^ Hoddinott 1989 , p. 52.

^ Popescu 1971 , p. 62.

^ Farkas 1981 , p. 37.

^ Farkas 1981 , p. 33.

^ Olmsted 2001 , p. 22.

^ a b Goldman 1970 , p. 904.

References [ edit ] Dumitrescu, V; Boardman (1982).

The Prehistory of Romania: from the earliest times to IOOO B.C . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521224963 .

Farkas, Anne (1981).

Style and Subject Matter in Native Thracian Art pp 33-48 . Vol. 16. METROPOLITAN MUSEUM JOURNAL.

Giurescu, Dinu C; Nestorescu, Ioana (1981).

Illustrated history of the Romanian people . Editura Sport-Turism.

OCLC 8405224 .

Goldman, Bernard (1970). "DACIAN ART AND THE EAGLE-HARE MOTIF".

Bericht, International Union of Prehistoric and Protohistoric Sciences . Oxford University Press.

Hoddinott, R.F. (1989). "Thracians, Mycenaeans and "The Trojan Question" ".

Thracians and Mycenaeans: Proceedings of the Fourth International Congress of Thracology Rotterdam, 24-26 September 1984 edited by Jan G. P. Best and Nanny M. W. de Vries . Brill Academic Pub.

ISBN 978-9004088641 .

MacKenzie, Andrew (1986).

Archaeology in Romania: the mystery of the Roman occupation . Hale.

ISBN 9780709027249 .

Mountain, Harry (1998).

The Celtic Encyclopedia . Universal Publishers.

ISBN 978-1581128901 .

Müller, Karl Otfried (1877).

Strabonis Geographicorum by Strabo . Ambrosio Firmin-Didot.

Olmsted, Garrett (2001).

Celtic art in transition during the first century BC . Innsbruck : Archaeolingua Institut für Sprachen und Literaturen der Universität, Abteilung Sprachwissenschaft.

ISBN 9783851242034 .

Popescu, Dorin (1971).

"The Art of Metal-work in Pre-Roman Dacia pp.35–47" .

Treasures from Romania: a special exhibition . London, Trustees of the British Museum, England.

OCLC 1298877 .

Waldman, Carl; Mason, Catherine (2006).

Encyclopedia of European Peoples .

Infobase Publishing .

ISBN 1438129181 .

Further reading [ edit ] v t e Dacia Tribes ( List ) Aedi Albocenses Anartes Apuli Biephi Bessi / Bessoi Burs (Dacia) Carpi Ciaginsi Clariae Costoboci Crobidae Daci Getae Moesi Peukini Piephigi Potulatenses Predasenses Rhadacenses Saldenses Scaugdae Senses Suci Terizi Teurisci Trixae Tyragetae Troglodytae Kings Coson Cothelas Dromichaetes Moskon Oroles Rhemaxos Rubobostes Zalmodegicus Dacian nucleus in Transylvania 1 Burebista (82/61–44 BC) Deceneus (44 BC–???) Comosicus (9 BC(?)–30s AD) Scorilo (c. 30s–70 AD) Duras (c. 69–87 AD) Decebalus (87–106 AD) Dacian kingdom of Banat and Oltenia 1 Cotiso (c. 40–c. 9 BC) Dacian kingdom of Dobruja 1 Dapyx (1st-century BC) Rholes Zyraxes Dacian kingdom of Wallachia and southern Moldavia and Transylvania 1 Dicomes Culture and civilization Artifacts Coinage Art, jewellery, treasures, tools bracelets Clothing Language Belagines Words of possible Dacian origin Dacian plant names Dacian names Dacian script Sinaia lead plates Daco-Thracian Thracian language Thraco-Illyrian Religion Deities Bendis Deceneus Derzelas Dionysus Gebeleizis Kotys Pleistoros Sabazios Semele Seirenes Silenus Zalmoxis Dacian Draco Kogaionon Settlements and Fortresses Sarmizegetusa Argidava Buridava Cumidava Piroboridava Sucidava Davae Dacian Fortresses of the Orăștie Mountains Murus Dacicus Foreign relations Greeks Celts Germanic tribes Romans Warfare Falx Sica Thracian warfare Wars with the Roman Empire Domitian First Battle of Tapae Trajan First War Second Battle of Tapae Battle of Adamclisi Second War Battle of Sarmizegetusa Roman Dacia / Free Dacians Dacia Traiana Moesia Scythia Minor Dacia Aureliana Diocese of Dacia Dacia Mediterranea Dacia Ripensis Trajan Bridge Column Towns and cities Castra Limes Alutanus Moesiae Porolissensis Sarmatiae (Devil's Dykes) Transalutanus Trajan's Wall Brazda lui Novac Culture Daco-Roman Thraco-Roman Eastern Romance substratum Research Archaeology sites in Romania Books Dacianism Dacology Thracology Category Commons WikiProject 1 Dacian kingdoms succeeding Burebista's state and preceding Decebalus' state v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dacian_art&oldid=1184516280 " Categories : Dacian culture Iron Age art of Europe Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 November 2023, at 22:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dacian art 1 language Add topic

