Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Modernism 2 Post-1950s Toggle Post-1950s subsection 2.1 Gallery of modern sculpture 2.2 Contemporary movements 2.3 Minimalism 2.3.1 Postminimalism 2.3.2 Contemporary genres 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Modern sculpture 4 languages العربية Español Galego 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Era of sculpture beginning with Auguste Rodin Auguste Rodin , The Burghers of Calais , 1889, Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden , Washington, D.C.

, cast 1943.

[ 1 ] Modern sculpture is generally considered to have begun with the work of Auguste Rodin , who is seen as the progenitor of modern sculpture . While Rodin did not set out to rebel against the past, he created a new way of building his works.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] He "dissolved the hard outline of contemporary Neo-Greek academicism, and thereby created a vital synthesis of opacity and transparency, volume and void".

[ 4 ] Along with a few other artists in the late 19th century who experimented with new artistic visions in sculpture like Edgar Degas and Paul Gauguin , Rodin invented a radical new approach in the creation of sculpture. Modern sculpture, along with all modern art, "arose as part of Western society's attempt to come to terms with the urban, industrial and secular society that emerged during the nineteenth century".

[ 5 ] Modernist sculpture movements include Art Nouveau , Cubism , Geometric abstraction , De Stijl , Suprematism , Constructivism , Dadaism , Surrealism , Futurism , Formalism , Abstract expressionism , Pop-Art , Minimalism , Postminimalism , Land art , Conceptual art , and Installation art among others.

Modernism [ edit ] Alberto Giacometti , Cat , 1954, Metropolitan Museum of Art Gaston Lachaise , Floating Figure 1927, bronze, no. 5 from an edition of 7, National Gallery of Australia Henry Moore , Double Oval (1966), Henry Moore Foundation David Smith , CUBI VI (1963) at the Israel Museum in Jerusalem The modern sculpture movement can be said to begin at the Rodin exhibit at the Universal Exhibition held in Paris in 1900. At this event Rodin showed his Burghers of Calais , Balzac , Victor Hugo statues, and the exhibition included the first public showing of his Gates of Hell which included The Thinker .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Cubist sculpture , in the early 20th century, was a style that developed in parallel with cubist painting , and the formal experiments of Georges Braque and Pablo Picasso . Beginning around 1909 and evolving through the early 1920s cubist artists developed new means of constructing works of art using collage , sculptural assemblage using disparate materials and traditional sculpture making from plaster and clay molds. Some sources name Picasso's 1909 bronze Head of a Woman as the first cubist sculpture.

[ 8 ] André Derain , 1908, photograph published in Gelett Burgess, " The Wild Men of Paris ", Architectural Record , May 1910. Sculpture: Nu debout (Standing Woman) , 1907 Artists like Raymond Duchamp-Villon (1876-1918), whose career was cut short by his death in military service, and Alexander Archipenko , who'd arrived in Paris in 1908 and whose 1912 Walking Woman were very quick to follow Braque and Picasso's lead.

[ 9 ] Joseph Csaky , a sculptor from Hungary, exhibited his first cubist sculptures in Paris in 1911.

Duchamp-Villon , Jacques Lipchitz , Henri Laurens and Ossip Zadkine and others joined the earlier cubist sculptors.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] In the early 20th century, during his period of cubist innovation, Pablo Picasso revolutionized the art of sculpture when he began creating his constructions fashioned by combining disparate objects and materials into one constructed piece of sculpture; Picasso reinvented the art of sculpture with his innovative use of constructing a work in three dimensions with disparate material, the sculptural equivalent of the collage in two-dimensional art. Just as collage was a radical development in two-dimensional art; so was construction a radical development in three-dimensional sculpture. The advent of Surrealism led to things occasionally being described as "sculpture" that would not have been so previously, such as "involuntary sculpture" in several senses, including coulage . In later years Picasso became a prolific potter , leading, with interest in historic pottery from around the world, to a revival of ceramic art , with figures such as George E. Ohr and subsequently Peter Voulkos , Kenneth Price , and Robert Arneson .

Marcel Duchamp originated the use of the " found object " (French: objet trouvé ) or readymade with pieces such as Fountain (1917).

[ citation needed ] Similarly, the work of Constantin Brâncuși at the beginning of the century paved the way for later abstract sculpture. In revolt against the naturalism of Rodin and his late 19th-century contemporaries, Brâncuși distilled subjects down to their essences as illustrated by the elegantly refined forms of his Bird in Space series (1924). These elegantly refined forms became synonymous with 20th-century sculpture.

[ 12 ] In 1927, Brâncuși won a lawsuit against the U.S. customs authorities who attempted to value his sculpture as raw metal. The suit led to legal changes permitting the importation of abstract art free of duty.

[ 13 ] Brâncuși's impact, with his vocabulary of reduction and abstraction, is seen throughout the 1930s and 1940s, and exemplified by artists such as Gaston Lachaise , Sir Jacob Epstein , Henry Moore , Alberto Giacometti , Joan Miró , Ásmundur Sveinsson , Julio González , Pablo Serrano , Jacques Lipchitz [ 14 ] and also by the 1940s abstract sculpture was impacted and expanded by Alexander Calder , Len Lye , Jean Tinguely , and Frederick Kiesler who were pioneers of Kinetic art .

Post-1950s [ edit ] Since the 1950s Modernist trends in sculpture both abstract and figurative have dominated the public imagination and the popularity of Modernist sculpture had sidelined the traditional approach.

Picasso was commissioned to make a maquette for a huge, 50-foot (15 m)-high public sculpture to be built in Chicago , known usually as the Chicago Picasso . He approached the project with a great deal of enthusiasm, designing a sculpture which was ambiguous and somewhat controversial. What the figure represents is not known; it could be a bird, a horse, a woman, or a totally abstract shape. The sculpture, one of the most recognizable landmarks in downtown Chicago, was unveiled in 1967. Picasso refused to be paid $100,000 for it, donating it to the people of the city.

[ citation needed ] In the late 1950s and the 1960s, abstract sculptors began experimenting with a wide array of new materials and different approaches to creating their work. Surrealist imagery, anthropomorphic abstraction, new materials and combinations of new energy sources and varied surfaces and objects became characteristic of much new modernist sculpture. Collaborative projects with landscape designers, architects, and landscape architects expanded the outdoor site and contextual integration. Artists such as Isamu Noguchi , David Smith , Alexander Calder , Jean Tinguely , Richard Lippold , George Rickey , Louise Bourgeois , and Louise Nevelson came to characterize the look of modern sculpture.

[ citation needed ] By the 1960s Abstract expressionism , Geometric abstraction and Minimalism , which reduces sculpture to its most essential and fundamental features,  predominated. Some works of the period are: the Cubi works of David Smith, and the welded steel works of Sir Anthony Caro , [ 15 ] as well as welded sculpture by a large variety of sculptors, the large scale work of John Chamberlain , and environmental installation scale works by Mark di Suvero . Other Minimalists and Postminimalists include Tony Smith , Donald Judd , Robert Morris , Anne Truitt , Ronald Bladen , Giacomo Benevelli , Arnaldo Pomodoro , Richard Serra , Carl Andre , Dan Flavin , Eva Hesse , Christo , Walter De Maria , Robert Smithson , and others like John Safer who added motion and monumentality to the theme of purity of line, [ 16 ] led contemporary abstract sculpture in new directions. During the 1960s and 1970s figurative sculpture by pop artists and modernist artists in stylized forms by artists such as: George Segal , Claes Oldenburg , Arman , Leonard Baskin , Ernest Trova , Marisol Escobar , Paul Thek , Manuel Neri and others became popular. In the 1980s several artists, among others, exploring figurative sculpture were Robert Graham in a classic articulated style and Fernando Botero bringing his painting's "oversized figures" into monumental sculptures.

Ceramic sculpture as practiced by Pablo Picasso , Peter Voulkos , Stephen De Staebler , Kenneth Price , and others became an important idiom of modern sculpture in the 20th century.

[ citation needed ] Gallery of modern sculpture [ edit ] Henri Matisse , The Back Series , bronze, left to right: The Back I, 1908–09, The Back II, 1913, The Back III 1916, The Back IV, c. 1931, all Museum of Modern Art , New York [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Auguste Rodin , The Three Shades , before 1886, plaster, 97 x 91.3 x 54.3 cm. In Dante's Divine Comedy , the shades, i.e. the souls of the damned, stand at the entrance to The Gates of Hell , pointing to an unequivocal inscription, “Abandon hope, all ye who enter here”. Rodin assembled three identical figures that seem to be turning around the same point.

[ 20 ] Paul Gauguin , 1894, Oviri (Sauvage) , partially glazed stoneware, 75 x 19 x 27 cm, Musée d'Orsay, Paris Auguste Rodin , The Thinker , 1902, Musée Rodin , Paris Constantin Brâncuși , 1907–08, The Kiss , Exhibited at the Armory Show and published in the Chicago Tribune , 25 March 1913 Constantin Brâncuși , Portrait of Mademoiselle Pogany, 1912, White marble; limestone block, Philadelphia Museum of Art , exhibited at the 1913 Armory Show Alexander Archipenko , 1910–11, Negress (La Negresse) , Armory Show catalogue photo Antoine Bourdelle , 1910–12, La Musique , bas-relief, Théâtre des Champs-Élysées , Paris Joseph Csaky , 1911–1912, Groupe de femmes (Groupe de trois femmes, Groupe de trois personnages) , plaster lost, Exhibited at the 1912 Salon d'Automne , and Salon des Indépendants , 1913, Paris Amedeo Modigliani , Female Head , 1911/1912, Tate .

Paul Guillaume , introduced Modigliani to Constantin Brâncuși . He was Brâncuși's disciple for a year.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] Otto Gutfreund , Violoncelliste ( Cellist ), 1912–13 [ 23 ] Raymond Duchamp-Villon , 1913, Les amants II , Musée national d'art moderne , Paris Henri Gaudier-Brzeska , 1914, Boy with a Coney (Boy with a rabbit) , marble Marcel Duchamp , Fountain , 1917, photograph by Alfred Stieglitz Joseph Csaky , Tête , ca.1920 (front and side view), limestone, 60 cm, Kröller-Müller Museum , Otterlo, Netherlands Aristide Maillol , The Night, 1920, Stuttgart Jacob Epstein , Day and Night , carved for the London Underground 's headquarters, 1928.

Käthe Kollwitz , The Grieving Parents , 1932, World War I memorial (for her son Peter), Vladslo German war cemetery Jacques Lipchitz , Birth of the Muses , (1944–1950) Barbara Hepworth , Monolith-Empyrean , 1953 Alexander Calder , Red Mobile , 1956, Painted sheet metal and metal rods, Montreal Museum of Fine Arts Ruth Asawa , Untitled (1950s-60s; exact date unknown) at the DeYoung Museum in San Francisco.

John Chamberlain , S , 1959, Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden , Washington, DC.

Pablo Picasso , Public Sculpture , 1967, Chicago, Illinois Isamu Noguchi , Heimar , 1968, at the Billy Rose Sculpture Garden, Israel Museum , Jerusalem , Israel George Rickey , Four Squares in Geviert, 1969, terrace of the New National Gallery , Berlin, Germany , Rickey is considered a Kinetic sculptor Alexander Calder , Crinkly avec disc rouge, 1973, Schlossplatz, Stuttgart Louise Nevelson , Atmosphere and Environment XII , 1970–1973, Philadelphia Museum of Art Sir Anthony Caro , Black Cover Flat, 1974, steel, Tel Aviv Museum of Art Jean-Yves Lechevallier , Cristaux , Homage to Béla Bartók , Paris, 1980 Joan Miró , Woman and Bird , 1982, Barcelona, Spain Karlheinz Oswald , Hildegard of Bingen , 1998, bronze, in front of Eibingen Abbey Louise Bourgeois , Maman , 1999, outside Museo Guggenheim Antony Gormley , Iron: Man , 2005, in Victoria Square , Birmingham Yayoi Kusama , Pumpkin , 2015, in Montreal.

Karen LaMonte , Etudes , 2017, at the Hunter Museum of Art in Tennessee.

Contemporary movements [ edit ] Site specific and environmental art works are represented by artists: Andy Goldsworthy , Walter De Maria , [ 24 ] Richard Long , Richard Serra , Robert Irwin , [ 25 ] George Rickey , and Christo and Jeanne-Claude -led contemporary abstract sculpture in new directions. Artists created environmental sculpture on expansive sites in the " land art in the American West " group of projects. These land art or "earth art" environmental scale sculpture works exemplified by artists such as Robert Smithson , Michael Heizer , James Turrell ( Roden Crater ).

Eva Hesse , Sol LeWitt , Jackie Winsor , Keith Sonnier , and Bruce Nauman , among others were pioneers of Postminimalist sculpture.

Also during the 1960s and 1970s artists as diverse as Eduardo Paolozzi , Chryssa , Walter De Maria , Claes Oldenburg , George Segal , Edward Kienholz , Nam June Paik , Wolf Vostell , Duane Hanson , and John DeAndrea explored abstraction, imagery, and figuration through video art , environment, light sculpture, and installation art in new ways.

Conceptual art is art in which the concept(s) or idea(s) involved in the work take precedence over traditional aesthetic and material concerns. Works include One and Three Chairs , 1965, by Joseph Kosuth , and An Oak Tree , 1973, by Michael Craig-Martin , and those of Joseph Beuys and James Turrell among others.

[ 26 ] Postmodern sculpture occupies a broader field of activities than Modernist sculpture.

Rosalind Krauss identified sculpture in the expanded field, a series of oppositions around the work's relationship to its environment that describe the various sculpture-like activities that are postmodern sculpture, creating a theoretical explanation that could adequately fit the developments of Land art , Minimalist sculpture , and site-specific art into the category of "sculpture": Site-Construction: the intersection of landscape and architecture Axiomatic Structures: the combination of architecture and not-architecture Marked sites: the combination of landscape and not-landscape Sculpture: intersection of not-landscape and not-architecture Spiral Jetty by Robert Smithson from atop Rozel Point, in mid-April 2005 Christo and Jeanne-Claude , Umbrellas 1991, (Japan) [ 27 ] Richard Long , South Bank Circle, 1991 Tate Liverpool, England Time guards / Madonna , light sculpture by Manfred Kielnhofer at the Light Art Biennale Austria 2010 Minimalism [ edit ] Tony Smith , Free Ride , 1962, Museum of Modern Art Larry Bell , Untitled 1964, bismuth, chromium, gold, and rhodium on gold-plated brass; Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden Donald Judd , Untitled 1977, Münster Richard Serra , Fulcrum 1987, 55-ft-high freestanding sculpture of Cor-ten steel near Liverpool Street station Donald Judd , Untitled, 1991, Israel Museum Art Garden Postminimalism [ edit ] Rachel Whiteread , Holocaust Monument 2000 Judenplatz , Vienna Anish Kapoor , Turning the World Upside Down , Israel Museum , 2010 The Spire of Dublin officially titled the Monument of Light , stainless steel, 121.2 metres (398 ft), the world's tallest sculpture Contemporary genres [ edit ] Modern sculpture is often created outdoors, as in environmental art and environmental sculpture , often in full view of spectators.

Light sculpture and site-specific art also often make use of the environment. Site-specific artwork is intentionally created for a specific place. The term was first used in the mid-1970s by sculptors Patricia Johanson , Dennis Oppenheim , Athena Tacha , and others.

[ 28 ] Site specific environmental art was described as a movement by architectural critic Catherine Howett [ 29 ] and art critic Lucy Lippard .

[ 30 ] Land art , Earthworks , ( Earth art ) is an art movement that makes specific use of the real landscape to form works of sculpture that are located in and make use of nature generally in altered form. It is a form of sculpture created in nature, from nature, using materials found in nature like dirt, soil , rocks , logs, branches, leaves , and water , as well as man made materials like Chain-link fencing , barbed wire , rope , rubber , glass , concrete , metal , asphalt , and mineral pigments .

Ice sculpture is a form of ephemeral sculpture that uses ice as the raw material. It is popular in China, Japan, Canada, Sweden, and Russia. Ice sculptures feature decoratively in some cuisines, especially in Asia.

Kinetic sculptures are sculptures that are designed to move, which include mobiles .

Snow sculptures are usually carved out of a single block of snow about 6 to 15 feet (4.6 m) on each side and weighing about 20–30 tons. The snow is densely packed into a form after having been produced by artificial means or collected from the ground after a snowfall.

Sound sculptures take the form of indoor sound installations, outdoor installations such as aeolian harps , automatons, or be more or less near conventional musical instruments. Sound sculpture is often site-specific.

Art toys have become another format for contemporary artists since the late 1990s, such as those produced by Takashi Murakami and Kid Robot , designed by Michael Lau , or hand-made by Michael Leavitt .

[ 31 ] See also [ edit ] List of female sculptors List of sculptors Outline of sculpture List of most expensive sculptures National Gallery of Art Sculpture Garden Arborsculpture Assemblage Butter sculpture Bricolage California Clay Movement Collage Cubist sculpture Decollage Environmental art Earthworks (art) Electrotyping Floral design ( Ikebana ) Garden sculpture Gas sculpture Glassblowing Hologram Kinetic sculpture Land art (Earth art) Land Arts of the American West Light sculpture Living sculpture Mask Mobiles Neon lighting and artists in light Origami Plaster cast Site-specific art Sustainable art Wax sculpture Welded sculpture Welding References [ edit ] ^ "The Burghers of Calais, (sculpture)" .

SIRIS ^ Elsen, Albert E. (2003).

Rodin's Art: The Rodin Collection of the Iris & Gerald B. Cantor Center for the Visual Arts . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-513381-1 .

^ " Rodin to Now: Modern Sculpture ", Palm Springs Desert Museum.

^ Giedion-Welcker, Carola, ‘’Contemporary Sculpture: An Evolution in Volume and Space, A revised and Enlarged Edition’’, Faber and Faber, London, 1961, p. X ^ Atkins, Robert, ‘’ARTSPOKE: A Guide to Modern Ideas, Movements and Buzzwords, 1848-1944’’ Abbeville Publishers, New York, 1993, p.140 ^ Curtis, Penelope, ‘’Sculpture: 1900-1945’’, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1999, p. 1 ^ Elsen, Albert L., ‘’Rodin’s Gates of Hell’’, University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, MN, 1960 p. 77 ^ Grace Glueck, " Picasso Revolutionized Sculpture Too ", New York Times , exhibition review 1982, Retrieved July 20, 2010.

^ "Gallery" .

^ Robert Rosenblum, "Cubism", Readings in Art History 2 (1976), Seuphor, Sculpture of this Century ^ Edith Balas, Joseph Csaky: A Pioneer of Modern Sculpture , American Philosophical Society, 1998.

^ Edward Lucie-Smith, Visual arts in the 20th century , Edition illustrated, Publisher Harry N. Abrams, 1997, Original from the University of Michigan, ISBN 0-8109-3934-7 , ISBN 978-0-8109-3934-9 ^ "Constantin Brâncuși", Columbia Encyclopedia , Sixth Edition, 2008 http://www.encyclopedia.com/topic/Constantin_Brancusi.aspx ^ The Oxford dictionary of American art and artists, Author Ann Lee Morgan, Publisher Oxford University Press, 2007, Original from the University of Michigan, ISBN 0-19-512878-8 , ISBN 978-0-19-512878-9 ^ Cole, Ina, ed. (2021).

“From the Sculptor’s Studio”, conversation with Anthony Caro, held in 2006 . Laurence King Publishing Ltd. p. 34-47.

ISBN 9781913947590 .

OCLC 1420954826 .

^ National Air and Space Museum Receives "Ascent" Sculpture for display at Udvar-Hazy Center [1] [ permanent dead link ] ^ The Guardian, Hillary Spurling on The Back Series ^ MoMA, the collection ^ Tate ^ Rodin Museum, The Three Shades ^ the Art Story ^ Klein, Mason, et al., Modigliani: Beyond the Myth . The Jewish Museum and Yale University Press, 2004.

^ Otto Gutfreund - exhibition in the Municipal House (Czech Radio) ^ Guggenheim museum Archived 2013-01-04 at the Wayback Machine ^ Dia Foundation ^ Tate ^ NY Times, Umbrella Crushes Woman ^ Peter Frank, "Site Sculpture", Art News , Oct. 1975 ^ Catherine Howett, New Directions in Environmental Art, Landscape Architecture, Jan. 1977 ^ Lucy Lippard, Art Outdoors, In and Out of the Public Domain, Studio International, March–April 1977 ^ "Art Army by Michael Leavitt", hypediss.com [2] , December 13, 2006.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Modern sculptures .

Article on Minimalist Art at the Dia Beacon Museum "Dia Beacon", Tiziano Thomas Dossena, Bridge Apulia USA N.9, 2003 Tate, Definition of Minimal Art Tate Glossary: Minimalism MoMA, Art terms Minimalism Modern Sculpture and the Question of Status (Ebook) , edited by C. Rodriguez-Samaniego and I. Gras Valero, University of Barcelona, 2018 v t e Sculpture Types of sculpture Architectural sculpture Assemblage Bas relief Bust Chalk carving Effigy Gas sculpture Earth art Environmental sculpture Figurine Installation art Kinetic sculpture Mobile Monumental Pedimental Soap carving Soft sculpture Statue Stele Styles of sculpture Baroque Classical Detonography Jain sculpture Modern sculpture Relief Renaissance Elements in sculpture Mass Negative space Space Volume Traditional materials Wood Marble Limestone Granite Porphyry Diorite Jade Ivory Clay Terracotta Bronze Gold Silver Butter Soapstone Modern materials Steel Ice Jesmonite Acrylic Concrete Plastic Fiberglass Glass Aluminium Fabric Paper Found object Notable sculptures Venus of Hohle Fels (c. 40–42,000 BP) Lion-man (c. 35–41,000 BP) Venus of Willendorf ( c. 24–26,000 BP) Great Sphinx of Giza (c. 2558–2532 BCE) Nefertiti Bust (c. 1345 BCE) Mask of Tutankhamun (c. 1323 BCE) Abu Simbel temples (c. 1264 BCE) Discobolus (c. 450 BCE) Elgin Marbles from the Parthenon (438 BCE) Colossus of Rhodes (c. 292 BCE) Lion Capital of Ashoka (c. 250 BCE) Terracotta Army (246–210 BCE) Winged Victory of Samothrace (c. 2nd century BCE) Laocoön and His Sons (c. 200 BCE – 70 CE) Venus de Milo (130–100 BCE) Augustus of Prima Porta (c. 1st century CE) Equestrian Statue of Marcus Aurelius (175 CE) Buddhas of Bamiyan (507–554 CE) Great Budda of Nara (752 CE) Borobudur (c. 780-833 CE) Bayon (c. 12th or 13th century CE) Angkor Wat (1150 CE) Chartes Cathedral (c. 1194–1250 CE) Konark Sun Temple (1250 CE) Moai , Easter Islands (1250–1500 CE) Pietà (1498–1499) David (1501–1504) Aztec sun stone (1502–1520) Ecstasy of Saint Teresa (1647–1652) Veiled Christ (1753) Jadeite Cabbage (19th century) Nelson's Column (1843) Lion of Belfort (1880) The Kiss (1882) Liberty Enlightening the World , Statue of Liberty (1886) The Gates of Hell (1890–1917) The Thinker (1904) Abraham Lincoln (1920) Mount Rushmore Shrine of Democracy (1927–1941) Christ the Redeemer (1927–1931) The Motherland Calls (1967) Fallen Astronaut (1971) Mother Ukraine (1981) Genghis Khan Equestrian Statue (2008) Statue of Unity (2018) Category Outline v t e Avant-garde movements Visual art Abstract expressionism Art Nouveau Art & Language Conceptual art Constructivism Proto-Cubism Cubism Functionalism Bauhaus Grosvenor School Devětsil Divisionism Fauvism Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Post-Impressionism Color Field Incoherents Lyrical Abstraction Mail art Minimalism Mir iskusstva Multidimensional art Neoplasticism De Stijl Neue Slowenische Kunst Nonconformism Nouveau réalisme Orphism Performance art Pop art Process art Purism Rayonism Suprematism Temporary art Vorticism Literature and poetry Acmeism Angry Penguins Asemic writing Conceptual poetry Cyberpunk Ego-Futurism Experimental literature Flarf poetry Hungry generation Imaginism Imagism Language poets Neoavanguardia Neoteric Nouveau roman Oberiu Oulipo Slam poetry Ultraísmo Visual poetry Zaum Music By style Funk Jazz Free funk Yass Pop Rock Prog Punk Metal Others Aleatoric music Ars nova Ars subtilior Atonal music Electroacoustic music Electronic music Industrial music Experimental pop Free jazz Free improvisation Futurism Microtonal music Minimal music Drone music Music theatre Musique concrète New Complexity No wave Noise music Post-rock Rock in Opposition Second Viennese School Serialism Spectral music Stochastic music Textural music Totalism Twelve-tone technique Cinema and theatre Cinéma pur Dogme 95 Drop Art Epic theatre Experimental film Experimental theatre Modernist film Poetic realism Postdramatic theatre Remodernist film Structural film Theatre of the Absurd Theatre of Cruelty General Constructivism Dada Expressionism Fluxus Futurism Russian Futurism Cubo-Futurism Lettrism Modernism Minimalism Postminimalism Neo-minimalism Neo-Dada Neoism Postmodernism Postmodernist film Late modernism Primitivism Situationist International Social realism Socialist realism Surrealism Symbolism Russian symbolism v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Authority control databases National United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Modern_sculpture&oldid=1302462451 " Categories : Contemporary art movements Abstract art Western art Sculpture Modernist sculpture Artistic techniques Types of sculpture Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2021 Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 15:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Modern sculpture 4 languages Add topic

