Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Existence Toggle Existence subsection 1.1 From the compactness theorem 1.2 From the incompleteness theorems 1.2.1 Arithmetic unsoundness for models with ~ G true 1.3 From an ultraproduct 2 Structure of countable non-standard models 3 References Toggle References subsection 3.1 Citations 3.2 Sources 4 See also Toggle the table of contents Non-standard model of arithmetic 5 languages Español Français 日本語 Português Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Model of (first-order) Peano arithmetic that contains non-standard numbers This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Non-standard model of arithmetic" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In mathematical logic , a non-standard model of arithmetic is a model of first-order Peano arithmetic that contains non-standard numbers.  The term standard model of arithmetic refers to the standard natural numbers 0, 1, 2, ….  The elements of any model of Peano arithmetic are linearly ordered and possess an initial segment isomorphic to the standard natural numbers. A non-standard model is one that has additional elements outside this initial segment.  The construction of such models is due to Thoralf Skolem (1934).

Non-standard models of arithmetic exist only for the first-order formulation of the Peano axioms ; for the original second-order formulation, there is, up to isomorphism, only one model: the natural numbers themselves.

[ 1 ] Existence [ edit ] There are several methods that can be used to prove the existence of non-standard models of arithmetic.

From the compactness theorem [ edit ] The existence of non-standard models of arithmetic can be demonstrated by an application of the compactness theorem .  To do this, a set of axioms P* is defined in a language including the language of Peano arithmetic together with a new constant symbol x . The axioms consist of the axioms of Peano arithmetic P together with another infinite set of axioms: for each numeral [ clarify ] n , the axiom x > n is included. Any finite subset of these axioms is satisfied by a model that is the standard model of arithmetic plus the constant x interpreted as some number larger than any numeral mentioned in the finite subset of P*. Thus by the compactness theorem there is a model satisfying all the axioms P*. Since any model of P* is a model of P (since a model of a set of axioms is obviously also a model of any subset of that set of axioms), we have that our extended model is also a model of the Peano axioms. The element of this model corresponding to x cannot be a standard number, because as indicated it is larger than any standard number.

Using more complex methods, it is possible to build non-standard models that possess more complicated properties. For example, there are models of Peano arithmetic in which Goodstein's theorem fails. It can be proved in Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory that Goodstein's theorem holds in the standard model, so a model where Goodstein's theorem fails must be non-standard.

From the incompleteness theorems [ edit ] Gödel's incompleteness theorems also imply the existence of non-standard models of arithmetic.
The incompleteness theorems show that a particular sentence G , the Gödel sentence of Peano arithmetic, is neither provable nor disprovable in Peano arithmetic. By the completeness theorem , this means that G is false in some model of Peano arithmetic. However, G is true in the standard model of arithmetic, and therefore any model in which G is false must be a non-standard model. Thus satisfying ~ G is a sufficient condition for a model to be nonstandard. It is not a necessary condition, however; for any Gödel sentence G and any infinite cardinality there is a model of arithmetic with G true and of that cardinality.

Arithmetic unsoundness for models with ~ G true [ edit ] Assuming that arithmetic is consistent, arithmetic with ~ G is also consistent. However, since ~ G states that arithmetic is inconsistent, the result will not be ω-consistent (because ~ G is false and this violates ω-consistency).

From an ultraproduct [ edit ] Another method for constructing a non-standard model of arithmetic is via an ultraproduct . A typical construction uses the set of all sequences of natural numbers, N N {\displaystyle \mathbb {N} ^{\mathbb {N} }} . Choose an ultrafilter on N {\displaystyle \mathbb {N} } , then identify two sequences whenever they have equal values on positions that form a member of the ultrafilter (this requires that they agree on infinitely many terms, but the condition is stronger than this as ultrafilters resemble axiom-of-choice-like maximal extensions of the Fréchet filter). The resulting semiring is a non-standard model of arithmetic.  It can be identified with the hypernatural numbers.

[ 2 ] Structure of countable non-standard models [ edit ] The ultraproduct models are uncountable.  One way to see this is to construct an injection of the infinite product of N into the ultraproduct. However, by the Löwenheim–Skolem theorem there must exist countable non-standard models of arithmetic. One way to define such a model is to use Henkin semantics .

Any countable non-standard model of arithmetic has order type ω + (ω* + ω) ⋅ η , where ω is the order type of the standard natural numbers, ω* is the dual order (an infinite decreasing sequence) and η is the order type of the rational numbers .  In other words, a countable non-standard model begins with an infinite increasing sequence (the standard elements of the model). This is followed by a collection of "blocks", each of order type ω* + ω , the order type of the integers. These blocks are in turn densely ordered with the order type of the rationals. The result follows fairly easily because it is easy to see that the blocks of non-standard numbers have to be dense and linearly ordered without endpoints, and the order type of the rationals is the only countable dense linear order without endpoints (see Cantor's isomorphism theorem ).

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] So, the order type of the countable non-standard models is known. However, the arithmetical operations are much more complicated.

It is easy to see that the arithmetical structure differs from ω + (ω* + ω) ⋅ η . For instance if a nonstandard (non-finite) element u is in the model, then so is m ⋅ u for any m in the initial segment N , yet u 2 is larger than m ⋅ u for any standard finite m .

Also one can define "square roots" such as the least v such that v 2 > 2 ⋅ u .  These cannot be within a standard finite number of any rational multiple of u . By analogous methods to non-standard analysis one can also use PA to define close approximations to irrational multiples of a non-standard number u such as the least v with v > π ⋅ u (these can be defined in PA using non-standard finite rational approximations of π even though π itself cannot be). Once more, v − ( m / n ) ⋅ ( u / n ) has to be larger than any standard finite number for any standard finite m , n .

[ citation needed ] This shows that the arithmetical structure of a countable non-standard model is more complex than the structure of the rationals. There is more to it than that though: Tennenbaum's theorem shows that for any countable non-standard model of Peano arithmetic there is no way to code the elements of the model as (standard) natural numbers such that either the addition or multiplication operation of the model is computable on the codes. This result was first obtained by Stanley Tennenbaum in 1959.

References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Hans Hermes (1973).

Introduction to Mathematical Logic . Hochschultext. London: Springer.

ISBN 3540058192 .

ISSN 1431-4657 .

Here: Ch. VI.3 ^ Goldblatt, Robert (1998), "Ultrapower Construction of the Hyperreals", Lectures on the Hyperreals , Graduate Texts in Mathematics, vol. 188, New York: Springer, pp.

23– 33, doi : 10.1007/978-1-4612-0615-6_3 , ISBN 978-1-4612-6841-3 ^ Andrey Bovykin and Richard Kaye Order-types of models of Peano arithmetic: a short survey June 14, 2001 ^ Andrey Bovykin On order-types of models of arithmetic thesis submitted to the University of Birmingham for the degree of Ph.D. in the Faculty of Science 13 April 2000 ^ Fred Landman LINEAR ORDERS, DISCRETE, DENSE, AND CONTINUOUS – includes proof that Q is the only countable dense linear order.

Sources [ edit ] Boolos, George , and Jeffrey, Richard 1974.

Computability and Logic , Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-38923-2 .

Skolem, Thoralf (1934).

"Über die Nicht-charakterisierbarkeit der Zahlenreihe mittels endlich oder abzählbar unendlich vieler Aussagen mit ausschließlich Zahlenvariablen" (PDF) .

Fundamenta Mathematicae (in German).

23 (1): 150– 161.

doi : 10.4064/fm-23-1-150-161 .

See also [ edit ] Non-Euclidean geometry — about non-standard models in geometry v t e Mathematical logic General Axiom list Cardinality First-order logic Formal proof Formal semantics Foundations of mathematics Information theory Lemma Logical consequence Model Theorem Theory Type theory Theorems ( list ) and paradoxes Gödel's completeness and incompleteness theorems Tarski's undefinability Banach–Tarski paradox Cantor's theorem, paradox and diagonal argument Compactness Halting problem Lindström's Löwenheim–Skolem Russell's paradox Logics Traditional Classical logic Logical truth Tautology Proposition Inference Logical equivalence Consistency Equiconsistency Argument Soundness Validity Syllogism Square of opposition Venn diagram Propositional Boolean algebra Boolean functions Logical connectives Propositional calculus Propositional formula Truth tables Many-valued logic 3 finite ∞ Predicate First-order list Second-order Monadic Higher-order Fixed-point Free Quantifiers Predicate Monadic predicate calculus Set theory Set hereditary Class ( Ur- ) Element Ordinal number Extensionality Forcing Relation equivalence partition Set operations: intersection union complement Cartesian product power set identities Types of sets Countable Uncountable Empty Inhabited Singleton Finite Infinite Transitive Ultrafilter Recursive Fuzzy Universal Universe constructible Grothendieck Von Neumann Maps and cardinality Function / Map domain codomain image In / Sur / Bi -jection Schröder–Bernstein theorem Isomorphism Gödel numbering Enumeration Large cardinal inaccessible Aleph number Operation binary Set theories Zermelo–Fraenkel axiom of choice continuum hypothesis General Kripke–Platek Morse–Kelley Naive New Foundations Tarski–Grothendieck Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Ackermann Constructive Formal systems ( list ), language and syntax Alphabet Arity Automata Axiom schema Expression ground Extension by definition conservative Relation Formation rule Grammar Formula atomic closed ground open Free/bound variable Language Metalanguage Logical connective ¬ ∨ ∧ → ↔ = Predicate functional variable propositional variable Proof Quantifier ∃ !

∀ rank Sentence atomic spectrum Signature String Substitution Symbol function logical/constant non-logical variable Term Theory list Example axiomatic systems ( list ) of arithmetic : Peano second-order elementary function primitive recursive Robinson Skolem of the real numbers Tarski's axiomatization of Boolean algebras canonical minimal axioms of geometry : Euclidean : Elements Hilbert's Tarski's non-Euclidean Principia Mathematica Proof theory Formal proof Natural deduction Logical consequence Rule of inference Sequent calculus Theorem Systems axiomatic deductive Hilbert list Complete theory Independence ( from ZFC ) Proof of impossibility Ordinal analysis Reverse mathematics Self-verifying theories Model theory Interpretation function of models Model equivalence finite saturated spectrum submodel Non-standard model of arithmetic Diagram elementary Categorical theory Model complete theory Satisfiability Semantics of logic Strength Theories of truth semantic Tarski's Kripke's T-schema Transfer principle Truth predicate Truth value Type Ultraproduct Validity Computability theory Church encoding Church–Turing thesis Computably enumerable Computable function Computable set Decision problem decidable undecidable P NP P versus NP problem Kolmogorov complexity Lambda calculus Primitive recursive function Recursion Recursive set Turing machine Type theory Related Abstract logic Algebraic logic Automated theorem proving Category theory Concrete / Abstract category Category of sets History of logic History of mathematical logic timeline Logicism Mathematical object Philosophy of mathematics Supertask Mathematics portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Non-standard_model_of_arithmetic&oldid=1293079354 " Categories : Arithmetic Formal theories of arithmetic Mathematical logic Model theory Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2015 Articles needing additional references from July 2012 All articles needing additional references All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Wikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2012 CS1 German-language sources (de) This page was last edited on 30 May 2025, at 15:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Non-standard model of arithmetic 5 languages Add topic

