Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Recognition of speedy trial rights Toggle Recognition of speedy trial rights subsection 1.1 Bangladesh 1.2 Canada 1.3 Europe 1.4 India 1.5 Japan 1.6 New Zealand 1.7 Philippines 1.8 United States 1.8.1 State Law 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Speedy trial 4 languages Hausa हिन्दी עברית 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Human right to trial without arbitrary or indefinite delay Criminal procedure Criminal trials and convictions Rights of the accused Appeal Bail Double jeopardy 2 Exclusionary rule 1 Fair trial Jury trial Trial as an adult Presumption of innocence Pre-trial Counsel Self-incrimination Rights of the victim Clearance rate Criminal justice Right to an effective remedy Speedy trial Victims' rights Verdict Acquittal Conviction Conviction rate Guilt Not proven 3 Directed verdict Sentencing Custodial Disparity Discharge Guidelines Totality 5, 6 Mandatory Periodic Dangerous offender 4, 5 Capital punishment Execution warrant Cruel and unusual punishment Imprisonment Life Indefinite Legal remedy Loss of rights Reparation Restitution Reform Suspended Three-strikes law Zero tolerance Post-sentencing Criminal justice Exoneration Parole Probation Habitual offender Life licence 6 Miscarriage of justice Pardon Recidivism Rehabilitation Restorative justice Sex offender registry Sexually violent predator laws 1 Tariff 6 Related areas of law Civil procedure Criminal defenses Criminal law Evidence Portals Law portal 1 US courts 2 Not in English/Welsh courts 3 Scottish courts 4 English/Welsh courts 5 Canadian courts 6 UK courts v t e In criminal law , the right to a speedy trial is a human right under which it is asserted that a government prosecutor may not delay the trial of a criminal suspect arbitrarily and indefinitely. Otherwise, the power to impose such delays would effectively allow prosecutors to send anyone to jail for an arbitrary length of time without trial, expressed as the maxim Justice delayed is justice denied .

Although it is important for the protection of speedy trial rights for there to be a court in which a defendant may complain about the unreasonable delay of the trial, it is also important that nations implement structures that avoid the delay.

[ 1 ] Jurimetrics allows to estimate the current judicial efficiency.

[ 2 ] Speedy justice tends to correlate with quality and fairness of justice .

[ 3 ] Recognition of speedy trial rights [ edit ] In jurisdictions with strong rule of law , the requirement of a "speedy trial" forces prosecutors to diligently build cases within a reasonable amount of time commensurate with the complexity and heinousness of the crimes of which suspects are accused. The right is based on the notion that long-term incarceration should normally be restricted to situations in which a judge or jury have determined a suspect has committed a crime.

The right to a speedy trial is codified in fundamental legal documents in several jurisdictions, and may be further defined by statutory law.

Bangladesh [ edit ] In Bangladesh , the right to a speedy trial is stated in Article 35(3) of the Constitution of Bangladesh , which provides: "Every person accused of a criminal offence" to "have the right to a speedy and public trial by an independent and impartial Court or tribunal established by law".

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The Law and Order Disruption (Speedy Trial) Act (2002) , aimed to implement this constitutional right. The Act requires that trials for specified offenses be concluded within 120 days, with a possible extension of 60 days if necessary.

[ 6 ] Speedy Trial Courts, presided over by Judicial or Metropolitan Magistrates , are established under this law to expedite cases.

[ 7 ] The act was notably used in The State vs. Mehedi Hasan Rasel and Others criminal case.

[ 8 ] In 2024, the Act, initially enacted as a temporary measure, was made permanent, drawing criticism from legal experts and rights organizations.

[ 9 ] Canada [ edit ] Speedy trial rights are recognized within Section Eleven of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms .

In R v Jordan , the Supreme Court of Canada held that these Charter rights are presumed to have been violated when the trial does not end within 18 months of the charges being filed, or 30 months when there is a preliminary inquiry. When speedy trial rights are violated, the Crown must drop relevant charges by entering a stay of proceedings.

Once the presumptive ceiling is exceeded, the burden is on the Crown to rebut the presumption of unreasonableness on the basis of exceptional circumstances outside the Crown's control.

Europe [ edit ] Within Europe, speedy trial rights are recognized by Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights .

In English law, this right was developed by the Assize of Clarendon in 1166 (a judge would be summoned if one was not immediately available) and Magna Carta in 1215 ("To no one will we sell, to no one will we refuse or delay, right or justice.").

[ 10 ] India [ edit ] The right to a speedy trial is guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India .

[ 11 ] There is no automatic legal remedy available to defendants who are denied speedy trials, rendering it difficult to hold judicial officers accountable for violations.

[ 12 ] Japan [ edit ] The Article 37 [ ja ] of the Japanese Constitution states, "In all criminal cases the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial by an impartial tribunal." [ 13 ] Takada case [ ja ] , which had not held a court for 15 years, was dismissed by Supreme Court of Japan according to Article 37.

[ 14 ] After the Takada case, it is considered that dismissing judge should only apply if the accused ask acceleration of a trial.

New Zealand [ edit ] There is no guaranteed right to a speedy trial in New Zealand. The New Zealand Bill of Rights Act states that persons charged have the right to be tried without undue delay.

[ 15 ] However the law does not provide a means of enforcing this requirement nor a definition of what constitutes an "undue delay". Under s79(3), the provisions of the Bill of Rights Act cannot be enforced when they relate to “an act or omission of a court.” [ 16 ] In 2024, it is estimated that 81% of cases take 15 months to go from initial arrest to trial, with the remaining cases taking longer, [ 17 ] with those defendants often waiting many years for their cases to be heard.

[ 18 ] The extreme length of time required to have a trial has caused an increasing number of people to plead guilty to criminal charges, for which they deny guilt, in order to have their matters resolved sooner.

[ 19 ] Philippines [ edit ] The Constitution of the Philippines states, "All persons shall have the right to a speedy disposition of their cases before all judicial, quasi-judicial , or administrative bodies." [ 20 ] United States [ edit ] In the United States, basic speedy trial rights are protected by the Speedy Trial Clause of the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution . For federal charges, the Speedy Trial Act of 1974 applies. The trial must commence within 70 days from the date the information or indictment was filed, or from the date the defendant appears before an officer of the court in which the charge is pending, whichever is later.

The consequences of a speedy trial violation may require that the case be dismissed, although depending upon the circumstances it may be possible for the state to again initiate a criminal charge against a defendant despite a speedy trial violation.

Defendants may waive their right to a speedy trial for the purposes of negotiation .

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] State Law [ edit ] States may offer speedy trial protections in addition to federal protections, which can vary significantly from the rights available under the federal Constitution and in federal courts under the Speedy Trial Act. In June 1776, a "speedy trial" provision was explicitly included in the Virginia Declaration of Rights by George Mason , its principal author.

California's right to a speedy trial is different in several ways from the federal right.

[ 23 ] In California, the right to a speedy trial attaches as soon as a felony complaint is filed (that is, as soon as the criminal action is initiated), while in federal courts, the right attaches at a later point, in the form of a "formal accusation" by indictment or information.

[ 23 ] In California, dismissal is automatic for a violation of the state statute implementing the state constitutional right to a speedy trial (Penal Code section 1382); no affirmative showing of prejudice is required.

[ 23 ] However, where there was no statutory violation but there may have been a state constitutional violation, then an affirmative showing of prejudice is required and the trial court can defer evaluation of a motion to dismiss to the end of trial in order to evaluate whether the evidence presented at trial shows that the defendant suffered actual prejudice from the delay.

[ 23 ] Unlike the federal constitutional right to a speedy trial, California does not treat a "uncommonly long" delay as giving rise to a presumption of prejudice under its state constitutional right to a speedy trial, meaning the defendant must show actual prejudice in the sense that evidence material to his defense was actually lost or damaged as a result of the delay.

[ 23 ] See also [ edit ] Law reform Judicial reform Judicial review References [ edit ] ^ Buonomo, Giampiero (2000).

"Equa durata del processo: il risarcimento non risolve il problema" .

Diritto&Giustizia Edizione Online . Archived from the original on 2012-08-01.

^ Unger, Adriana Jacoto; Neto, José Francisco dos Santos; Fantinato, Marcelo; Peres, Sarajane Marques; Trecenti, Julio; Hirota, Renata (21 June 2021).

Process mining-enabled jurimetrics: analysis of a Brazilian court's judicial performance in the business law processing . ACM. pp.

240– 244.

doi : 10.1145/3462757.3466137 .

ISBN 978-1-4503-8526-8 .

^ Melcarne, Alessandro; Ramello, Giovanni B.; Spruk, Rok (2021).

"Is justice delayed justice denied? An empirical approach" .

International Review of Law and Economics .

65 : 105953.

doi : 10.1016/j.irle.2020.105953 .

^ Sakin Tanvir (2021).

"Whether Article 35 of the Constitution of Bangladesh Contravenes with Section 53 of the Penal Code" .

SSRN . Retrieved 23 January 2025 .

^ Zakir Hossain (28 October 2019).

"A faster approach" .

Dhaka Tribune . Retrieved 23 January 2025 .

^ "Speedy Trial Act set to become permanent law" .

The Daily Star . 29 January 2024 . Retrieved 23 January 2025 .

^ UNB (5 March 2024).

"Speedy Trial Bill passed in parliament" .

Dhaka Tribune . Retrieved 23 January 2025 .

^ "BUET students, others remember Abrar Fahad, demand speedy trial" .

New Age (Bangladesh) . 18 June 2021 . Retrieved 23 January 2025 .

^ "Bangladesh to make Speedy Trial Act a permanent law" .

Bdnews24.com . 30 January 2024 . Retrieved 23 January 2025 .

^ Wermiel, Stephen J. (Fall 2014). "Magna Carta in Supreme Court Jurisprudence".

Insights on Law & Society .

15 . American Bar Association: 30.

^ "Analysis of the legal position in India on speedy trial versus judicial delay" .

alrc.asia .

^ "Speedy justice is fundamental right: Madhya Pradesh HC" .

The Times of India . 2023-11-25.

ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 2024-04-20 .

^ "日本国憲法 / The Constitution of Japan" .

www.japaneselawtranslation.go.jp . Retrieved 2020-06-17 .

^ 日本国語大辞典, ブリタニカ国際大百科事典 小項目事典,朝日新聞掲載「キーワード」,デジタル大辞泉,百科事典マイペディア,世界大百科事典 第２版,大辞林 第三版,日本大百科全書(ニッポニカ),精選版 (14 July 2016).

"免訴(めんそ)とは" .

コトバンク (in Japanese) . Retrieved 2020-06-17 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ "New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990 s 25" .

New Zealand Legislation . Parliamentary Counsel Office. 2022-08-30 . Retrieved 2025-02-01 .

^ "New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990 s 79" .

New Zealand Legislation . Parliamentary Counsel Office. 2024-07-01 . Retrieved 2025-02-01 .

^ Heemi Taumaunu (2024-06-01).

"Timely Access to Justice, Judicial Protocol Ref#01" (PDF) .

District Court of New Zealand . Chief District Court Judge . Retrieved 2025-01-12 .

^ Sam Sherwood (2021-11-27).

"Man's four-year wait for trial one of nearly 6000 cases to be heard" .

Stuff News . Retrieved 2025-01-12 .

^ Shannon Pitman (2025-01-02).

"Growing backlog of judge-alone trials causing concern among lawyers and frustrated defendants" .

Radio New Zealand . Retrieved 2025-01-12 .

^ "Constitution of the Philippines, Article III" .

Wikisource . Retrieved 28 September 2017 .

^ Francis, Enjoli (4 December 2018).

"Teenager who was badly injured after friend pushed her off bridge still 'looking for justice' " .

ABC News . Retrieved 23 February 2024 .

^ Strom, Samuel, J.D.; Earhart, Rhonda, Esq.

"Right to a Speedy Jury Trial" .

FindLaw.com . Retrieved 23 February 2024 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b c d e People v. Martinez , 22 Cal. 4th 750, 94 Cal. Rptr. 2d 381, 996 P.2d 32 (2000).

v t e Types of justice In philosophy Commutative Distributive Divine Interactional Global Natural Organizational Procedural Victor's Recognition Areas Climate Criminal Economic Environmental Equality Fairness Gender Military Racial Reproductive Restorative Retributive Resource Social Spatial Speedy Trade Transformative Utilitarian Other Frontier Poetic v t e Substantive human rights What is considered a human right is in some cases controversial; not all the topics listed are universally accepted as human rights Civil and political Equality before the law Freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention Freedom of assembly Freedom of association Cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment Freedom from discrimination Freedom of information Freedom of movement Freedom of religion Freedom from slavery Freedom of speech Freedom of thought Freedom from torture LGBT rights Liberty Nationality Personhood Presumption of innocence Access to justice Right of asylum Right to die Right to a fair trial Right to counsel Right to family life Right to keep and bear arms Right to life Right to petition Right to privacy Right to protest Right to refuse medical treatment Right to resist Right of return Right of self-defense Right to truth Security of person Speedy trial Suffrage right to be a candidate Right to homeland Economic, social and cultural Digital rights Equal pay for equal work Fair remuneration Labor rights Right to an adequate standard of living Right to clothing Right to development Right to education Right to food Right to health Right to a healthy environment Right to housing Right to Internet access Right to property Right to public participation Right of reply Right to rest and leisure Right of return Right to science and culture Right to social security Right to water Right to work Sexual and reproductive Abortion Family planning Family rights Freedom from involuntary female genital mutilation Freedom from forced circumcision Intersex human rights LGBT rights Sexual and reproductive health Right to sexuality Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Japan Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Speedy_trial&oldid=1294736829 " Categories : Speedy trial Criminal law Human rights Time in government Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 June 2025, at 14:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Speedy trial 4 languages Add topic

