Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 Systematics and species 3 Other "magpies" 4 Human interactions Toggle Human interactions subsection 4.1 Cultural references 4.1.1 East Asia 4.1.2 Europe 4.2 As pests 5 In legend 6 Gallery 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Magpie 25 languages Afrikaans العربية Dansk Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia עברית Kiswahili Latviešu മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Picard Português Simple English Suomi Tagalog தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Large bird in the corvid family This article is about the birds in the family Corvidae. For the black and white bird often referred to by English speakers simply as 'magpie', see Eurasian magpie . For the Australasian bird in the family Artamidae, see Australian magpie . For other uses, see Magpie (disambiguation) .

Magpie Eurasian magpie Scientific classification Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Aves Order: Passeriformes Superfamily: Corvoidea Family: Corvidae Groups included Cissinae Cyanopica Pica Cladistically included but traditionally excluded taxa Cyanocoracinae Perisoreus Garrulus Ptilostomus Zavattariornis Podoces Nucifraga Coloeus Corvus Magpies are birds of various species of the family Corvidae . Like other members of their family, they are widely considered to be intelligent creatures. The Eurasian magpie , for instance, is thought to rank among the world's most intelligent creatures , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] and is one of the few nonmammalian species able to recognize itself in a mirror test .

[ 3 ] Magpies have shown the ability to make and use tools, imitate human speech, grieve, play games, and work in teams.

[ 4 ] They are particularly well known for their songs and were once popular as cagebirds. In addition to other members of the genus Pica , corvids considered magpies are in the genera Cissa , Urocissa , and Cyanopica .

Magpies of the genus Pica are generally found in temperate regions of Europe, Asia, and western North America, with populations also present in Tibet and high-elevation areas of Kashmir. Magpies of the genus Cyanopica are found in East Asia and the Iberian Peninsula . The birds called magpies in Australia are, however, not related to the magpies in the rest of the world.

[ 5 ] Name [ edit ] The name is a combination of "mag" and "pie".  The "pie" part of the name derives from an earlier name for the animal that can be traced back to the PIE root *(s)peik-. Itself possible derived from the PIE root *pi, implying pointedness. Possibly in reference to its pointed beak, or its long tail.

[ 6 ] The tendency in previous centuries was to give birds common names, such as robin redbreast (which now is called the robin ) and jenny wren. The magpie was originally variously maggie pie and mag pie.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] The term " pica " for the human disorder involving a compulsive desire to eat items that are not food is borrowed from the Latin name of the magpie, pica , for its reputed tendency to feed on miscellaneous things.

[ 8 ] Systematics and species [ edit ] According to some studies, magpies do not form the monophyletic group they are traditionally believed to be; tails have elongated (or shortened) independently in multiple lineages of corvid birds.

[ 9 ] Among the traditional magpies,  two distinct lineages apparently exist. One consists of Holarctic species with black and white colouration, and is probably closely related to crows and Eurasian jays . The other contains several species from South to East Asia with vivid colouration, which is predominantly green or blue. The azure-winged magpie and the Iberian magpie , formerly thought to constitute a single species with a most peculiar distribution, have been shown to be two distinct species, and are classified as the genus Cyanopica .

[ 10 ] Other research has cast doubt on the taxonomy of the Pica magpies, since P. hudsonia and P. nuttalli may not be different species, whereas the Korean race of P. pica is genetically very distinct from the other Eurasian (as well as the North American) forms. Either the North American, Korean, and remaining Eurasian forms are accepted as three or four separate species, or else only a single species, Pica pica , exists.

[ 11 ] Oriental (blue and green) magpies Subfamily Cissinae Genus Urocissa Taiwan blue magpie , Urocissa caerulea Red-billed blue magpie , Urocissa erythroryncha Yellow-billed blue magpie , Urocissa flavirostris White-winged magpie , Urocissa whiteheadi Sri Lanka blue magpie , Urocissa ornata Genus Cissa Common green magpie , Cissa chinensis Indochinese green magpie , Cissa hypoleuca Javan green magpie , Cissa thalassina Bornean green magpie , Cissa jefferyi Azure-winged magpies Genus Cyanopica Azure-winged magpie , Cyanopica cyanus Iberian magpie , Cyanopica cooki Holarctic (black-and-white) magpies Genus Pica Eurasian magpie , Pica pica Black-billed magpie , Pica hudsonia (may be conspecific with P. pica ) Yellow-billed magpie , Pica nuttalli (may be conspecific with P. (pica) hudsonia ) Asir magpie , Pica asirensis (may be conspecific with P. pica ) Maghreb magpie , Pica mauritanica (may be conspecific with P. pica ) Oriental magpie , Pica serica (may be conspecific with P. pica ) Black-rumped magpie .

Pica bottanensis (may be conspecific with P. pica ) Other "magpies" [ edit ] The black magpies , Platysmurus , are treepies ; they are neither magpies, nor as was long believed, jays. Treepies are a distinct group of corvids externally similar to magpies.

The Australian magpie , Gymnorhina tibicen , is conspicuously "pied", with black and white plumage reminiscent of a Eurasian magpie. It is a member of the family Artamidae and not a corvid.

The magpie-robins , members of the genus Copsychus , have a similar "pied" appearance, but they are Old World flycatchers , unrelated to the corvids.

Human interactions [ edit ] Cultural references [ edit ] See also: Eurasian magpie § Relationship with humans , and Black-billed magpie § Relationship with humans Named as official bird of city of Edmonton, AB, CA in May 2025 per CBC East Asia [ edit ] In East Asian cultures, the magpie is a very popular bird and is a symbol of good luck and fortune.

The magpie is a common subject in Chinese paintings. It is also often found in traditional Chinese poetry and couplets. In addition, in Chinese folklore, all the magpies of the Qixi Festival every year will fly to the Milky Way and form a bridge, where the separated Cowherd and Weaver Girl will meet. The Milky Way is like a river, and the Cowherd and Weaver Girl refer to the famous α-Aquilae and α-Lyrae of modern Astronomy, respectively. For this reason, the magpie bridge has come to symbolize a relationship between men and women.

Magpies have an important place in the birth myth of Ai Xinjue Luo Bukuri Yushun , the ancestor of the Qing dynasty .

The magpie is a national bird of Korea and a symbol of its capital Seoul .

[ 12 ] Europe [ edit ] In European culture, the magpie is reputed to collect shiny objects such as wedding rings and other valuables, a well known example being Rossini 's opera La Gazza Ladra ( The Thieving Magpie ). A recent study conducted by Exeter University found that Eurasian magpies express neophobia when presented with unfamiliar objects, and were less likely to approach or interact with the shiny objects - metal screws, foil rings and aluminium foil - used in the experiments.

[ 13 ] However, magpies are naturally curious like other members of the corvid family, and may collect shiny objects, but do not favour shiny objects over dull ones.

[ 14 ] As pests [ edit ] Magpies are common orchard pests in some regions of the world.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] In legend [ edit ] Magpies are the National bird of Bangladesh .

In England , magpies were traditionally viewed as omens either of fortune or misfortune, depending upon the number of birds one saw. An English nursery rhyme known as " One for Sorrow " recounts the tradition: One for sorrow, Two for joy, Three for a girl, Four for a boy, Five for silver, Six for gold, Seven for a secret never to be told.

[ 17 ] John Brand was an English antiquarian and Church of England clergyman, who was appointed Secretary to the Society of Antiquaries, in 1784. His book, Observations of Popular Antiquities , (1780), has the first-known record of counting Magpies to predict good or ill-fortune, in the description, and records only four lines: "One for sorrow,
Two for mirth,
Three for a funeral,
And four for a birth".

Popular antiquities later became known as folklore , (a term coined by William John Thoms in 1846).

In that year, the rhyme was added to Proverbs and Popular Sayings of the Seasons ,  by Michael Aislabie Denham , an English merchant and collector of folklore. The following lines were added:- "Five for heaven,
Six for hell,
Seven for the devil, his own self".

Sir Humphry Davy attributed the connection for the feeling of one, then two magpies to joy and sorrow in his, Salmonia : or Days of Fly Fishing , (1828); he wrote:
"For anglers in spring it is always unlucky to see single magpies, but two may be always regarded as a favourable omen; and the reason is, that in cold and stormy weather one magpie alone leaves the nest in search of food, the other remaining sitting upon the eggs or the young ones; but when two go out together, it is only when the weather is warm and mild, and thus favourable for fishing." [ 18 ] In sports, some teams that wear black and white striped kits are nicknamed the magpies, such as Newcastle United and Notts County from England.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Gallery [ edit ] Sri Lanka blue magpie Indochinese green magpie Iberian magpie Yellow-billed magpie References [ edit ] ^ Connor, Steve (19 August 2008).

"Magpies reflect on a newly discovered intellectual prowess" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on 18 November 2011 . Retrieved 4 September 2017 .

^ "Eurasian Magpie: A True Bird Brain" . Encyclopedia Britannica.

Archived from the original on 14 January 2021 . Retrieved 5 February 2021 .

^ Prior H, et al. (2008). De Waal F (ed.).

"Mirror-Induced Behavior in the Magpie ( Pica pica ): Evidence of Self-Recognition" .

PLOS Biology .

6 (8). Public Library of Science: e202.

doi : 10.1371/journal.pbio.0060202 .

PMC 2517622 .

PMID 18715117 .

^ Administrator (2016-09-12).

"Eurasian Magpie: A True Bird Brain" .

Saving Earth | Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2024-03-15 .

^ Joseph, Leo (2017-12-12).

"It's beloved, but Australia's magpie is an international bird of mystery | Leo Joseph" .

the Guardian .

Archived from the original on 2020-10-23 . Retrieved 2020-10-19 .

^ a b "magpie" .

Online Etymology Dictionary . Retrieved 29 June 2025 .

^ "magpie" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ "pica" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ Ericson, Per G. P.; Jansén, Anna-Lee; Johansson, Ulf S. & Ekman, Jan (2005): Inter-generic relationships of the crows, jays, magpies and allied groups (Aves: Corvidae) based on nucleotide sequence data.

Archived 2017-08-10 at the Wayback Machine Journal of Avian Biology 36 : 222–234.

^ Kyukov et al, Synchronic east–west divergence in azure-winged magpies ( Cyanopica cyanus ) and magpies ( Pica pica ), Journal of Zoological Systematics and Evolutionary Research 42(4): 342-351 (2004) ^ Lee, Sang-im; Parr, Cynthia S.; Hwang, Youna; Mindell, David P. & Choe, Jae C. (2003): Phylogeny of magpies (genus Pica ) inferred from mtDNA data.

Archived 2004-05-04 at the Wayback Machine Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 29 : 250–257.

^ "Tree, Flower & Bird -" .

Seoul Metropolitan Government .

Archived from the original on 2023-08-12 . Retrieved 2023-08-12 .

^ "Magpies 'don't steal shiny objects' " .

BBC News . 2014-08-16.

Archived from the original on 2023-06-05 . Retrieved 2022-05-02 .

^ "Do Magpies Like Stealing Shiny Things?" .

Audubon . 2019-04-15.

Archived from the original on 2022-05-20 . Retrieved 2022-05-02 .

^ "Birds / Cherry / Agriculture: Pest Management Guidelines" .

UC Statewide IPM Program (UC IPM) .

Archived from the original on 2022-09-15 . Retrieved 2022-06-21 .

^ "Birds on Tree Fruits and Vines Management Guidelines" .

UC Statewide IPM Program (UC IPM) . 2005-05-20.

Archived from the original on 2022-06-21 . Retrieved 2022-06-21 .

^ P. Tate (2010).

Flights of Fancy: Birds in Myth, Legend, and Superstition . New York: Random House.

ISBN 978-1409035695 .

^ Paris, John Ayrton (1831).

The Life of Sir Humphry Davy: Volume I . London: H. Colburn and R. Bentley. p. 468.

^ Spiers, Tim.

"Villans, Cherries, Toffees and Tractor Boys: The origins of English football club nicknames" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2024-10-13 .

^ "NOTTINGHAM COUNTY – whatsbehindthebadge" . Retrieved 2024-10-13 .

Further reading [ edit ] Song, S.; Zhang, R.; Alström, P.; Irestedt, M.; Cai, T.; Qu, Y.; Ericson, P.G.P.; Fjeldså, J.; Lei, F. (2017).

"Complete taxon sampling of the avian genus Pica (magpies) reveals ancient relictual populations and synchronous Late-Pleistocene demographic expansion across the Northern Hemisphere" .

Journal of Avian Biology .

49 (2): jav-01612.

doi : 10.1111/jav.01612 .

External links [ edit ] Magpie videos, photos and sounds on eBird v t e Extant species of family Corvidae Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Aves Order: Passeriformes Family Corvidae Choughs Pyrrhocorax Alpine chough ( P. graculus ) Red-billed chough ( P. pyrrhocorax ) Treepies Crypsirina Hooded treepie ( C. cucullata ) Black racket-tailed treepie ( C. temia ) Dendrocitta Andaman treepie ( D. bayleyi ) Bornean treepie ( D. cinerascens ) Grey treepie ( D. formosae ) Black-faced treepie ( D. frontalis ) White-bellied treepie ( D. leucogastra ) Sumatran treepie ( D. occipitalis ) Rufous treepie ( D. vagabunda ) Platysmurus Malayan black magpie ( P. leucopterus ) Bornean black magpie ( P. aterrimus ) Temnurus Ratchet-tailed treepie ( T. temnurus ) Oriental magpies Cissa Common green magpie ( C. chinensis ) Indochinese green magpie ( C. hypoleuca ) Bornean green magpie ( C. jefferyi ) Javan green magpie ( C. thalassina ) Urocissa Taiwan blue magpie ( U. caerulea ) Red-billed blue magpie ( U. erythrorhyncha ) Yellow-billed blue magpie ( U. flavirostris ) Sri Lanka blue magpie ( U. ornata ) White-winged magpie ( U. whiteheadi ) Old World jays Garrulus Eurasian jay ( G. glandarius ) Lanceolated jay ( G. lanceolatus ) Lidth's jay ( G. lidthi ) Podoces (Ground jays) Xinjiang ground jay ( P. biddulphi ) Mongolian ground jay ( P. hendersoni ) Turkestan ground jay ( P. panderi ) Iranian ground jay ( P. pleskei ) Ptilostomus Piapiac ( P. afer ) Stresemann's bushcrow Zavattariornis Stresemann's bushcrow ( Z. stresemanni ) Family Corvidae (continued) Nutcrackers Nucifraga Spotted nutcracker ( N. caryocatactes ) Clark's nutcracker ( N. columbiana ) Kashmir nutcracker ( N. multipunctata ) Holarctic magpies Pica Black-billed magpie ( P. hudsonia ) Yellow-billed magpie ( P. nuttalli ) Eurasian magpie ( P. pica ) Oriental magpie ( P. serica ) Maghreb magpie ( P. mauritanica ) Asir magpie ( P. asirensis ) Black-rumped magpie ( P. bottanensis ) True crows Corvus Australian and Melanesian species Little crow ( C. bennetti ) Australian raven ( C. coronoides ) Bismarck crow ( C. insularis ) Brown-headed crow ( C. fuscicapillus ) Bougainville crow ( C. meeki ) Little raven ( C. mellori ) New Caledonian crow ( C. moneduloides ) Torresian crow ( C. orru ) Forest raven ( C. tasmanicus ) Grey crow ( C. tristis ) Long-billed crow ( C. validus ) White-billed crow ( C. woodfordi ) Pacific island species Hawaiian crow ( C. hawaiiensis ) Mariana crow ( C. kubaryi ) Tropical Asian species Slender-billed crow ( C. enca ) Small crow ( C. samarensis ) Palawan crow ( C. pusillus ) Flores crow ( C. florensis ) Large-billed crow ( C. macrorhynchos ) Eastern jungle crow ( C. levaillantii ) Indian jungle crow ( C. culminatus ) House crow ( C. splendens ) Collared crow ( C. torquatus ) Piping crow ( C. typicus ) Banggai crow ( C. unicolor ) Violet crow ( C. violaceus ) Eurasian and North African species Mesopotamian crow ( C. capellanus ) Hooded crow ( C. cornix ) Carrion crow ( C. corone ) Rook ( C. frugilegus ) Eastern carrion crow ( C. orientalis ) Fan-tailed raven ( C. rhipidurus ) Brown-necked raven ( C. ruficollis ) Holarctic species Common raven ( C. corax ) North and Central American species American crow ( C. brachyrhynchos ) Chihuahuan raven ( C. cryptoleucus ) Tamaulipas crow ( C. imparatus ) Jamaican crow ( C. jamaicensis ) White-necked crow ( C. leucognaphalus ) Cuban palm crow ( C. minutus ) Cuban crow ( C. nasicus ) Fish crow ( C. ossifragus ) Hispaniolan palm crow ( C. palmarum ) Sinaloan crow ( C. sinaloae ) Tropical African species White-necked raven ( C. albicollis ) Pied crow ( C. albus ) Cape crow ( C. capensis ) Thick-billed raven ( C. crassirostris ) Somali crow ( C. edithae ) Jackdaws Coloeus Daurian jackdaw ( C. dauuricus ) Western jackdaw ( C. monedula ) Family Corvidae (continued) Azure-winged magpies Cyanopica Iberian magpie ( C. cooki ) Azure-winged magpie ( C. cyanus ) Grey jays Perisoreus Canada jay ( P. canadensis ) Siberian jay ( P. infaustus ) Sichuan jay ( P. internigrans ) New World jays Aphelocoma (Scrub jays) California scrub jay ( A. californica ) Island scrub jay ( A. insularis ) Woodhouse's scrub jay ( A. woodhouseii ) Florida scrub jay ( A. coerulescens ) Transvolcanic jay ( A. ultramarina ) Unicolored jay ( A. unicolor ) Mexican jay ( A. wollweberi ) Calocitta (Magpie-Jays) Black-throated magpie-jay ( C. colliei ) White-throated Magpie-jay ( C. formosa ) Cyanocitta Blue jay ( C. cristata ) Steller's jay ( C. stelleri ) Cyanocorax Black-chested jay ( C. affinis ) Purplish-backed jay ( C. beecheii ) Azure jay ( C. caeruleus ) Cayenne jay ( C. cayanus ) Plush-crested jay ( C. chrysops ) Curl-crested jay ( C. cristatellus ) Purplish jay ( C. cyanomelas ) White-naped jay ( C. cyanopogon ) Tufted jay ( C. dickeyi ) Azure-naped jay ( C. heilprini ) Bushy-crested jay ( C. melanocyaneus ) Brown jay ( C. morio ) White-tailed jay ( C. mystacalis ) San Blas jay ( C. sanblasianus ) Violaceous jay ( C. violaceus ) Green jay ( C. ynca ) Yucatan jay ( C. yucatanicus ) Cyanolyca Silvery-throated jay ( C. argentigula ) Black-collared jay ( C. armillata ) Azure-hooded jay ( C. cucullata ) White-throated jay ( C. mirabilis ) Dwarf jay ( C. nana ) Beautiful jay ( C. pulchra ) Black-throated jay ( C. pumilo ) Turquoise jay ( C. turcosa ) White-collared jay ( C. viridicyana ) Gymnorhinus Pinyon jay ( G. cyanocephalus ) Portal : Birds Authority control databases National United States Czech Republic Israel Other NARA NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐2wxjl
Cached time: 20250818102121
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.720 seconds
Real time usage: 0.881 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8147/1000000
Revision size: 17548/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 184202/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4717/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 86134/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.505/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6664715/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  755.552      1 -total
 31.35%  236.870      1 Template:Paraphyletic_group
 28.22%  213.237      1 Template:Reflist
 14.92%  112.698      1 Template:Corvidae
 14.53%  109.754      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 11.58%   87.504      3 Template:Cite_news
  7.93%   59.909      1 Template:Short_description
  6.56%   49.567      9 Template:Cite_web
  6.16%   46.549     15 Template:Navbox
  5.71%   43.117     41 Template:Delink Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:142879:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818102121 and revision id 1303098118. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Magpie&oldid=1303098118 " Categories : Corvidae Bird common names Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 02:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Magpie 25 languages Add topic

