Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Theory 2 Competing frames of reference 3 Influences 4 (Humanistic) social work 5 Research 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Microsociology 16 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Italiano ქართული Қазақша Nederlands Polski Português Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Microsociology is one of the main levels of analysis (or focuses) of sociology , concerning the nature of everyday human social interactions and agency on a small scale: face to face.

[ 1 ] : 5 Microsociology is based on subjective interpretative analysis rather than statistical or empirical observation, [ 2 ] : 18–21 and shares close association with the philosophy of phenomenology . Methods include symbolic interactionism and ethnomethodology ; ethnomethodology in particular has led to many academic sub-divisions and studies such as micro- linguistical research and other related aspects of human social behaviour.

Macrosociology , by contrast, concerns the social structure and broader systems.

Part of a series on Sociology History Outline Index Key themes Society Globalization Human behavior Human environmental impact Identity Industrial revolutions 3 / 4 / 5 Popularity Social complexity Social environment Social equality Social equity Social power Social stratification Social structure Social cycle theory Perspectives Conflict theory Critical theory Structural functionalism Positivism Social constructionism Social darwinism Symbolic interactionism Branches Aging Architecture Art Astrosociology Body Criminology Consciousness Culture Death Demography Deviance Disaster Economic Education Emotion ( Jealousy ) Environmental Family Feminist Fiscal Food Gender Generations Health Historical Immigration Industrial Internet Jewry Knowledge Language Law Leisure Literature Marxist Mathematic Medical Military Music Peace, war, and social conflict Philosophy Political Public Punishment Race and ethnicity Religion Rural Science ( History of science ) Social movements Social psychology Sociocybernetics Sociology Space Sport Technology Terrorism Urban Utopian Victimology Visual Methods Quantitative Qualitative Comparative Computational Ethnographic Conversation analysis Historical Interview Mathematical Network analysis Social experiment Survey Major theorists 1700s: Comte · Sieyès 1800s: Martineau · Tocqueville · Marx · Spencer · Le Bon · Ward · Pareto · Tönnies · Veblen · Simmel · Durkheim · Addams · Mead · Weber · Du Bois · Mannheim · Elias 1900s: Fromm · Adorno · Gehlen · Aron · Merton · Nisbet · Mills · Bell · Schoeck · Goffman · Bauman · Foucault · Luhmann · Habermas · Baudrillard · Bourdieu · Giddens Lists Bibliography Terminology Journals Organizations People Timeline By country Society portal v t e Theory [ edit ] Microsociology exists both as an umbrella term for perspectives which focus on agency, such as Max Weber 's theory of social action , and as a body of distinct techniques, particularly in American sociology. The term was conceived by Georges Gurvitch in 1939, borrowing the term from the micro-physics and referring to the irreducible and unstable nature of everyday forms of sociality. It also provided an extra dimension between the studies of social psychology , sociology, and social anthropology —focusing more on individual interaction and thinking within groups, rather than just large social group/societal behaviour. At the micro level, social status and social roles are the most important components of social structure. Microsociology forms an important perspective in many fields of study, including modern psychosocial studies, conversational analysis and human-computer interaction. Microsociology continues to have a profound influence on research in all human fields, often under other names.

[ 3 ] Competing frames of reference [ edit ] Some have considered that face-to-face interaction can be studied in at least three distinct (if overlapping) ways: psychology ; intersubjectivity ; and microsociology.

[ 1 ] : 22 Erving Goffman however saw a central tension between Durkheimian approaches, and those drawn from ethology , especially in respect of interpersonal ritual; [ 2 ] : 84, 88–9 while followers of him have seen in a Durkheimian microsociology the key to the understanding of large-scale social conflict as well.

[ 4 ] : 42 Erving Goffman's theories of social interaction challenged other sociologists to redirect their focus to the questionable aspects of social behavior.

[ 5 ] Contrary to Erving Goffman's theory, Émile Durkheim believed that advanced methodological principles should guide sociologists and that they should research social fact .

[ 5 ] Influences [ edit ] Sartre , in his work on the phenomenology of social dynamics, Critique of Dialectical Reason , written in the late 1950s, called microsociology the only valid theory of human relations.

[ 6 ] Jürgen Habermas and Pierre Bourdieu are two more recent theorists who have put microsociological concepts to good use in their works.

[ 7 ] R.D. Laing was much influenced by Garfinkel's ideas on "degradation ceremonies".

[ 8 ] (Humanistic) social work [ edit ] Key issues, categories and principles of the microsociology, such as human relations, face-to-face interaction, interpretive/ qualitative analysis , attachment and empathy , micro-level analysis, human behavior , micro-community, everyday human life, human context, microculture ,  focus on agency, have influenced and still influences today the social work theory and practice, having a crucial role in the emergence of humanistic social work (Petru Stefaroi), [ 9 ] as response to the structural and systemic social work, which theoretically originates from macrosociology or mesosociology . This is why Malcolm Payne considers microsociology a fundamental theoretical-methodological source of this postmodern and innovative orientation from the contemporary social work, especially of the humanistic social work practice.

[ 10 ] Research [ edit ] Research begins by evaluating the social life of the individuals with the goal of showing the reciprocal relationship between events/actions and the nature of the societal context in which they occur.

[ 11 ] Empirical evidence from recorded conversations and the microsociology of emotion has proved of particular interest to students of interaction ritual.

[ 4 ] : 47 See also [ edit ] Society portal Generalized other George Herbert Mead Human ethology Kurt Lewin Proxemics Socialization References [ edit ] ^ a b Smelser, Neil J. 1997.

Problematics of Sociology.

.

^ a b Goffman, Erving. 1972.

Relations in Public.

^ "...The theoretical premises and methodological approaches developed by microsociologists created a sharp juxtaposition with more conventional ways of prosecuting social science, and the ensuing debates can be said to have formed a primary fault line, at least in U.S. sociology" (Elliot B. Weininger and Omar Lizardo . Ritual, Emotion, Violence: Studies on the Micro-Sociology of Randall Collins, p. 3 [1] ).

^ a b Collins, Randall. 2004.

Interaction Ritual Chains.

^ a b Giddens, Anthony (2014).

Introducrion to Sociology . W.W. NORTON. pp. 18, 10– 11.

ISBN 978-0-393-92223-3 .

^ Stack, George J. 1977.

Satre's Philosophy of Social Existence.

p. 56 ^ Calhoun, Craig, et al. 2012.

Contemporary Sociological Theory.

p. 33.

^ Laing, R. D. 1984.

The Politics of Experience.

p. 86.

^ Stefaroi, Petru. 2012. "Humanistic Paradigm of Social Work or Brief Introduction in Humanistic Social Work." Social Work Review 10(1):161–74.

^ Malcolm Payne. 2011.

Humanistic Social Work: Core Principles in Practice . Chicago: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 9.

^ Scheff, Thomas J. 2007.

"Microsociology" , edited by G. Ritzer .

ISBN 9781405124331 .

Further reading [ edit ] Turner, Jonathan H.

Sociology Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ. 2006.

External links [ edit ] Thomas Scheff, 'Microsociology' Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Microsociology&oldid=1295666749 " Category : Methods in sociology This page was last edited on 15 June 2025, at 03:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Microsociology 16 languages Add topic

