Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview Toggle Overview subsection 1.1 Examples of one-point perspective 1.2 Examples of two-point perspective 1.3 Examples of three-point perspective 1.4 Examples of curvilinear perspective 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Early history 2.2 Renaissance 3 Limitations 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Sources 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Perspective (graphical) 53 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Kreyòl ayisyen Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Perspective (visual) ) Form of graphical projection where the projection lines converge to one or more points "Perspective projection" redirects here. For a more mathematical treatment, see Perspective transform .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Perspective" graphical – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Graphical projection Planar projections Parallel projection Orthographic projection Isometric projection Oblique projection Perspective projection Curvilinear perspective Reverse perspective Views Bird's-eye view Cross section Cutaway drawing Exploded-view drawing Fisheye lens Multiviews Panorama Worm's-eye view Zoom lens Topics 3D projection Anamorphosis Axonometry Computer graphics Computer-aided design Descriptive geometry Engineering drawing Map projection Picture plane Plan (drawing) Projection (linear algebra) Projection plane Projective geometry Stereoscopy Technical drawing True length Vanishing point Video game graphics Viewing frustum v t e Perspectives (right column) are a subclass of graphical projections How linear or point-projection prospective works: Rays of light travel from the object (cube), through the picture plane, and to the viewer's eye (O).

Vanishing points emitting straightly lines coincident with the edges the cube drawn on the picture plane are located at the left and right of the plane.

External videos Linear Perspective: Brunelleschi's Experiment , Khan Academy [ 1 ] How One-Point Linear Perspective Works , Smarthistory [ 2 ] Empire of the Eye: The Magic of Illusion: The Trinity-Masaccio, Part 2 , National Gallery of Art [ 3 ] Linear or point-projection perspective (from Latin perspicere ' to see through ' ) is one of two types of graphical projection perspective in the graphic arts ; the other is parallel projection .

[ citation needed ] [ dubious – discuss ] Linear perspective is an approximate representation, generally on a flat surface, of an image as it is seen by the eye . Perspective drawing is useful for representing a three-dimensional scene in a two-dimensional medium, like paper . It is based on the optical fact that for a person an object looks N times (linearly) smaller if it has been moved N times further from the eye than the original distance was.

The most characteristic features of linear perspective are that objects appear smaller as their distance from the observer increases, and that they are subject to foreshortening , meaning that an object's dimensions parallel to the line of sight appear shorter than its dimensions perpendicular to the line of sight. All objects will recede to points in the distance, usually along the horizon line, but also above and below the horizon line depending on the view used.

Italian Renaissance painters and architects including Filippo Brunelleschi , Leon Battista Alberti , Masaccio , Paolo Uccello , Piero della Francesca and Luca Pacioli studied linear perspective, wrote treatises on it, and incorporated it into their artworks.

A figure explaining point-projection prospective. S is the distance between an observer's eye and an observation point on an object that is a long rectangular wall facing to the observer at a tilted angle. If the observation distance becomes N times longer, then the apparent height of the wall at the observation point is roughly N times smaller. As a result, the apparent shape of the wall over a wide angle roughly becomes a triangle which right vertex is located to the far right.

Overview [ edit ] Linear or point-projection perspective works by putting an imaginary flat plane that is close to an object under observation and directly facing an observer's eyes (i.e., the observer is on a normal, or perpendicular line to the plane). Then draw straight lines from every point in the object to the observer. The area on the plane where those lines pass through the plane is a point-projection prospective image resembling what is seen by the observer.

Examples of one-point perspective [ edit ] Examples of two-point perspective [ edit ] A cube drawing using two-point perspective Examples of three-point perspective [ edit ] A cube in three-points perspective where, compared with the above cube in two-points prospective , there is an additional vanishing point far below the cube, from which straight lines come that are coincident with vertical edges of the cube.

Staircase in multi-points perspective. Each point is a vanishing point from which straight lines come, and these lines are a guide to draw 3-dimensional object.

Examples of curvilinear perspective [ edit ] Main article: Curvilinear perspective Additionally, a central vanishing point can be used (just as with one-point perspective) to indicate frontal (foreshortened) depth.

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] Chauvet cave , spatially effective grading of a group of animals through overlap ( c.

31.000 BC ) Fresco from an Egyptian grave, c.

1500 BC Fresco from the Villa of Publius Fannius Synistor in Boscoreale near Pompeii , 1st ct. BC [ 5 ] A Song dynasty watercolor painting of a mill in an oblique projection , 12th century The floor tiles in Lorenzetti 's Annunciation (1344) strongly anticipate modern perspective Early history [ edit ] The earliest art paintings and drawings typically sized many objects and characters hierarchically according to their spiritual or thematic importance, not their distance from the viewer, and did not use foreshortening. The most important figures are often shown as the highest in a composition , also from hieratic motives, leading to the so-called "vertical perspective", common in the art of Ancient Egypt , where a group of "nearer" figures are shown below the larger figure or figures; simple overlapping was also employed to relate distance.

[ 6 ] Additionally, oblique foreshortening of round elements like shields and wheels is evident in Ancient Greek red-figure pottery .

[ 7 ] Systematic attempts to evolve a system of perspective are usually considered to have begun around the fifth century BC in the art of ancient Greece , as part of a developing interest in illusionism allied to theatrical scenery. This was detailed within Aristotle 's Poetics as skenographia : using flat panels on a stage to give the illusion of depth.

[ 8 ] The philosophers Anaxagoras and Democritus worked out geometric theories of perspective for use with skenographia .

Alcibiades had paintings in his house designed using skenographia , so this art was not confined merely to the stage.

Euclid in his Optics ( c.

300 BC ) argues correctly that the perceived size of an object is not related to its distance from the eye by a simple proportion.

[ 9 ] In the first-century BC frescoes of the Villa of P. Fannius Synistor , multiple vanishing points are used in a systematic but not fully consistent manner.

[ 5 ] Chinese artists made use of oblique projection from the first or second century until the 18th century. It is not certain how they came to use the technique; Dubery and Willats (1983) speculate that the Chinese acquired the technique from India, which acquired it from Ancient Rome, [ 10 ] while others credit it as an indigenous invention of Ancient China .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Oblique projection is also seen in Japanese art, such as in the Ukiyo-e paintings of Torii Kiyonaga (1752–1815).

[ 10 ] [ a ] By the later periods of antiquity, artists, especially those in less popular traditions, were well aware that distant objects could be shown smaller than those close at hand for increased realism, but whether this convention was actually used in a work depended on many factors. Some of the paintings found in the ruins of Pompeii show a remarkable realism and perspective for their time.

[ 14 ] It has been claimed that comprehensive systems of perspective were evolved in antiquity, but most scholars do not accept this. Hardly any of the many works where such a system would have been used have survived. A passage in Philostratus suggests that classical artists and theorists thought in terms of "circles" at equal distance from the viewer, like a classical semi-circular theatre seen from the stage.

[ 15 ] The roof beams in rooms in the Vatican Virgil , from about 400 AD, are shown converging, more or less, on a common vanishing point, but this is not systematically related to the rest of the composition.

[ 16 ] Medieval artists in Europe, like those in the Islamic world and China, were aware of the general principle of varying the relative size of elements according to distance, but even more than classical art were perfectly ready to override it for other reasons. Buildings were often shown obliquely according to a particular convention. The use and sophistication of attempts to convey distance increased steadily during the period, but without a basis in a systematic theory.

Byzantine art was also aware of these principles, but also used the reverse perspective convention for the setting of principal figures.

Ambrogio Lorenzetti painted a floor with convergent lines in his Presentation at the Temple (1342), though the rest of the painting lacks perspective elements.

[ 17 ] Renaissance [ edit ] Detail of Masolino da Panicale 's St. Peter Healing a Cripple and the Raising of Tabitha ( c.

1423 ), the earliest extant artwork known to use a consistent vanishing point .

[ 18 ] It is generally accepted that Filippo Brunelleschi conducted a series of experiments between 1415 and 1420, which included making drawings of various Florentine buildings in correct perspective.

[ 19 ] According to Vasari and Antonio Manetti , in about 1420, Brunelleschi demonstrated his discovery of perspective by having people look through a hole on his painting from the backside. Through it, they would see a building such as the Florence Baptistery for which the painting was made. When Brunelleschi lifted a mirror between the building and the painting, the mirror reflected the painting to an observer looking through the hole, so that the observer can compare how similar the building and the painting of it are. (The vanishing point is centered from the perspective of an experiment participant.) [ 20 ] Brunelleschi applied this new system of perspective to his paintings around 1425.

[ 21 ] This scenario is indicative, but faces several problems that are still debated. First of all, nothing can be said for certain about the correctness of his perspective construction of the Baptistery of San Giovanni because Brunelleschi's panel is lost. Second, no other perspective painting or drawing by Brunelleschi is known. (In fact, Brunelleschi was not known to have painted at all.) Third, in the account written by Antonio Manetti in his Vita di Ser Brunellesco at the end of the 15th century on Brunelleschi's panel, there is not a single occurrence of the word "experiment". Fourth, the conditions listed by Manetti are contradictory with each other. For example, the description of the eyepiece sets a visual field of 15°, much narrower than the visual field resulting from the urban landscape described.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Melozzo da Forlì 's use of upward foreshortening in his frescoes, Basilica dei Santi Apostoli, Rome, c.

1480 Soon after Brunelleschi's demonstrations, nearly every interested artist in Florence and in Italy used geometrical perspective in their paintings and sculpture, [ 24 ] notably Donatello , Masaccio , [ 25 ] Lorenzo Ghiberti , Masolino da Panicale , Paolo Uccello , [ 25 ] and Filippo Lippi . Not only was perspective a way of showing depth, it was also a new method of creating a composition. Visual art could now depict a single, unified scene rather than a combination of several. Early examples include Masolino's St. Peter Healing a Cripple and the Raising of Tabitha ( c.

1423 ), Donatello's The Feast of Herod ( c.

1427 ), as well as Ghiberti's Jacob and Esau and other panels from the east doors of the Florence Baptistery .

[ 26 ] Masaccio (d. 1428) achieved an illusionistic effect by placing the vanishing point at the viewer's eye level in his Holy Trinity ( c.

1427 ), [ 27 ] and in The Tribute Money , it is placed behind the face of Jesus.

[ 28 ] [ b ] In the late 15th century, Melozzo da Forlì first applied the technique of foreshortening (in Rome, Loreto , Forlì and others).

[ 30 ] This overall story is based on qualitative judgments, and would need to be faced against the material evaluations that have been conducted on Renaissance perspective paintings. Apart from the paintings of Piero della Francesca , which are a model of the genre, the majority of 15th century works show serious errors in their geometric construction. This is true of Masaccio's Trinity fresco [ 31 ] [ 32 ] and of many works, including those by renowned artists like Leonardo da Vinci.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] As shown by the quick proliferation of accurate perspective paintings in Florence, Brunelleschi likely understood (with help from his friend the mathematician Toscanelli ), [ 35 ] but did not publish the mathematics behind perspective. Decades later, his friend Leon Battista Alberti wrote De pictura ( c.

1435 ), a treatise on proper methods of showing distance in painting. Alberti's primary breakthrough was not to show the mathematics in terms of conical projections, as it actually appears to the eye. Instead, he formulated the theory based on planar projections, or how the rays of light, passing from the viewer's eye to the landscape, would strike the picture plane (the painting). He was then able to calculate the apparent height of a distant object using two similar triangles. The mathematics behind similar triangles is relatively simple, having been long ago formulated by Euclid.

[ c ] Alberti was also trained in the science of optics through the school of Padua and under the influence of Biagio Pelacani da Parma who studied Alhazen 's Book of Optics .

[ 36 ] This book, translated around 1200 into Latin, had laid the mathematical foundation for perspective in Europe.

[ 37 ] Pietro Perugino 's use of perspective in Delivery of the Keys (1482), a fresco at the Sistine Chapel Piero della Francesca elaborated on De pictura in his De Prospectiva pingendi in the 1470s, making many references to Euclid.

[ 38 ] Alberti had limited himself to figures on the ground plane and giving an overall basis for perspective. Della Francesca fleshed it out, explicitly covering solids in any area of the picture plane. Della Francesca also started the now common practice of using illustrated figures to explain the mathematical concepts, making his treatise easier to understand than Alberti's. Della Francesca was also the first to accurately draw the Platonic solids as they would appear in perspective.

Luca Pacioli 's 1509 Divina proportione ( Divine Proportion ), illustrated by Leonardo da Vinci , summarizes the use of perspective in painting, including much of Della Francesca's treatise.

[ 39 ] Leonardo applied one-point perspective as well as shallow focus to some of his works.

[ 40 ] Two-point perspective was demonstrated as early as 1525 by Albrecht Dürer , who studied perspective by reading Piero and Pacioli's works, in his Unterweisung der Messung ("Instruction of the Measurement").

[ 41 ] Limitations [ edit ] This section relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Perspective" graphical – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2023 ) Satire on False Perspective by William Hogarth , 1753 Example of a painting that combines various perspectives: The Frozen City (Museum of Art Aarau, Switzerland) by Matthias A. K. Zimmermann Perspective images are created with reference to a particular center of vision for the picture plane. In order for the resulting image to appear identical to the original scene, a viewer must view the image from the exact vantage point used in the calculations relative to the image. When viewed from a different point, this cancels out what would appear to be distortions in the image. For example, a sphere drawn in perspective will be stretched into an ellipse. These apparent distortions are more pronounced away from the center of the image as the angle between a projected ray (from the scene to the eye) becomes more acute relative to the picture plane. Artists may choose to "correct" perspective distortions, for example by drawing all spheres as perfect circles, or by drawing figures as if centered on the direction of view. In practice, unless the viewer observes the image from an extreme angle, like standing far to the side of a painting, the perspective normally looks more or less correct. This is referred to as "Zeeman's Paradox".

[ 42 ] See also [ edit ] Anamorphosis Camera angle Cutaway drawing Perspective control Perspective (geometry) Trompe-l'œil Uki-e Zograscope Notes [ edit ] ^ In the 18th century, Chinese artists began to combine oblique perspective with regular diminution of size of people and objects with distance; no particular vantage point is chosen, but a convincing effect is achieved.

[ 10 ] ^ Near the end of the 15th century, Leonardo da Vinci placed the vanishing point in his Last Supper behind Christ's other cheek .

[ 29 ] ^ In viewing a wall, for instance, the first triangle has a vertex at the user's eye, and vertices at the top and bottom of the wall. The bottom of this triangle is the distance from the viewer to the wall. The second, similar triangle, has a point at the viewer's eye, and has a length equal to the viewer's eye from the painting. The height of the second triangle can then be determined through a simple ratio, as proven by Euclid.

References [ edit ] ^ "Linear Perspective: Brunelleschi's Experiment" .

Khan Academy . Retrieved 2 June 2024 .

^ "How One-Point Linear Perspective Works" .

Smarthistory at Khan Academy .

Archived from the original on 13 July 2013 . Retrieved 12 May 2013 .

^ "Empire of the Eye: The Magic of Illusion: The Trinity-Masaccio, Part 2" .

National Gallery of Art . Retrieved 12 November 2024 .

^ "The Beginner's Guide to Perspective Drawing" .

The Curiously Creative . Retrieved 17 August 2019 .

^ a b Hurt, Carla (9 August 2013).

"Romans paint better perspective than Renaissance artists" .

Found in Antiquity . Retrieved 4 October 2020 .

^ Calvert, Amy.

"Egyptian Art (article)" .

Khan Academy . Retrieved 14 May 2020 .

^ Regoli, Gigetta Dalli; Gioseffi, Decio; Mellini, Gian Lorenzo; Salvini, Roberto (1968).

Vatican Museums: Rome . Italy: Newsweek. p.

22 .

^ "Skenographia in Fifth Century" .

CUNY . Archived from the original on 17 December 2007 . Retrieved 27 December 2007 .

^ Smith, A. Mark (1999).

Ptolemy and the Foundations of Ancient Mathematical Optics: A Source Based Guided Study . Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society . p. 57.

ISBN 978-0-87169-893-3 .

^ a b c Cucker, Felipe (2013).

Manifold Mirrors: The Crossing Paths of the Arts and Mathematics . Cambridge University Press. pp.

269– 278.

ISBN 978-0-521-72876-8 .

Dubery and Willats (1983:33) write that 'Oblique projection seems to have arrived in China from Rome by way of India round about the first or second century AD.' Figure 10.9 [Wen-Chi returns home, anon, China, 12th century] shows an archetype of the classical use of oblique perspective in Chinese painting.

^ "Seeing History: Is perspective learned or natural?" .

Eclectic Light . 10 January 2018.

Over the same period, the development of sophisticated and highly-detailed visual art in Asia arrived at a slightly different solution, now known as the oblique projection. Whereas Roman and subsequent European visual art effectively had multiple and incoherent vanishing points, Asian art usually lacked any vanishing point, but aligned recession in parallel. An important factor here is the use of long scrolls, which even now make fully coherent perspective projection unsuitable.

^ Martijn de Geus (9 March 2019).

"China Projections" .

Arch Daily . Retrieved 8 July 2020 .

^ Krikke, Jan (2 January 2018).

"Why the world relies on a Chinese "perspective" " .

Medium.com .

About 2000 years ago, the Chinese developed dengjiao toushi (等角透視), a graphic tool probably invented by Chinese architects. It came to be known in the West as axonometry. Axonometry was crucial in the development of the Chinese hand scroll painting, an art form that art historian George Rowley referred to as "the supreme creation of Chinese genius". Classic hand scroll paintings were up to ten meters in length. They are viewed by unrolling them from right to left in equal segments of about 50 cm. The painting takes the viewer through a visual story in space and time.

^ "Pompeii. House of the Vettii. Fauces and Priapus" .

SUNY Buffalo . Archived from the original on 24 December 2007 . Retrieved 27 December 2007 .

^ Panofsky, Erwin (1960).

Renaissance and Renascences in Western Art . Stockholm: Almqvist & Wiksell. p.

122, note 1 .

ISBN 0-06-430026-9 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Vatican Virgil image ^ Heidi J. Hornik and Mikeal Carl Parsons, Illuminating Luke: The infancy narrative in Italian Renaissance painting , p. 132 ^ "Perspective: The Rise of Renaissance Perspective" .

WebExhibits . Retrieved 15 October 2020 .

^ Gärtner, Peter (1998).

Brunelleschi . Cologne: Könemann. p. 23.

ISBN 978-3-8290-0701-6 .

^ Edgerton 2009 , pp. 44–46.

^ Edgerton 2009 , p. 40.

^ Dominique Raynaud (1998).

L'Hypothèse d'Oxford. Essai sur les origines de la perspective . Paris: Presses universitaires de France. pp.

132– 141.

^ Raynaud, Dominique (2014).

Optics and the Rise of Perspective . Oxford: Bardwell Press. pp. 1–2].

^ "...and these works (of perspective by Brunelleschi) were the means of arousing the minds of the other craftsmen, who afterwards devoted themselves to this with great zeal." Vasari's Lives of the Artists , chapter on Brunelleschi.

^ a b Hale, John R . (1981) [1965].

Great Ages of Man: Renaissance (rev. ed.). Time-Life. p. 98.

^ "The Gates of Paradise: Lorenzo Ghiberti's Renaissance Masterpiece" .

Art Institute of Chicago . 2007 . Retrieved 20 September 2020 .

^ Vasari, The Lives of the Artists , "Masaccio".

^ Adams, Laurie (2001).

Italian Renaissance Art . Oxford: Westview Press. p. 98.

ISBN 978-0-8133-4902-2 .

^ White, Susan D. (2006).

Draw Like Da Vinci . London: Cassell Illustrated, p. 132.

ISBN 978-1-84403-444-4 .

^ Harness, Brenda.

"Melozzo da Forli: Master of Foreshortening" .

Fine Art Touch . Retrieved 15 October 2020 .

^ Field, J. V.; Lunardi, R.; Settle, T. B. (1989). "The perspective scheme of Masaccio's Trinity fresco".

Nuncius .

4 (2): 31– 118.

doi : 10.1163/182539189X00680 .

INIST 11836604 .

^ Dominique Raynaud (1998).

L'Hypothèse d'Oxford . Paris: Presses universitaires de France. pp.

72– 120.

^ Raynaud, Dominique (2016). "Fact and Fiction Regarding Masaccio's Trinity Fresco".

Studies on Binocular Vision . Archimedes. Vol. 47. pp.

53– 67.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-42721-8_4 .

ISBN 978-3-319-42720-1 .

^ Raynaud, Dominique (2020). "Las fuentes ópticas de Leonardo". In Ramón-Laca, Luis (ed.).

Leonardo da Vinci. Perspectiva y visión . Alcalá de Henares: UAH. pp.

61– 62.

ISBN 978-84-18254-89-5 .

OCLC 1243556932 .

^ Vasari, Giorgio (1885).

Stories of the Italian Artists . Scribner & Welford. p. 53.

Messer Paolo dal Pozzo Toscanelli, having returned from his studies, invited Filippo with other friends to supper in a garden, and the discourse falling on mathematical subjects, Filippo formed a friendship with him and learned geometry from him.

^ El-Bizri, Nader (2010). "Classical Optics and the Perspectiva Traditions Leading to the Renaissance". In Hendrix, John Shannon ; Carman, Charles H. (eds.).

Renaissance Theories of Vision (Visual Culture in Early Modernity) . Farnham, Surrey: Ashgate Publishing . pp.

11 –30.

ISBN 978-1-409400-24-0 .

^ Hans, Belting (2011).

Florence and Baghdad: Renaissance art and Arab science (1st English ed.). Cambridge, Massachusetts: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. pp.

90– 92.

ISBN 978-0-674-05004-4 .

OCLC 701493612 .

^ Livio, Mario (2003).

The Golden Ratio . New York: Broadway Books . p. 126.

ISBN 0-7679-0816-3 .

^ O'Connor, J. J.; Robertson, E. F. (July 1999).

"Luca Pacioli" .

University of St Andrews .

Archived from the original on 22 September 2015 . Retrieved 23 September 2015 .

^ Goldstein, Andrew M. (17 November 2011).

"The Male "Mona Lisa"?: Art Historian Martin Kemp on Leonardo da Vinci's Mysterious "Salvator Mundi" " .

Artinfo . Blouin Artinfo.

^ MacKinnon, Nick (1993). "The Portrait of Fra Luca Pacioli".

The Mathematical Gazette .

77 (479): 206.

doi : 10.2307/3619717 .

JSTOR 3619717 .

S2CID 195006163 .

^ "Handprint : Perspective in the world" .

Archived from the original on 6 January 2007 . Retrieved 25 December 2006 .

Retrieved on 25 December 2006 Sources [ edit ] Edgerton, Samuel Y. (2009).

The Mirror, the Window & the Telescope: How Renaissance Linear Perspective Changed Our Vision of the Universe . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8014-4758-7 .

Further reading [ edit ] Andersen, Kirsti (2007).

The Geometry of an Art: The History of the Mathematical Theory of Perspective from Alberti to Monge . Springer.

Damisch, Hubert (1994).

The Origin of Perspective, Translated by John Goodman . Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press .

Gill, Robert W (1974).

Perspective From Basic to Creative . Australia: Thames & Hudson.

Hyman, Isabelle, comp (1974).

Brunelleschi in Perspective . Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) Kemp, Martin (1992).

The Science of Art: Optical Themes in Western Art from Brunelleschi to Seurat .

Yale University Press .

Pérez-Gómez, Alberto; Pelletier, Louise (1997).

Architectural Representation and the Perspective Hinge . Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.

Raynaud, Dominique (2003).

"Linear perspective in Masaccio's Trinity fresco: Demonstration or self-persuasion?" .

Nuncius .

18 (1): 331– 344.

doi : 10.1163/182539103X00684 .

Raynaud, Dominique (2014).

Optics and the Rise of Perspective. A Study in Network Knowledge Diffusion . Oxford: Bardwell Press.

Raynaud, Dominique (2016).

Studies on Binocular Vision . Archimedes. Vol. 47.

Bibcode : 2016sbvo.book.....R .

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-42721-8 .

ISBN 978-3-319-42720-1 .

S2CID 151589160 .

Vasari, Giorgio (1568).

The Lives of the Artists . Florence, Italy.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Perspective drawings .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Evolution of Perspective .

Teaching Perspective in Art and Mathematics through Leonardo da Vinci's Work at Mathematical Association of America Metaphysical Perspective in Ancient Roman-Wall Painting How to Draw a Two Point Perspective Grid at Creating Comics v t e Visualization of technical information Fields Biological data visualization Chemical imaging Crime mapping Data visualization Educational visualization Flow visualization Geovisualization Information visualization Mathematical visualization Medical imaging Molecular graphics Product visualization Scientific visualization Social visualization Software visualization Technical drawing User interface design Visual analytics Visual culture Volume visualization Image types Chart Diagram Engineering drawing Graph of a function Ideogram Map Photograph Pictogram Plot Sankey diagram Schematic Skeletal formula Statistical graphics Table Technical drawings Technical illustration People Pre-19th century Edmond Halley Charles-René de Fourcroy Joseph Priestley Gaspard Monge 19th century Charles Dupin Adolphe Quetelet André-Michel Guerry William Playfair August Kekulé Charles Joseph Minard Francis Amasa Walker John Venn Oliver Byrne Matthew Sankey Charles Booth John Snow Florence Nightingale Karl Wilhelm Pohlke Toussaint Loua Francis Galton Early 20th century Edward Walter Maunder Otto Neurath W. E. B. Du Bois Henry Gantt Arthur Lyon Bowley Howard G. Funkhouser John B. Peddle Ejnar Hertzsprung Henry Norris Russell Max O. Lorenz Fritz Kahn Harry Beck Erwin Raisz Mid 20th century Jacques Bertin Rudolf Modley Arthur H. Robinson John Tukey Mary Eleanor Spear Edgar Anderson Howard T. Fisher Late 20th century Borden Dent Nigel Holmes William S. Cleveland George G. Robertson Bruce H. McCormick Catherine Plaisant Stuart Card Pat Hanrahan Edward Tufte Ben Shneiderman Michael Friendly Howard Wainer Clifford A. Pickover Lawrence J. Rosenblum Thomas A. DeFanti George Furnas Sheelagh Carpendale Cynthia Brewer Jock D. Mackinlay Alan MacEachren David Goodsell Kwan-Liu Ma Michael Maltz Leland Wilkinson Alfred Inselberg Early 21st century Ben Fry Jeffrey Heer Jessica Hullman Daniel A. Keim Gordon Kindlmann Aaron Koblin Christopher R. Johnson Manuel Lima David McCandless Mauro Martino John Maeda Miriah Meyer Tamara Munzner Ade Olufeko Hanspeter Pfister Hans Rosling Claudio Silva Moritz Stefaner Fernanda Viégas Martin Wattenberg Bang Wong Hadley Wickham Related topics Cartography Chartjunk Color coding Computer graphics in computer science CPK coloring Graph drawing Graphic design Graphic organizer Imaging science Information art Information graphics Information science Misleading graph Neuroimaging Patent drawing Scientific modelling Spatial analysis Visual perception Volume cartography Volume rendering v t e Cinematic techniques Lighting Background Cameo Fill Flood High-key Key Lens flare Low-key Mood Rembrandt Stage Soft Sound Diegetic Non-diegetic Narration Film score Sound effects Shooting Field size Wide / Long / Full American Medium Close-up Italian Two shot Camera placement Perspective Over-the-shoulder Point-of-view (POV) Reverse Trunk Single / multiple-camera setup Camera angle Tilt Aerial High-angle Bird's-eye Crane shot Jib shot Low-angle Worm's-eye view Dutch angle Camera movement Unchained camera technique Tilting Panning Whip pan Hand-held Shaky Tracking Dolly Steadicam SnorriCam Walk and talk Follow Dolly zoom Lens effects Focus Racking Depth of field Shallow Deep Zooming Other techniques Establishing shot Master shot B-roll Freeze-frame shot Long take One-shot Insert v t e Special effects Practical Aerial rigging ( wire-flying ) Air bladder effect Animatronics Bullet hit squib Costumed character Creature suit Dead-character costume Kitbashing Miniature effect ( hanging ) Prosthetic makeup Puppetry Pyrotechnics Rubber mask Matte painting Sugar glass Theatrical blood In-camera Bipacks Bullet time Dolly zoom Forced perspective Front projection Infrared photography Lens flares Lighting effects Multiple exposure Filtration Rear projection Reverse motion Schüfftan process Shutter effects Slit-scan Tilted plane focus Time-lapse Fast motion Slow motion Speed ramping Stop motion Visual Bullet time Chroma key Compositing ( digital ) Computer-generated imagery Go motion Introvision Match moving Optical printing Smallgantics Split screen Stop motion v t e Mathematics and art Concepts Algorithm Catenary Fractal Golden ratio Hyperboloid structure Minimal surface Paraboloid Perspective Camera lucida Camera obscura Plastic ratio Projective geometry Proportion Architecture Human Symmetry Tessellation Wallpaper group Forms Algorithmic art Anamorphic art Architecture Geodesic dome Pyramid Vastu shastra Computer art Fiber arts 4D art Fractal art Islamic geometric patterns Girih Jali Muqarnas Zellij Knotting Celtic knot Croatian interlace Interlace Music Origami Mathematics Sculpture String art String figure Tiling Artworks List of works designed with the golden ratio Continuum Mathemalchemy Mathematica: A World of Numbers... and Beyond Octacube Pi Pi in the Sky Buildings Cathedral of Saint Mary of the Assumption Hagia Sophia Kresge Auditorium Pantheon Parthenon Pyramid of Khufu Sagrada Família Sydney Opera House Taj Mahal Artists Renaissance Paolo Uccello Piero della Francesca Leonardo da Vinci Vitruvian Man Albrecht Dürer Parmigianino Self-portrait in a Convex Mirror 19th–20th Century William Blake The Ancient of Days Newton Jean Metzinger Danseuse au café L'Oiseau bleu Giorgio de Chirico Man Ray M. C. Escher Circle Limit III Print Gallery Relativity Reptiles Waterfall René Magritte La condition humaine Salvador Dalí Crucifixion The Swallow's Tail Crockett Johnson Contemporary Max Bill Martin and Erik Demaine Scott Draves Jan Dibbets John Ernest Helaman Ferguson Peter Forakis Susan Goldstine Bathsheba Grossman George W. Hart Desmond Paul Henry Anthony Hill Charles Jencks Garden of Cosmic Speculation Andy Lomas Robert Longhurst Jeanette McLeod Hamid Naderi Yeganeh István Orosz Hinke Osinga Antoine Pevsner Tony Robbin Alba Rojo Cama Reza Sarhangi Oliver Sin Hiroshi Sugimoto Daina Taimiņa Roman Verostko Margaret Wertheim Theorists Ancient Polykleitos Canon Vitruvius De architectura Renaissance Filippo Brunelleschi Leon Battista Alberti De pictura De re aedificatoria Piero della Francesca De prospectiva pingendi Luca Pacioli De divina proportione Leonardo da Vinci A Treatise on Painting Albrecht Dürer Vier Bücher von Menschlicher Proportion Sebastiano Serlio Regole generali d'architettura Andrea Palladio I quattro libri dell'architettura Romantic Samuel Colman Nature's Harmonic Unity Frederik Macody Lund Ad Quadratum Jay Hambidge The Greek Vase Modern Owen Jones The Grammar of Ornament Ernest Hanbury Hankin The Drawing of Geometric Patterns in Saracenic Art G. H. Hardy A Mathematician's Apology George David Birkhoff Aesthetic Measure Douglas Hofstadter Gödel, Escher, Bach Nikos Salingaros The 'Life' of a Carpet Publications Journal of Mathematics and the Arts Lumen Naturae Making Mathematics with Needlework Rhythm of Structure Viewpoints: Mathematical Perspective and Fractal Geometry in Art Organizations Ars Mathematica The Bridges Organization European Society for Mathematics and the Arts Goudreau Museum of Mathematics in Art and Science Institute For Figuring Mathemalchemy National Museum of Mathematics Related Droste effect Mathematical beauty Patterns in nature Sacred geometry Category Authority control databases : National Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐6tzlf
Cached time: 20250814220733
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.019 seconds
Real time usage: 1.291 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5473/1000000
Revision size: 36128/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 238560/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8530/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 228611/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.642/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22776954/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1078.665      1 -total
 27.06%  291.923      2 Template:Reflist
 13.26%  143.049     26 Template:Cite_book
 13.11%  141.390     16 Template:Cite_web
 10.56%  113.865      1 Template:Etymology
  8.37%   90.335      1 Template:Wikt-lang
  7.97%   86.012      9 Template:Navbox
  7.13%   76.885      1 Template:Views
  6.98%   75.244      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  6.11%   65.902      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:380405:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220733 and revision id 1290648144. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Perspective_(graphical)&oldid=1290648144 " Categories : Perspective projection Technical drawing Functions and mappings Composition in visual art Italian inventions Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2022 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from March 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2022 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from July 2024 Articles needing additional references from February 2023 CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Commons category link is on Wikidata Commons link is locally defined This page was last edited on 16 May 2025, at 03:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Perspective (graphical) 53 languages Add topic

