Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Writings 3 Spurious works 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Olympiodorus the Younger 23 languages العربية Български Català Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Magyar مصرى 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Suomi Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sixth-century Neoplatonist philosopher This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( June 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Olympiodorus the Younger ( Greek : Ὀλυμπιόδωρος ὁ Νεώτερος ; born c.

495–505 , died after 565) [ 1 ] was a Neoplatonist philosopher , astrologer and teacher who lived in the early years of the Byzantine Empire , after Justinian 's Decree of 529 AD which closed Plato's Academy in Athens and other pagan schools.  Olympiodorus was the last pagan to maintain the Platonist tradition in Alexandria (see Alexandrian School ); after his death the School passed into the hands of Christian Aristotelians , and was eventually moved to Constantinople . He is not to be confused with Olympiodorus the Deacon , a contemporary Alexandrian writer of Bible commentaries.

[ 2 ] Life [ edit ] Olympiodorus was the disciple of Ammonius Hermiae at the philosophy school in Alexandria, and succeeded him as its leader when Ammonius died c. 520. He was still teaching and writing in 565, because in his commentary on Aristotle 's Meteorology , he mentions a comet that appeared that year. Olympiodorus himself was able to survive the persecution experienced by many of his peers (see, for example, Hierocles of Alexandria ), possibly because the Alexandrian School was less involved in politics (for example, the attempts by the Emperor Julian to re-establish Mithraic cults) and also possibly because it was more scholastic and less religious than the Athenian Academy.

He is called "Olympiodorus the Younger" or "The Younger Olympiodorus" in contemporary references because there was an earlier (5th century) philosopher also called Olympiodorus ( Olympiodorus the Elder ) who also taught in Alexandria.

Writings [ edit ] Part of a series on Neoplatonism Reconstructed bust believed to represent Plotinus, the founder of Neoplatonism Concepts Emanationism Hypostasis Porphyrian tree Demiurge Anima mundi Henology Henosis Theurgy Okhema Kenoma Allegorical interpretations of Plato Plato's unwritten doctrines Works Chaldean Oracles Enneads Isagoge On the Cave of the Nymphs On the Mysteries Elements of Theology De Coelesti Hierarchia Commentarii in Somnium Scipionis The Consolation of Philosophy Theology of Aristotle Book of Causes De divisione naturae People Plotinus ( students ) Porphyry Iamblichus Julian the Apostate Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius of Cilicia Olympiodorus the Younger Asclepius of Tralles Pseudo-Dionysius Martianus Capella Macrobius Boethius Maximus the Confessor Al-Kindi Johannes Scotus Eriugena Related topics Platonic Academy Platonism Middle Platonism Neopythagoreanism Commentaries on Plato Commentaries on Aristotle Neoplatonism and Christianity / Gnosticism Platonism in Islamic philosophy Isma'ilism Druze Kabbalah School of Chartres Platonism in the Renaissance Cambridge Platonists Philosophy portal v t e Among the extant writings of Olympiodorus the Younger are a biography of Plato , commentaries on several dialogues of Plato and on Aristotle , and an introduction to Aristotelian philosophy.  Olympiodorus also provides information on the work of the earlier Neoplatonist Iamblichus which is not found elsewhere. The surviving works are: Commentary on Plato's Alcibiades (Σχόλια εἰς τὸν Πλάτωνος Ἀλκιβιάδην) Commentary on Plato's Gorgias (Σχόλια σὺν θεῷ εἰς τὸν Γοργίαν) [ 3 ] Commentary on Plato's Phaedo (Σχόλια εἰς τὸν Πλάτωνος Φαίδωνα) Life of Plato (Βίος Πλάτωνος) Introduction ( Prolegomena ) to Aristotle's Logic (Εἰς τὰ προλεγόμενα τῆς Λογικῆς) Commentary on Aristotle's Meteorology (Εἰς τὸ πρῶτον τῶν Μετεωρολογικῶν Ἀριστοτέλους σχόλια) Commentary on Aristotle's Categories (Σχόλια εἰς τὰς Ἀριστοτέλους Κατηγορίας) Commentary on Aristotle's On Interpretation (Σχόλια εἰς τὸ Ἀριστοτέλους Περὶ Ἑρμηνείας) A polemical work against Strato.

[ 4 ] In addition, a Commentary by Olympiodorus is extant on Paulus Alexandrinus ' Introduction to astrology (which was written in 378 AD).  Although the manuscript of the Commentary is credited in two later versions to a Heliodorus , L. G. Westerink argues that it is actually the outline of a series of lectures given by Olympiodorus in Alexandria between May and July 564 AD. The Commentary is an informative expatiation of Paulus' tersely written text, elaborating on practices and sources. The Commentary also illuminates the developments in astrological theory in the 200 years after Paulus.

Spurious works [ edit ] In addition there are three works ascribed to Olympiodorus, but which are now believed to be by other authors: An alchemical treatise concerning Zosimus ' On the Action , called On the Book Kat'energian (On the action or According to the Action) by Zosimus and on the Sayings of Hermes and the Philosophers (Εἰς τὸ κατ' ἐνέργειαν Ζωσίμου, ὅσα ἀπὸ Ἑρμοῦ καὶ τῶν φιλοσόφων ἦσαν εἰρημένα) On the Divine and Sacred Art of the Philosophical Stone (Περί τῆς ἱερᾶς τέχνης τῆς φιλοσοφικῆς λίθου; Latin : De arte sacra lapidis philosophorum ) A commentary on Plato's Philebus — now thought to be the work of Damascius Notes [ edit ] ^ Dates in Jackson, Lycos & Tarrant 1998 , p. 3 and Westerink 2011 , p. xiii.

^ Grillmeier, Aloys; Hainthaler, Theresia (1996).

Christ in Christian Tradition: The Church in Alexandria, with Nubia and Ethiopia after 451 AD, Volume 2 . London: A & C Black . p. 105.

ISBN 0264660188 .

^ Translated by Jackson, Lycos & Tarrant 1998 .

^ CP Mason - a fellow of University College, London (1873).

A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology, Volume 3 . J. Murray, 1873 . Retrieved 2015-04-11 .

References [ edit ] Olympiodorus, Introduction to Aristotle's Categories . [Translated by Sebastian Gertz]. Bloomsbury: London, 2017.

ISBN 9781350136441 .

Late Classical Astrology:  Paulus Alexandrinus and Olympiodorus (with the Scholia of later Latin Commentators).  [Translated by Dorian Gieseler Greenbaum.]  ARHAT [1] , 2001.

"Olympiodorus The Younger." Encyclopædia Britannica from Encyclopædia Britannica Premium Service. < https://www.britannica.com/biography/Olympiodorus-the-Younger > [Accessed September 24, 2017].

Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Olympiodorus s.v.

(3)" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 20 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 97.

L.G. Westerink, "Ein astrologisches Kolleg aus dem Jahre 564," in Byzantinische Zeitschrift , 64, 1971, pp. 6–21.

Bruce M. Metzger, "Ancient Astrological Geography and Acts 2:9-11," W. Ward Gasque & Ralph P. Martin, eds., Apostolic History and the Gospel. Biblical and Historical Essays Presented to F.F. Bruce. Exeter: The Paternoster Press, 1970. Hbk.

ISBN 0-85364-098-X . pp. 123–133.

Harold Tarrant, "Olympiodorus and history," in Idem, From the Old Academy to Later Neo-Platonism: Studies in the History of Platonic Thought (Aldershot, Ashgate, 2010) (Variorum Collected Studies Series: CS964).

Harold Tarrant, "Politike Eudaimonia: Olympiodorus on Plato's Republic," in Idem, From the Old Academy to Later Neo-Platonism: Studies in the History of Platonic Thought (Aldershot, Ashgate, 2010) (Variorum Collected Studies Series: CS964).

Harold Tarrant, "Restoring Olympiodorus' syllogistic," in Idem, From the Old Academy to Later Neo-Platonism: Studies in the History of Platonic Thought (Aldershot, Ashgate, 2010) (Variorum Collected Studies Series: CS964).

Robert Schmidt, Project Hindsight [2] Sebastian R. P. Gertz, Death and Immortality in Late Neoplatonism: Studies on the Ancient Commentaries on Plato's Phaedo , Brill: Leiden, 2011.

Jackson, Robin; Lycos, Kimon; Tarrant, Harold (1998).

Olympiodorus: Commentary on Plato's Gorgias . Leiden: Brill.

ISBN 90-04-10972-2 .

Westerink, L. G. (2011).

Anonymous Prolegomena to Platonic Philosophy . Wiltshire, UK: The Prometheus Trust.

ISBN 978-1-898910-510 .

External links [ edit ] Wildberg, Christian.

"Olympiodorus" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Olympiodorus of Alexandria - Encyclopedia.com Apocrypha public domain audiobook at LibriVox . Collection includes Olympiodorus' Life of Plato.

George Burges , translator (1855).

v t e Platonists Ancient Academics Old Plato Aristotle Eudoxus Philip of Opus Aristonymus Coriscus and Erastus of Scepsis Demetrius of Amphipolis Euaeon of Lampsacus Heraclides and Python of Aenus Hestiaeus of Perinthus Lastheneia of Mantinea Timolaus of Cyzicus Speusippus Axiothea of Phlius Heraclides Ponticus Menedemus of Pyrrha Xenocrates Crantor Polemon Crates of Athens Skeptics Middle Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus New Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Dio of Alexandria Middle Platonists Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Anonymous Theaetetus Commentator Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Justin Martyr Gaius Albinus Alcinous Alexander Peloplaton Apuleius Atticus Maximus of Tyre Numenius of Apamea Ammonius Saccas Longinus Clement of Alexandria Origen Origen the Pagan Calcidius Neoplatonists Plotinus Students Amelius Porphyry of Tyre Iamblichus Sopater Eustathius of Cappadocia Sosipatra Aedesius Dexippus Chrysanthius Theodorus of Asine Julian Salutius Maximus of Ephesus Eusebius of Myndus Priscus of Epirus Antoninus Hypatia Gaius Marius Victorinus Augustine Macrobius Boethius Academy Plutarch of Athens Asclepigenia Hierocles Syrianus Hermias Aedesia Proclus Marinus Isidore Ammonius Hermiae Asclepiodotus Hegias Zenodotus Agapius Damascius Simplicius Priscian John Philoponus Olympiodorus David the Invincible Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Medieval John Scotus Eriugena Al-Farabi Anselm Peter Abelard Bernard Gilbert Thierry Henry of Ghent Bonaventure Theodoric of Freiberg Meister Eckhart Berthold of Moosburg Paul of Venice Modern Renaissance Florentine Academy Plethon Marsilio Ficino Cristoforo Landino Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Giordano Bruno Blaise Pascal Cambridge Ralph Cudworth Henry More Anne Conway Thomas Taylor Emanuel Swedenborg Josiah Royce Aleksei Losev Contemporary Analytic Gottlob Frege Bertrand Russell Kurt Gödel Roderick Chisholm W. V. O. Quine Jan Łukasiewicz Crispin Wright Edward N. Zalta Continental Edmund Husserl Leo Strauss v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Sweden Vatican Israel Academics CiNii Artists ULAN People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Olympiodorus_the_Younger&oldid=1291033072 " Categories : 490s births 6th-century deaths 5th-century Byzantine people 6th-century Greek philosophers Byzantine astrologers 6th-century Byzantine writers Greek-language commentators on Aristotle Greek-language commentators on Plato Neoplatonists in Athens Late-Roman-era pagans 6th-century astrologers 6th-century Byzantine scientists Philosophers in ancient Alexandria Ancient Greek astrologers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from June 2011 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles containing Greek-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 18 May 2025, at 17:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Olympiodorus the Younger 23 languages Add topic

