Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin 2 Artists 3 Criticisms 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Institutional critique 8 languages Deutsch Français Italiano 日本語 Polski Русский Svenska Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Artistic movement and commentary This article uses bare URLs , which are uninformative and vulnerable to link rot .

Please consider converting them to full citations to ensure the article remains verifiable and maintains a consistent citation style.

Several templates and tools are available to assist in formatting, such as reFill ( documentation ) and Citation bot ( documentation ) .

( August 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In art , institutional critique is the systematic inquiry into the workings of art institutions, such as galleries and museums, and is most associated with the work of artists like Michael Asher , Marcel Broodthaers , Daniel Buren , Andrea Fraser , John Knight , Adrian Piper , Fred Wilson , and Hans Haacke and the scholarship of Alexander Alberro , Benjamin H. D. Buchloh , Birgit Pelzer , and Anne Rorimer .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Institutional critique takes the form of temporary or nontransferable approaches to painting and sculpture, architectural alterations and interventions, and performative gestures and language intended to disrupt the otherwise transparent operations of galleries and museums and the professionals who administer them. Examples would be Niele Toroni making imprints of a No. 50 brush at 30 cm (12 in) intervals directly onto gallery walls as opposed to applying the same mark to paper or canvas; [ 3 ] Chris Burden's Exposing the Foundation of the Museum (1986), in which he made an excavation in a gallery of the Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles , to expose the literal concrete foundation of the building;, [ 4 ] Andrea Fraser inhabiting the persona of an archetypical museum docent in the form of a live performance or video document, [ 5 ] or art group monochrom who sent the fictitious artist Georg Paul Thomann to the São Paulo Art Biennial . Assumptions about the aesthetic autonomy of painting and sculpture, the neutral context of the white cube gallery , and the objective delivery of information are explored as subjects of art, mapped out as discursive formations, and (re)framed within the context of the museum itself. As such, institutional critique seeks to make visible the social, political, economic, and historical underpinnings of art. Institutional critique questions the false distinction between taste and disinterested aesthetic judgement, revealing that taste is an institutionally cultivated sensibility that differs depending on the intersection of any one person's class, ethnic, sexual, or gender subject positions.

[ 6 ] Origin [ edit ] Institutional critique is a practice that emerged from the developments of Minimalism and its concerns with the phenomenology of the viewer; formalist art criticism and art history (e.g.

Clement Greenberg and Michael Fried ); conceptual art and its concerns with language, processes, and administrative society; and the critique of authorship that begins with Roland Barthes and Michel Foucault in the late 1960s and continues with the advent of appropriation art in the 1970s and its upending of long-held notions of authorship, originality, artistic production, popular culture , and identity.  Institutional critique is often site-specific and is contemporaneous with the advent of artists who eschewed gallery and museum contexts altogether to build monumental earthworks in the landscape, notably Michael Heizer , Nancy Holt , Walter de Maria , and Robert Smithson . Institutional critique is also associated with the development of post-structuralist philosophy, critical theory , literary theory , feminism , gender studies , and critical race theory .

Artists [ edit ] Artists associated with institutional critique since the 1960s include Marcel Broodthaers , Daniel Buren , Hans Haacke , Michael Asher , John Knight (artist) , Christopher D'Arcangelo , Robert Smithson , Dan Graham , Mierle Laderman Ukeles , Adrian Piper , and Martha Rosler . Artists active since the 1980s include Louise Lawler , Antoni Muntadas , Fred Wilson , Santiago Sierra , Martha Fleming and Lyne Lapointe , Renée Green , Group Material , Andrea Fraser , Renzo Martens , Fred Forest , Christian Philipp Müller , and Mark Dion .

In the early 1990s, influenced in large part by Daniel Buren, Jacques Tati , Roland Barthes , and the participatory sculptures of Felix Gonzalez-Torres , a loose affiliation of artists including Liam Gillick , Dominique Gonzalez-Foerster , Pierre Huyghe , and Rirkrit Tiravanija engaged the institution of art in a convivial manner. These artists, gathered under the rubric of Relational Aesthetics by critic Nicolas Bourriaud , saw galleries and museums as sites of social interaction and the spontaneous creation of works of art characterized by their contingent temporality.

[ 7 ] The collegial atmosphere of these open-ended situations was quite distinct from the more confrontational strategies of Buren, Haacke, Jenny Holzer , and Barbara Kruger .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] In recent years, Maurizio Cattelan , Ellen Harvey , Matthieu Laurette , monochrom , Tameka Norris , Tino Sehgal , Carey Young , and others have taken a critical eye to the art museum and its role as a public and private institution.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Criticisms [ edit ] One of the criticisms of institutional critique is that it requires from its audience a familiarity with its esoteric concerns. As with much contemporary music and dance, [ 12 ] [ 13 ] the institutional critique of art is a practice that only specialists in the field—artists, theorists, historians, and critics—are privy to. Due to its sophisticated understanding of modern art and society—and as part of a privileged discourse—art as institutional critique can often leave lay viewers alienated and/or marginalized.

Another criticism of the concept is that it can be a misnomer. Artist Andrea Fraser (in Artforum) and critic Michael Kimmelman (in The New York Times) have argued, for example, that institutional critique artists work within—and benefit from—the very same institutions they ostensibly critique.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] In his 2015 book "Der wunde Punkt", curator and art critic Thomas Edlinger addresses some of the inherent problems of institutional critique. He specifically refers to monochrom's Taiwan intervention as an excellent example of new and needed forms of intervention: "[It] shows an area of conflict between inclusion and exclusion, and one has to recognize that institutional critique is constantly changing and cannot know any fixed rules. Contextualization and site specificity have become key terms. Depending on the situation, it proceeds very differently and also wants very different things. Moreover, the change from criticism to affirmation is always possible and hardly predictable." [ 16 ] References [ edit ] ^ Institutional Critique: An Anthology of Artists' Writings . MIT Press. 25 September 2009.

ISBN 9780262013161 .

^ "1965-1975: Reconsidering the Object of Art" .

^ "Niele Toroni | Exhibitions | the Renaissance Society" .

^ "Exposing the Foundation of the Museum" .

^ "Three Histories: The Wadsworth According to MATRIX 114" .

^ "Publishing House - Contemporary Artists" .

^ "MAY, Quarterly Journal » Traffic: Space-times of the Exchange" .

^ http://www.marginalutility.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/07/Claire-Bishop_Antagonism-and-Relational-Aesthetics.pdf [ bare URL PDF ] ^ "Traffic Control: Joe Scanlan on Social Space and Relational Aesthetics" . 11 February 2004.

^ "Fair Use - Joe Scanlan - Things That Fall" . Archived from the original on 2017-12-12 . Retrieved 2017-12-10 .

^ "Maurizio Cattelan: "America" " .

^ "Why do we hate modern classical music? | Alex Ross" .

TheGuardian.com . 28 November 2010.

^ https://www.um.es/vmca/proceedings/docs/35.Inma-Alvarez.pdf [ bare URL PDF ] ^ http://www.marginalutility.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/07/Andrea-Fraser_From-the-Critique-of-Institutions-to-an-Institution-of-Critique.pdf [ bare URL PDF ] ^ Kimmelman, Michael (25 March 2005).

"Tall French Visitor Takes up Residence in the Guggenheim" .

The New York Times .

^ Edlinger, Thomas (2015).

Der wunde Punkt. Vom Unbehagen an der Kritik . Suhrkamp. p. 26.

ISBN 9783518742068 . Retrieved 2021-12-22 .

Further reading [ edit ] Meyer, James (1993), What Happened to the Institutional Critique?

New York: American Fine Arts, Co. and Paula Cooper Gallery. Reprinted in Peter Weibel, ed., Kontext Kunst (Cologne: Dumont, 1993), 239-256.

Buchloh, Benjamin (1999), Conceptual Art 1962–1969: From the Aesthetics of Administration to the Critique of Institutions," October 55: 105–143.

Bryan-Wilson, Julia (2003), A Curriculum of Institutional Critique , in: Jonas Ekeberg, ed., New Institutionalism (Oslo: OCA/verksted), 89–109.

Edlinger, Thomas (2015), Der wunde Punkt. Vom Unbehagen an der Kritik (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 2015).

v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Institutional_critique&oldid=1304056100 " Categories : 1960s introductions 20th-century art movements Contemporary art movements Postmodern art Critical theory Hidden categories: All articles with bare URLs for citations Articles with bare URLs for citations from March 2022 Articles with PDF format bare URLs for citations Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing cleanup from August 2022 Articles with bare URLs for citations from August 2022 Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from August 2022 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 18:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Institutional critique 8 languages Add topic

