Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Analytic philosophy Toggle Analytic philosophy subsection 1.1 Frege 1.2 Russell and Wittgenstein 1.3 Quine and Kripke 2 Continental philosophy Toggle Continental philosophy subsection 2.1 Structuralism and post-structuralism 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Linguistic turn 22 languages العربية 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Қазақша Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Sicilianu Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Early-20th-century development in Western philosophy The linguistic turn was a major development in Western philosophy during the early 20th century, the most important characteristic of which is the focusing of philosophy primarily on the relations between language , language users, and the world.

[ 1 ] Very different intellectual movements were associated with the "linguistic turn", although the term itself is commonly thought to have been popularised by Richard Rorty 's 1967 anthology The Linguistic Turn , in which he discusses the turn towards linguistic philosophy . According to Rorty, who later dissociated himself from linguistic philosophy and analytic philosophy generally, the phrase "the linguistic turn" originated with philosopher Gustav Bergmann .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Analytic philosophy [ edit ] Traditionally, the linguistic turn is taken to also mean the birth of analytic philosophy .

[ 4 ] One of the results of the linguistic turn was an increasing focus on logic and philosophy of language , and the cleavage between ideal language philosophy and ordinary language philosophy .

Frege [ edit ] According to Michael Dummett , the linguistic turn can be dated to Gottlob Frege 's 1884 work The Foundations of Arithmetic , specifically paragraph 62 where Frege explores the identity of a numerical proposition.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] In order to answer a Kantian question about numbers , "How are numbers given to us, granted that we have no idea or intuition of them?" Frege invokes his " context principle ", stated at the beginning of the book, that only in the context of a proposition do words have meaning, and thus finds the solution to be in defining "the sense of a proposition in which a number word occurs." Thus an ontological and epistemological problem, traditionally solved along idealist lines, is instead solved along linguistic ones.

[ 4 ] Russell and Wittgenstein [ edit ] This concern for the logic of propositions and their relationship to "facts" was later taken up by the notable analytic philosopher Bertrand Russell in " On Denoting ", and played a weighty role in his early work in logical atomism .

[ 7 ] Ludwig Wittgenstein , an associate of Russell, was one of the progenitors of the linguistic turn. This follows from his ideas in his Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus that philosophical problems arise from a misunderstanding of the logic of language, and from his remarks on language games in his later work.

[ 8 ] Quine and Kripke [ edit ] W.V.O. Quine describes the historical continuity of the linguistic turn with earlier philosophy in " Two Dogmas of Empiricism ": " Meaning is what essence becomes when it is divorced from the object of reference and wedded to the word." [ 9 ] Later in the twentieth century, philosophers like Saul Kripke in Naming and Necessity drew metaphysical conclusions from closely analyzing language.

[ 10 ] Continental philosophy [ edit ] Structuralism and post-structuralism [ edit ] In continental philosophy , thinkers like Ferdinand de Saussure , Jacques Derrida , and Michel Foucault emphasized that meaning is shaped by linguistic structures and discourses rather than inherent truths.

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Aretaic turn Cultural turn Deconstruction Discourse analysis Formal semantics (natural language) Historical turn Semiotics Structural linguistics References [ edit ] ^ "Philosophy of language" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2018-11-14 .

^ Richard Rorty , "Wittgenstein, Heidegger, and the Reification of Language", in Richard Rorty, Essays on Heidegger and Others: Philosophical Papers , Cambridge University Press, 1991.

^ Neil Gross, Richard Rorty: The Making of an American Philosopher , University Of Chicago Press, 2008, p. xxix.

^ a b Dummett, Michael A. (1994).

Origins of analytical philosophy . Cambridge. Mass.: Harvard University Press. p. 5.

ISBN 0674644735 .

OCLC 38153975 .

^ "Language, Philosophy of – Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" .

www.iep.utm.edu . Retrieved 20 April 2018 .

^ M. Dummett, "Frege: Philosophy of Mathematics" ^ Russell, Bertrand (1918).

"The Philosophy of Physical Atomism" (PDF) . In Marsh, Robert Charles (ed.).

Logic and Knowledge . Capricorn Books. p. 178.

^ Glock, Hans-Johann; Javier, Kalhat (2018).

Linguistic turn .

doi : 10.4324/0123456789-DD3600-1 .

ISBN 978-0-415-25069-6 . Retrieved August 25, 2024 .

{{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) ^ Quine, W.V.O.

Two Dogmas of Empiricism ^ Brian Garrett (25 February 2011).

What Is This Thing Called Metaphysics?

. Taylor & Francis. p. 54.

ISBN 978-1-136-79269-4 .

^ Colebrook, Claire (2014). "The Linguistic Turn in Continental Philosophy". In Schrift, Alan D. (ed.).

Poststructuralism and Critical Theory's Second Generation . The history of continental philosophy. London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-315-72974-9 .

Further reading [ edit ] Gross, Neil (2008), Richard Rorty, The Making of an American Philosopher . The University of Chicago Press, Chicago and London.

Rorty, Richard (ed.), 1967.

The Linguistic Turn: Recent Essays in Philosophical Method.

The University of Chicago Press, Chicago and London.

Rorty, Richard. 'Wittgenstein, Heidegger, and the Reification of Language.' Essays on Heidegger and Others . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991.

Clark, Elizabeth A.

(2004), History, Theory, Text: Historians and the Linguistic Turn , Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Losonsky, Michael (2006), Linguistic Turns in Modern Philosophy.

Cambridge University Press, Cambridge and New York.

Toews, John E.

(1987), "Intellectual History after the Linguistic Turn: The Autonomy of Meaning and the Irreducibility of Experience", The American Historical Review 92/4, 879–907.

White, Hayden (1973), Metahistory: The Historical Imagination in Nineteenth-Century Europe , Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD.

Cornforth, Maurice (1971), Marxism and the Linguistic Philosophy , Lawrence & Wishart, London (repr. of 1967). The classical critique from the left-wing standpoint.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Linguistic turn at Wikimedia Commons v t e Ludwig Wittgenstein Family Margaret Stonborough-Wittgenstein Karl Wittgenstein Paul Wittgenstein Works associated with Paul Wittgenstein Early work Picture theory of language Truth tables Truth conditions Truth functions State of affairs Logical necessity Wittgenstein's ladder Late work Meaning as use Language-game Private language argument Family resemblance Ideal language analysis Rule-following Form of life Wittgenstein's philosophy of mathematics Therapeutic approach Anti-skepticism Publications Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus " Some Remarks on Logical Form " Blue and Brown Books Philosophical Remarks Philosophical Investigations On Certainty Culture and Value Remarks on Frazer's Golden Bough Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics Zettel Remarks on Colour Lectures and Conversations on Aesthetics, Psychology, and Religious Belief Remarks on the Philosophy of Psychology Movements Analytic philosophy Linguistic turn Ideal language philosophy Logical atomism Logical positivism Pyrrhonian skepticism Ordinary language philosophy Wittgensteinian fideism Quietism Therapeutic approach Postanalytic philosophy Friends G. E. M. Anscombe R. B. Braithwaite Rudolf Carnap Paul Engelmann John Maynard Keynes Peter Geach Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore David Pinsent Frank P. Ramsey Rush Rhees Bertrand Russell Moritz Schlick Francis Skinner Piero Sraffa Vienna Circle Friedrich Waismann Peter Winch G. H. von Wright Biographers David Edmonds Ray Monk William Warren Bartley Secondary sources A. J. Ayer Gordon Baker Jacques Bouveresse Stanley Cavell James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Terry Eagleton Juliet Floyd Warren Goldfarb A. C. Grayling Peter Hacker Oswald Hanfling Cressida Heyes Jaakko Hintikka Dale Jacquette Anthony Kenny Fergus Kerr Saul Kripke Sandra Laugier Elisabeth Leinfellner Werner Leinfellner Sabina Lovibond Norman Malcolm John McDowell Colin McGinn Marie McGinn Stephen Mulhall D. Z. Phillips Rupert Read Constantine Sandis Hans Sluga Barry Stroud Stephen Toulmin Michael Williams Crispin Wright John Wisdom Related Austrian Ludwig Wittgenstein Society Cambridge Apostles Cambridge University Moral Sciences Club International Wittgenstein Symposium Haidbauer incident Haus Wittgenstein New Wittgenstein Fritz Mauthner Wittgenstein's Poker Film Wittgenstein (film) Wittgenstein Tractatus v t e Analytic philosophy Related articles Areas of focus Metaphysics Epistemology Language Mathematics Science Turns Aretaic Historical Linguistic Performative Logic Classical Deviant Mathematical Non-classical Paraconsistent Philosophical Predicate Theories Anti-realism Causal theory of reference Descriptivism Emotivism Feminism Functionalism Logical atomism Logical positivism Marxism Neurophilosophy Ordinary language Pragmatism Quietism Scientific structuralism Sense data Analytic theology Analytical Thomism Concepts Analysis ( paradox of analysis ) Analytic–synthetic distinction Counterfactual Natural kind Reflective equilibrium Supervenience Modality Actualism Necessity Possibility Possible world Realism Rigid designator Philosophers Noam Chomsky Keith Donnellan Gottlob Frege Edmund Gettier Jaakko Hintikka Giuseppe Peano Russ Shafer-Landau Ernest Sosa Barry Stroud Australian realism David Malet Armstrong David Chalmers J. L. Mackie Peter Singer J. J. C. Smart Cambridge Arif Ahmed Charlie Broad Casimir Lewy Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore Graham Priest Bertrand Russell Frank P. Ramsey Ludwig Wittgenstein Oxford G. E. M. Anscombe J. L. Austin Michael Dummett Antony Flew Philippa Foot Peter Geach Paul Grice R. M. Hare Alasdair MacIntyre Derek Parfit Gilbert Ryle John Searle P. F. Strawson Richard Swinburne Charles Taylor Bernard Williams Timothy Williamson Logical positivists A. J. Ayer Ernest Nagel Berlin Circle Carl Gustav Hempel Hans Reichenbach Vienna Circle Rudolf Carnap Hans Hahn Otto Neurath Moritz Schlick Friedrich Waismann Harvard Roderick Chisholm Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett Nelson Goodman Christine Korsgaard Thomas Nagel Robert Nozick Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine John Rawls Notre Dame Robert Audi Peter van Inwagen Pittsburgh School Robert Brandom Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Adolf Grünbaum John McDowell Ruth Millikan Alexander Pruss Nicholas Rescher Wilfrid Sellars Bas van Fraassen Pragmatism Susan Haack Nicholas Rescher Morton White Princeton Alonzo Church Jerry Fodor Kurt Gödel David Lewis Jaegwon Kim Saul Kripke Richard Rorty Nathan Salmon Michael Walzer Quietism James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Reformed Alvin Plantinga William Lane Craig Nicholas Wolterstorff Science Paul Feyerabend Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Karl Popper Stanford School Nancy Cartwright John Dupré Peter Galison Ian Hacking Patrick Suppes Lwow–Warsaw Jan Łukasiewicz Alfred Tarski Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Linguistic_turn&oldid=1304442561 " Categories : Linguistic turn History of linguistics Philosophy of language Hidden categories: CS1 errors: periodical ignored Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 02:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Linguistic turn 22 languages Add topic

