Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Ideology 3 Bibliography 4 References Toggle the table of contents Marhaenism 11 languages العربية Català Español 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Polski ไทย 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indonesian left-wing political ideology This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( August 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is part of a series about Sukarno 1st President of Indonesia Pre-independence PNI Partindo PETA BPUPK Pancasila PPKI Indonesian National Revolution Proclamation of Independence Domestic policy APRA Ambon Permesta DI/TII Three Souths Affair Marhaenism Guided Democracy 5 July Decree Nasakom Monas G30S Supersemar Fall De-Sukarnoization Foreign policy Non-aligned movement Bandung Conference 1962 Asian Games CONEFO GANEFO building West Irian Trikora Pepera Konfrontasi Sunda Straits Crisis Speeches Indonesia Menggugat Tahun Vivere Pericoloso Family Spouses Fatmawati Dewi Children Rukmini Megawati Rachmawati Sukmawati Guruh Grandchildren Puan Media and legacy Grave Soekarno Seclusion house Soekarno–Hatta International Airport Gelora Bung Karno Stadium KRI Bung Karno v t e Part of a series on Socialism History Outline Development French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Socialist calculation debate Socialist economics Ideas Calculation in kind Collective ownership Cooperative Common ownership Critique of political economy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal liberty Equal opportunity Free association Freed market Industrial democracy Input–output model Internationalism Labour-time calculation Labour voucher Material balance planning Peer‑to‑peer economics Production for use Sharing economy Spontaneism Social dividend Social ownership Socialism in one country Socialist mode of production Soviet democracy Strike action To each according to his contribution / needs Vanguardism Workers' self-management Workplace democracy Models Communalism Socialist planned economy Decentralized planning Inclusive Democracy OGAS Project Cybersyn Soviet-type Market socialism Lange model Mutualism Socialist market economy Socialist-oriented market Participatory economics Variants 21st-century African Arab Agrarian Anarchism Authoritarian Blanquism Buddhist Chinese Christian Communism Democratic Democratic road Digital Ethical Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Fourierism Free-market Gandhian Guild Islamic Jewish Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Marhaenism Market Marxism Municipal Nationalist Nkrumaism Owenism Popular (Central Europe) Popular (Nordic) Reformism Religious Revolutionary Ricardian Saint-Simonianism Scientific Sewer Social democracy State Syndicalism Third World Utopian Yellow Zionist Intellectuals More Campanella d'Hupay Saint-Simon Buonarroti Saint-Just Owen Fourier Cabet Leroux Sue Blanqui Proudhon Greeley Herzen Bakunin Marx Kingsley Engels Wallace Lavrov Lassalle Saltykov Chernyshevsky Tolstoy Michel Morris Jones Kropotkin Carpenter Sorel Bellamy Kautsky Wilde Bellamy Plekhanov Ferrer Dewey Wells Du Bois Gorky Goldman Landauer Berkman Luxemburg Russell Pannekoek Rocker Spengler Keller Pankhurst Volin Lukács Korsch Polanyi Vanzetti Bordiga Serge Gramsci Sacco Day Marcuse James Orwell Montseny Sartre Bookchin Zinn Castoriadis Thompson Chomsky Fotopoulos Newton Wolff Ali Öcalan Hampton Žižek West Hedges Varoufakis Saito Politicians (Tiberius) Gracchus (Gaius) Gracchus Mazdak Roux Babeuf Blanc Hong Bebel Bernstein Malatesta Debs Markievicz Connolly Gandhi Liebknecht Savage Blum Stauning Martov Nygaardsvold Trotsky Kerensky Attlee Spiridonova Chifley Drees Makhno Nehru Tito Nagy Durruti Gerhardsen Van Acker Spaak Sukarno Erlander Douglas Senghor Allende van der Lubbe Nkrumah Kreisky Whitlam Corvalán Mitterrand Nasser Mandela Dubček Nyerere Koivisto Manley Benn Palme Bhutto Che Gorbachev Ismail Vázquez Sanders González Lula Ortega Guterres Corbyn Sankara Mélenchon Chávez Galloway Marcos Morales Sánchez Ocasio-Cortez Organizations Socialist Party Labour and Socialist International Network of Social Democracy in Asia Party of European Socialists Socialist International World Socialist Movement Young European Socialists Related topics Capitalism Communist society Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Economic calculation problem Economic system French Left Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Market abolitionism Marxist philosophy Nanosocialism Progressivism Socialism and LGBTQ rights Socialist calculation debate Socialist Party Socialist state Workers' council Lists Democratic socialists Democratic socialist parties and organizations Economists Films Social democrats Social democratic parties Songs States Socialism portal ( WikiProject ) Economics portal Organized Labour portal Philosophy portal Politics portal v t e Marhaenism ( Indonesian : Marhaenisme ) is a socialistic political ideology originated and developed by the first President of Indonesia , Sukarno .

[ 1 ] It was developed from the ideas of Marxism applied according to the nature and culture of Indonesia, or simply described as "Marxism adapted to Indonesian conditions".

[ 2 ] Marhaenism is a variant of Marxism but emphasizes national unity , culture, collectivist economics , and democratic rights and condemns liberalism and individualism . It was established as an anticapitalist and anti-imperialist ideology. Marhaenism was the guiding ideology of the Indonesian National Party .

[ 3 ] It also was a major influence on left-wing nationalism taking hold in neighbouring Malaya , such as the espousals of Parti Kebangsaan Melayu Malaya and later Parti Rakyat — both founded by Ahmad Boestamam .

[ 4 ] Etymology [ edit ] This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Marhaenism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article has an unclear citation style .

The references used may be made clearer with a different or consistent style of citation and footnoting .

( December 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Sukarno as university student in Bandung The name of the ideology is alleged to be taken from the name of a peasant, Aen, whom Sukarno claimed he met near Bandung. In the dialogue between Bung Karno and the farmer, he was later referred to as Mang Aen. The farmer has various factors of production including agricultural land, hoes , and others that he cultivates himself, but the results are only enough for the needs of his simple family. This condition then triggered various questions in Bung Karno's mind, which eventually gave birth to various dialectics of thought as the basis for his next move. Life, an innocent personality, unpretentious but still has the spirit to struggle to meet the needs of his life, then the name of the farmer by Bung Karno is enshrined in every Indonesian whose life is oppressed by the prevailing system of life. As a language adjustment, Mang Aen's name became Marhaen.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] However, this turned out to be a myth as the name was used by Sarekat Islam to describe ordinary people long before Sukarno first came to Bandung.

[ 7 ] In any case, Sukarno took to referring to members of the agrarian class as "Marhaens", a term that was first used by Sukarno in his Indonesia Accuses ( Indonesia Menggugat ) speech in 1930 to replace the term proletariat , as he considered the latter to be largely irrelevant to Indonesia.

[ 8 ] Defining "proletariat" as members of the working class not owning their own labour power , Sukarno pointed out that many Indonesian farmers owned their labour power and used it primarily for themselves, in spite of their poverty. To Sukarno, the means of production in Indonesia were so small that they are only sufficient to sustain life of the Individual; to raise social, political, or economic status. Thus the expression "marhaen" extended the meaning aimed at all the small groups of people that are meant to be farmers and laborers (proletarians) whose lives are always in the grip of the rich and rulers/bourgeois/capitalists.

[ 9 ] In 1966, an opinion emerged stating that Marhaen was an abbreviation of Marx , Hegel , Engels .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] According to politician Nazaruddin Sjamsuddin , the first time this opinion emerged was triggered by an editorial in the Angkatan Bersenjata newspaper which was immediately answered by Osa Maliki from the Marhaen Development Institute Team.

[ 12 ] Ideology [ edit ] Marhaenism is essentially a struggle ideology formed from Social Nationalism , Social Democracy , and the cultural divinity from Sukarno's beliefs.

One of the basic theses put forward by Sukarno was the necessity of combining the idea of national liberation with the Marxist vision of history , understood as a permanent struggle of the oppressed class with the oppressor. In such a vision of reality, the vast majority of Indonesians, as Marhaens, had participated for centuries in the historical system of class oppression , from the 350 years of the feudalistic system to the Dutch colonial system. The national liberation struggle therefore took the form of a revolution, which was to overthrow the colonial order and establish a socialist republic .

[ 13 ] According to Marhaenism, to be economically independent and free from exploitation by other parties, each person or household needs factors of production or capital. The form can be in the form of land or machines/tools. In a modern context, vehicles, information technology devices, kitchen utensils, and electronic goods can be effectively used as capital or production factors. Although not large, the ownership of capital is necessary to ensure the independence of the person or household in the economy.

Marhaenism rejected the capitalist model of the state as contrary to the ideas of equality and democracy. Sukarno rejected liberalism and individualism .

[ 14 ] The collectivism postulated in Marhaenism, however, differed significantly from Marx's postulates regarding the socialization of the means of production. The aim of the national revolution was not to equalize the rights of the wealthy Dutch population with the rights of the indigenous inhabitants, but to gain full control over the land and means of production by the Indonesians. In contrast to capitalism , capital in Marhaenism is not to be hoarded or multiplied but is to be processed to meet the necessities of life and produce a surplus . Farmers plant to feed their own families and then sell the surplus or excess to the market. Tailors, craftsmen, and laborers produce goods, which later some will be used by themselves although the rest is of course sold. Ideally, the self-sufficiency requirement should be met before serving the market. That means when workers, craftsmen, or farmers produce goods that will not be consumed by themselves, they act only as factors of production for others, which makes them vulnerable to being dictated by the market or exploited. In aggregate (overall) in a Marhaenist economic system, goods that are not needed will not be produced because people and households must first ensure the profile and the level of their own needs before they make anything. The innovation of the birth of a new product will occur when the need is really concrete. The method encourages the achievement of efficiency and prevents wasting resources and consumptive attitudes. Because it functions only to produce a surplus, the available capital cannot be hoarded or misappropriated to suppress the economic growth and the development of other parties.

The Marhaenism that was referred to by Sukarno can be compared with the formulation of the entrepreneurship theory approach, which was introduced only in the 1970s by David McClelland , almost 50 years later. The difference is that McCleland puts more emphasis on the option of planting the need for achievement or the will to get ahead from the people or small entrepreneurs and so it is in fact dominated by a functional approach. Sukarno's approach to marhaen (farmers and small traders) is actually structural, through the cultivation of a progressive revolutionary attitude.

In a speech before the United Nations General Assembly , September 30, 1960, Sukarno firmly stated that Pancasila was essentially a sublimation of the United States Declaration of Independence and the Communist Manifesto , thus declaring that means that Pancasila was actually the third alternative from the two opposing camps in the Cold War between the Western Bloc and the Eastern Bloc at that time.

Bibliography [ edit ] Dahm, Bernard (1974). "The Parties, the Masses and the Elections: A Historical Survey". In Oey Hong Lee (ed.).

Indonesia After the 1971 Elections . Oxford University press. pp.

7– 22.

ISBN 0-19-713422-X .

Pour, Julius (2010).

Gerakan 30 September: pelaku, pahlawan & petualang [ The September 30th Movement: doers, heroes & adventurers ] (in Indonesian). Buku Kompas.

ISBN 9789797095246 .

Saksono, Ignatius Gatut (2008).

Marhaenisme Bung Karno: marxisme ala Indonesia [ Bung Karno's Marhaenism: Marxism a la Indonesia ] (in Indonesian). Yabinkas Learning House.

ISBN 9789791118682 .

Soerojo, Soegiarso (nd).

Siapa Menabur Angin akan Menuai Badai : G30S - PKI dan Peran Bung Kamo [ Whoever sows the wind will reap the storm: G30S-PKI and the role of Bung Karno ] (in Indonesian). Soegiarso Soerojo.

Sulistyanto, Ali (ed.).

Marhaenisme Sukarno [ Sukarno's Marhaenism ] (in Indonesian). Promedia.

References [ edit ] ^ Dictionary of the modern politics of South-East Asia ^ Rocamora, J. Eliseo (October 1970).

"The Partai Nasional Indonesia, 1963–1965" .

Indonesia .

10 (10): 143– 181.

doi : 10.2307/3350638 .

hdl : 1813/53493 .

JSTOR 3350638 .

^ The Transition to Guided Democracy: Indonesian Politics, 1957–1959 ^ Teo Lee Ken (Apr 2018).

"Liberational Justice in the Political Thought of Ahmad Boestamam" .

Southeast Asian Studies .

7 (1).

Kyoto University : 68-9.

doi : 10.20495/seas.7.1_65 .

^ Adams, Cindy Heller (2011). "Chapter VI: Marhaenisme".

Bung Karno: penyambung lidah rakyat Indonesia (in Indonesian). Kerja sama Yayasan Bung Karno [dengan] Penerbit Media Pressindo.

ISBN 978-979-9110-32-9 .

^ "Kisah Kang Aeng dan Bung Karno" .

Historia – Majalah Sejarah Populer Pertama di Indonesia (in Indonesian). 2018-03-14 . Retrieved 2024-10-20 .

^ Dahm (1974) p15 ^ "Marhaenisme Pancasila" . Archived from the original on 2019-05-06 . Retrieved 2014-01-21 .

^ Firdausi, Fadrik Aziz (2020-06-29).

"Marhaenisme, Ideologi yang Tercetus Saat Sukarno Bersepeda" .

tirto.id (in Indonesian) . Retrieved 2024-10-20 .

^ Pour 2010, h. 457 ^ Soerojo 1988 ^ Sjamsuddin, Nazaruddin (1984).

PNI dan kepolitikannya : 1963–1969 (in Indonesian). Jakarta: Rajawali.

^ "Sukarno's Pancasila, Nasakom and Marhaenism Concepts | The Indonesian Army" .

www.theindonesianarmy.com . Retrieved 2017-06-06 .

^ Mackie, J. a. C. (1968-09-01).

"The Transition to Guided Democracy: Indonesian Politics, 1957–59" .

Journal of Southeast Asian History .

9 (2).

doi : 10.1017/S0217781100004774 .

ISSN 0217-7811 .

v t e Socialism History - Outline Schools of thought 21st century Agrarian Communist Democratic Ethical Feminist Green Guild Labourism Syndicalism Liberal Market Marxian Nationalist Reformist Revolutionary Scientific Social democracy Utopian Fourierism Icarianism Owenism Saint-Simonianism Technocracy Libertarian ( from below ) Anarchism Collectivist Communist Free-market Left-wing laissez-faire Green Individualist Insurrectionary Magonism Mutualism Neozapatismo Platformism Communalism Social Syndicalist Left-libertarianism Libertarian Marxism Left communism Council communism Luxemburgism Mao-Spontex Trotskyism Pabloism Posadism Orthodox Third camp Authoritarian ( from above ) Barracks Nechayevism Blanquism Bolshevism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Brezhnevism Castroism Ceaușism Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism Dengism Maoism–Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Prachanda Path Xi Jinping Thought Stalinism Neo-Stalinism National Tkachevism State Lassallism Religious Buddhist Christian anarchism communism Islamic Jewish Regional variants African African-Caribbean Arab Bolivarian Chinese Communist Nationalist Chiangist European Eurocommunism Indian Israeli Indonesian Melanesian Mexican Soviet In one country Real Sri Lankan Third World Yugoslav Key topics and issues Anti-revisionism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Critique of political economy Critique of work Class struggle Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Egalitarianism Equal liberty Equality of opportunity Equality of outcome History of anarchism History of communism History of socialism History of social democracy Impossibilism " The Internationale " Internationalism Socialist Internationals First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Socialist International Land reform Left-wing politics Mixed economy Mode of production Nanosocialism Nationalization Planned economy Post-capitalism Proletarian revolution Reformism Revisionism Socialisation of production Socialist economics Socialist market economy Socialist state State capitalism State-owned enterprise Trade union Welfare state Workers' council Concepts Adhocracy Basic income Calculation in kind Common ownership Cooperative ownership Decentralized planning Direct democracy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal opportunity Free association of producers Industrial democracy Labor-time calculation Labour voucher Organizational self-management Production for use Public ownership Social dividend Socialist mode of production Technocracy Workplace democracy People 16th c.

Tommaso Campanella Thomas More 18th c.

Gracchus Babeuf Louis Antoine de Saint-Just Victor d'Hupay Gabriel Bonnot de Mably Sylvain Maréchal Étienne-Gabriel Morelly 19th c.

Stephen Pearl Andrews Mikhail Bakunin John Goodwyn Barmby Enrico Barone August Bebel Edward Bellamy Eduard Bernstein Louis Blanc Louis Auguste Blanqui Philippe Buchez Georg Büchner Philippe Buonarroti Francisco Largo Caballero Étienne Cabet Edward Carpenter Nikolay Chernyshevsky James Connolly Victor Prosper Considerant Claire Démar Théodore Dézamy W. E. B. Du Bois Prosper Enfantin Friedrich Engels Charles Fourier Emma Goldman William Batchelder Greene Charles Hall Alexander Herzen Thomas Hodgskin Jean Jaurès Mother Jones Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Paul Lafargue Ferdinand Lassalle Pyotr Lavrov Alexandre Ledru-Rollin Pierre Leroux Helen Macfarlane Errico Malatesta Karl Marx Louise Michel Nikolay Mikhaylovsky William Morris Robert Owen Antonie Pannekoek Giovanni Pascoli Constantin Pecqueur Georgi Plekhanov Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Luis Emilio Recabarren Henri de Saint-Simon Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin George Sand Friedrich Wilhelm Schulz Eugène Sue Lysander Spooner Fred M. Taylor William Thompson Pyotr Tkachev Benjamin Tucker Suzanne Voilquin Alfred Russel Wallace Josiah Warren Wilhelm Weitling Oscar Wilde 20th c.

Tariq Ali Salvador Allende Inejirō Asanuma Hafez al-Assad Clement Attlee Aung San Deng Xiaoping Jiang Zemin Henri Barbusse Jyoti Basu Simone de Beauvoir Walter Benjamin Tony Benn Léon Blum Grace Lee Boggs Murray Bookchin Bertolt Brecht Aristide Briand Nikolai Bukharin Cornelius Castoriadis Noam Chomsky M. N. Roy G. D. H. Cole Jeremy Corbyn Marcel Déat Guy Debord Eugene V. Debs John Dewey Alexander Dubček Albert Einstein Faiz Ahmad Faiz Muammar Gaddafi Einar Gerhardsen Mikhail Gorbachev Maxim Gorky Antonio Gramsci Safdar Hashmi Eric Hobsbawm Saddam Hussein Dolores Ibárruri Pablo Iglesias Posse Jayaprakash Narayan Russell Jacoby Kim Jong-il Kim Il Sung Martin Luther King Jr.

Alexandra Kollontai James Larkin E. M. S. Namboodiripad Jack Layton Henri Lefebvre Claude Lefort Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Rosa Luxemburg Lu Xun Alasdair MacIntyre Nestor Makhno Nelson Mandela José Carlos Mariátegui Adrien Marquet Mao Dun Salama Moussa François Mitterrand Imre Nagy Gamal Abdel Nasser Jawaharlal Nehru Ernst Niekisch Ne Win George Orwell Sylvia Pankhurst Fred Paterson Karl Polanyi Pierre Renaudel B. T. Ranadive Bertrand Russell Gaetano Salvemini Bernie Sanders Jean-Paul Sartre Arthur Scargill Léopold Sédar Senghor George Bernard Shaw Sukarno Sun Yat-sen R. H. Tawney E. P. Thompson Ernst Toller Leon Trotsky Ram Manohar Lohia H. G. Wells Cornel West Clara Zetkin Howard Zinn J. Posadas 21st c.

Pedro Castillo Hugo Chávez Bob Crow Hu Jintao Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu Kim Jong Un Hasan Piker Lula da Silva Evo Morales Yanis Varoufakis Xi Jinping Vaush Organizations International socialist organizations Socialist parties See also Economic calculation problem Marxist philosophy New Left Old Left Socialism by country Socialist calculation debate Categories Socialism WikiProject Socialism portal Communism portal Organized Labour portal v t e Communism in Indonesia Wars and incidents Wars Malayan Emergency Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation Incidents Madiun Affair Limbang raid Battle of Long Jawai Landing at Labis Action of 13 December 1964 Battle of Sungei Koemba Battle of Kindau Battle of Babang Operation Claret Battle of Bau Three Souths Affair 30 September Movement 1965–66 Indonesian mass killings Organisations Communist Party of Indonesia Socialist Party of Indonesia Murba Party Acoma Party Sarbupri Central All-Indonesian Workers Organization Malayan Peoples' Anti-Japanese Army South Seas Communist Party North Kalimantan Communist Party Key people Henk Sneevliet Tan Malaka Siauw Giok Tjhan Darsono Sukarno Alimin Amir Sjarifuddin D. N. Aidit M. H. Lukman Musso Njoto Samikidin Semaun Kamaruzaman Sjam Marco Kartodikromo Bakri Wahab Sudisman Wikana Affiliation Communist International Brunei People's Party Kesatuan Melayu Muda Malayan Communist Party North Kalimantan Communist Party Related topics Calcutta Southeast Asian Youth Conference CONEFO Nasakom Marhaenism Revolutionary Socialist Party (Netherlands) Communism in Sumatra Domino theory Brunei Revolt Japanese Red Army In popular culture Pengkhianatan G30S/PKI The Year of Living Dangerously Puisi Tak Terkuburkan The Act of Killing The Look of Silence Communism portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Marhaenism&oldid=1305466840 " Categories : Authoritarianism Eponymous political ideologies History of socialism Political history of Indonesia Political movements in Indonesia Socialism in Indonesia Syncretic political movements Socialism Marxism Sukarno Hidden categories: CS1 Indonesian-language sources (id) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from August 2023 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles containing Indonesian-language text Articles needing additional references from December 2024 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia references cleanup from December 2024 All articles needing references cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from December 2024 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 06:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Marhaenism 11 languages Add topic

