Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Discussion 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Rajas 23 languages অসমীয়া বাংলা Bikol Central Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Latina Lietuvių मराठी Nederlands नेपाल भाषा Polski Português Русский Slovenčina தமிழ் తెలుగు Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hindu philosophical concept This article is about a psychological, philosophical concept in Indian religions. For other similar words, see Raja (disambiguation) .

Rajas ( Sanskrit : रजस्) is one of the three guṇas (tendencies, qualities, attributes), a philosophical and psychological concept developed by the Samkhya school of Hindu philosophy .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The other two qualities are sattva (goodness, balance) and tamas (lethargy, violence, disorder).

Rajas is innate tendency or quality that drives motion, energy and activity.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Rajas is sometimes translated as passion, where it is used in the sense of activity, without any particular value and it can contextually be either good or bad.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Rajas helps actualize the other two guṇa .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] In simply it is the mixture of both sattva and tamas .

Description [ edit ] In Samkhya philosophy, a guṇa is one of three "tendencies, qualities": sattva , rajas and tamas . This category of qualities have been widely adopted by various schools of Hinduism for categorizing behavior and natural phenomena. The three qualities are: Sattva is the quality of balance, harmony, goodness, purity, universalizing, holistic, constructive, creative, building, positive attitude, luminous, serenity, being-ness, peaceful, virtuous.

[ 4 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Rajas is the quality of passion, activity, neither good nor bad and sometimes either, self-centeredness, egoistic, individualizing, driven, moving, dynamic.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Tamas is the quality of imbalance, disorder, chaos, anxiety, impure, destructive, delusion, negative, dull or inactive, apathy, inertia or lethargy, violent, vicious, ignorant.

[ 11 ] In Indian philosophy , these qualities are not considered as present in either-or fashion. Rather, everyone and everything has all three, only in different proportions and in different contexts.

[ 12 ] The living being or substance is viewed as the net result of the joint effect of these three qualities.

[ 9 ] [ 12 ] According to Samkhya school, no one and nothing is either purely sattvic or purely rajasic or purely tamasic .

[ 9 ] One's nature and behavior is a complex interplay of all of these, with each guna in varying degrees. In some, the conduct is rajasic with significant influence of sattvic guṇa , in some it is rajasic with significant influence of tamasic guna , and so on.

[ 9 ] In the fourteenth chapter of the Bhagavad Gita , rajas is described as being of a passionate nature, driving desire, attachment, and action. When rajas is dominant, it manifests as greed, restlessness, agitation, and constant engagement in actions, which obscure wisdom and keep one bound to the cycle of worldly pursuits.

[ 13 ] Discussion [ edit ] Rajas is that quality or attribute in a substance ( prakriti ) or individual which promotes or upholds the activity of the other aspects of nature ( prakriti ) such as one or more of the following: action ;famous change, mutation ; passion, excitement; birth , creation, generation.

If a person or thing tends to be extremely active, excitable, or passionate, that person or thing could be said to have a preponderance of rajas . It is contrasted with the quality of tamas , which is the quality of inactivity, darkness, and laziness, and with sattva , which is the quality of purity, clarity, calmness and creativity.

Rajas is viewed as being more positive than tamas , and less positive than sattva , except, perhaps, for one who has "transcended the gunas" and achieved equanimity in all fields of relative life.

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Samkhyakarika (verses 12 to 14 discuss Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) References [ edit ] ^ a b Gerald James Larson (2001).

Classical Sāṃkhya: An Interpretation of Its History and Meaning . Motilal Banarsidass. pp.

10– 18, 49, 163.

ISBN 978-81-208-0503-3 .

^ a b James G. Lochtefeld, Rajas, in The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Hinduism: A-M, Vol. 2, Rosen Publishing, ISBN 9780823931798 , pages 546-547 ^ Gerald James Larson (2001).

Classical Sāṃkhya: An Interpretation of Its History and Meaning . Motilal Banarsidass. p. 244.

ISBN 978-81-208-0503-3 .

^ a b Ian Whicher (1998), The Integrity of the Yoga Darśana , State University of New York Press, pages 86-87, 124-125, 163-167, 238-243 ^ Autobiography Of A Yogi , Paramahansa Yogananda , Self Realization Fellowship, 1973, p. 22 ^ Maharishi Mahesh Yogi on the Bhagavad Gita Translation and Commentary, Arkana, 1990 p. 236 ^ Alter, Joseph S., Yoga in Modern India , 2004 Princeton University Press, p 55 ^ Mikel Burley (2007).

Classical Samkhya and Yoga: An Indian Metaphysics of Experience . Routledge. pp.

101– 105, 120– 122, 167, 185.

ISBN 978-1-134-15978-9 .

^ a b c d Alban Widgery (1930), The principles of Hindu Ethics, International Journal of Ethics, Vol. 40, No. 2, pp. 234–237.

^ Ian Whicher (1998), The Integrity of the Yoga Darśana , State University of New York Press, pp. 63, 124–129, 138, 188–190.

^ Ian Whicher (1998), The Integrity of the Yoga Darśana , State University of New York Press, pp. 63, 110–112, 124–126, 163, 188.

^ a b James G. Lochtefeld, Sattva, in The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Hinduism: A–M, Vol. 2, Rosen Publishing, ISBN 9780823931798 , p. 265.

^ Sutton, Nicholas (2017).

Bhagavad Gita: The Oxford Centre for Hindu Studies Guide . CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform. p. 211.

ISBN 978-1-5030-5291-8 .

^ Maharishi Mahesh Yogi on the Bhagavad Gita Translation and Commentary, 1990 pp. 221–223 v t e Hinduism topics Glossary Index Timeline Philosophy Concepts Brahman Om Ishvara Atman Maya Karma Saṃsāra Puruṣārthas Dharma Artha Kama Moksha Niti Ahimsa Asteya Aparigraha Brahmacharya Satya Dāna Damah Dayā Akrodha Schools Āstika : Samkhya Yoga Nyaya Vaisheshika Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Svābhāvika Bhedābheda Dvaita Advaita Vishishtadvaita Nāstika : Charvaka Texts Classification Śruti Smṛti Vedas Rigveda Yajurveda Samaveda Atharvaveda Divisions Samhita Brahmana Aranyaka Upanishads Aitareya Kaushitaki Brihadaranyaka Isha Taittiriya Katha Maitrayaniya Shvetashvatara Chandogya Kena Mundaka Mandukya Prashna Upavedas Ayurveda Dhanurveda Natyaveda Sthapatyaveda Vedanga Shiksha Chandas Vyākaraṇa Nirukta Kalpa Jyotisha Other Bhagavad Gita Agamas Itihasas Ramayana Mahabharata Puranas Minor Upanishads Arthashastra Nitisara Dharmaśāstra Manusmriti Nāradasmṛti Yājñavalkya Smṛti Sutras Stotras Subhashita Tantras Yoga Vasistha Yoga Sutras of Patanjali Sangam literature Tirumurai Divya Prabandham Tirumurukāṟṟuppaṭai Thiruppugal Thirukkural Kamba Ramayanam Five Great Epics Eighteen Greater Texts Eighteen Lesser Texts Athichudi Iraiyanar Akapporul Abhirami Antati Thiruvilaiyadal Puranam Vinayagar Agaval Vedarthasamgraha Deities Gods Trimurti Brahma Vishnu Shiva Agni Dattatreya Ganesha Hanuman Indra Kartikeya Krishna Rama Surya Varuna Vayu more Goddesses Tridevi Saraswati Lakshmi Parvati Bhumi Durga Kali Mahavidya Matrika Radha Rukmini Sati Shakti Shashthi Sita more Practices Worship Temple Murti Puja Bhakti Japa Bhajan Naivedhya Yajna Homa Tapas Dhyāna Tirthatana Sanskaras Garbhadhana Pumsavana Simantonayana Jatakarma Namakarana Nishkramana Annaprashana Chudakarana Karnavedha Vidyarambha Upanayana Keshanta Ritushuddhi Samavartanam Vivaha Antyeshti Varnashrama Varna Brahmin Kshatriya Vaishya Shudra Ashrama Brahmacharya Grihastha Vanaprastha Sannyasa Festivals Diwali Holi Shivaratri Raksha Bandhan Navaratri Durga Puja Ramlila Vijayadashami Ganesh Chaturthi Rama Navami Janmashtami Onam Pongal Makar Sankranti New Year Bihu Gudi Padwa Pahela Baishakh Puthandu Vaisakhi Vishu Ugadi Kumbh Mela Haridwar Nashik Prayag Ujjain Ratha Yatra Teej Vasant Panchami Others Other Svādhyāya Namaste Bindi Tilaka Related Hindus Etymology List Denominations Law Calendar Anti-Hindu sentiment Criticism Hindu gurus and sants Hindu studies Iconography Mythology Nationalism Hindutva Persecution Pilgrimage sites India Relations with other religions Baháʼí Buddhism Islam Jainism Judaism Sikhism Theosophy Glossary Hinduism by country Hindu temples List Architecture Outline Category Portal WikiProject v t e Indian philosophy Topics Atheism Atomism Idealism Logic Monotheism Vedic philosophy Kama Artha Moksha Ancient Āstika Hindu : Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Shaiva Raseśvara Pashupata Shaivism Pāṇiniya Nāstika Ājīvika Ajñana Charvaka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist philosophy and Early Buddhist schools Śūnyatā Madhyamaka Yogachara Sautrāntika Svatantrika Medieval Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Svabhavika Bhedabheda Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Sikh Philosophy Shaiva Pratyabhijna Pashupata Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Modern Integral yoga Gandhism Radical Humanism Progressive utilization theory Texts Abhinavabharati Arthashastra Bhagavad Gita Bhagavata Purana Brahma Sutra Buddhist texts Dharmashastra Hindu texts Jain Agamas Kamasutra Mimamsa Sutras All 108 texts Principal Nyāya Sūtras Nyayakusumanjali Panchadasi Samkhyapravachana Sutra Sangam texts Sarvadarsanasangraha Shiva Sutras Tarka-Sangraha Tattvacintāmaṇi Tirukkuṟaḷ Upanishads Minor Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Vedangas Vedas Yoga Sutras of Patanjali Yoga Vasistha More...

Philosophers Adi Shankara Abhinavagupta Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Maṇḍana Miśra Valluvar Avatsara Vāchaspati Misra Uddalaka Aruni Gautama Buddha Yājñavalkya Gārgī Vāchaknavī Buddhaghosa Patañjali Kanada Kapila Brihadratha Ikshvaku Jaimini Vyasa Chanakya Dharmakirti Akshapada Gotama Nagarjuna Padmasambhāva Vasubandhu Gaudapada Ramana Maharshi Vivekananda Dayananda Saraswati Ramanuja Vedanta Desika Raikva Sadananda Sakayanya Satyakama Jabala Madhvacharya Mahavira Guru Nanak More...

Concepts Abhava Abhasavada Abheda Adarsana Adrishta Advaita Aham Ahimsa Aishvarya Akrodha Aksara Anatta Ananta Anavastha Anupalabdhi Apauruṣheyā Artha Asiddhatva Asatkalpa Ātman Avyakta Bhrama Brahman Bhuman Bhumika Catuṣkoṭi Chaitanya Chidabhasa Cittabhumi Dāna Devatas Dharma Dhi Dravya Dhrti Ekagrata Guṇa Hitā Idam Ikshana Ishvaratva Jivatva Kama Karma Kasaya Kshetrajna Lakshana Matsya Nyaya Mithyatva Mokṣa Nididhyasana Nirvāṇa Nishkama Karma Niyama Padārtha Paramatman Paramananda Parameshashakti Parinama-vada Pradhana Prajna Prakṛti Pratibimbavada Pratītyasamutpāda Puruṣa Rājamaṇḍala Ṛta Sakshi Samadhi Saṃsāra Satya Satkaryavada Shabda Brahman Sphoṭa Sthiti Śūnyatā Sutram Svātantrya Iccha-mrityu Syādvāda Taijasa Tajjalan Tanmatra Tyāga Uparati Upekkhā Utsaha Vivartavada Viraj Yamas Yoga More...

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rajas&oldid=1289731054 " Category : Guna Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 May 2025, at 13:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rajas 23 languages Add topic

