Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Characteristics Toggle Characteristics subsection 1.1 Administration 2 Countries that use the euro Toggle Countries that use the euro subsection 2.1 Eurozone members 2.2 Special territories of members of the European Economic Area 2.3 Other users 3 EU members not using the euro Toggle EU members not using the euro subsection 3.1 Acceding to the eurozone 3.2 Committed to adopt the euro 3.3 Opt-outs 4 Coins and banknotes Toggle Coins and banknotes subsection 4.1 Coins 4.1.1 Coin minting 4.2 Banknotes 4.2.1 Issuing modalities for banknotes 4.2.2 Banknote printing 4.3 Payments clearing, electronic funds transfer 5 History Toggle History subsection 5.1 Introduction 5.2 Currency sign 5.3 Eurozone crisis 6 Direct and indirect usage Toggle Direct and indirect usage subsection 6.1 Agreed direct usage with minting rights 6.2 Agreed direct usage without minting rights 6.3 Unilateral direct usage 6.4 Currencies pegged to the euro 6.5 Use as reserve currency 7 Economics Toggle Economics subsection 7.1 Optimal currency area 7.2 Transaction costs and risks 7.3 Price parity 7.4 Macroeconomic stability 7.4.1 Trade 7.4.2 Investment 7.4.3 Inflation 7.4.4 Exchange rate risk 7.4.5 Financial integration 7.4.6 Effect on interest rates 7.4.7 Price convergence 7.4.8 Tourism 8 Exchange rates Toggle Exchange rates subsection 8.1 Flexible exchange rates 8.2 Against other major currencies 9 Political considerations Toggle Political considerations subsection 9.1 Eurozone 9.2 Countries not using the euro 10 Euro in various official EU languages 11 See also 12 Notes 13 References 14 Further reading 15 External links Toggle the table of contents Euro 209 languages Адыгэбзэ Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Anarâškielâ العربية Aragonés ܐܪܡܝܐ Arpetan অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Čeština Corsu Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Davvisámegiella Deitsch Deutsch Dolnoserbski Eesti Ελληνικά Эрзянь Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gagauz Gàidhlig Galego 贛語 𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Ilokano বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Ирон IsiXhosa IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Kaszëbsczi Қазақша Kernowek Ikinyarwanda Kiswahili Коми Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Ladin Ladino ລາວ Latgaļu Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Лезги Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingála La .lojban.

Lombard Magyar Madhurâ Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti Māori मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Mirandés Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Napulitano Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Novial Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی ပအိုဝ်ႏဘာႏသာႏ Papiamentu پښتو Patois Picard Piemontèis Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Qırımtatarca Ripoarisch Română Rumantsch Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Gagana Samoa ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Sardu Scots Seeltersk Sesotho Sesotho sa Leboa Shqip Sicilianu Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Словѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟ Ślůnski Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit Tarandíne Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ ᏣᎳᎩ Türkçe Удмурт Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Võro Walon Wayuunaiki 文言 West-Vlams Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Zeêuws Žemaitėška 中文 Batak Mandailing Kumoring Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Currency of the European Union This article is about the currency. For other uses, see Euro (disambiguation) .

"EUR" redirects here. For other uses, see EUR (disambiguation) .

Euro see also euro in various languages Euro banknotes ISO 4217 Code EUR (numeric: 978 ) Subunit 0.01 Unit Unit euro Plural Varies, see language and the euro Symbol € ‎ Nickname The single currency [ a ] Denominations Subunit 1 ⁄ 100 euro cent ( Name varies by language ) Plural euro cent ( Varies by language ) Symbol euro cent c Banknotes Freq. used €5 , €10 , €20 , €50 , €100 [ 2 ] Rarely used €200 , €500 [ 2 ] Coins Freq. used 1c , 2c , 5c , 10c , 20c , 50c , €1 , €2 Rarely used 1c , 2c (Belgium, Estonia, Finland, Ireland, Italy, Lithuania, Netherlands, Slovakia [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] ) Demographics Date of introduction 1 January 1999 ; 26 years ago ( 1999-01-01 ) Replaced European Currency Unit User(s) primary: § members of Eurozone (20), also: § other users Issuance Central bank European Central Bank Website www .ecb .europa .eu Printer see § Banknote printing Mint List of mints Valuation Inflation 2.0% (June 2025) [ 7 ] Source ec.europa.eu Method HICP Pegged by see § Pegged currencies This article is part of a series on Politics of the European Union Member states (27) Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Candidate countries Albania Bosnia and Herzegovina Georgia Moldova Montenegro North Macedonia Serbia Ukraine Countries with suspended accession negotiations Turkey Applicant countries Kosovo States not on the agenda Armenia Azerbaijan Belarus Iceland Kazakhstan Norway Russia Switzerland United Kingdom Microstates and the European Union Andorra Liechtenstein Monaco San Marino Vatican City Special territories EU 3 (EU founding states) Enlargement of the European Union Withdrawal from the European Union Treaties and Declarations Schuman Declaration (1950) Treaty of Paris (1951) Europe Declaration (1951) Spaak Report (1956) Treaty of Rome (1957) Euratom Treaty (1957) Merger Treaty (1965) Solemn Declaration (1983) Single European Act (1986) Maastricht Treaty (1992) Treaty of Amsterdam (1997) Treaty of Nice (2001) Berlin Declaration (2007) Treaty of Lisbon (2007) Article 7 Article 50 Opt-outs Treaties of accession 1972 , 1979 , 1985 , 1994 , 2003 , 2005 , 2011 Treaties of withdrawal 1984 , 2020 Other treaties Schengen Agreement (1985) European Economic Area Agreement (1992) Abandoned treaties and agreements European Constitution (2004) UK membership renegotiation (2015–2016) Executive institutions European Council President : Costa (PES) Parties List of meetings European Commission Von der Leyen Commission President : Von der Leyen (EPP) Vice Presidents College of Commissioners Civil Service Secretary-General : Juhansone Legislative institutions Legislative procedure Council of the EU Presidency Denmark ( July–December 2025 ) Configurations GAC FAC ECOFIN Eurogroup AGRIFISH EPSCO COMPET TTE ENVI JHA EYC Voting Secretariat Secretary-General : Thérèse Blanchet Directorates-general Council preparatory bodies COREPER Council Working Parties European Parliament ( Members ) President : Metsola Largest groups EPP ( Manfred Weber ) S&D ( Iratxe García ) Member of the European Parliament 10th session (2024–2029) Bureau Vice Presidents Quaestor Conference National parliaments Judicial institutions Court of Justice of the EU European Court of Justice Members Advocates General Rulings General Court Auditory institutions European Court of Auditors European Court of Auditors Other auditory bodies Internal Audit Service of the Commission Committee on Budgetary Control of the Parliament Economic and Financial Affairs configuration of the Council Anti-Fraud Office Public Prosecutor's Office European Central Bank President Lagarde ESCB EMU Euro banknotes Euro coins Other bodies European Investment Bank Group Investment Bank Investment Fund EIB Institute European Stability Mechanism European Stability Mechanism European University Institute European University Institute Unified Patent Court Unified Patent Court Agencies, decentralised independent bodies and joint undertakings Decentralised agencies of the EU Single market agencies CFSP agencies AFSC agencies ESFS European Supervisory Authorities SRM bodies Executive agencies of the EU Euratom agencies Decentralised independent bodies of the EU European Institute of Innovation and Technology European Public Prosecutor's Office Corporate bodies of the EU European Data Protection Board Authority for European Political Parties and European Political Foundations Joint undertakings of the EU of the Euratom Other independent bodies European Data Protection Supervisor European Ombudsman Advisory bodies European Committee of the Regions European Economic and Social Committee Political and Security Committee European Union Military Committee EU/ESA Space Council Inter-institutional bodies Publications Office of the European Union European External Action Service European Personnel Selection Office Anti-Fraud Office European Administrative School Euratom Euratom members Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Associated states Switzerland United Kingdom Nuclear power in the European Union Euratom since 1 January 2021 Economic and Monetary Union Eurozone members Austria Belgium Croatia Cyprus Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Eurogroup President Paschal Donohoe Other currencies in use Bulgarian lev Czech koruna Danish krone Hungarian forint Polish złoty Romanian leu Swedish krona ERM II Enlargement of the eurozone Non Euro countries relationship to Euro Bulgaria Czechia Denmark Hungary Poland Sweden Romania Eurozone since 2015 Schengen Area Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Non-EU members Iceland Liechtenstein Norway Switzerland Non-Schengen area EU member states Cyprus Ireland (Opt-out) ETIAS Prüm Convention Schengen Information System Visa Information System Visa policy of the Schengen Area Schengen Area from January 2023 European Economic Area EEA members Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Non-EU members Iceland Liechtenstein Norway Topics EEA Joint Committee EEA National Identity cards Microstates and the European Union European Economic Area Elections Elections to the European Parliament European parties European foundations Political groups of the European Parliament Spitzenkandidat Constituencies Apportionment Referendums related to the EU European elections 1979 1984 1989 1994 1999 2004 2009 2014 2019 2024 (latest election) Elections in EU member states Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Law Acquis Conferral Primacy ( ECJ Case 6/64 ) Subsidiarity Regulation Democratic legitimacy Directive Decision Recommendation Fundamental Rights Policies and issues Budget Customs Union Free Trade Agreements European Single Market Area of FS&J Policies Agricultural Energy Fisheries Regional Citizenship Passports of the European Union Identity Pro-Europeanism Euroscepticism European banking union European Banking Supervision Single Resolution Mechanism Capital Markets Union European System of Financial Supervision Institutional seats of the European Union Integration Supranationalism European Federation Multi-speed Europe Enhanced cooperation Foreign relations High Representative Kaja Kallas Ext. Action Service Foreign Policy Defence Policy Foreign relations of EU member states Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Argentina–European Union relations Armenia–European Union relations Australia–European Union relations Brazil–European Union relations Canada–European Union relations China–European Union relations European Union–NATO relations Georgia–European Union relations Iceland–European Union relations Iran–European Union relations Israel–European Union relations Japan–European Union relations Kazakhstan–European Union relations Mexico–European Union relations Moldova–European Union relations Norway–European Union relations Russia–European Union relations Switzerland–European Union relations Turkey–European Union relations Ukraine–European Union relations United Kingdom–European Union relations ( History ) Post-Brexit United Kingdom relations with the European Union Brexit United States–European Union relations Common Travel Area ( Ireland ) Microstates and the European Union European Union and the United Nations European Union Association Agreement European Neighbourhood Policy Eastern Partnership Euronest Parliamentary Assembly G7 G20 Defunct bodies European Communities (1958–1993) European Coal and Steel Community European Economic Community European Community Western European Union Convention on the Future of Europe European Union portal Other countries v t e The euro ( symbol : € ; currency code : EUR ) is the official currency of 20 of the 27 member states of the European Union . This group of states is officially known as the euro area or, more commonly, the eurozone . The euro is divided into 100 euro cents .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] The currency is also used officially by the institutions of the European Union , by four European microstates that are not EU members, [ 9 ] the British Overseas Territory of Akrotiri and Dhekelia , as well as unilaterally by Montenegro and Kosovo . Outside Europe, a number of special territories of EU members also use the euro as their currency.

The euro is used by 350 million people in Europe and additionally, over 200 million people worldwide use currencies pegged to the euro .

[ 10 ] It is the second-largest reserve currency as well as the second-most traded currency in the world after the United States dollar .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] As of December 2019, [update] with more than €1.3 trillion in circulation, the euro has one of the highest combined values of banknotes and coins in circulation in the world.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] The name euro was officially adopted on 16 December 1995 in Madrid .

[ 18 ] The euro was introduced to world financial markets as an accounting currency on 1 January 1999, replacing the former European Currency Unit (ECU) at a ratio of 1:1 (US$1.1743 at the time). Physical euro coins and banknotes entered into circulation on 1 January 2002, making it the day-to-day operating currency of its original members, and by March 2002 it had completely replaced the former currencies.

[ 19 ] Between December 1999 and December 2002, the euro traded below the US dollar, but has since traded near parity with or above the US dollar, peaking at US$1.60 on 18 July 2008 and since then returning near to its original issue rate. On 13 July 2022, the two currencies hit parity for the first time in nearly two decades due in part to the Russian invasion of Ukraine .

[ 20 ] Then, in September 2022, the US dollar again had a face value higher than the euro, at around US$0.95 per euro.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] Characteristics [ edit ] Administration [ edit ] Main articles: European Central Bank , Maastricht Treaty , and Eurogroup Seat of the European Central Bank in Frankfurt , Germany The euro is managed and administered by the European Central Bank and the Eurosystem , composed of the central banks of the eurozone countries. As an independent central bank, the ECB has sole authority to set monetary policy . The Eurosystem participates in the printing, minting and distribution of euro banknotes and coins in all member states, and the operation of the eurozone payment systems.

Through their ratification of the 1992 Maastricht Treaty (or subsequent treaties of accession ), most EU member states committed to adopt the euro upon meeting certain monetary and budgetary convergence criteria , although not all participating states have done so.

Denmark has negotiated exemptions, [ 23 ] while Sweden (which joined the EU in 1995, after the Maastricht Treaty was signed) turned down the euro in a 2003 non-binding referendum , and has circumvented its commitment to adopt the euro by not meeting the monetary and budgetary requirements. All nations that have joined the EU since 1993 have pledged to adopt the euro in due course. The Maastricht Treaty was amended by the 2001 Treaty of Nice , which closed the gaps and loopholes in the Maastricht and Rome Treaties.

[ 24 ] Countries that use the euro [ edit ] Further information: Euro § Direct and indirect usage The euro is the official currency of 43 countries and territories: Eurozone members [ edit ] Main article: Eurozone The 20 participating members are: Austria Belgium Croatia Cyprus [ b ] Estonia Finland France [ c ] Germany Greece Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands [ d ] Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Special territories of members of the European Economic Area [ edit ] EU Outermost Regions : France French Guiana Guadeloupe Martinique Saint Martin Mayotte Réunion Portugal Azores Madeira Spain Canary Islands Overseas Territories : France French Southern and Antarctic Lands Saint Barthélemy Saint Pierre and Miquelon [ 25 ] Special Autonomous Territories : Finland Åland Greece Mount Athos Spain Ceuta Melilla Other users [ edit ] Microstates with a monetary agreement: Andorra [ 26 ] Monaco [ 27 ] San Marino [ 28 ] Vatican City [ 29 ] British Overseas Territory : Akrotiri and Dhekelia [ 30 ] Unilateral adopters: Kosovo [ 31 ] Montenegro [ e ] EU members not using the euro [ edit ] Main articles: Enlargement of the eurozone and Currencies of the European Union Acceding to the eurozone [ edit ] See also: Bulgaria and the euro Bulgaria : Bulgaria has been approved to replace the Bulgarian lev with the euro on 1 January 2026.

[ 32 ] Committed to adopt the euro [ edit ] See also: Czech Republic and the euro , Hungary and the euro , Poland and the euro , Romania and the euro , and Sweden and the euro The following five EU member states, representing almost 90 million people, committed themselves in their respective Treaty of Accession to adopt the euro. However they do not have a deadline to do so and can delay the process by deliberately not complying with the convergence criteria (such as by not meeting the convergence criteria to join ERM II).

Czech Republic Hungary Poland Romania Sweden Opt-outs [ edit ] See also: Denmark and the euro and United Kingdom and the euro The Maastricht Treaty of 1992 included protocols on Denmark and the United Kingdom, giving them opt-outs with the right to decide if and when they would adopt the euro.

[ 33 ] Denmark : The government of Denmark negotiated an opt-out to retain usage of the Danish krone , but the currency is pegged to the euro via the ERM II , the European Union's exchange rate mechanism.

United Kingdom : Prior to its withdrawal from the European Union in 2020, the United Kingdom negotiated an opt-out to retain usage of the pound sterling .

Coins and banknotes [ edit ] Coins [ edit ] Main article: Euro coins See also: List of Euro coin series and Identifying marks on euro coins Euro coins with Croatian national sides The euro is divided into 100 cents (also referred to as euro cents , especially when distinguishing them from other currencies, and referred to as such on the common side of all cent coins). In Community legislative acts the plural forms of euro and cent are spelled without the s , notwithstanding normal English usage.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Otherwise, normal English plurals are used, [ 36 ] with many local variations such as centime in France.

All circulating coins have a common side showing the denomination or value and a map in the background. Due to the linguistic plurality in the European Union , the Latin alphabet version of euro is used (as opposed to the less common Greek or Cyrillic) and Arabic numerals (other text is used on national sides in national languages, but other text on the common side is avoided). For the denominations except the 1-, 2- and 5-cent coins, the map only showed the 15 member states of the union as of 2002. Beginning in 2007 or 2008 (depending on the country), the old map was replaced by a map of Europe also showing countries outside the EU .

[ 37 ] The 1-, 2- and 5-cent coins, however, keep their old design, showing a geographical map of Europe with the EU member states as of 2002, raised somewhat above the rest of the map. All common sides were designed by Luc Luycx . The coins also have a national side showing an image specifically chosen by the country that issued the coin. Euro coins from any member state may be freely used in any nation that has adopted the euro.

The coins are issued in denominations of €2 , €1 , 50c , 20c , 10c , 5c , 2c , and 1c . To avoid the use of the two smallest coins, some cash transactions are rounded to the nearest five cents in the Netherlands and Ireland [ 38 ] [ 39 ] (by voluntary agreement) and in Finland and Italy (by law).

[ 40 ] This practice is discouraged by the commission, as is the practice of certain shops of refusing to accept high-value euro notes.

[ 41 ] Commemorative coins with €2 face value have been issued with changes to the design of the national side of the coin. These include both commonly issued coins, such as the €2 commemorative coin for the fiftieth anniversary of the signing of the Treaty of Rome, and nationally issued coins, such as the coin to commemorate the 2004 Summer Olympics issued by Greece. These coins are legal tender throughout the eurozone. Collector coins with various other denominations have been issued as well, but these are not intended for general circulation, and they are legal tender only in the member state that issued them.

[ 42 ] Vatican euro coins with images of Pope Francis and Pope Benedict XVI Coin minting [ edit ] A number of institutions are authorised to mint euro coins: Bayerisches Hauptmünzamt ( Mint mark : D) Currency Centre Real Casa de la Moneda Hamburgische Münze (J) Hrvatska kovnica novca Banknote and Securities Printing Foundation [ el ] Imprensa Nacional-Casa da Moeda Istituto Poligrafico e Zecca dello Stato Koninklijke Munt van België/Monnaie Royale de Belgique Koninklijke Nederlandse Munt Lietuvos monetų kalykla Mincovňa Kremnica Monnaie de Paris Münze Österreich Suomen Rahapaja/Myntverket i Finland Staatliche Münze Berlin (A) Staatliche Münzen Baden-Württemberg (F): Stuttgart, (G): Karlsruhe Banknotes [ edit ] Main article: Euro banknotes First series of Euro banknotes of various denominations The design for the euro banknotes has common designs on both sides. The design was created by the Austrian designer Robert Kalina .

[ 43 ] Notes are issued in €500 , €200 , €100 , €50 , €20 , €10 , and €5 . Each banknote has its own colour and is dedicated to an artistic period of European architecture. The front of the note features windows or gateways while the back has bridges, symbolising links between states in the union and with the future. While the designs are supposed to be devoid of any identifiable characteristics, the initial designs by Robert Kalina were of specific bridges, including the Rialto and the Pont de Neuilly , and were subsequently rendered more generic; the final designs still bear very close similarities to their specific prototypes; thus they are not truly generic. The monuments looked similar enough to different national monuments to please everyone.

[ 44 ] The Europa series, or second series, consists of six denominations and no longer includes the €500 with issuance discontinued as of 27 April 2019.

[ 45 ] However, both the first and the second series of euro banknotes, including the €500, remain legal tender throughout the euro area.

[ 45 ] In December 2021, the ECB announced its plans to redesign euro banknotes by 2024. A theme advisory group, made up of one member from each euro area country, was selected to submit theme proposals to the ECB. The proposals will be voted on by the public; a design competition will also be held.

[ 46 ] Issuing modalities for banknotes [ edit ] Since 1 January 2002, the national central banks (NCBs) and the ECB have issued euro banknotes on a joint basis.

[ 47 ] Eurosystem NCBs are required to accept euro banknotes put into circulation by other Eurosystem members and these banknotes are not repatriated. The ECB issues 8% of the total value of banknotes issued by the Eurosystem.

[ 47 ] In practice, the ECB's banknotes are put into circulation by the NCBs, thereby incurring matching liabilities vis-à-vis the ECB. These liabilities carry interest at the main refinancing rate of the ECB. The other 92% of euro banknotes are issued by the NCBs in proportion to their respective shares of the ECB capital key, [ 47 ] calculated using national share of European Union (EU) population and national share of EU GDP, equally weighted.

[ 48 ] Image Value Year Dimensions (millimetres) Main colour Design Printer code position Obverse Reverse Architecture Century €5 2013 120 × 62 mm Grey [ 49 ] Classical 8th BC–4th AD Top right €10 2014 127 × 67 mm Red [ 50 ] Romanesque 11–12th €20 2015 133 × 72 mm Blue [ 51 ] Gothic 13–14th €50 2017 140 × 77 mm Orange [ 52 ] Renaissance 15–16th €100 2019 147 × 77 mm Green [ 53 ] Baroque & Rococo 17–18th €200 153 × 77 mm Yellow-brown [ 54 ] Art Nouveau 19th These images are to scale at 0.7 pixel per millimetre (18 pixel per inch). For table standards, see the banknote specification table .

Banknote printing [ edit ] Member states are authorised to print or to commission bank note printing. As of November 2022 [update] , these are the printers: Istituto Poligrafico e Zecca dello Stato Banco de Portugal Bank of Greece Bank of France Bundesdruckerei Central Bank of Ireland De La Rue Real Casa de la Moneda François-Charles Oberthür Giesecke+Devrient Royal Joh. Enschedé National Bank of Belgium Oesterreichische Nationalbank Setec Oy Payments clearing, electronic funds transfer [ edit ] Main article: Single Euro Payments Area Capital within the EU may be transferred in any amount from one state to another. All intra-Union transfers in euro are treated as domestic transactions and bear the corresponding domestic transfer costs.

[ 55 ] This includes all member states of the EU, even those outside the eurozone providing the transactions are carried out in euro.

[ 56 ] Credit/debit card charging and ATM withdrawals within the eurozone are also treated as domestic transactions; however paper-based payment orders, like cheques, have not been standardised so these are still domestic-based. The ECB has also set up a clearing system , T2 since March 2023, for large euro transactions.

[ 57 ] History [ edit ] Main article: History of the euro Introduction [ edit ] Historical currencies of the European Union v t e Currency Code Rate [ 58 ] Fixed on Yielded Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603 31 December 1998 1 January 1999 Belgian franc BEF 40.3399 31 December 1998 1 January 1999 Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371 31 December 1998 1 January 1999 Finnish markka FIM 5.94573 31 December 1998 1 January 1999 French franc FRF 6.55957 31 December 1998 1 January 1999 German mark DEM 1.95583 31 December 1998 1 January 1999 Irish pound IEP 0.787564 31 December 1998 1 January 1999 Italian lira ITL 1,936.27 31 December 1998 1 January 1999 Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399 31 December 1998 1 January 1999 Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482 31 December 1998 1 January 1999 Spanish peseta ESP 166.386 31 December 1998 1 January 1999 Greek drachma GRD 340.750 19 June 2000 1 January 2001 Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640 11 July 2006 1 January 2007 Cypriot pound CYP 0.585274 10 July 2007 1 January 2008 Maltese lira MTL 0.429300 10 July 2007 1 January 2008 Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260 8 July 2008 1 January 2009 Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466 13 July 2010 1 January 2011 Latvian lats LVL 0.702804 9 July 2013 1 January 2014 Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280 23 July 2014 1 January 2015 Croatian kuna HRK 7.53450 12 July 2022 1 January 2023 Bulgarian lev BGN 1.95583 8 July 2025 1 January 2026 The euro was established by the provisions in the 1992 Maastricht Treaty . To participate in the currency, member states are meant to meet strict criteria , such as a budget deficit of less than 3% of their GDP, a debt ratio of less than 60% of GDP (both of which were ultimately widely flouted after introduction), low inflation, and interest rates close to the EU average. In the Maastricht Treaty, the United Kingdom and Denmark were granted exemptions per their request from moving to the stage of monetary union which resulted in the introduction of the euro (see also United Kingdom and the euro ).

The name "euro" was officially adopted in Madrid on 16 December 1995.

[ 18 ] Belgian Esperantist Germain Pirlot , a former teacher of French and history, is credited with naming the new currency by sending a letter to then President of the European Commission , Jacques Santer , suggesting the name "euro" on 4 August 1995.

[ 59 ] Due to differences in national conventions for rounding and significant digits, all conversion between the national currencies had to be carried out using the process of triangulation via the euro. The definitive values of one euro in terms of the exchange rates at which the currency entered the euro are shown in the table.

The rates were determined by the Council of the European Union , [ f ] based on a recommendation from the European Commission based on the market rates on 31 December 1998. They were set so that one European Currency Unit (ECU) would equal one euro. The European Currency Unit was an accounting unit used by the EU, based on the currencies of the member states; it was not a currency in its own right. They could not be set earlier, because the ECU depended on the closing exchange rate of the non-euro currencies (principally pound sterling ) that day.

The procedure used to fix the conversion rate between the Greek drachma and the euro was different since the euro by then was already two years old. While the conversion rates for the initial eleven currencies were determined only hours before the euro was introduced, the conversion rate for the Greek drachma was fixed several months beforehand.

[ g ] The currency was introduced in non-physical form ( traveller's cheques , electronic transfers, banking, etc.) at midnight on 1 January 1999, when the national currencies of participating countries (the eurozone) ceased to exist independently. Their exchange rates were locked at fixed rates against each other. The euro thus became the successor to the European Currency Unit (ECU). The notes and coins for the old currencies, however, continued to be used as legal tender until new euro notes and coins were introduced on 1 January 2002.

The changeover period during which the former currencies' notes and coins were exchanged for those of the euro lasted about two months, until 28 February 2002. The official date on which the national currencies ceased to be legal tender varied from member state to member state. The earliest date was in Germany, where the mark officially ceased to be legal tender on 31 December 2001, though the exchange period lasted for two months more. Even after the old currencies ceased to be legal tender, they continued to be accepted by national central banks for periods ranging from several years to indefinitely (the latter for Austria, Germany, Ireland, Estonia and Latvia in banknotes and coins, and for Belgium, Luxembourg, Slovenia and Slovakia in banknotes only). The earliest coins to become non-convertible were the Portuguese escudos , which ceased to have monetary value after 31 December 2002, although banknotes remained exchangeable until 2022.

Currency sign [ edit ] Main article: Euro sign Graphic construction of the euro logo A special euro currency sign (€) was designed after a public survey had narrowed ten of the original thirty proposals down to two. The President of the European Commission at the time ( Jacques Santer ) and the European Commissioner with responsibility for the euro ( Yves-Thibault de Silguy ) then chose the winning design.

[ 60 ] Regarding the symbol, the European Commission stated on behalf of the European Union : The symbol € is based on the Greek letter epsilon (Є), with the first letter in the word "Europe" and with 2 parallel lines signifying stability.

— Directorate-General for Communication [ 61 ] The European Commission also specified a euro logo with exact proportions.

[ 61 ] Placement of the currency sign relative to the numeric amount varies from state to state, but for texts in English published by EU institutions, the symbol (or the ISO -standard "EUR") should precede the amount.

[ 62 ] Eurozone crisis [ edit ] Main articles: Euro area crisis and Greek government-debt crisis See also: 2008–2011 Icelandic financial crisis European 10 year bonds, before the Great Recession in Europe bonds floated together in parity Greece 10 year bond Portugal 10 year bond Ireland 10 year bond Spain 10 year bond Italy 10 year bond France 10 year bond Germany 10 year bond Following the 2008 financial crisis , fears of a sovereign default developed in 2009 among investors concerning some European states, with the situation becoming particularly tense in early 2010 .

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] Greece was most acutely affected, but fellow Eurozone members Cyprus , Ireland , Italy , Portugal , and Spain were also significantly affected.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] All these countries used EU funds except Italy, which is a major donor to the EFSF.

[ 67 ] To be included in the eurozone, countries had to fulfil certain convergence criteria , but the meaningfulness of such criteria was diminished by the fact it was not enforced with the same level of strictness among countries.

[ 68 ] According to the Economist Intelligence Unit in 2011, "[I]f the [euro area] is treated as a single entity, its [economic and fiscal] position looks no worse and in some respects, rather better than that of the US or the UK" and the budget deficit for the euro area as a whole is much lower and the euro area's government debt/GDP ratio of 86% in 2010 was about the same level as that of the United States. "Moreover", they write, "private-sector indebtedness across the euro area as a whole is markedly lower than in the highly leveraged Anglo-Saxon economies". The authors conclude that the crisis "is as much political as economic" and the result of the fact that the euro area lacks the support of "institutional paraphernalia (and mutual bonds of solidarity) of a state".

[ 69 ] The crisis continued with S&P downgrading the credit rating of nine euro-area countries, including France, then downgrading the entire European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) fund.

[ 70 ] A historical parallel – to 1931 when Germany was burdened with debt, unemployment and austerity while France and the United States were relatively strong creditors – gained attention in summer 2012 [ 71 ] even as Germany received a debt-rating warning of its own.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] Direct and indirect usage [ edit ] Further information: Eurozone , International status and usage of the euro , and Enlargement of the eurozone AT BE HR CY FI EE FR GR DE IE IT LV LT LU MT NL PT SK SI ES AD MC SM VA XK ME Eurozone members (20) Monetary agreement (4) Unilaterally adopted (2) Agreed direct usage with minting rights [ edit ] The euro is the sole currency of 20 EU member states : Austria, Belgium, Croatia, Cyprus, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, and Spain. These countries constitute the " eurozone ", some 347 million people in total as of 2023 [update] .

[ 74 ] According to bilateral agreements with the EU , the euro has also been designated as the sole and official currency in a further four European microstates awarded minting rights (Andorra, Monaco, San Marino and the Vatican City). All other EU member states (except Denmark, which has an opt-out ), and any potential future members, are obliged to adopt the euro when economic conditions permit.

Agreed direct usage without minting rights [ edit ] The euro is also the sole currency in three overseas territories of France that are not themselves part of the EU, namely Saint Barthélemy , Saint Pierre and Miquelon , and the French Southern and Antarctic Lands , as well as in the British Overseas Territory of Akrotiri and Dhekelia .

[ 75 ] Unilateral direct usage [ edit ] The euro has been adopted unilaterally as the sole currency of Montenegro and Kosovo. It has also been used as a foreign trading currency in Cuba since 1998, [ 76 ] Syria since 2006, [ 77 ] and Venezuela since 2018.

[ 78 ] In 2009, Zimbabwe abandoned its local currency and introduced major global convertible currencies instead, including the euro and the United States dollar. The direct usage of the euro outside of the official framework of the EU affects nearly 3 million people.

[ 79 ] Currencies pegged to the euro [ edit ] Main article: International status and usage of the euro Worldwide use of the euro and the US dollar: Eurozone External adopters of the euro Currencies pegged to the euro Currencies pegged to the euro within narrow band United States External adopters of the US dollar Currencies pegged to the US dollar Currencies pegged to the US dollar within narrow band Note: The Belarusian rouble is pegged to the euro, Russian ruble and US dollar in a currency basket .

Outside the eurozone, two EU member states have currencies that are pegged to the euro , which is a precondition to joining the eurozone. The Danish krone and Bulgarian lev are pegged due to their participation in the ERM II .

Additionally, a total of 22 countries and territories that do not belong to the EU have currencies that are directly pegged to the euro including 14 countries in mainland Africa ( CFA franc ), three African island countries ( Comorian franc , Cape Verdean escudo and São Tomé and Príncipe dobra (since 1 January 2010) [ 80 ] ), three French Pacific territories ( CFP franc ) and two Balkan countries, Bosnia and Herzegovina ( Bosnia and Herzegovina convertible mark ) and North Macedonia ( Macedonian denar ).

[ 81 ] Additionally, the Moroccan dirham is tied to a basket of currencies, including the euro and the US dollar, with the euro given the highest weighting.

These countries generally had previously implemented a currency peg to one of the major European currencies (e.g. the French franc , Deutsche Mark or Portuguese escudo ), and when these currencies were replaced by the euro their currencies became pegged to the euro. Pegging a country's currency to a major currency is regarded as a safety measure, especially for currencies of areas with weak economies, as the euro is seen as a stable currency, prevents runaway inflation, and encourages foreign investment due to its stability.

In total, as of 2013 [update] , 182 million people in Africa use a currency pegged to the euro, 27 million people outside the eurozone in Europe, and another 545,000 people on Pacific islands.

[ 74 ] Since 2005, stamps issued by the Sovereign Military Order of Malta have been denominated in euros, although the Order's official currency remains the Maltese scudo .

[ 82 ] The Maltese scudo itself is pegged to the euro and is only recognised as legal tender within the Order.

The currency of a number of states is pegged to the euro. These states are: [ citation needed ] Europe Bosnia and Herzegovina ( Bosnia and Herzegovina convertible mark , BAM) Bulgaria ( Bulgarian lev , BGN) Denmark ( Danish krone , DKK) North Macedonia ( Macedonian denar , MKD) [ 81 ] Sovereign Military Order of Malta ( Maltese scudo ) [ 83 ] Oceania French Polynesia ( CFP franc , XPF) New Caledonia (CFP franc) Wallis and Futuna (CFP franc) Africa Cape Verde ( Cape Verdean escudo , CVE) Cameroon ( Central African CFA franc , XAF) Central African Republic (Central African CFA franc) Chad (Central African CFA franc) Equatorial Guinea (Central African CFA franc) Gabon (Central African CFA franc) Congo (Central African CFA franc) Comoros ( Comorian franc , KMF) São Tomé and Príncipe ( São Tomé and Príncipe dobra , STN) Benin ( West African CFA franc , XOF) Burkina Faso (West African CFA franc) Ivory Coast (West African CFA franc) Guinea-Bissau (West African CFA franc) Mali (West African CFA franc) Niger (West African CFA franc) Senegal (West African CFA franc) Togo (West African CFA franc) Use as reserve currency [ edit ] Since its introduction in 1999, the euro has been the second most widely held international reserve currency after the U.S. dollar. The share of the euro as a reserve currency increased from 18% in 1999 to 27% in 2008. Over this period, the share held in U.S. dollar fell from 71% to 64% and that held in RMB fell from 6.4% to 3.3%. The euro inherited and built on the status of the Deutsche Mark as the second most important reserve currency. The euro remains underweight as a reserve currency in advanced economies while overweight in emerging and developing economies: according to the International Monetary Fund [ 84 ] the total of euro held as a reserve in the world at the end of 2008 was equal to $1.1 trillion or €850 billion, with a share of 22% of all currency reserves in advanced economies, but a total of 31% of all currency reserves in emerging and developing economies.

The possibility of the euro becoming the first international reserve currency has been debated among economists.

[ 85 ] Former Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan gave his opinion in September 2007 that it was "absolutely conceivable that the euro will replace the US dollar as reserve currency, or will be traded as an equally important reserve currency".

[ 86 ] In contrast to Greenspan's 2007 assessment, the euro's increase in the share of the worldwide currency reserve basket has slowed considerably since 2007 and since the beginning of the Great Recession and Euro area crisis .

[ 84 ] Economics [ edit ] Euro Monetary policy Euro Zone inflation year/year M3 money supply increases Marginal Lending Facility Main Refinancing Operations Deposit Facility Rate Euribor Optimal currency area [ edit ] Further information: Optimum currency area In economics, an optimum currency area, or region (OCA or OCR), is a geographical region in which it would maximise economic efficiency to have the entire region share a single currency. There are two models, both proposed by Robert Mundell : the stationary expectations model and the international risk sharing model . Mundell himself advocates the international risk sharing model and thus concludes in favour of the euro.

[ 87 ] However, even before the creation of the single currency, there were concerns over diverging economies. Before the late-2000s recession it was considered unlikely that a state would leave the euro or the whole zone would collapse.

[ 88 ] However the Greek government-debt crisis led to former British Foreign Secretary Jack Straw claiming the eurozone could not last in its current form.

[ 89 ] Part of the problem seems to be the rules that were created when the euro was set up. John Lanchester, writing for The New Yorker , explains it: The guiding principle of the currency, which opened for business in 1999, were supposed to be a set of rules to limit a country's annual deficit to three per cent of gross domestic product, and the total accumulated debt to sixty per cent of G.D.P. It was a nice idea, but by 2004 the two biggest economies in the euro zone, Germany and France, had broken the rules for three years in a row.

[ 90 ] Increasing business cycle divergence across the Eurozone over the last decades implies a decreasing optimum currency area.

[ 91 ] Transaction costs and risks [ edit ] The most obvious benefit of adopting a single currency is to remove the cost of exchanging currency, theoretically allowing businesses and individuals to consummate previously unprofitable trades. For consumers, banks in the eurozone must charge the same for intra-member cross-border transactions as purely domestic transactions for electronic payments (e.g., credit cards , debit cards and cash machine withdrawals).

Financial markets on the continent are expected to be far more liquid and flexible than they were in the past. The reduction in cross-border transaction costs will allow larger banking firms to provide a wider array of banking services that can compete across and beyond the eurozone. However, although transaction costs were reduced, some studies have shown that risk aversion has increased during the last 40 years in the Eurozone.

[ 92 ] Price parity [ edit ] Another effect of the common European currency is that differences in prices—in particular in price levels—should decrease because of the law of one price . Differences in prices can trigger arbitrage , i.e., speculative trade in a commodity across borders purely to exploit the price differential. Therefore, prices on commonly traded goods are likely to converge, causing inflation in some regions and deflation in others during the transition. Some evidence of this has been observed in specific eurozone markets.

[ 93 ] Macroeconomic stability [ edit ] Before the introduction of the euro, some countries had successfully contained inflation, which was then seen as a major economic problem, by establishing largely independent central banks. One such bank was the Bundesbank in Germany; the European Central Bank was modelled on the Bundesbank.

[ 94 ] The euro has come under criticism due to its regulation, lack of flexibility and rigidity towards sharing member states on issues such as nominal interest rates.

[ 95 ] Many national and corporate bonds denominated in euro are significantly more liquid and have lower interest rates than was historically the case when denominated in national currencies. While increased liquidity may lower the nominal interest rate on the bond, denominating the bond in a currency with low levels of inflation arguably plays a much larger role. A credible commitment to low levels of inflation and a stable debt reduces the risk that the value of the debt will be eroded by higher levels of inflation or default in the future, allowing debt to be issued at a lower nominal interest rate.

There is also a cost in structurally keeping inflation lower than in the United States, United Kingdom, and China. The result is that seen from those countries, the euro has become expensive, making European products increasingly expensive for its largest importers; hence export from the eurozone becomes more difficult.

In general, those in Europe who own large amounts of euro are served by high stability and low inflation.

A monetary union means states in that union lose the main mechanism of recovery of their international competitiveness by weakening ( depreciating ) their currency. When wages become too high compared to productivity in the exports sector, then these exports become more expensive and they are crowded out from the market within a country and abroad. This drives the fall of employment and output in the exports sector and fall of trade and current account balances. Fall of output and employment in the tradable goods sector may be offset by the growth of non-exports sectors, especially in construction and services . Increased purchases abroad and negative current account balances can be financed without a problem as long as credit is cheap.

[ 96 ] The need to finance trade deficit weakens currency, making exports automatically more attractive in a country and abroad. A state in a monetary union cannot use weakening of currency to recover its international competitiveness. To achieve this a state has to reduce prices, including wages ( deflation ). This could result in high unemployment and lower incomes as it was during the euro area crisis .

[ 97 ] Trade [ edit ] The euro increased price transparency and stimulated cross-border trade.

[ 98 ] A 2009 consensus from the studies of the introduction of the euro concluded that it has increased trade within the eurozone by 5% to 10%, [ 99 ] and a meta-analysis of all available studies on the effect of introduction of the euro on increased trade suggests that the prevalence of positive estimates is caused by publication bias and that the underlying effect may be negligible.

[ 100 ] Although a more recent meta-analysis shows that publication bias decreases over time and that there are positive trade effects from the introduction of the euro, as long as results from before 2010 are taken into account. This may be because of the inclusion of the 2008 financial crisis and ongoing integration within the EU.

[ 101 ] Furthermore, older studies based on certain methods of analysis of main trends  reflecting general cohesion policies in Europe that started before, and continue after implementing the common currency find no effect on trade.

[ 102 ] [ 103 ] These results suggest that other policies aimed at European integration might be the source of observed increase in trade. According to Barry Eichengreen, studies disagree on the magnitude of the effect of the euro on trade, but they agree that it did have an effect.

[ 98 ] Investment [ edit ] Physical investment seems to have increased by 5% in the eurozone due to the introduction.

[ 104 ] Regarding foreign direct investment, a study found that the intra-eurozone FDI stocks have increased by about 20% during the first four years of the EMU.

[ 105 ] Concerning the effect on corporate investment, there is evidence that the introduction of the euro has resulted in an increase in investment rates and that it has made it easier for firms to access financing in Europe. The euro has most specifically stimulated investment in companies that come from countries that previously had weak currencies. A study found that the introduction of the euro accounts for 22% of the investment rate after 1998 in countries that previously had a weak currency.

[ 106 ] Inflation [ edit ] Euro Zone inflation The introduction of the euro has led to extensive discussion about its possible effect on inflation. In the short term, there was a widespread impression in the population of the eurozone that the introduction of the euro had led to an increase in prices, but this impression was not confirmed by general indices of inflation and other studies.

[ 107 ] [ 108 ] A study of this paradox found that this was due to an asymmetric effect of the introduction of the euro on prices: while it had no effect on most goods, it had an effect on cheap goods which have seen their price round up after the introduction of the euro. The study found that consumers based their beliefs on inflation of those cheap goods which are frequently purchased.

[ 109 ] It has also been suggested that the jump in small prices may be because prior to the introduction, retailers made fewer upward adjustments and waited for the introduction of the euro to do so.

[ 110 ] Based on the introduction of the euro as the official currency in Croatia in 2023, the ECB argues that inflation due to a change of currency is a one-time effect of limited impact.

[ 111 ] Exchange rate risk [ edit ] One of the advantages of the adoption of a common currency is the reduction of the risk associated with changes in currency exchange rates.

[ 98 ] It has been found that the introduction of the euro created "significant reductions in market risk exposures for nonfinancial firms both in and outside Europe".

[ 112 ] These reductions in market risk "were concentrated in firms domiciled in the eurozone and in non-euro firms with a high fraction of foreign sales or assets in Europe".

Financial integration [ edit ] The introduction of the euro increased financial integration within Europe, which helped stimulate growth of a European securities market (bond markets are characterized by economies of scale dynamics).

[ 98 ] According to a study on this question, it has "significantly reshaped the European financial system, especially with respect to the securities markets [...] However, the real and policy barriers to integration in the retail and corporate banking sectors remain significant, even if the wholesale end of banking has been largely integrated." [ 113 ] Specifically, the euro has significantly decreased the cost of trade in bonds, equity, and banking assets within the eurozone.

[ 114 ] On a global level, there is evidence that the introduction of the euro has led to an integration in terms of investment in bond portfolios, with eurozone countries lending and borrowing more between each other than with other countries.

[ 115 ] Financial integration made it cheaper for European companies to borrow.

[ 98 ] Banks, firms and households could also invest more easily outside of their own country, thus creating greater international risk-sharing.

[ 98 ] Effect on interest rates [ edit ] Secondary market yields of government bonds with maturities of close to 10 years As of January 2014, and since the introduction of the euro, interest rates of most member countries (particularly those with a weak currency) have decreased. Some of these countries had the most serious sovereign financing problems.

The effect of declining interest rates, combined with excess liquidity continually provided by the ECB, made it easier for banks within the countries in which interest rates fell the most, and their linked sovereigns, to borrow significant amounts (above the 3% of GDP budget deficit imposed on the eurozone initially) and significantly inflate their public and private debt levels.

[ 116 ] Following the 2008 financial crisis , governments in these countries found it necessary to bail out or nationalise their privately held banks to prevent systemic failure of the banking system when underlying hard or financial asset values were found to be grossly inflated and sometimes so nearly worthless there was no liquid market for them.

[ 117 ] This further increased the already high levels of public debt to a level the markets began to consider unsustainable, via increasing government bond interest rates, leading to the euro area crisis .

Price convergence [ edit ] The evidence on the convergence of prices in the eurozone with the introduction of the euro is mixed. Several studies failed to find any evidence of convergence following the introduction of the euro after a phase of convergence in the early 1990s.

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] Other studies have found evidence of price convergence, [ 120 ] [ 121 ] in particular for cars.

[ 122 ] A possible reason for the divergence between the different studies is that the processes of convergence may not have been linear, slowing down substantially between 2000 and 2003, and resurfacing after 2003 as suggested by a recent study (2009).

[ 123 ] Tourism [ edit ] A study suggests that the introduction of the euro has had a positive effect on the amount of tourist travel within the EMU, with an increase of 6.5%.

[ 124 ] Exchange rates [ edit ] Flexible exchange rates [ edit ] The ECB targets interest rates rather than exchange rates and in general, does not intervene on the foreign exchange rate markets. This is because of the implications of the Mundell–Fleming model , which implies a central bank cannot (without capital controls ) maintain interest rate and exchange rate targets simultaneously, because increasing the money supply results in a depreciation of the currency. In the years following the Single European Act , the EU has liberalised its capital markets and, as the ECB has inflation targeting as its monetary policy , the exchange-rate regime of the euro is floating .

Against other major currencies [ edit ] The euro is the second-most widely held reserve currency after the U.S. dollar. After its introduction on 4 January 1999 its exchange rate against the other major currencies fell reaching its lowest exchange rates in 2000 (3 May vs sterling , 25 October vs the U.S. dollar , 26 October vs Japanese yen ). Afterwards it regained and its exchange rate reached its historical highest point in 2008 (15 July vs US dollar, 23 July vs Japanese yen, 29 December vs sterling). With the onset of the 2008 financial crisis , the euro initially fell, to regain later. Despite pressure due to the euro area crisis , the euro remained stable.

[ 125 ] In November 2011 the euro's exchange rate index – measured against currencies of the bloc's major trading partners – was trading almost two percent higher on the year, approximately at the same level as it was before the crisis began in 2007.

[ 126 ] In mid July 2022, the euro and the US dollar traded at par for a short period of time during an episode of dollar appreciation .

[ 20 ] On 11 July 2024, it recorded a new high against the Japanese yen during a long period of depreciation of the latter.

[ 127 ] [ 128 ] [ 129 ] Euro exchange rate against US dollar (USD), sterling (GBP) and Japanese yen (JPY), starting from 1999.

Current and historical exchange rates against 32 other currencies (European Central Bank): link Current EUR exchange rates From Google Finance : AUD CAD CHF CNY GBP HKD JPY USD SEK PLN From Yahoo! Finance : AUD CAD CHF CNY GBP HKD JPY USD SEK PLN From XE.com : AUD CAD CHF CNY GBP HKD JPY USD SEK PLN From OANDA: AUD CAD CHF CNY GBP HKD JPY USD SEK PLN Political considerations [ edit ] Besides the economic motivations to the introduction of the euro, its creation was also partly justified as a way to foster a closer sense of joint identity between European citizens. Statements about this goal were for instance made by Wim Duisenberg , European Central Bank Governor, in 1998, [ 130 ] Laurent Fabius , French Finance Minister, in 2000, [ 131 ] and Romano Prodi , President of the European Commission, in 2002.

[ 132 ] However, 15 years after the introduction of the euro, a study found no evidence that it has had any effect on a shared sense of European identity.

[ 133 ] Public support for the euro by EU member state, according to a Eurobarometer opinion poll in 2024: [ 134 ] Eurozone [ edit ] Country For % Against % Austria 66 27 Belgium 82 15 Croatia 71 24 Cyprus 80 16 Estonia 90 8 Finland 7 France 74 20 Germany 81 14 Greece 80 16 Ireland 88 7 Italy 70 23 Latvia 85 8 Lithuania 78 15 Luxembourg 90 8 Malta 89 Netherlands 84 13 Portugal 81 13 Slovakia 86 8 Slovenia 92 7 Spain 83 11 Countries not using the euro [ edit ] Country For % Against % Bulgaria 37 47 Czech Republic 30 62 Denmark 34 58 Hungary 65 28 Poland 36 51 Romania 54 37 Sweden 37 56 Euro in various official EU languages [ edit ] Main article: Language and the euro The formal titles of the currency are euro for the major unit and cent for the minor (one-hundredth) unit and for official use in most eurozone languages; according to the ECB, all languages should use the same spelling for the nominative singular.

[ 135 ] This may contradict normal rules for word formation in some languages.

Bulgaria has negotiated an exception; euro in the Bulgarian Cyrillic alphabet is spelled eвро ( evro ) and not eуро ( euro ) in all official documents.

[ 136 ] In the Greek script the term ευρώ ( evró ) is used; the Greek "cent" coins are denominated in λεπτό/ά ( leptó/á ). Official practice for English-language EU legislation is to use the words euro and cent as both singular and plural, [ 137 ] although the European Commission's Directorate-General for Translation states that the plural forms euros and cents should be used in English.

[ 138 ] The word "euro" is pronounced differently according to pronunciation rules in the individual languages applied; in German [ˈɔʏʁo] , in English / ˈ ɪ u r oʊ / , in French [øʁo] , etc.

In summary: Language(s) Name IPA In most EU languages euro Croatian: [ěuro] , Czech: [ˈɛuro] , Danish: [ˈœwʁo] , Dutch: [ˈøːroː] , Estonian: [ˈeu̯ro] , Finnish: [ˈeu̯ro] , French: [øʁo] , Italian: [ˈɛuro] , Polish: [ˈɛwrɔ] , Portuguese: [ˈewɾɔ] or [ˈewɾu] , Slovak: [ˈewrɔ] , Spanish: [ˈewɾo] Bulgarian евро evro Bulgarian: [ˈɛvro] German Euro [ˈɔʏʁo] Greek ευρώ evró [eˈvro] Hungarian euró [ˈɛuroː] or [ˈɛu̯roː] Latvian euro or eiro [ɛìro] Lithuanian euras [ˈɛʊrɐs] Maltese ewro [ˈɛʊ̯rɔ] Slovene evro [ˈéːʋrɔ] For local phonetics, cent, use of plural and amount formatting (€6,00 or 6.00 €), see Language and the euro .

See also [ edit ] European Union portal Europe portal Captain Euro , The Raspberry Ice Cream War Causes of the euro area crisis Currency union Digital euro Economic and Monetary Union of the European Union Euro area crisis European integration History of the European Union List of acronyms associated with the eurozone crisis List of circulating currencies List of currencies in Europe Proposed long-term solutions for the eurozone crisis Withdrawal from the eurozone Notes [ edit ] ^ Official documents and legislation refer to the euro as "the single currency".

[ 1 ] ^ Northern Cyprus , where the government of the Republic of Cyprus does not exercise effective control, uses the Turkish lira .

^ Including outermost regions of French Guiana , Guadeloupe , Martinique , Mayotte , Réunion , Saint Barthélemy , Saint Martin , and Saint Pierre and Miquelon .

^ Only the European part of the country is part of the European Union and uses the euro. The Caribbean Netherlands introduced the United States dollar in 2011 following the dissolution of the Netherlands Antilles (which used the Netherlands Antillean guilder ).

Curaçao , Sint Maarten and Aruba have their own currencies, which are pegged to the dollar.

^ See Montenegro and the euro .

^ by means of Council Regulation 2866/98 (EC) of 31 December 1998.

^ by Council Regulation 1478/2000 (EC) of 19 June 2000.

References [ edit ] ^ "Council Regulation (EC) No 1103/97 of 17 June 1997 on certain provisions relating to the introduction of the euro" .

Official Journal L 162, 19 June 1997 P. 0001 – 0003 . European Communities. 19 June 1997 . Retrieved 1 April 2009 .

^ a b "ECB Statistical Data Warehouse, Reports>ECB/Eurosystem policy>Banknotes and coins statistics>1.Euro banknotes>1.1 Quantities" . European Central Bank.

^ Walsh, Alistair (29 May 2017).

"Italy to stop producing 1- and 2-cent coins" .

Deutsche Welle . Retrieved 4 November 2019 .

^ "Po 1. júli 2022 budú končiť na Slovensku jedno a dvojcentové mince" [One and two cent coins will end in Slovakia after 1 July  2022].

bystricoviny.sk (in Slovak). 29 May 2017 . Retrieved 17 December 2023 .

^ "Euro kasutusele võtmise ja eurodes tehtavate sularahamaksete arveldamise seadus–Riigi Teataja" [Act on the Introduction of the Euro and Settlement of Cash Payments in Euros–Riigi Teataja].

www.riigiteataja.ee (in Estonian) . Retrieved 29 December 2024 .

^ "Paverskite smulkias monetas istorijos dalimi: proginė moneta, skirta gynybai, laukia Jūsų!" .

Bank of Lithuania (in Lithuanian). 11 April 2025 . Retrieved 1 May 2025 .

^ "Inflation and consumer prices" .

^ "The euro" .

European Commission website . Retrieved 2 January 2019 .

^ a b "What is the euro area?" .

European Commission website . Retrieved 2 January 2019 .

^ "Population on 1 January" .

Eurostat .

^ "IMF Data – Currency Composition of Official Foreign Exchange Reserve – At a Glance" . International Monetary Fund. 23 December 2022 . Retrieved 11 January 2023 .

^ "Foreign exchange turnover in April 2013: preliminary global results" (PDF) . Bank for International Settlements . Retrieved 7 February 2015 .

^ "Triennial Central Bank Survey 2007" (PDF) . BIS. 19 December 2007 . Retrieved 25 July 2009 .

^ Aristovnik, Aleksander; Čeč, Tanja (30 March 2010).

"Compositional Analysis of Foreign Currency Reserves in the 1999–2007 Period. The Euro vs. The Dollar As Leading Reserve Currency" (PDF) . Munich Personal RePEc Archive, Paper No. 14350 . Retrieved 27 December 2010 .

^ Boesler, Matthew (11 November 2013).

"There Are Only Two Real Threats to the US Dollar's Status As The International Reserve Currency" .

Business Insider . Retrieved 8 December 2013 .

^ "1.2 Euro banknotes, values" . European Central Bank Statistical Data Warehouse. 14 January 2020 . Retrieved 23 January 2020 .

^ "2.2 Euro coins, values" . European Central Bank Statistical Data Warehouse. 14 January 2020 . Retrieved 23 January 2020 .

^ a b "Madrid European Council (12/95): Conclusions" . European Parliament . Retrieved 14 February 2009 .

^ "Initial changeover (2002)" . European Central Bank . Retrieved 5 March 2011 .

^ a b "Euro Falls Near Parity With Dollar, a Threshold Watched Closely by Investors" .

The New York Times . 12 July 2022.

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 13 July 2022 .

^ "Euro fällt zum US-Dollar auf 20-Jahrestief" .

Der Spiegel (in German). 23 September 2022.

ISSN 2195-1349 . Retrieved 10 July 2024 .

^ "Euro (EUR) To US Dollar (USD) Exchange Rate History for 2022" .

www.exchange-rates.org . Retrieved 10 July 2024 .

^ "The Euro" . European Commission . Retrieved 29 January 2009 .

^ Nice, Treaty of.

"Treaty of Nice" .

About Parliament . European Parliament . Retrieved 7 May 2021 .

^ "By agreement of the EU Council" . Retrieved 30 May 2010 .

^ "Monetary Agreement between the European Union and the Principality of Andorra" .

Official Journal of the European Union . 17 December 2011. Archived from the original on 10 May 2013 . Retrieved 8 September 2012 .

^ "By monetary agreement between France (acting for the EC) and Monaco" . Retrieved 30 May 2010 .

^ "By monetary agreement between Italy (acting for the EC) and San Marino" . Retrieved 30 May 2010 .

^ "By monetary agreement between Italy (acting for the EC) and Vatican City" . Retrieved 30 May 2010 .

^ Theodoulou, Michael (27 December 2007).

"Euro reaches field that is for ever England" .

The Times . Archived from the original on 10 May 2011 . Retrieved 4 January 2008 .

^ "By UNMIK administration direction 1999/2" . Unmikonline.org. Archived from the original on 7 June 2011 . Retrieved 30 May 2010 .

^ "Bulgaria ready to use the euro from 1 January 2026: Council takes final steps" .

European Council . Retrieved 8 July 2025 .

^ Parliament of the United Kingdom (12 March 1998).

"Volume: 587, Part: 120 (12 Mar 1998: Column 391, Baroness Williams of Crosby)" .

House of Lords Hansard . Retrieved 13 October 2007 .

^ "How to use the euro name and symbol" . European Commission . Retrieved 7 April 2010 .

^ European Commission.

"Spelling of the words "euro" and "cent" in official Community languages as used in Community Legislative acts" (PDF) . Retrieved 26 November 2008 .

^ European Commission Directorate-General for Translation.

"English Style Guide: A handbook for authors and translators in the European Commission" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 December 2010 . Retrieved 16 November 2008 .

; European Union.

"Interinstitutional style guide, 7.3.3. Rules for expressing monetary units" . Retrieved 16 November 2008 .

^ "Common sides of euro coins" .

Europa . European Commission . Retrieved 30 December 2023 .

^ "Ireland to round to nearest 5 cents starting October 28" . 27 October 2015. Archived from the original on 6 March 2016 . Retrieved 17 December 2018 .

^ "Rounding" .

Central Bank of Ireland .

^ European Commission (January 2007).

"Euro cash: five and familiar" .

Europa . Retrieved 26 January 2009 .

^ Pop, Valentina (22 March 2010) "Commission frowns on shop signs that say: '€500 notes not accepted ' " , EU Observer ^ European Commission (15 February 2003).

"Commission communication: The introduction of euro banknotes and coins one year after COM(2002) 747" . Europa (web portal) . Retrieved 26 January 2009 .

^ "Robert Kalina, designer of the euro banknotes, at work at the Oesterreichische Nationalbank in Vienna" . European Central Bank . Retrieved 30 May 2010 .

^ Schmid, John (3 August 2001).

"Etching the Notes of a New European Identity" .

International Herald Tribune . Retrieved 29 May 2009 .

^ a b "Banknotes" .

European Central Bank . Retrieved 10 May 2020 .

^ "ECB to redesign euro banknotes by 2024" .

European Central Bank . 6 December 2021 . Retrieved 7 December 2021 .

^ a b c Scheller, Hanspeter K. (2006).

The European Central Bank: History, Role and Functions (PDF) (2nd ed.). European Central Bank. p. 103.

ISBN 978-92-899-0027-0 .

Since 1 January 2002, the NCBs and the ECB have issued euro banknotes on a joint basis.

^ "Capital Subscription" . European Central Bank . Retrieved 18 December 2011 .

The NCBs' shares in this capital are calculated using a key which reflects the respective country's share in the total population and gross domestic product of the EU – in equal weightings. The ECB adjusts the shares every five years and whenever a new country joins the EU. The adjustment is done on the basis of data provided by the European Commission.

^ "Denominations Europa series €5" . European Central Bank. 13 September 2018 . Retrieved 17 June 2019 .

^ "Denominations Europa series €10" . European Central Bank. 13 September 2018 . Retrieved 17 June 2019 .

^ "Denominations Europa series €20" . European Central Bank. 13 September 2018 . Retrieved 17 June 2019 .

^ "Denominations Europa series €50" . European Central Bank. 13 September 2018 . Retrieved 17 June 2019 .

^ "Denominations Europa series €100" . European Central Bank. 13 September 2018 . Retrieved 17 June 2019 .

^ "Denominations Europa series €200" . European Central Bank. 13 September 2018 . Retrieved 17 June 2019 .

^ "Regulation (EC) No 2560/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 December 2001 on cross-border payments in euro" . EUR-lex – European Communities, Publications office, Official Journal L 344, 28 December 2001 P. 0013 – 0016 . Retrieved 26 December 2008 .

^ "Cross border payments in the EU, Euro Information, The Official Treasury Euro Resource" . United Kingdom Treasury. Archived from the original on 1 December 2008 . Retrieved 26 December 2008 .

^ European Central Bank.

"TARGET" . Archived from the original on 21 January 2008 . Retrieved 25 October 2007 .

^ "Use of the euro" .

European Central Bank . Retrieved 15 August 2020 .

^ "Germain Pirlot 'uitvinder' van de euro" (in Dutch). De Zeewacht. 16 February 2007. Archived from the original on 30 June 2013 . Retrieved 21 May 2012 .

^ "The euro, our currency | A symbol for the European currency" (PDF) . European Commission. 18 March 2009 . Retrieved 8 April 2023 .

^ a b Directorate-General for Communication.

"Institutions, law, budget | The Euro | Design" . European Union . Retrieved 8 April 2022 .

^ "Position of the ISO code or euro sign in amounts" .

Interinstitutional style guide . Bruxelles, Belgium: Europa Publications Office. 5 February 2009 . Retrieved 10 January 2010 .

^ George Matlock (16 February 2010).

"Peripheral euro zone government bond spreads widen" .

Reuters . Retrieved 28 April 2010 .

^ "Acropolis now" .

The Economist . 29 April 2010 . Retrieved 22 June 2011 .

^ European Debt Crisis Fast Facts , CNN Library (last updated 22 January 2017).

^ Ricardo Reis , Looking for a Success in the Euro Crisis Adjustment Programs: The Case of Portugal , Brookings Papers on Economic Activity , Brookings Institution (Fall 2015), p. 433.

^ "Efsf, come funziona il fondo salvastati europeo" . 4 November 2011.

^ "The politics of the Maastricht convergence criteria" . VoxEU. 15 April 2009 . Retrieved 1 October 2011 .

^ "State of the Union: Can the euro zone survive its debt crisis?" (PDF) .

Economist Intelligence Unit . 1 March 2011. p. 4 . Retrieved 1 December 2011 .

^ "S&P downgrades euro zone's EFSF bailout fund" .

Reuters . 16 January 2017 . Retrieved 21 January 2017 .

^ Delamaide, Darrell (24 July 2012).

"Euro crisis brings world to brink of depression" .

MarketWatch . Retrieved 24 July 2012 .

^ Lindner, Fabian, " Germany would do well to heed the Moody's warning shot ", The Guardian , 24 July 2012. Retrieved 25 July 2012.

^ Buergin, Rainer, " Germany, Juncker Push Back After Moody's Rating Outlook Cuts Archived 28 July 2012 at the Wayback Machine ", washpost.bloomberg , 24 July 2012. Retrieved 25 July 2012.

^ a b Population Reference Bureau .

"2013 World Population Data Sheet" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 February 2015 . Retrieved 1 October 2013 .

^ "Sovereign Base areas of Akrotiri and Dhekelia on Cyprus" .

Commonwealth Chamber of Commerce .

^ "Cuba to adopt euro in foreign trade" .

BBC News . 8 November 1998 . Retrieved 2 January 2008 .

^ "US row leads Syria to snub dollar" .

BBC News . 14 February 2006 . Retrieved 2 January 2008 .

^ Rosati, Andrew; Zerpa, Fabiola (17 October 2018).

"Dollars Are Out, Euros Are in as U.S. Sanctions Sting Venezuela" .

Bloomberg . Retrieved 17 June 2019 .

^ "Zimbabwe: A Critical Review of Sterp" . 17 April 2009 . Retrieved 30 April 2009 .

^ "1 euro equivale a 24.500 dobras" [1 euro is equivalent to 24,500 dobras] (in Portuguese). Téla Nón. 4 January 2009 . Retrieved 16 November 2020 .

^ a b Cardoso, Paulo.

"Interview – Governor of the National Bank of Macedonia – Dimitar Bogov" .

The American Times United States Emerging Economies Report (USEER Report) . Hazlehurst Media SA. Archived from the original on 20 October 2013 . Retrieved 8 September 2013 .

^ "Retrieved 3 October 2017" .

^ "Numismatica" .

Ordine di Malta Italia . Retrieved 30 April 2022 .

^ a b "Currency Composition of Official Foreign Exchange Reserves (COFER) – Updated COFER tables include first quarter 2009 data. June 30, 2009" (PDF) . Retrieved 8 July 2009 .

^ "Will the Euro Eventually Surpass the Dollar As Leading International Reserve Currency?" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 August 2013 . Retrieved 17 July 2011 .

^ "Euro could replace dollar as top currency – Greenspan" .

Reuters . 17 September 2007 . Retrieved 17 September 2007 .

^ Mundell, Robert (1970) [published 1973]. "A Plan for a European Currency". In Johnson, H. G.; Swoboda, A. K. (eds.).

The Economics of Common Currencies –  Proceedings of Conference on Optimum Currency Areas. 1970. Madrid . London: Allen and Unwin. pp.

143– 172.

ISBN 9780043320495 .

^ Eichengreen, Barry (14 September 2007). "The Breakup of the Euro Area by Barry Eichengreen".

NBER Working Paper (w13393).

SSRN 1014341 .

^ "Greek debt crisis: Straw says eurozone 'will collapse' " .

BBC News . 20 June 2011 . Retrieved 17 July 2011 .

^ John Lanchester, "Euro Science", The New Yorker , 10 October 2011.

^ Beck, Krzysztof; Okhrimenko, Iana (2024).

"Optimum Currency Area in the Eurozone" .

Open Economies Review .

doi : 10.1007/s11079-024-09750-z .

ISSN 0923-7992 .

^ Benchimol, J., 2014.

Risk aversion in the Eurozone , Research in Economics , vol. 68, issue 1, pp. 40–56.

^ Goldberg, Pinelopi K.; Verboven, Frank (2005). "Market Integration and Convergence to the Law of One Price: Evidence from the European Car Market".

Journal of International Economics .

65 (1): 49– 73.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.494.1517 .

doi : 10.1016/j.jinteco.2003.12.002 .

S2CID 26850030 .

^ de Haan, Jakob (2000).

The History of the Bundesbank: Lessons for the European Central Bank . London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-21723-1 .

^ Silvia, Steven J (2004). "Is the Euro Working? The Euro and European Labour Markets".

Journal of Public Policy .

24 (2): 147– 168.

doi : 10.1017/s0143814x0400008x .

JSTOR 4007858 .

S2CID 152633940 .

^ Ernest Pytlarczyk, Stefan Kawalec (June 2012).

"Controlled Dismantlement of the Euro Area in Order to Preserve the European Union and Single European Market" . CASE Center for Social and Economic Research. p. 11 . Retrieved 19 December 2018 .

^ Martin Feldstein (January–February 2012).

"The Failure of the Euro" .

Foreign Affairs . Chapter: Trading Places.

^ a b c d e f Eichengreen, Barry (2019).

Globalizing Capital: A History of the International Monetary System (3rd ed.). Princeton University Press. pp.

212– 213.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctvd58rxg .

ISBN 978-0-691-19390-8 .

JSTOR j.ctvd58rxg .

S2CID 240840930 .

^ "The euro's trade effects" (PDF) . Retrieved 2 October 2009 .

^ Havránek, Tomáš (2010).

"Rose effect and the euro: is the magic gone?" (PDF) .

Review of World Economics .

146 (2): 241– 261.

doi : 10.1007/s10290-010-0050-1 .

S2CID 53585674 .

^ Polák, Petr (2019).

"The Euro's Trade Effect: A Meta-Analysis" (PDF) .

Journal of Economic Surveys .

33 (1): 101– 124.

doi : 10.1111/joes.12264 .

hdl : 10419/174189 .

ISSN 1467-6419 .

S2CID 157693449 .

^ Gomes, Tamara; Graham, Chris; Helliwel, John; Takashi, Kano; Murray, John; Schembri, Lawrence (August 2006).

"The Euro and Trade: Is there a Positive Effect?" (PDF) . Bank of Canada. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 September 2015.

^ H., Berger; V., Nitsch (2008).

"Zooming out: The trade effect of the euro in historical perspective" (PDF) .

Journal of International Money and Finance .

27 (8): 1244– 1260.

doi : 10.1016/j.jimonfin.2008.07.005 .

hdl : 10419/18799 .

S2CID 53493723 .

^ "The Impact of the Euro on Investment: Sectoral Evidence" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 31 August 2013 . Retrieved 2 October 2009 .

^ "Does the single currency affect FDI?" (PDF) . AFSE.fr. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 December 2006 . Retrieved 30 May 2010 .

^ "The Real Effects of the Euro: Evidence from Corporate Investments" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 July 2011 . Retrieved 30 May 2010 .

^ Paolo Angelini; Francesco Lippi (December 2007).

"Did Prices Really Soar after the Euro Cash Changeover? Evidence from ATM Withdrawals" (PDF) .

International Journal of Central Banking . Retrieved 23 August 2011 .

^ Irmtraud Beuerlein.

"Fünf Jahre nach der Euro-Bargeldeinführung –War der Euro wirklich ein Teuro?" [Five years after the introduction of euro cash – Did the euro really make things more expensive?] (PDF) (in German). Statistisches Bundesamt, Wiesbaden . Retrieved 23 August 2011 .

^ Dziuda, Wioletta; Mastrobuoni, Giovanni (2009).

"The Euro Changeover and Its Effects on Price Transparency and Inflation" .

Journal of Money, Credit and Banking .

41 (1): 101– 129.

doi : 10.1111/j.1538-4616.2008.00189.x . Archived from the original on 11 October 2017 . Retrieved 12 November 2010 .

^ Hobijn, Bart; Ravenna, Federico; Tambalotti, Andrea (2006).

"Quarterly Journal of Economics – Abstract" (PDF) .

Quarterly Journal of Economics .

121 (3): 1103– 1131.

doi : 10.1162/qjec.121.3.1103 .

^ Falagiarda, Matteo; Gartner, Christine; Mužić, Ivan; Pufnik, Andreja (7 March 2023).

"Has the euro changeover really caused extra inflation in Croatia" .

ECB . Retrieved 5 May 2024 .

^ Bartram, Söhnke M.; Karolyi, G. Andrew (2006). "The impact of the introduction of the Euro on foreign exchange rate risk exposures".

Journal of Empirical Finance .

13 ( 4– 5): 519– 549.

doi : 10.1016/j.jempfin.2006.01.002 .

^ "The Euro and Financial Integration" (PDF) . May 2006 . Retrieved 2 October 2009 .

^ Coeurdacier, Nicolas; Martin, Philippe (2009).

"The geography of asset trade and the euro: Insiders and outsiders" (PDF) .

Journal of the Japanese and International Economies .

23 (2): 90– 113.

doi : 10.1016/j.jjie.2008.11.001 .

S2CID 55948853 .

^ Lane, Philip R. (June 2006).

"Global Bond Portfolios and EMU" .

International Journal of Central Banking .

2 (2): 1– 23.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.365.4579 .

^ "Redwood: The origins of the euro crisis" . Investmentweek.co.uk. 3 June 2011 . Retrieved 16 September 2011 .

^ "Farewell, Fair-Weather Euro | IP – Global-Edition" . Ip-global.org. Archived from the original on 17 March 2011 . Retrieved 16 September 2011 .

^ "Price setting and inflation dynamics: did EMU matter" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 July 2011 . Retrieved 13 March 2011 .

^ "Price convergence in the EMU? Evidence from micro data" (PDF) . Retrieved 2 October 2009 .

^ "One TV, One Price?" (PDF) . Retrieved 17 July 2011 .

^ "One Market, One Money, One Price?" (PDF) . Retrieved 17 July 2011 .

^ Gil-Pareja, Salvador, and Simón Sosvilla-Rivero, "Price Convergence in the European Car Market" , FEDEA, November 2005.

^ Fritsche, Ulrich; Lein, Sarah; Weber, Sebastian (April 2009).

"Do Prices in the EMU Converge (Non-linearly)?" (PDF) . University of Hamburg, Department Economics and Politics Discussion Papers, Macroeconomics and Finance Series. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 July 2011 . Retrieved 28 December 2010 .

^ Gil-Pareja, Salvador; Llorca-Vivero, Rafael; Martínez-Serrano, José (May 2007). "The Effect of EMU on Tourism".

Review of International Economics .

15 (2): 302– 312.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9396.2006.00620.x .

S2CID 154503069 .

SSRN 983231 .

^ Kirschbaum, Erik.

"Schaeuble says markets have confidence in euro" .

Reuters . Retrieved 28 March 2018 .

^ "Puzzle over euro's 'mysterious' stability" .

Reuters . 15 November 2011. Archived from the original on 30 December 2015.

^ 日本放送協会 (11 July 2024).

"円相場 対ユーロで最安値を更新 | NHK" .

NHKニュース . Retrieved 16 July 2024 .

^ "Weekly Pairs in Focus - July 7 (Charts)" .

DailyForex . 7 July 2024 . Retrieved 12 July 2024 .

^ "Japanese yen sinks to record low against euro" .

www.bastillepost.com . 1 July 2024 . Retrieved 1 July 2024 .

^ Global Finance After the Crisis . 2013.

The euro is far more than a medium of exchange. It is part of the identity of a people. It reflects what they have in common now and in the future.

^ "European identity".

Financial Times . 24 July 2000.

Thanks to the euro, our pockets will soon hold solid evidence of a European identity ^ Speech to the European Parliament . 16 January 2002.

The euro is becoming a key element in peoples sense of shared European identity and common destiny.

^ Franz Buscha (November 2017).

"Can a common currency foster a shared social identity across different nations? The case of the euro" (PDF) .

European Economic Review .

100 : 318– 336.

doi : 10.1016/j.euroecorev.2017.08.011 .

S2CID 102510742 .

^ European Commission. Directorate General for Communication. (2024).

Public opinion in the European Union: first results : report (Report). Publications Office of the European Union. p. 26.

doi : 10.2775/437940 .

^ "European Central Bank, Convergence Report" (PDF) . May 2007 . Retrieved 29 December 2008 .

The euro is the single currency of the member states that have adopted it. To make this singleness apparent, Community law requires a single spelling of the word euro in the nominative singular case in all community and national legislative provisions, taking into account the existence of different alphabets.

^ Elena Koinova (19 October 2007).

" "Evro" Dispute Over – Portuguese Foreign Minister – Bulgaria" .

The Sofia Echo . Archived from the original on 3 June 2011 . Retrieved 17 July 2011 .

^ European Commission. "Spelling of the words "euro" and "cent" in official community languages as used in community legislative acts" (PDF). Retrieved 12 January 2009.

^ For example, see "English Style Guide" (PDF) . European Commission Directorate-General for Translation. 29 June 2010. para.

20.8. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 December 2010.

The euro.

Like "pound", "dollar" or any other currency name in English, the word "euro" is written in lower case with no initial capital and, where appropriate, takes the plural "s" (as does "cent").

Further reading [ edit ] Bartram, Söhnke M.; Taylor, Stephen J.; Wang, Yaw-Huei (May 2007).

"The Euro and European Financial Market Dependence" (PDF) .

Journal of Banking and Finance .

51 (5): 1461– 1481.

doi : 10.1016/j.jbankfin.2006.07.014 .

SSRN 924333 .

Bartram, Söhnke M.; Karolyi, G. Andrew (October 2006). "The Impact of the Introduction of the Euro on Foreign Exchange Rate Risk Exposures".

Journal of Empirical Finance .

13 ( 4– 5): 519– 549.

doi : 10.1016/j.jempfin.2006.01.002 .

SSRN 299641 .

Baldwin, Richard; Wyplosz, Charles (2004).

The Economics of European Integration . New York: McGraw Hill.

ISBN 978-0-07-710394-1 .

Buti, Marco; Deroose, Servaas; Gaspar, Vitor; Nogueira Martins, João (2010).

The Euro . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-92-79-09842-0 .

Jordan, Helmuth (2010).

"Fehlschlag Euro" . Dorrance Publishing. Archived from the original on 16 September 2010 . Retrieved 28 January 2011 .

Simonazzi, A.; Vianello, F. (2001). "Financial Liberalization, the European Single Currency and the Problem of Unemployment". In Franzini, R.; Pizzuti, R.F. (eds.).

Globalization, Institutions and Social Cohesion . Springer.

ISBN 978-3-540-67741-3 .

External links [ edit ] Euro at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity European Union – Euro European Commission – Euro Area European Central Bank – Euro European Central Bank – Euro Exchange Rates v t e Euro topics General Economic and Monetary Union of the European Union Capital Markets Union European banking union Euro sign Eurozone Language Euro-Skulptur Administration European Central Bank ECB president European System of Central Banks Eurosystem Ecofin Eurogroup Euro summit Fiscal provisions Stability and Growth Pact European Stability Mechanism Euro Plus Pact Six pack European Fiscal Compact Economy Economy of Europe Economy of the European Union Eonia Euro calculator Euro interbank offered rate (Euribor) Single euro payments area (SEPA) European payments initiative (EPI) Euro Currency Index International status Proposed eurobonds International status and usage of the euro Reserve currency Petroeuro World currency Denominations Coins 1c 2c 5c 10c 20c 50c €1 €2 €2 commemorative coins Other commemorative coins Identifying marks Starter kits Europa coin programme Euro mint Banknotes €5 €10 €20 €50 €100 €200 €500 Coins by country with minting rights Eurozone Austria Belgium Croatia Cyprus Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Monetary agreement with EU Andorra Monaco San Marino Vatican City Adoption by country Non-EU territories using euro per agreement without minting rights Saint Barthélemy Saint Pierre and Miquelon French Southern and Antarctic Lands Akrotiri and Dhekelia Past adoption by country Croatia Latvia Lithuania Potential adoption by other countries Bulgaria Czech Republic Denmark Hungary Poland Romania Sweden Countries and territories using euro unilaterally Kosovo Montenegro Other extant EU currencies ERM II Bulgarian lev Danish krone Other Czech koruna Hungarian forint Polish złoty Romanian leu Swedish krona History General " Snake in the tunnel " European Monetary System I ECU II ERM III EMU European Monetary Cooperation Fund Delors Committee European Monetary Institute Enlargement Black Wednesday Euro area crisis Withdrawal Previous EU members and euro United Kingdom Preceding currencies European Currency Unit Austrian schilling Belgian franc Croatian kuna Cypriot pound Dutch guilder Estonian kroon Finnish markka French franc German Mark Greek drachma Irish pound Italian lira Latvian lats Lithuanian litas Luxembourg franc Maltese lira Monégasque franc Portuguese escudo Sammarinese lira Slovak koruna Slovenian tolar Spanish peseta Vatican lira Former fiscal provisions European Financial Stability Facility European Financial Stabilisation Mechanism Money portal European Union portal Numismatics portal Links to related articles v t e European Union articles History Timeline Ideas of European unity before 1948 Founders 1948–1957 1958–1972 1973–1993 1993–2004 Since 2004 Predecessors Defence policy Western Union (1948–1954) Western European Union (1954–2011) European Communities (1967–2009) International Authority for the Ruhr (1949–1951) European Coal and Steel Community (1951–2002) European Economic Community (1958–1993) European Community (1993–2009) European Atomic Energy Community (est. 1958) Central bank European Monetary Cooperation Fund (1973–1994) European Monetary Institute (1994–1998) Financial stability European Financial Stability Facility (2010– 2012 ) European Financial Stability Mechanism (2010– 2012 ) Enlargements 1954 1973 1981 1986 1990 1995 2004 2007 2013 Withdrawals 1962 1984 1985 2012 2020 Geography Geography Demographics External border Environmental issues Extreme points Geographic centre Institutional seats of the European Union Larger urban zones Member states Protected areas Regions (first-level NUTS) Special territories Statistics Bodies Institutions Legislature European Parliament President Vice-Presidents Secretariat Committees Elections Constituencies Political groups European political parties European political foundations Council of the European Union Presidency General Secretariat Eurogroup Executive European Council President Euro summit European Commission President Vice-Presidents Commissioners Directorates-General Judiciary Court of Justice of the European Union Court of Justice General Court Central bank European Central Bank President System of Central Banks Eurosystem Supreme audit institution European Court of Auditors Secretary-General Other international-law EU bodies European Atomic Energy Community EIB Group European Investment Bank European Investment Fund EIB Institute European University Institute European Stability Mechanism Unified Patent Court Independent offices European Ombudsman European Data Protection Supervisor Agencies Agencies of the European Union Advisory bodies European Committee of the Regions European Economic and Social Committee Military bodies Political and Security Committee European Union Military Committee European Union Military Staff Law Acquis Charter of Fundamental Rights Competition law Copyright law Directive Citizens' Rights Mechanism for Cooperation and Verification Official Journal Legislative procedure Citizens' Initiative Regulation LGBT rights Enhanced cooperation Treaties opt-outs Withdrawal Economy Budget Currencies Community preference Government procurement Eurozone Euro International status and usage Transport TRACECA Minimum wage Average wage Unemployment rate Health expense per person Politics Concepts European integration Eurosphere Intergovernmentalism Multi-speed Europe Neofunctionalism Optimum currency area Supranational union Euroscepticism Euromyths Federalisation Pro-Europeanism Budget accountability Censorship Democratic legitimacy Differentiated integration Privileged partnership Potential superpower status Policies Area of freedom, security and justice Migration and asylum policy Schengen Area European Judicial Network (criminal matters) European Judicial Network in civil and commercial matters Citizenship passports identity card ( list ) Driving licence Vehicle registration plates Common Foreign and Security Policy Common Security and Defence Policy Permanent Structured Cooperation Enlargement Policy Neighbourhood Policy Global Strategy Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) Eurozone European banking union European Banking Supervision Single Resolution Mechanism Capital Markets Union European System of Financial Supervision Single market Agricultural policy Cultural policies Customs Union Educational policies Energy policy Environmental policy European Green Deal Fisheries policy Healthcare Health Insurance Card Labour mobility Regional development European Structural and Investment Funds Space policy Sport policies VAT Area Foreign relations Neighbourhood Policy European Economic Area EEA Joint Committee Energy Community European Political Community European Common Aviation Area European Higher Education Area EU/ESA Framework Agreement EU/ESA Space Council European Peace Facility Economic Partnership Agreements European Union Association Agreement Stabilisation and Association Process Eastern Partnership Euronest Parliamentary Assembly EU Gateway Programme EU Strategy for the South Caucasus Northern Dimension Union for the Mediterranean Global Strategy Free trade agreements Enlargement Current agenda Statistics Culture Douzelage House of European History 2012 Nobel Peace Prize Laissez-passer Languages Media freedom Public holidays Religion Telephone numbers Symbols Lists Books on the subject Directives Largest cities by population within city limits National parties by affiliation Presidents of the institutions Terrorist incidents Urban areas Outline Category Portal v t e Currencies of Europe European Union Bulgarian lev Czech koruna Danish krone (pegged currency: Faroese króna ) Euro Hungarian forint Polish złoty Romanian leu Swedish krona Eastern Abkhazian apsar (unrecognised) Armenian dram Azerbaijani manat Belarusian ruble Georgian lari Kazakhstani tenge Moldovan leu Russian ruble Transnistrian ruble (unrecognised) Ukrainian hryvnia Southern Albanian lek Bosnia and Herzegovina convertible mark Macedonian denar Serbian dinar Turkish lira Western Sterling (pegged currencies: Gibraltar pound · Guernsey pound · Jersey pound · Manx pound ) Swiss franc Northern Icelandic króna Norwegian krone v t e Currencies of Africa North Algerian dinar Egyptian pound Euro Libyan dinar Mauritanian ouguiya Moroccan dirham Sahrawi peseta ( unrecognized ) Sudanese pound Tunisian dinar Central Angolan kwanza Burundian franc Central African CFA franc Congolese franc Rwandan franc East Comorian franc Djiboutian franc Eritrean nakfa Ethiopian birr Kenyan shilling Seychellois rupee Somali shilling Somaliland shilling ( unrecognized ) South Sudanese pound Tanzanian shilling Ugandan shilling South Botswana pula Sterling Euro Lesotho loti Malagasy ariary Malawian kwacha Mauritian rupee Mozambican metical Namibian dollar Saint Helena pound South African rand Swazi lilangeni Zambian kwacha Zimbabwean ZiG mosi-oa-Tunya West Cape Verdean escudo Euro Gambian dalasi Ghanaian cedi Guinean franc Liberian dollar Nigerian naira São Tomé and Príncipe dobra Sierra Leonean leone U.S. dollar West African CFA franc v t e Currencies of the Americas North Bermudian dollar Canadian dollar Danish krone Euro Mexican peso U.S. dollar Caribbean Aruban florin Bahamian dollar Barbadian dollar Caribbean guilder Cayman Islands dollar Cuban peso Dominican peso East Caribbean dollar Euro Haitian gourde Jamaican dollar Trinidad and Tobago dollar U.S. dollar Central Bitcoin Belize dollar Costa Rican colón Guatemalan quetzal Honduran lempira Nicaraguan córdoba Panamanian balboa U.S. dollar Salvadoran colón (non-circulating) South Argentine peso Bolivian boliviano Brazilian real Chilean peso Colombian peso Euro Ecuadorian centavo coins Falkland Islands pound Guyanese dollar Paraguayan guaraní Peruvian sol Sterling Surinamese dollar Uruguayan peso U.S. dollar Venezuelan bolívar v t e Currencies of Asia Central Kazakhstani tenge Kyrgyz som Tajikistani somoni Turkmen manat Uzbekistani sum East Renminbi (yuan) Hong Kong dollar Japanese yen North Korean won South Korean won Macanese pataca Mongolian tögrög New Taiwan dollar North Russian ruble South Afghan afghani Bangladeshi taka Bhutanese ngultrum Indian rupee Maldivian rufiyaa Nepalese rupee Pakistani rupee Pound sterling Sri Lankan rupee U.S. dollar Southeast Australian dollar Brunei dollar Cambodian riel Indonesian rupiah Lao kip Malaysian ringgit Myanmar kyat Philippine peso ( piso ) Singapore dollar Thai baht Timor-Leste centavo coins U.S. dollar Vietnamese đồng West Armenian dram Azerbaijani manat Bahraini dinar Egyptian pound Emirati dirham Euro Georgian lari Iranian rial Iraqi dinar Israeli new shekel Jordanian dinar Kuwaiti dinar Lebanese pound Omani rial Qatari riyal Saudi riyal Syrian pound Turkish lira Yemeni rial v t e Recipients of the Charlemagne Prize 1950–1975 1950 Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi 1951 Hendrik Brugmans 1952 Alcide De Gasperi 1953 Jean Monnet 1954 Konrad Adenauer 1955 1956 Winston Churchill 1957 Paul-Henri Spaak 1958 Robert Schuman 1959 George C. Marshall 1960 Joseph Bech 1961 Walter Hallstein 1962 1963 Edward Heath 1964 Antonio Segni 1965 1966 Jens Otto Krag 1967 Joseph Luns 1968 1969 European Commission 1970 François Seydoux de Clausonne 1971 1972 Roy Jenkins 1973 Salvador de Madariaga 1974 1975 1976–2000 1976 Leo Tindemans 1977 Walter Scheel 1978 Konstantinos Karamanlis 1979 Emilio Colombo 1980 1981 Simone Veil 1982 King Juan Carlos I 1983 1984 1985 1986 People of Luxembourg 1987 Henry Kissinger 1988 François Mitterrand / Helmut Kohl 1989 Brother Roger 1990 Gyula Horn 1991 Václav Havel 1992 Jacques Delors 1993 Felipe González 1994 Gro Harlem Brundtland 1995 Franz Vranitzky 1996 Queen Beatrix 1997 Roman Herzog 1998 Bronisław Geremek 1999 Tony Blair 2000 Bill Clinton 2001–present 2001 György Konrád 2002 Euro 2003 Valéry Giscard d'Estaing 2004 Pat Cox / Pope John Paul II 1 2005 Carlo Azeglio Ciampi 2006 Jean-Claude Juncker 2007 Javier Solana 2008 Angela Merkel 2009 Andrea Riccardi 2010 Donald Tusk 2011 Jean-Claude Trichet 2012 Wolfgang Schäuble 2013 Dalia Grybauskaitė 2014 Herman Van Rompuy 2015 Martin Schulz 2016 Pope Francis 2017 Timothy Garton Ash 2018 Emmanuel Macron 2019 António Guterres 2020 Klaus Iohannis 2022 Sviatlana Tsikhanouskaya , Maria Kalesnikava , Veronika Tsepkalo 2023 Volodymyr Zelensky , the Ukrainian people 2024 Pinchas Goldschmidt and the Jewish communities in Europe 2025 Ursula von der Leyen 1 Received extraordinary prize.

Portals : European Union Money Numismatics Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Euro&oldid=1306546090 " Categories : Currencies with ISO 4217 code Euro 1999 in economic history Currencies introduced in 1999 Currencies introduced in 2002 Currencies of South America Currencies of the Caribbean Currencies of Zimbabwe Currencies of Finland Currencies of Africa Circulating currencies Currencies of Asia Currencies of Europe Hidden categories: CS1 Slovak-language sources (sk) CS1 Estonian-language sources (et) CS1 Lithuanian-language sources (lt) CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Good articles Use British English from March 2013 Use dmy dates from March 2021 Pages using Infobox currency to check Articles containing potentially dated statements from December 2019 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing potentially dated statements from November 2022 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2023 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2013 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 Articles containing Bulgarian-language text Articles containing Greek-language text Pages with German IPA Pages with French IPA Pages with Croatian IPA Pages with Czech IPA Pages with Danish IPA Pages with Dutch IPA Pages with Estonian IPA Pages with Finnish IPA Pages with Italian IPA Pages with Polish IPA Pages with Portuguese IPA Pages with Slovak IPA Pages with Spanish IPA Pages with Bulgarian IPA Articles containing German-language text Pages with Greek IPA Articles containing Hungarian-language text Pages with Hungarian IPA Articles containing Latvian-language text Pages with Latvian IPA Articles containing Lithuanian-language text Pages with Lithuanian IPA Articles containing Maltese-language text Pages with Maltese IPA Articles containing Slovene-language text Pages with Slovene IPA Pages using Sister project links with default search This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 09:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Euro 209 languages Add topic

