Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Works Toggle Works subsection 2.1 Bhāṣya 2.2 Tattvabindu - theory of meaning 3 Bhamati school 4 Notes 5 References 6 Sources Toggle Sources subsection 6.1 Web-sources 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Vāchaspati Misra 13 languages বাংলা Català Deutsch Français हिन्दी ಕನ್ನಡ Bahasa Melayu नेपाली Polski संस्कृतम् Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски தமிழ் తెలుగు Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Vācaspati Miśra ) Indian Hindu philosopher Vāchaspati Miśra Personal life Born 9th/10th century CE [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Vachaspati Mishra Dih , Mithila (modern-day Bihar , India ) Died unknown, 9th/10th century CE [ 1 ] Spouse Bhamati Religious life Religion Hinduism Philosophy Advaita Vedanta , Hinduism Part of a series on Advaita Schools Classical Advaita Vedanta Bhāmatī Vivarana Shaivism/Tantra/Nath Kashmir Shaivism ( Pratyabhijna ) Nath ( Inchegeri Sampradaya ) New movements Neo-Advaita Concepts Classical Advaita vedanta Atman Brahman Avidya Ajativada Mahāvākyas Satchitananda Om Tat Tvam Asi Three Bodies Aham Cause and effect Kosha Neti neti Kashmir Shaivism Pratyabhijna so'ham Practices Guru Meditation Svādhyāya Sravana, manana, nididhyasana Jnana yoga Rāja yoga "Unfoldment of the middle" Self-enquiry Moksha Moksha Anubhava Turiya Jivanmukta Sahaja Texts Advaita Vedanta Prasthanatrayi ( Principal Upanishads , Brahma Sutras , Bhagavad Gita ) Advaita Bodha Deepika Dŗg-Dŗśya-Viveka Vedantasara of Sadananda Panchadasi Ashtavakra Gita Gaudapada Mandukya Karika Adi Shankara Upadesasahasri Attributed to Shankara Vivekachudamani Atma bodha Aparokshanubhuti Advaita-Yoga Yoga Vasistha Yoga Yajnavalkya Nath Avadhuta Gita Kashmir Shaivism Shiva Sutras of Vasugupta Pratyabhijnahridayam Neo-Vedanta Works by Vivekananda Inchegeri Sampradaya Dasbodh Teachers Classical Advaita Vedanta Gaudapada Adi Shankara Mandana Misra Sureśvara Vāchaspati Misra Padmapadacharya Amalananda Vidyaranya Bharathi Tirtha Advaita teachers Contemporary Swami Vivekananda Swami Rama Tirtha Swami Sivananda Swami Chinmayananda Swami Dayananda Swami Sarvapriyananda Shaivism/Tantra/Nath Gorakshanath Matsyendranath Neo-Advaita Ramana Maharshi Nisargadatta Maharaj H. W. L. Poonja Vijnanabhiksu Influences Sramanic movement Hinduism Vedas Upanishads Mimamsa Nyaya Samkhya Yoga Vedanta Buddhism Precanonical Buddhism Madhyamika Yogacara Buddha-nature Monasteries and Orders Classical Advaita Vedanta Dashanami Sampradaya Gaudapadacharya Math Sringeri Sharada Peetham Govardhana Pīṭhaṃ Dvāraka Pīṭhaṃ Jyotirmaṭha Pīṭhaṃ Modern Advaita Vedanta Divine Life Society Chinmaya Mission Arsha Vidya Gurukulam Neo-Vedanta Ramakrishna Mission Scholarship Academic Paul Deussen Daniel H. H. Ingalls Richard De Smet Eliot Deutsch Sengaku Mayeda Max Müller Hajime Nakamura Patrick Olivelle Anantanand Rambachan Arvind Sharma Non-academic David Godman Categories Advaita Advaita Vedanta Vishishtadvaita Vedanta Advaita Shaivism Kashmir Shaivism Inchegeri Sampradaya Nondualism Neo-Advaita teachers Hindu philosophy v t e Part of a series on Hindu philosophy Orthodox Samkhya Yoga Nyaya Vaisheshika Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Heterodox Charvaka Ājīvika Buddhism Jainism Ajñana Sub-schools Smartist Advaita Vaishnavite Bhedabheda Vishishtadvaita Dvaita Shuddhadvaita Achintya Bheda Abheda Svabhavika Bhedabheda Mahanubhava Ekasarana Dharma Akshar Purushottam Darshan Shaivite Shaiva Siddhanta Pratyabhijna Panchartika Pramanavada Shakti Vishishtadvaita Shiva Bhedabeda Shiva Advaita Neo-Vedanta Integral yoga Teachers ( Acharyas ) Nyaya Akṣapāda Gotama Jayanta Bhatta Raghunatha Siromani Mīmāṃsā Jaimini Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Prabhākara Advaita (Mayavada) Gaudapada Vāchaspati Misra Adi Shankara Vishishtadvaita Ramanuja Vedanta Desika Dvaita (Tattvavada) Madhvacharya Jayatirtha Vyasatirtha Shuddhadvaita Vallabha Achintya Bheda Abheda Chaitanya Mahaprabhu Svabhavika Bhedabheda Nimbarka Srinivasacharya Purushottam Keshav Kashmiri Harivyas devacharya Mahanubhava Chakradhara Ekasarana Dharma Sankardev Akshar Purushottam Darshan Swaminarayan Tantra Shakta Abhinavagupta Nigamananda Paramahansa Ramprasad Sen Bamakhepa Kamalakanta Bhattacharya Anandamayi Ma Neo-Vedanta Vivekananda Aurobindo Radhakrishnan Others Samkhya Kapila Yoga Patanjali Vaisheshika Kaṇāda , Prashastapada Secular Valluvar Major texts Śruti Smṛti Vedas Rigveda Yajurveda Samaveda Atharvaveda Upanishads Principal Upanishads Minor Upanishads Other scriptures Bhagavad Gita Agama (Hinduism) Vachanamrut Shastras and Sutras Brahma Sutras Samkhya Sutras Mimamsa Sutras Nyāya Sūtras Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Yoga Sutras Pramana Sutras Puranas Dharmaśāstra Arthashastra Kama Sutra Naalayira Divya Prabandham Tirumurai Shiva Samhita Secular ethics Kural Hinduism Other Indian philosophies v t e Vachaspati Mishra ( IAST : Vācaspati Miśra), was a ninth or tenth century [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Indian Hindu philosopher of the Advaita Vedanta tradition, who wrote bhashya (commentaries) on key texts of almost every 9th-century school of Hindu philosophy .

[ 4 ] [ 3 ] and harmonised Shankara's thought with that of Mandana Miśra, who until the 10th century was the most authoritative exponent of Advaita Vedanta. He also wrote an independent treatise on grammar, Tattvabindu , or Drop of Truth , which focuses on Mīmāṃsā theories of sentence meaning.

Biography [ edit ] Vāchaspati Misra was born into a Maithil Brahmin family in Andhra Tharhi , Madhubani , Bihar .

[ 5 ] [ 3 ] Little is known about Vāchaspati Miśra's life, and the earliest text that has been dated with certainty is from 840 CE, and he was at least one generation younger than Adi Śaṅkara .

[ 2 ] However, an alternate date for the same text may be 976 CE, according to some scholars; a confusion that is based on whether Hindu Śaka or Vikrama era calendar is used for the dating purposes.

[ 3 ] He was a student of Maṇḍana Miśra , who was his main inspirator. He harmonised Shankara's thought with that of Mandana Miśra.

[ 6 ] [ web 1 ] According to Advaita tradition, Shankara reincarnated as Vachaspati Miśra "to popularise the Advaita System through his Bhamati ." [ 7 ] He wrote so broadly on various branches of Indian philosophy that later Indian scholars called him the "one for whom all systems are his own", or in Sanskrit, a sarva-tantra-sva-tantra .

[ 8 ] Works [ edit ] Bhāṣya [ edit ] Vāchaspati Miśra was a prolific scholar and his writings are extensive, including bhasyas (commentaries) on key texts of almost every 9th-century school of Hindu philosophy , with notes on non-Hindu or nāstika traditions such as Buddhism and Charvaka .

[ 4 ] [ 3 ] Vāchaspati Miśra wrote the Bhamati , a commentary on Shankara's Brahma Sutra Bhashya , named after his devout wife, [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ a ] and the Brahmatattva-samiksa , a commentary on Mandana Mishra's Brahma-siddhi . The Bhamati Tika was explained by Amalananda Swami in his sub commentary called Kalpataru during 1300 AD. Similarly the sub commentary Kalpataru was explained by Mahapandit Appaya Dikshit explained in his sub commentary called Parimal during 1600 AD.

[ 12 ] In 1983, Dr Ishwar Singh of Maharshi Dayanand University published a research book on Bhamati Tika known as " Bhamati: Ek Adhyayana ". This book is an evaluation of Vachaspati Mishra in the context of Vedanta philosophy .

[ 13 ] Other influential commentaries are Tattvakaumudi on Sāṃkhyakārika ; [ 14 ] Nyāyasucinibandha on Nyāya-sūtras ; [ 1 ] Nyāyakānika (an Advaita work on science of reason), Tattvasamikṣa (lost work), Nyāya-vārttika-tātparyaṭīkā (a subcommentary on the Nyāya-sūtras ), Tattva-vaiśāradī on Yogasūtra .

[ 3 ] While some known works of Vāchaspati Miśra are now lost, numerous others exist. Over ninety medieval era manuscripts, for example, in different parts of India have been found of his Tattvakaumudi , which literally means "Moonlight on the Truth".

[ 3 ] This suggests that his work was sought and influential. A critical edition of Tattvakaumudi was published by Srinivasan [ who?

] in 1967.

[ 3 ] Tattvabindu - theory of meaning [ edit ] In Tattvabindu Vachaspati Mishra develops principles of hermeneutics , and discusses the "Theory of Meaning" for the Mīmāṃsā school of Hindu philosophy.

[ 3 ] This is an influential work, and attempted to resolve some of the interpretation disputes on classical Sanskrit texts. Vāchaspati examines five competing theories of linguistic meaning: [ 8 ] [ 15 ] Mandana Misra 's ( sphoṭavāda ), which involves grasping the meaning of a word or sentence by perceiving a sphoṭa or single holistic sound, which is distinct from the elements (sounds or characters) that make up the word or sentence; the Nyāya theory which involves concatenating the memory traces ( saṃskāra ) of momentary components of a word or sentence when we hear the final momentary component; the similar Mīmāmsā theory, according to which our grasp of the meaning of a sentence lies in the memory traces created by the words; and the Prābhākara Mīmāmsā theory, anvitābhidhānavāda , "the view on which denotation is constituted by what is connected." On this view, sentence-meaning is derived from the meanings of its words, which is fully given only by syntactic relations with the other words — no sphoṭa or memory traces are required; and the Bhāṭṭa Mīmāṃsā theory, abhihitānvayavāda, or "the view on which connection (anvaya) is constituted by what has been denoted." On this view, word-meaning is denoted entirely first ( abhihita ) and then individual word-meanings are connected by means of lakṣaṇā (implication). Vāchaspati concurs with the Bhāṭṭa view, when he employs in other contexts, such as the Nyāya sub-commentary, the Nyāya-vārttika-tātparya-ṭīkā, and the Tattva-vaiśāradī.

[ 8 ] Bhamati school [ edit ] Main article: Bhamati Tika The Bhamati school, or Bhāmatī-Prasthāna , [ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] is named after Vāchaspati Miśra's commentary on Shankara's Brahma Sutra Bhashya , [ web 1 ] [ web 2 ] but several distinctive can be traced back to Maṇḍana Miśra 's Brahmasiddhi . It sees the Jiva as the source or locus of avidya .

[ web 1 ] According to the Bhamati School, while " Brahman is the object of Avidya." [ 19 ] In the beginning of the Bhamati Tika, Vachaspati Mishra refers two kinds of Avidya . There are as many ignorances (Avidya ) as living beings. This school accepts Avchedavada (Excluding Distinction) regarding the nature of soul and God. Vachaspati Mishra considered that the Brahman bound by Maya (illusion) or Avidya is the living being, while the Brahman beyond Maya is God.

[ 19 ] It sees meditation as the main factor in the acquirement of liberation , while the study of the Vedas and reflection are additional factors.

[ 20 ] Vachaspati Mishra belonged to a tradition of Advaita Vedanta known as Prasankhyanavada which believed in the " Dhyana Theory ". It is the theory of continuous meditation. According to this theory, unlike the theory propounded by the Samuccayavādins , the performance of Karmas does not contribute to the attainment of "Brahman-Knowledge". According to this theory one should renounce performances of all the Karmas before going to start the practice of meditation. The practice of meditation is on the meaning of the mahavakya (great sentence) " Tat Tvam Asi " of Upanishad text. Vachaspati Mishra similar to Mandan Mishra believed that there should be no injunction during the practice of meditation because right knowledge of Vedantic teaching may be sublated by incorrect knowledge during the ordinary life.

[ 21 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Pooja Kashyap: "Written in 10th century, 'Bhamati Tika' speaks of a woman Bhamati who for complete 18 years only lighted the lamp while her husband Vachaspati Mishra, a philosopher worked on the analysis of a text 'Brahma Sutra' given to him by the 6th Shankaracharya. After the text was over Mishra asked the lady lighting the diya beside him about her identity and in reply she said "I am your wife." Her husband was so touched to see her dedication that he named the book 'Bhamati Tika'." [ 11 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Fowler 2002 , p. 129.

^ a b c Isaeva 1993 , p. 85-86.

^ a b c d e f g h i j Larson & Bhattacharya 1987 , p. 301-312.

^ a b Chatterji 1912 , p. vi.

^ Bagchi, Jhunu (1993).

The History and Culture of the Pālas of Bengal and Bihar, Cir. 750 A.D.-cir. 1200 A.D.

Abhinav Publications.

ISBN 978-81-7017-301-4 .

^ Roodurmun 2002 , p. 35.

^ Roodurmun 2002 , p. 34.

^ a b c Phillips 2015 .

^ eGangotri.

Bhamati Of Vachaspati Mishra By Dhundhiraj Shastri 1st Part 1935 Kashi Sanskrit Series No. 116 Chaukhamba .

^ Ranganath, S. (1999).

Contribution of Vācaspati Miśra to Indian Philosophy . Pratibha Prakashan.

ISBN 978-81-7702-002-1 .

^ "Bhamati Tika" .

The Times of India . 14 January 2011.

ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 13 July 2024 .

^ Verma, Dr Rishika (29 December 2023).

Samkhyadarshan Avam Shankarvedant ka Tulanatmak Adhyayan (in Hindi). Blue Rose Publishers.

^ Dr Ishwar Singh (1983).

1983 -Bhamati Ek Adhyayana .

^ Isaeva 1993 , p. 124].

^ Ranganath 1999 .

^ www.wisdomlib.org (14 October 2012).

"Bhamati, Bhāmatī: 8 definitions" .

www.wisdomlib.org . Retrieved 13 July 2024 .

^ "Bhamati school | philosophy | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 13 July 2024 .

^ Rawal, Mona (2018), Jain, Pankaj; Sherma, Rita; Khanna, Madhu (eds.), "Vācaspati Miśra" , Hinduism and Tribal Religions , Encyclopedia of Indian Religions, Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, pp.

1– 5, doi : 10.1007/978-94-024-1036-5_630-1 , ISBN 978-94-024-1036-5 , retrieved 13 July 2024 ^ a b www.wisdomlib.org (14 June 2021).

"Vācaspati Miśra—Works on Advaita Vedānta [Chapter 2.5]" .

www.wisdomlib.org . Retrieved 13 July 2024 .

^ Roodurmun 2002 , p. 37.

^ Roodurmun 2002 .

Sources [ edit ] Chatterji, Jagadisha Chandra (1912).

Hindu Realism .

Isaeva, Natalia (1993).

Shankara and Indian Philosophy . USA: State University of New York Press.

ISBN 978-0-7914-1281-7 .

Fowler, Jeaneane (2002), Perspectives of Reality: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Hinduism , Sussex Academic Press, ISBN 978-1898723943 Larson, Gerald James; Bhattacharya, Ram Shankar (1987), The Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies, Volume 4 , Princeton University Press Phillips, Stephen (2015).

"Seeing From the Other's Point of View: Counter the Schismatic Interpretation of Vācaspati Miśra" (PDF) .

APA Newsletter: Asian and Asian-American Philosophers and Philosophies .

14 (2): 4– 8.

Roodurmun, Pulasth Soobah (2002), Bhāmatī and Vivaraṇa Schools of Advaita Vedānta: A Critical Approach , Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers Private Limited Web-sources [ edit ] ^ a b c The Bhamati and Vivarana Schools ^ Rajesh Anand, Vachaspati Mishra Archived 3 September 2012 at the Wayback Machine Further reading [ edit ] S.S. Hasurkar, Vācaspati Miśra on Advaita Vedanta . Darbhanga: Mithila Institute of Post-Graduate Studies, 1958.

Karl H. Potter, "Vācaspati Miśra" (in Robert L. Arrington [ed.].

A Companion to the Philosophers . Oxford: Blackwell, 2001.

ISBN 0-631-22967-1 ) J.N. Mohanty, Classican Indian Philosophy . Oxford: Rowman & Littlefield, 2000.

ISBN 0-8476-8933-6 V.N. Sheshagiri Rao, Vācaspati's Contribution to Advaita . Mysore: Samvit Publishers, 1984.

External links [ edit ] Vachaspati Mishra’s commentary on the Yoga Sutras English translation and Sanskrit text Bibliography of Vācaspati Mishra's works, Item 530 , Karl Potter, University of Washington v t e Indian philosophy Topics Atheism Atomism Idealism Logic Monotheism Vedic philosophy Kama Artha Moksha Ancient Āstika Hindu : Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Shaiva Raseśvara Pashupata Shaivism Pāṇiniya Nāstika Ājīvika Ajñana Charvaka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist philosophy and Early Buddhist schools Śūnyatā Madhyamaka Yogachara Sautrāntika Svatantrika Medieval Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Svabhavika Bhedabheda Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Sikh Philosophy Shaiva Pratyabhijna Pashupata Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Modern Integral yoga Gandhism Radical Humanism Progressive utilization theory Texts Abhinavabharati Arthashastra Bhagavad Gita Bhagavata Purana Brahma Sutra Buddhist texts Dharmashastra Hindu texts Jain Agamas Kamasutra Mimamsa Sutras All 108 texts Principal Nyāya Sūtras Nyayakusumanjali Panchadasi Samkhyapravachana Sutra Sangam texts Sarvadarsanasangraha Shiva Sutras Tarka-Sangraha Tattvacintāmaṇi Tirukkuṟaḷ Upanishads Minor Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Vedangas Vedas Yoga Sutras of Patanjali Yoga Vasistha More...

Philosophers Adi Shankara Abhinavagupta Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Maṇḍana Miśra Valluvar Avatsara Vāchaspati Misra Uddalaka Aruni Gautama Buddha Yājñavalkya Gārgī Vāchaknavī Buddhaghosa Patañjali Kanada Kapila Brihadratha Ikshvaku Jaimini Vyasa Chanakya Dharmakirti Akshapada Gotama Nagarjuna Padmasambhāva Vasubandhu Gaudapada Ramana Maharshi Vivekananda Dayananda Saraswati Ramanuja Vedanta Desika Raikva Sadananda Sakayanya Satyakama Jabala Madhvacharya Mahavira Guru Nanak More...

Concepts Abhava Abhasavada Abheda Adarsana Adrishta Advaita Aham Ahimsa Aishvarya Akrodha Aksara Anatta Ananta Anavastha Anupalabdhi Apauruṣheyā Artha Asiddhatva Asatkalpa Ātman Avyakta Bhrama Brahman Bhuman Bhumika Catuṣkoṭi Chaitanya Chidabhasa Cittabhumi Dāna Devatas Dharma Dhi Dravya Dhrti Ekagrata Guṇa Hitā Idam Ikshana Ishvaratva Jivatva Kama Karma Kasaya Kshetrajna Lakshana Matsya Nyaya Mithyatva Mokṣa Nididhyasana Nirvāṇa Nishkama Karma Niyama Padārtha Paramatman Paramananda Parameshashakti Parinama-vada Pradhana Prajna Prakṛti Pratibimbavada Pratītyasamutpāda Puruṣa Rājamaṇḍala Ṛta Sakshi Samadhi Saṃsāra Satya Satkaryavada Shabda Brahman Sphoṭa Sthiti Śūnyatā Sutram Svātantrya Iccha-mrityu Syādvāda Taijasa Tajjalan Tanmatra Tyāga Uparati Upekkhā Utsaha Vivartavada Viraj Yamas Yoga More...

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Australia 2 Netherlands Norway Vatican 2 3 Israel People Trove DDB Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vāchaspati_Misra&oldid=1299056100 " Categories : 10th-century Indian philosophers Advaitin philosophers Indian logicians Medieval linguists from India Medieval Sanskrit grammarians Nyaya Philosophers of language Philosophers of Mithila Scholars from Bihar Indian Sanskrit scholars Hidden categories: CS1 Hindi-language sources (hi) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from May 2015 Use dmy dates from May 2015 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from June 2022 This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 08:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vāchaspati Misra 13 languages Add topic

