Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Quotes 3 Act of Hope 4 See also 5 Further reading 6 References Toggle the table of contents Hope (virtue) 9 languages Español Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Norsk bokmål Polski Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Theological virtue in Christian tradition Allegorical personification of Hope: Hope in a Prison of Despair , 1887, by Evelyn De Morgan Hope ( Latin : spes ) is one of the three theological virtues in the Christian tradition. Hope is a combination of the desire for something and expectation of receiving it. The Christian virtue is hoping specifically for Divine union and so eternal happiness. While faith is a function of the intellect, hope is an act of the will.

As a deeply rooted aspect of human life, it also encompasses other dimensions, such as the cultural and mythical dimension of hope, the hope required to perform every action, psychological hope, and the legal aspect of hope .

Overview [ edit ] Thomas Aquinas defined hope as "...a future good, difficult but possible to attain... by means of the Divine Assistance... on Whose help it leans".

[ 1 ] Hope is always concerned with something in the future. Like the theological virtues of faith and charity, hope finds its "origin, motive, and object" in God.

[ 2 ] In Hebrews 10 :23, Paul the Apostle says, "Let us hold unwaveringly to our confession that gives us hope, for he who made the promise is trustworthy." The Catholic Encyclopedia defines hope as "the desire of something together with the expectation of obtaining it." Specifically, in the Christian context, this is the hope that God will extend His help to you to "elevate and strengthen [your] will[]" as you strive to "reach eternal felicity." Like the other theological virtues, hope is an infused virtue (defined as one that is implanted in you by God, as opposed to one that you develop yourself through habit). It is not, like good habits in general, the outcome of repeated acts or the product of our own industry.

[ 3 ] Hope is bestowed by God at baptism.

[ 4 ] In the Christian tradition, hope in Christ and faith in Christ are closely linked, with hope having a connotation that means the one with hope has a firm assurance, through the witness of the Holy Spirit, that Christ has promised a better world to those who are His. The Christian sees death not just as the end of a passing life, but as the gateway to a future life without limitation and in all fullness. Pope Benedict XVI states: "Whoever believes in Christ has a future. For God has no desire for what is withered, dead, artificial, and finally discarded: he wants what is fruitful and alive, he wants life in its fullness and he gives us life in its fullness" [ 5 ] Hope can thus sustain one through trials of faith, human tragedies, or difficulties that may otherwise seem overwhelming. Hope is "an anchor of the soul" as referenced in the Epistle to the Hebrews of the New Testament .

Hebrews 7:19 also describes the "better hope" of the New Covenant in Christ rather than the Old Covenant of the Jewish law .

Hope is opposed to the sins of despair and presumption; refraining from them is adhering to the negative precept of hope. The positive precept is required when exercising some duties, as in prayer or penance.

[ 3 ] Some forms of Quietism denied that a human being should desire anything whatsoever, to such an extent that they denied that hope was a virtue. Quietism was condemned as heresy by Pope Innocent XI in 1687 in the papal bull Coelestis Pastor .

[ 3 ] Quotes [ edit ] "For in hope we were saved. Now hope that sees for itself is not hope. For who hopes for what one sees?" ( Romans 8:24 ) “Trust perfectly in the grace which is offered you in the revelation of Jesus Christ.” ( 1 Peter 1:13 ) “I know well the plans I have in mind for you says the Lord, plans for your welfare and not for woe so as to give you a future of hope” ( Jeremiah 29:11 ) "The Christian who hopes seeks God for himself or herself. In technical language, the formal object of theological hope is God-as-possessed." [ 6 ] “Nobody can live without hope, even if it were only for the smallest things which give some satisfaction even under the words of conditions, even in poverty, sickness and social failure.” [ 7 ] Act of Hope [ edit ] The Act of Hope is a Catholic prayer: O my God, relying on Your almighty power and infinite mercy and promises, I hope to obtain pardon of my sins, the help of Your grace, and life everlasting through the merits of Jesus Christ, my Lord and Redeemer. Amen.

[ 4 ] Positive psychology has studied some positive psychological attributes for a healthy mental life, such as happiness, encouragement, love, forgiveness, and hope.

[ 8 ] One of the most prominent authors developing the role of hope in psychology is Charles R. Snyder , who even has created several measures of private and social hope.

[ 9 ] According to Snyder, psychological hope consists of three fundamental components: goals, pathways, and agency.

[ 9 ] This implies that hope necessitates, firstly, an individual having a goal that is deemed desirable, feasible, yet not currently fulfilled (belief); secondly, envisioning a pathway to attain that goal; and thirdly, possessing the capability to act on that pathway toward the defined goal. A lack of agency results in mere "wishful hope," whereas elevated levels of conviction or commitment lead to an "aspirational hope." [ 9 ] See also [ edit ] abandon hope all ye who enter here Optimism – Positive mental attitude Spe Salvi – 2007 Papal encyclical by Pope Benedict XVI Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Further reading [ edit ] Slater S.J., Thomas (1925).

"Book V: Part II: On Hope" .

A manual of moral theology for English-speaking countries . Burns Oates & Washbourne Ltd.

Summa Theologica "Second Part of the Second Part" See Questions 17-22 References [ edit ] ^ Aquinas, Thomas.

Summa Theologica . II-II, 17.1.

^ Catechism of the Catholic Church, §1812 ^ a b c Delany, Joseph (1910).

"Hope" .

The Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 7. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ a b "What is hope and why do we need it?" .

Diocese of La Crosse .

^ "Homily of His Holiness Benedict XVI" . Berlin. September 22, 2011.

^ Cessario, Romanus (2002).

The Virtues, or the Examined Life . London: Continuum. p. 38.

^ Tillich, Paul (1965).

"The Right to Hope" .

Neue Zeitschrift für Systematische Theologie und Religionsphilosophie .

7 (3).

doi : 10.1515/nzst.1965.7.3.371 .

ISSN 0028-3517 .

S2CID 201842525 .

Text: Romans 4:18 : "In hope he believed against hope" ^ Jeffrey J., Froh.

"The History of Positive Psychology: Truth Be Told" (PDF) .

NYS Psychologist .

16 : 18.

^ a b c Snyder, C. R. (2002).

"Hope Theory: Rainbows in the Mind" .

Psychological Inquiry .

13 (4): 249– 275.

doi : 10.1207/S15327965PLI1304_01 .

ISSN 1047-840X .

JSTOR 1448867 .

S2CID 143302451 .

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). " Hope ".

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

v t e Seven virtues in Christian ethics Four cardinal virtues Prudence ( Prudentia ) Justice ( Iustitia ) Fortitude ( Fortitudo ) Temperance ( Temperantia ) Sources: Plato Republic , Book IV Cicero Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Thomas Aquinas Faith, Hope and Love, as portrayed by Mary Lizzie Macomber (1861–1916) Three theological virtues Faith ( Fides ) Hope ( Spes ) Love ( Caritas ) Sources: Paul the Apostle 1 Corinthians 13 Seven lively virtues versus Seven deadly sins Chastity ( Castitas ) Temperance ( Temperantia ) Charity ( Caritas ) Diligence ( Diligentia ) Kindness ( Humanitas ) Patience ( Patientia ) Humility ( Humilitas ) Lust ( Luxuria ) Gluttony ( Gula ) Greed ( Avaritia ) Sloth ( Acedia ) Wrath ( Ira ) Envy ( Invidia ) Pride ( Superbia ) Source: Prudentius , Psychomachia People: Evagrius Ponticus John Cassian Pope Gregory I Dante Alighieri Peter Binsfeld Related concepts Ten Commandments Great Commandment Eschatology Sin Original sin Old Covenant Hamartiology Christian philosophy v t e Virtues About virtues Endowment Moral character Nicomachean Ethics Positive psychology Trait theory Virtue ethics Virtue families Bodhipakkhiyā dhammā Brahmavihārās Bushidō Catalogue of Vices and Virtues Emi Omo Eso Epistemic virtues Five virtues Four Cardinal Principles and Eight Virtues Intellectual virtues Moral virtues Nine Noble Virtues Omoluwabi Pāramīs Prussian virtues Scout Law Seven virtues Cardinal Theological Teachings of the Seven Grandfathers Three Treasures Values in Action Inventory of Strengths Yamas Individual virtues Accountability Alertness Altruism Authenticity Calmness Charisma Charity Chastity Chivalry Cleanliness Compassion Conscientiousness Courage Civil Moral Courtesy Diligence Discernment Discipline Duty Empathy Endurance Equanimity Etiquette Faith Faithfulness Fidelity Foresight Forgiveness Frugality Generosity Glory Good faith Gratitude Heroism Honesty Honour Hope Hospitality Humanity Humility Impartiality Innocence Insight Integrity Intelligence Emotional Social Judgement Justice Kindness Love Loyalty Magnanimity Magnificence Meekness Mercy Moderation Modesty Nonattachment Patience Patriotism Perspicacity Philanthropy Piety Filial Pity Politeness Prudence Punctuality Religion Renunciation Resilience Respect Reverence Righteous indignation Righteousness Self-control Self-cultivation Self-transcendence Simplicity Sincerity Solidarity Sportsmanship Sympathy Taste Temperance Tranquillity Trust Wisdom Wit Workmanship Chinese De Jing Li Ren Yi Greek Agape Arete Ataraxia Eutrapelia Philotimo Phronesis Sophia Sophrosyne Indian Adhiṭṭhāna Ahimsa Akrodha Aparigraha Ārjava Asteya Brahmacharya Dāna Dhṛti Hrī Karuṇā Kshama Kshanti Mettā Muditā Nishkama Karma Prajñā Samatva Satya Shaucha Sevā Śraddhā / Saddhā Upekṣā Vīrya Latin Auctoritas Caritas Decorum Dignitas Fides Gravitas Humanitas Pietas Virtus Other Ganbaru Giri Sadaqah Seny Sisu Virtù This Christian theology article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hope_(virtue)&oldid=1296865608 " Categories : Christian terminology Virtue Hope Christian theology stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles containing Catalan-language text Articles containing Italian-language text All stub articles This page was last edited on 22 June 2025, at 20:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hope (virtue) 9 languages Add topic

