Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geometry Toggle Geometry subsection 1.1 Map view 2 Thrust belts Toggle Thrust belts subsection 2.1 Africa 2.2 Asia 2.3 Australia 2.4 Europe 2.5 North America 2.6 South America 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Fold and thrust belt 6 languages Català Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Modelling of a fold and thrust belt in a sand box A fold and thrust belt is a series of mountainous foothills adjacent to an orogenic belt , which forms due to contractional tectonics . Fold and thrust belts commonly form in the forelands adjacent to major orogens as deformation propagates outwards. Fold and thrust belts usually comprise both folds and thrust faults , commonly interrelated. 
They are commonly also known as thrust-and-fold belts, or simply thrust-fold belts.

Geometry [ edit ] Fold and thrust belts are formed of a series of sub-parallel thrust sheets, separated by major thrust faults. As the total shortening increases in a fold and thrust belt, the belt propagates into its foreland. New thrusts develop at the front of the belt, folding the older thrusts that have become inactive. This sequential propagation of thrusts into the foreland is the most common. Thrusts that form within the belt rather than at the thrust front are known as "out-of-sequence".

Map view [ edit ] In map view, fold and thrust belts are generally sinuous rather than completely linear.

[ 1 ] Where the thrust front bulges out in the direction of tectonic transport, a salient is formed. Between the bulges the areas are known as recesses , reentrants or sometimes embayments .

Thrust belts [ edit ] Profile through the Pyrenees. In the south a fold and thrust belt exists as sediments are folded and stacked (thrust) on top of the other.

An example of thin-skinned thrusting in Montana . The white Madison Limestone is repeated, with one example in the foreground (that pinches out with distance) and another to the upper right corner and top of the picture.

Africa [ edit ] Thrustbelt name Age Structural style Atlas Mountains Cape Fold Belt Asia [ edit ] Thrustbelt name Age Structural style Aravalli Range Precambrian Himalayas Upper Cretaceous Zagros fold and thrust belt Young and active deforming belt Australia [ edit ] Thrustbelt name Age Structural style Eastern Lachlan Orogen Middle Paleozoic North-south oriented structures Europe [ edit ] Thrustbelt name Age Structural style Alps Cenozoic Scandinavian Caledonides Ordovician - Devonian Carpathians Mesozoic - Tertiary North America [ edit ] Thrustbelt name Age Structural style Alaska Range Late Cretaceous - Cenozoic Thick-skin Anadyr Highlands Late Paleocene - Eocene Unknown Antler Thrustbelt Carboniferous Thin-skin Appalachians Late Paleozoic Thin-skin Arctic Cordillera Middle Devonian - Early Carboniferous Unknown Brooks Range Jurassic - Early Cretaceous , Early Cenozoic Thin-skin California Coast Ranges Late Miocene - Quaternary Transpressional Chihuahua Belt Paleocene Unknown Chugach Mountains Cenozoic Thin-skin Eurekan Fold Belt Eocene - Oligocene Unknown Innuitian Fold-Thrust Belt Late Cretaceous - Early Cenozoic Thin-skin Kuskokwim Mountains Late Cretaceous - Eocene Unknown Mackenzie Mountains Late Cretaceous - Middle Eocene Thin-skin Maria Fold and Thrust Belt Cretaceous Thick-skin North Greenland Fold Belt Middle Devonian - Early Carboniferous Unknown Northern Ellesmere Fold Belt Middle Devonian - Early Carboniferous Thin-skin Ogilvie Mountains Late Cretaceous - Eocene Thin-skin Oregon Accretionary Prism Late Miocene - Quaternary Thin-skin Ouachitas Late Carboniferous - Early Permian Thick- and thin-skin Richardson Mountains Late Cretaceous - Middle Eocene Thin-skin Rocky Mountains Paleocene to Middle Eocene Thick-skin Selwyn Fold Belt , Yukon [ 2 ] Late Cretaceous Unknown Sierra Madre Oriental Early Cenozoic Unknown Sierra Madre Occidental Cretaceous - Eocene Unknown South Canadian Rockies Late Jurassic - Eocene Thin-skin Wyoming-Utah Thrustbelt (North Sevier ) Late Jurassic - Eocene Thin-skin Much of this table is adapted from Nemcok et al.

, 2005 [ 3 ] South America [ edit ] Thrustbelt name Age Structural style Magallanes (Fuegian) fold and thrust belt Late Cretaceous - Cenozoic Thin-skin Malargüe fold and thrust belt Marañón fold and thrust belt Cenozoic Thick-skin and thin-skin Central Andean fold and thrust belt Mesozoic - Cenozoic Thin skin [ 4 ] Paipote fold and thrust belt Cenozoic Thick-skin and thin-skin [ 5 ] References [ edit ] ^ Lickorish W.H.; Grasso M.; Butler R.W.H.; Argnani A.; Moniscalco R. (1999).

"Structural styles and regional tectonic setting of the "Gela Nappe" and frontal part of the Maghrebian thrust belt in Sicily" .

Tectonics .

18 (4): 655– 668.

Bibcode : 1999Tecto..18..655L .

doi : 10.1029/1999TC900013 .

^ Selwyn Basin Metallogeny Yukon Geological Survey Archived 2014-03-31 at the Wayback Machine ^ Nemcok, M., Schamel, S. & Gayer, R. 2005. Thrustbelts - Structural Architecture, Thermal Regimes and Petroleum Systems. Cambridge University Press ISBN 978-0-521-82294-7 ^ The evolution of the Altiplano-Puna Plateau of the Central Andes . 1997.

^ Martínez, F.; Arancibia, J.; Torres, C.; Peña, M.; Díaz, L.; Reyes, P. (2024).

"Paipote fold-and-thrust belt, a key element in understanding the upper crustal shortening mechanisms of the Central Andean forearc" .

Journal of Structural Geology .

185 .

doi : 10.1016/j.jsg.2024.105187 .

External links [ edit ] Fold and thrust belts publications v t e Structural geology Underlying theory Deformation mechanism Lamé's stress ellipsoid Mohr–Coulomb theory Mohr's circle Overburden pressure Rock mechanics Strain Strain partitioning Stress Stress field Tension Measurement conventions Brunton compass Inclinometer Orthographic projection Rake Stereographic projection Strike and dip Large-scale tectonics Accretionary wedge Allochthon Autochthon Back-arc basin Continental collision Convergent boundary Décollement Divergent boundary Extensional tectonics Fault block Fenster Fold and thrust belt Fold mountains Foreland basin Graben Half-graben Horse Horst Horst and graben Intra-arc basin Inversion Klippe List of tectonic plate interactions Mélange Mountain formation Nappe Obduction Orogeny Passive margin Plate tectonics Pull-apart basin Rift valley Rift Saddle Strike-slip tectonics Structural basin Suture Syneclise Terrane Thick-skinned deformation Thin-skinned deformation Thrust tectonics Fracturing Columnar jointing Dike Exfoliation joint Fissure Joint Vein Faulting Asperity Cataclasite Cataclastic rock Detachment fault Disturbance Fault friction Fault mechanics Fault scarp Fault trace Thrust fault Transfer zone Transform fault Foliation and lineation Cleavage Compaction Crenulation Fissility Oblique foliation Pressure solution Rock microstructure Slickenside Stylolite Tectonic phase Tectonite Folding Anticline Chevron Detachment fold Dome Homocline Monocline Syncline Vergence Boudinage Competence Kinematic analysis 3D fold evolution Paleostress inversion Paleostress Section restoration Shear zone Mylonite Pure shear Shear Category This tectonics article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fold_and_thrust_belt&oldid=1296436209 " Categories : Orogeny Geological processes Tectonics stubs Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All stub articles This page was last edited on 20 June 2025, at 00:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fold and thrust belt 6 languages Add topic

