Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Scope Toggle Scope subsection 1.1 Definition and ontology of economics 1.2 Methodology and epistemology of economics 1.3 Rational choice, decision theory and game theory 1.4 Ethics and justice 1.5 Non-mainstream economic thinking 2 Scholars cited in the literature 3 Related disciplines 4 Degrees 5 Journals 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Philosophy and economics 24 languages العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Български Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi ไทย Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of philosophy See also: Philosophy, politics and economics Part of a series on Philosophy Philosophy portal Contents Outline Glossary History Categories Philosophies By period Ancient Egyptian Greek Roman Chinese Medieval Buddhism Neo-Confucianism Scholasticism Renaissance Modern Enlightenment Idealism Contemporary Analytic Continental By region African Egyptian Ethiopian South African Eastern Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Vietnamese Indigenous American Aztec Middle Eastern Iranian Western United States British French German Italian Russian By religion Buddhist Confucian Christian Hindu Islamic Jain Jewish Taoist Branches Epistemology Ethics Logic Metaphysics Aesthetics Education History Language Law Metaphilosophy Mind Ontology Phenomenology Political Religion Science Philosophers Aesthetic philosophers Epistemologists Ethicists Logicians Metaphysicians Philosophers of mind Social and political philosophers Women in philosophy v t e Part of the behavioral sciences Economics Outline Index Glossary Economists Principles of Economics Tools and methodology Economic theory Mathematical modeling Game theory Rational choice Cognitive science ( Behavioral ) Economic equilibrium Empirical methods Experimental National accounts Econometrics Time series Spatial Prescriptive and policy Welfare analysis Social choice theory Rational choice theory Cost–benefit analysis Branches and subfields Applied Econometrics International Heterodox Micro Macro Mainstream Mathematical Mech. design Methodology Political Industrial org.

Market design Applications Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Economics portal Society portal v t e Philosophy and economics studies topics such as public economics , behavioural economics , rationality , justice , history of economic thought , rational choice , the appraisal of economic outcomes, institutions and processes, the status of highly idealized economic models, the ontology of economic phenomena and the possibilities of acquiring knowledge of them.

[ 1 ] It is useful to divide philosophy of economics in this way into three subject matters which can be regarded respectively as branches of action theory , ethics (or normative social and political philosophy), and philosophy of science . Economic theories of rationality , welfare , and social choice defend substantive philosophical theses often informed by relevant philosophical literature and of evident interest to those interested in action theory, philosophical psychology, and social and political philosophy.

Economics is of special interest to those interested in epistemology and philosophy of science both because of its detailed peculiarities and because it has many of the overt features of the natural sciences , while its object consists of social phenomena .

[ 2 ] In any empirical setting, the epistemic assumptions of financial economics (and related applied financial disciplines) are relevant, [ 3 ] [ 4 ] and are further discussed under the Epistemology of finance .

Scope [ edit ] Definition and ontology of economics [ edit ] The question usually addressed in any subfield of philosophy (the philosophy of X ) is "what is X ?".  A philosophical approach to the question "what is economics?" is less likely to produce an answer than it is to produce a survey of the definitional and territorial difficulties and controversies. Similar considerations apply as a prologue to further discussion of methodology in a subject.

Definitions of economics have varied over time from the modern origins of the subject, reflecting programmatic concerns and distinctions of expositors.

[ 5 ] Ontological questions continue with further "what is..." questions addressed at fundamental economic phenomena, such as "what is (economic) value?" or "what is a market?". While it is possible to respond to such questions with real verbal definitions, the philosophical value of posing such questions actually aims at shifting entire perspectives as to the nature of the foundations of economics. In the rare cases that attempts at ontological shifts gain wide acceptance, their ripple effects can spread throughout the entire field of economics.

[ 6 ] Methodology and epistemology of economics [ edit ] Main article: Economic methodology An epistemology deals with how we know things. In the philosophy of economics this means asking questions such as: what kind of a " truth claim" is made by economic theories – for example, are we claiming that the theories relate to reality or perceptions? How can or should we prove economic theories – for example, must every economic theory be empirically verifiable? How exact are economic theories and can they lay claim to the status of an exact science – for example, are economic predictions as reliable as predictions in the natural sciences, and why or why not? Another way of expressing this issue is to ask whether economic theories can state "laws". Philosophers of science and economists have explored these issues intensively since the work of Alexander Rosenberg and Daniel M. Hausman dating to 3 decades ago.

[ 7 ] Rational choice, decision theory and game theory [ edit ] Main articles: Decision theory and Game theory Philosophical approaches in decision theory focus on foundational concepts in decision theory – for example, on the natures of choice or preference , rationality , risk and uncertainty , and economic agents.

[ 8 ] Game theory is shared between a number of disciplines, but especially mathematics , economics and philosophy . Game theory is still extensively discussed within the field of the philosophy of economics. Game theory is closely related to and builds on decision theory and is likewise very strongly interdisciplinary.

[ 9 ] Ethics and justice [ edit ] Main articles: Distributive justice and Justice (economics) The ethics of economic systems deals with the issues such as how it is right (just, fair) to keep or distribute economic goods.

Economic systems as a product of collective activity allow examination of their ethical consequences for all of their participants.

Ethics and economics relates ethical studies to welfare economics .

[ 10 ] It has been argued that a closer relation between welfare economics and modern ethical studies may enrich both areas, even including predictive and descriptive economics as to rationality of behaviour, given social interdependence.

[ 11 ] Ethics and justice overlap disciplines in different ways. Approaches are regarded as more philosophical when they study the fundamentals – for example, John Rawls ' A Theory of Justice (1971) [ 12 ] and Robert Nozick 's Anarchy, State and Utopia (1974). 'Justice' in economics is a subcategory of welfare economics [ 13 ] with models frequently representing the ethical-social requirements of a given theory. "Practical" matters include such subjects as law [ 14 ] and cost–benefit analysis [ 15 ] Utilitarianism , one of the ethical methodologies, has its origins inextricably interwoven with the emergence of modern economic thought . Today utilitarianism has spread throughout applied ethics as one of a number of approaches. Non-utilitarian approaches in applied ethics are also now used when questioning the ethics of economic systems – e.g. rights-based ( deontological ) approaches.

[ 16 ] Many political ideologies have been an immediate outgrowth of reflection on the ethics of economic systems.

Marx , for example, is generally regarded primarily as a philosopher, his most notable work being on the philosophy of economics. However, Marx's economic critique of capitalism did not depend on ethics, justice, or any form of morality, instead focusing on the inherent contradictions of capitalism through the lens of a process which is today called dialectical materialism .

Non-mainstream economic thinking [ edit ] Main articles: Heterodox economics and Critique of political economy The philosophy of economics defines itself as including the questioning of foundations or assumptions of economics. The foundations and assumption of economics have been questioned from the perspective of noteworthy but typically under-represented groups. These areas are therefore to be included within the philosophy of economics.

Praxeology : a deductive theory of human action based on premises presumed to be philosophically true (following the analytic–synthetic distinction of Immanuel Kant ). Developed by Ludwig von Mises within the Austrian School , is a self-conscious opposition to the mathematical modeling and hypothesis-testing to validate neoclassical economics.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Cross-cultural perspectives on economics, and economic anthropology : an example is the Buddhist -inspired Bhutanese " Gross National Happiness " concept (suggested as a better development measure than GNI/GDP).

Amartya Sen is a renowned advocate for the integration of cross-cultural phenomena into economic thinking.

[ 19 ] Feminist perspectives on economics, or feminist economics .

[ 20 ] Scholars cited in the literature [ edit ] Aristotle Kenneth Arrow Roger E. Backhouse Ken Binmore Kevin Carson Milton Friedman Frank Hahn Friedrich Hayek Martin Hollis Daniel M. Hausman Terence Wilmot Hutchison David Hume John Neville Keynes John Maynard Keynes Tony Lawson John Locke Uskali Mäki Thomas Robert Malthus Karl Marx John Stuart Mill Ludwig von Mises Pierre-Joseph Proudhon John E. Roemer Murray Rothbard John Rawls Lionel Robbins Joan Robinson Alexander Rosenberg Paul Samuelson E. F. Schumacher Amartya Sen Brian Skyrms Adam Smith Max Weber Carl Menger Bernard Williams Related disciplines [ edit ] The ethics of economic systems is an area of overlap between business ethics and the philosophy of economics. People who write on the ethics of economic systems are more likely to call themselves political philosophers than business ethicists or economic philosophers . There is significant overlap between theoretical issues in economics and the philosophy of economics. As economics is generally accepted to have its origins in philosophy, the history of economics overlaps with the philosophy of economics.

Degrees [ edit ] Some universities offer joint degrees that combine philosophy, politics and economics . These degrees cover many of the problems that are discussed in Philosophy and Economics, but are more broadly construed. A small number of universities, notably the London School of Economics , University of Edinburgh , [ 21 ] the Erasmus University Rotterdam , Copenhagen Business School , the University of Vienna [ 22 ] the University of Bayreuth , the University of Hamburg and the Witten/Herdecke University offer master's degree programs specialized in philosophy, politics and economics.

Journals [ edit ] Economics and Philosophy Erasmus Journal for Philosophy and Economics Journal of Economic Methodology Philosophy and Public Affairs Politics, Philosophy & Economics – Aims and Scope See also [ edit ] Analytic philosophy Critique of political economy Epistemology of finance Philosophy of science Schools of economic thought History of economic thought Teoría de Precios: Porqué está mal la Economía textbook (2010) References [ edit ] ^ Walter Veit (2019). Model Pluralism. Philosophy of the Social Sciences, 50(2), 91–114.

https://doi.org/10.1177/0048393119894897 ^ "Philosophy of Economics" .

Philosophy of Economics, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2021.

^ de Scheemaekere, Xavier (2009).

"The epistemology of modern finance" .

Journal of Philosophical Economics .

II (Articles).

doi : 10.46298/jpe.10578 .

hdl : 2013/ULB-DIPOT:oai:dipot.ulb.ac.be:2013/14567 .

ISSN 1844-8208 .

^ Polakow, Daniel A.; Gebbie, Tim; Flint, Emlyn (2023).

"Epistemic Limits of Empirical Finance: Causal Reductionism and Self-Reference" .

SSRN Electronic Journal .

arXiv : 2311.16570 .

doi : 10.2139/ssrn.4646664 .

ISSN 1556-5068 .

^ For example: Roger E. Backhouse and Steven Medema (2008). "economics, definition of", The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics , 2nd Edition.

Abstract .

_____ (2009). "Retrospectives: On the Definition of Economics", Journal of Economic Perspectives , 23(1), pp.

221–33 .

Adam Smith ([1776] 1976).

An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations . Oxford University Press. p. 428.

John Stuart Mill (1844). "On the Definition of Political Economy; and on the Method of Investigation Proper to It", Essay V, in Essays on Some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy .

Lionel Robbins (1932).

An Essay on the Nature and Significance of Economic Science , Macmillan, p. 16.

^ For example: Roger E. Backhouse and Steven Medema (2008). "economics, definition of", The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics , 2nd Edition.

Abstract .

Uskali Mäki (2008). "scientific realism and ontology", The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics , 2nd Edition.

Abstract .

^ For example: D. Wade Hands  (2008). "philosophy and economics", The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics , 2nd Edition.

Abstract .

Roger E. Backhouse (2008). "methodology of economics", The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics , 2nd Edition.

Abstract .

Alexander Rosenberg (1976).

Microeconomic Laws: A Philosophical Analysis , University of Pittsburgh Press.

Description Archived 2012-01-12 at the Wayback Machine and Preview .

_____ (1983). "If Economics Isn't Science, What Is It?" Philosophical Forum , 14, pp. 296–314.

_____ (1986). "What Rosenberg's Philosophy of Economics Is Not", Philosophy of Science , 53(1), pp. 127–132.

JSTOR 187927 Douglas W. Hands (1984). "What Economics Is Not: An Economist's Response to Rosenberg", Philosophy of Science , 51(3), pp. 495–503.

JSTOR 187496 Bruce J. Caldwell ([1982] 1994).

Beyond Positivism: Economic Methodology in the Twentieth Century , 2nd ed. Routledge.

Preview .

Daniel M. Hausman (1980). "How to Do Philosophy of Economics", PSA: Proceedings of the Biennial Meeting of the Philosophy of Science Association , 1, pp. 353–362.

JSTOR 192578 _____ (1983). "The Limits of Economic Science", in The Limits of Lawfulness: Studies on the Scope and Nature of Scientific Knowledge , N. Rescher, ed. Reprinted in D.M. Hausman (1992 Essays on Philosophy and Economic Methodology , pp.

99–108 .

Daniel M. Hausman (1989). "Economic Methodology in a Nutshell", Journal of Economic Perspectives , 3(2), pp.

115–127 .

_____ (1992).

The Inexact and Separate Science of Economics .

Description , to ch. 1 excerpt , preview , and reviews: JSTOR 2185742 JSTOR 687635 Kevin D. Hoover (1995). "Review Article: Why Does Methodology Matter for Economics?" Economic Journal , 105(430), pp.

715–734 .

Vernon L. Smith (2003). "Constructivist and Ecological Rationality in Economics", American Economic Review , 93(3), pp.

465–508 .

Archived 2012-01-11 at the Wayback Machine _____ (2008). "experimental economics", The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics , 2nd Edition, Abstract .

Francesco Guala (2005).

The Methodology of Experimental Economics , Cambridge. Description/contents links and ch. 1 excerpt .

Archived 2012-09-17 at the Wayback Machine ^ Paul Anand (1993, 1995). "Foundations of Rational Choice Under Risk". Oxford. Oxford University Press.

^ Cristina Bicchieri (1993).

Rationality and Coordination . Cambridge.

Description and chapter-preview links, pp.

v-vi . Game-theory links .

^ For example: Amartya K. Sen (1970 [1984]).

Collective Choice and Social Welfare . Elsevier.

Daniel M. Hausman and Michael S. McPherson (1993).  "Taking Ethics Seriously: Economics and Contemporary Moral Philosophy", Journal of Economic Literature , 31(2), pp.

671–731 .

_____ ([1994] 2005), 2nd Ed.

Economic Analysis and Moral Philosophy . Cambridge University Press.

Hal R. Varian (1975).  "Distributive Justice, Welfare Economics, and the Theory of Fairness", Philosophy & Public Affairs 4(3), pp. 223–247.

JSTOR 2265084 ^ Amartya Sen (1987).

On Ethics and Economics , Blackwell.

^ Amartya Sen (1990). "Justice: Means versus Freedoms," Philosophy & Public Affairs , 19(2), pp.

111 -121.

^ In the Journal of Economic Literature classification codes at JEL: D63 ,  wedged on the same line between ' Equity ' and ' Inequality '.

^ For example: Richard Posner (1981).

The Economics of Justice .

Description and chapter links, pp.

xi-xiii .

David A. Hoffman and Michael P. O'Shea (2002). "Can Law and Economics Be Both Practical and Principled?" Alabama Law Review ,  53(2), pp.

335–420 .

^ Sven Ove Hansson (2010). "cost–benefit analysis: philosophical issues," The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics , Online Edition.

Abstract.

^ Marc Fleurbaey (2008).  "ethics and economics," The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics , 2nd Edition.

Abstract.

^ What Is the Mises Institute? Mission Statement .

^ Praxeology: The Methodology of Austrian Economics Praxeology: The Methodology of Austrian Economics . Murray N. Rothbard (1976) ^ Amartya Sen (2008).

"Culture and Development." Archived 2011-10-05 at the Wayback Machine ^ For example: Drucilla Barker & Edith Kuiper eds., Towards a feminist philosophy of economics . Routledge. 2003.

ISBN 0-415-28388-4 .

^ "MA Philosophy and Economics" .

www.ed.ac.uk . Retrieved 9 July 2022 .

^ "Master's in Philosophy and Economics About P&E" . univie . Retrieved 14 August 2022 .

Further reading [ edit ] Boulding, Kenneth E.

(1969). "Economics as a Moral Science," American Economic Review , 59(1), pp.

1 -12.

Caldwell, Bruce (1987). "positivism," The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics , v.3, pp. 921–23.

Downie, R.S. (1987). "moral philosophy," The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics , v. 3, pp. 551–56.

Hands, D. Wade, ed.  (1993).

The Philosophy and Methodology of Economics , Edward Elgar. 3 v. Description and Table of Contents links.

Davis, John B., Alain Marciano, Jochen Runde, eds. (2004).

The Elgar Companion to Economics and Philosophy . Description & Table of Contents links and Introduction and ch. 1 previews via sidebar scrolling . Articles from 1925 & 1940–1991.

Hausman, Daniel M.

(1992).

Essays on Philosophy and Economic Methodology .

Description ,  ch. 1 link.

Chapter-preview links.

_____, ed. ([1984] 2008).

The Philosophy of Economics: An Anthology , 3rd ed. Cambridge. Description & Table of contents links and Introduction . From John Stuart Mill on.

Heilbroner, Robert L.

([1953] 1999).

The Worldly Philosophers: The Lives, Times, and Ideas of the Great Economic Thinkers , 7th ed. Scroll to chapter-preview links.

Hodgson, Bernard (2001).

Economics as Moral Science .

Description and chapter-preview links, pp.

xi - xiv.

Peil, Jan, and Irene van Staveren, eds. (2009).

Handbook of Economics and Ethics , Edward Elgar.

Description and preview.

Putnam, Hilary (1993). "The Collapse of the Fact/Value Dichotomy," in Martha Nussbaum and Amartya Sen, ed.

The Quality of Life , pp. 143–157. Oxford. Reprinted in Putnam (2002), Part I, pp. 5 -64 .

_____ (2002).

The Collapse of the Fact/Value Dichotomy and Other Essays , Description and chapter-preview links.

Robinson, Joan (1962).

Economic Philosophy .

Description and scroll to chapter and previews.

Rubinstein, Ariel (2006). "Dilemmas of an Economic Theorist," Econometrica , 74(4), pp.

865–883 (close Page tab).

Szenberg, Michael , ed. (1992).

Eminent Economists: Their Life Philosophies , Cambridge.

Description and preview.

Walsh, Vivian (1961).

Scarcity and Evil]: An Original Exploration of Moral Issues on the Frontier Between Guilt and Tragedy . Prentice-Hall.

_____ (1987). "philosophy and economics," The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics , v. 3, pp. 861–869.

_____ (1996).

Rationality, Allocation, and Reproduction . Cambridge.

Description and scroll to chapter-preview links.

External links [ edit ] Philosophy of Economics (Daniel Little's entry in the Routledge Encyclopedia of the Philosophy of Science ) Philosophy of Economics (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy) by Daniel M. Hausman, notable in the field.

v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category Links to related articles v t e Economics Theoretical Microeconomics Decision theory Price theory Game theory Contract theory Mechanism design Macroeconomics Mathematical economics Complexity economics Computational economics Agent-based computational economics Behavioral economics Pluralism in economics Empirical Econometrics Economic statistics Experimental economics Economic history Applied Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Schools ( history ) Attention Mainstream Heterodox American (National) Ancient thought Austrian Behavioral Buddhist Chartalism Modern monetary theory Chicago Classical Critique of political economy Democratic Disequilibrium Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgism Happiness Historical Humanistic Institutional Keynesian Neo- ( neoclassical–Keynesian synthesis ) New Post- Circuitism Malthusianism Marginalism Marxian Neo- Mercantilism Mixed Mutualism Neoclassical Lausanne New classical Real business-cycle theory New institutional Physiocracy Socialist Stockholm Supply-side Thermo Economists de Mandeville Quesnay Smith Malthus Say Ricardo von Thünen List Bastiat Cournot Mill Gossen Marx Walras Jevons George Menger Marshall Edgeworth Clark Pareto von Böhm-Bawerk von Wieser Veblen Gesell Fisher Pigou Heckscher von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Knight Polanyi Frisch Sraffa Myrdal Hayek Kalecki Röpke Kuznets Tinbergen Robinson von Neumann Hicks Lange Leontief Galbraith Koopmans Schumacher Friedman Samuelson Simon Buchanan Arrow Baumol Solow Rothbard Greenspan Sowell Becker Ostrom Sen Lucas Stiglitz Thaler Hoppe Krugman Piketty more Lists Glossary Economists Publications ( journals ) Schools Category Index Lists Outline Publications Business portal v t e Social sciences Outline History Index Primary Anthropology archaeology cultural social physical Economics microeconomics macroeconomics econometrics mathematical Geography physical human technical integrated History cultural auxiliary sciences economic human military political social Law jurisprudence legal history legal systems public law private law Linguistics semiotics Political science international relations comparative philosophy public policy public administration Psychology abnormal cognitive developmental personality social Sociology criminology demography internet rural urban Interdisciplinary Administration business public Anthrozoology Area studies Business studies Cognitive science Communication studies Community studies Criminology Critical animal studies Cultural studies Development studies Education Environmental social science studies Food studies Gender studies Global studies Historical sociology History of technology Human ecology Information science International studies Linguistics Management Media studies Philosophies science economics history psychology social science Planning land use regional urban Political ecology Political economy Political sociology Public health Regional science Science and technology studies Science studies historical Quantum social science Social work Vegan studies List List of social science journals Other categorizations Behavioural sciences Geisteswissenschaft Human science Humanities Category v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category Authority control databases National Germany United States Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Philosophy_and_economics&oldid=1294706435 " Categories : Philosophy of economics Interdisciplinary subfields of economics Philosophy of science by discipline Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles with excerpts Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 9 June 2025, at 09:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Philosophy and economics 24 languages Add topic

