Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology and history 2 Geology Toggle Geology subsection 2.1 Stratigraphy 2.1.1 Early Jurassic 2.1.2 Middle Jurassic 2.1.3 Late Jurassic 2.2 Mineral and hydrocarbon deposits 2.3 Impact structures 3 Paleogeography and tectonics 4 Climate Toggle Climate subsection 4.1 Climatic events 4.1.1 Toarcian Oceanic Anoxic Event 4.1.2 End-Jurassic transition 5 Flora Toggle Flora subsection 5.1 End-Triassic extinction 5.2 Floral composition 5.2.1 Conifers 5.2.2 Ginkgoales 5.2.3 Bennettitales 5.2.4 Cycads 5.2.5 Other seed plants 5.2.6 Ferns and allies 5.2.7 Lower plants 6 Fauna Toggle Fauna subsection 6.1 Dinosaurs 6.1.1 Theropods 6.1.1.1 Birds 6.1.2 Ornithischians 6.1.3 Sauropodomorphs 6.2 Other reptiles 6.2.1 Crocodylomorphs 6.2.2 Turtles 6.2.3 Lepidosaurs 6.2.4 Choristoderes 6.2.5 Ichthyosaurs 6.2.6 Plesiosaurs 6.2.7 Pterosaurs 6.3 Amphibians 6.4 Mammaliaformes 6.5 Fish 6.5.1 Jawless fish 6.5.2 Sarcopterygii 6.5.3 Actinopterygii 6.5.4 Chondrichthyes 6.6 Insects and arachnids 6.7 Marine invertebrates 6.7.1 End-Triassic extinction 6.7.2 Marine ecosystems 6.7.3 Echinoderms 6.7.4 Crustaceans 6.7.5 Brachiopods 6.7.6 Bryozoans 6.7.7 Molluscs 6.7.7.1 Gastropods 6.7.7.2 Bivalves 6.7.7.3 Cephalopods 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Citations 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Jurassic 102 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Banjar 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Furlan Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Mirandés Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی پښتو Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Runa Simi Русский Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Walon 文言 Winaray 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Second period of the Mesozoic Era Jurassic 201.4 ± 0.2 – ~143.1 Ma PreꞒ Ꞓ O S D C P T J K Pg N A map of Earth as it appeared 170 million years ago during the Middle Jurassic Epoch Chronology −205 — – −200 — – −195 — – −190 — – −185 — – −180 — – −175 — – −170 — – −165 — – −160 — – −155 — – −150 — – −145 — – −140 — Mesozoic Triassic Jurassic Cretaceous Early Middle Late Hettangian Sinemurian Pliensbachian Toarcian Aalenian Bajocian Bathonian Callovian Oxfordian Kimmeridgian Tithonian ← Triassic–Jurassic extinction event Subdivision of the Jurassic according to the ICS , as of 2024.

[ 1 ] Vertical axis scale: Millions of years ago Etymology Name formality Formal Usage information Regional usage Global ( ICS ) Time scale(s) used ICS Time Scale Definition Chronological unit Period Stratigraphic unit System Time span formality Formal Lower boundary definition First appearance of the ammonite Psiloceras spelae tirolicum .

Lower boundary GSSP Kuhjoch section, Karwendel mountains , Northern Calcareous Alps , Austria 47°29′02″N 11°31′50″E ﻿ / ﻿ 47.4839°N 11.5306°E ﻿ / 47.4839; 11.5306 Lower GSSP ratified 2010 Upper boundary definition Not formally defined Upper boundary definition candidates Magnetic—base of Chron M18r Base of Calpionellid zone B FAD of ammonite Berriasella jacobi Upper boundary GSSP candidate section(s) None The Jurassic ( / dʒ ʊ ˈ r æ s ɪ k / juurr- ASS -ik [ 2 ] ) is a geologic period and stratigraphic system that spanned from the end of the Triassic Period 201.4 Ma (million years ago) to the beginning of the Cretaceous Period, approximately 143.1 Ma. The Jurassic constitutes the second and middle period of the Mesozoic Era as well as the eighth period of the Phanerozoic Eon and is named after the Jura Mountains , where limestone strata from the period were first identified.

The start of the Jurassic was marked by the major Triassic–Jurassic extinction event , associated with the eruption of the Central Atlantic Magmatic Province (CAMP). The beginning of the Toarcian Age started around 183 Ma and is marked by the Toarcian Oceanic Anoxic Event , a global episode of oceanic anoxia , ocean acidification , and elevated global temperatures associated with extinctions, likely caused by the eruption of the Karoo-Ferrar large igneous provinces . The end of the Jurassic, however, has no clear, definitive boundary with the Cretaceous and is the only boundary between geological periods to remain formally undefined.

By the beginning of the Jurassic, the supercontinent Pangaea had begun rifting into two landmasses: Laurasia to the north and Gondwana to the south. The climate of the Jurassic was warmer than the present, and there were no ice caps . Forests grew close to the poles, with large arid expanses in the lower latitudes.

On land, the fauna transitioned from the Triassic fauna, dominated jointly by dinosauromorph and pseudosuchian archosaurs , to one dominated by dinosaurs alone. The first stem-group birds appeared during the Jurassic, evolving from a branch of theropod dinosaurs. Other major events include the appearance of the earliest crabs and modern frogs , salamanders and lizards .

Mammaliaformes , one of the few cynodont lineages to survive the end of the Triassic, continued to diversify throughout the period, with the Jurassic seeing the emergence of the first crown group mammals .

Crocodylomorphs made the transition from a terrestrial to an aquatic life. The oceans were inhabited by marine reptiles such as ichthyosaurs and plesiosaurs , while pterosaurs were the dominant flying vertebrates . Modern sharks and rays first appeared and diversified during the period, while the first known crown-group teleost fish (the dominant group of modern fish) appeared near the end of the period. The flora was dominated by ferns and gymnosperms , including conifers , of which many modern groups made their first appearance during the period, as well as other groups like the extinct Bennettitales .

Etymology and history [ edit ] Portrait of Alexandre Brongniart , who coined the term "Jurassic" The chronostratigraphic term "Jurassic" is linked to the Jura Mountains , a forested mountain range that mainly follows the France–Switzerland border . The name "Jura" is derived from the Celtic root * jor via Gaulish *iuris "wooded mountain", which was borrowed into Latin as a name of a place and evolved into Juria and finally Jura .

During a tour of the region in 1795, German naturalist Alexander von Humboldt recognized carbonate deposits within the Jura Mountains as geologically distinct from the Triassic aged Muschelkalk of southern Germany , but he erroneously concluded that they were older. He then named them Jura-Kalkstein ('Jura limestone') in 1799.

[ 3 ] In 1829, the French naturalist Alexandre Brongniart published a book entitled Description of the Terrains that Constitute the Crust of the Earth or Essay on the Structure of the Known Lands of the Earth.

In this book, Brongniart used the phrase terrains jurassiques when correlating the "Jura-Kalkstein" of Humboldt with similarly aged oolitic limestones in Britain, thus coining and publishing the term "Jurassic".

[ 4 ] [ 3 ] The German geologist Leopold von Buch in 1839 established the three-fold division of the Jurassic, originally named from oldest to the youngest: the Black Jurassic , Brown Jurassic , and White Jurassic .

[ 5 ] The term " Lias " had previously been used for strata of equivalent age to the Black Jurassic in England by William Conybeare and William Phillips in 1822. William Phillips, the geologist, worked with William Conybeare to find out more about the Black Jurassic in England.

The French palaeontologist Alcide d'Orbigny in papers between 1842 and 1852 divided the Jurassic into ten stages based on ammonite and other fossil assemblages in England and France, of which seven are still used, but none has retained its original definition. The German geologist and palaeontologist Friedrich August von Quenstedt in 1858 divided the three series of von Buch in the Swabian Jura into six subdivisions defined by ammonites and other fossils.

The German palaeontologist Albert Oppel in his studies between 1856 and 1858 altered d'Orbigny's original scheme and further subdivided the stages into biostratigraphic zones, based primarily on ammonites. Most of the modern stages of the Jurassic were formalized at the Colloque du Jurassique à Luxembourg in 1962.

[ 3 ] Geology [ edit ] The Jurassic Period is divided into three epochs : Early, Middle, and Late. Similarly, in stratigraphy , the Jurassic is divided into the Lower Jurassic , Middle Jurassic , and Upper Jurassic series . Geologists divide the rocks of the Jurassic into a stratigraphic set of units called stages , each formed during corresponding time intervals called ages.

Stages can be defined globally or regionally. For global stratigraphic correlation, the International Commission on Stratigraphy (ICS) ratify global stages based on a Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP) from a single formation (a stratotype ) identifying the lower boundary of the stage.

[ 3 ] The ages of the Jurassic from youngest to oldest are as follows: [ 6 ] Series/epoch Stage/age Lower boundary Early Cretaceous Berriasian 143.1 ± 0.6 Ma Upper/Late Jurassic Tithonian 149.2 ± 0.7 Ma Kimmeridgian 154.8 ± 0.8 Ma Oxfordian 161.5 ± 1.0 Ma Middle Jurassic Callovian 165.3 ± 1.1 Ma Bathonian 168.2 ± 1.2 Ma Bajocian 170.9 ± 0.8 Ma Aalenian 174.7 ± 0.8 Ma Lower/Early Jurassic Toarcian 184.2 ± 0.3 Ma Pliensbachian 192.9 ± 0.3 Ma Sinemurian 199.5 ± 0.3 Ma Hettangian 201.4 ± 0.2 Ma Stratigraphy [ edit ] Folded Lower Jurassic limestone layers of the Doldenhorn nappe at Gasteretal , Switzerland Middle Jurassic strata in Neuquén Province , Argentina Tidwell Member of the Morrison Formation (Upper Jurassic), Colorado Jurassic stratigraphy is primarily based on the use of ammonites as index fossils . The first appearance datum of specific ammonite taxa is used to mark the beginnings of stages, as well as smaller timespans within stages, referred to as "ammonite zones"; these, in turn, are also sometimes subdivided further into subzones. Global stratigraphy is based on standard European ammonite zones, with other regions being calibrated to the European successions.

[ 3 ] Base Aalenian GSSP at Fuentelsaz Early Jurassic [ edit ] The oldest part of the Jurassic Period has historically been referred to as the Lias or Liassic, roughly equivalent in extent to the Early Jurassic, but also including part of the preceding Rhaetian . The Hettangian Stage was named by Swiss palaeontologist Eugène Renevier in 1864 after Hettange-Grande in north-eastern France.

[ 3 ] The GSSP for the base of the Hettangian is located at the Kuhjoch Pass, Karwendel Mountains , Northern Calcareous Alps , Austria; it was ratified in 2010. The beginning of the Hettangian, and thus the Jurassic as a whole, is marked by the first appearance of the ammonite Psiloceras spelae tirolicum in the Kendlbach Formation exposed at Kuhjoch.

[ 7 ] The base of the Jurassic was previously defined as the first appearance of Psiloceras planorbis by Albert Oppel in 1856–58, but this was changed as the appearance was seen as too localised an event for an international boundary.

[ 3 ] The Sinemurian Stage was first defined and introduced into scientific literature by Alcide d'Orbigny in 1842. It takes its name from the French town of Semur-en-Auxois , near Dijon . The original definition of Sinemurian included what is now the Hettangian. The GSSP of the Sinemurian is located at a cliff face north of the hamlet of East Quantoxhead , 6 kilometres east of Watchet , Somerset , England , within the Blue Lias , and was ratified in 2000. The beginning of the Sinemurian is defined by the first appearance of the ammonite Vermiceras quantoxense .

[ 3 ] [ 8 ] Albert Oppel in 1858 named the Pliensbachian Stage after the hamlet of Pliensbach in the community of Zell unter Aichelberg in the Swabian Alb , near Stuttgart , Germany. The GSSP for the base of the Pliensbachian is found at the Wine Haven locality in Robin Hood's Bay , Yorkshire , England, in the Redcar Mudstone Formation , and was ratified in 2005. The beginning of the Pliensbachian is defined by the first appearance of the ammonite Bifericeras donovani .

[ 9 ] The village Thouars (Latin: Toarcium ), just south of Saumur in the Loire Valley of France , lends its name to the Toarcian Stage. The Toarcian was named by Alcide d'Orbigny in 1842, with the original locality being Vrines quarry around 2 km northwest of Thouars. The GSSP for the base of the Toarcian is located at Peniche, Portugal , and was ratified in 2014. The boundary is defined by the first appearance of ammonites belonging to the subgenus Dactylioceras ( Eodactylites ) .

[ 10 ] Middle Jurassic [ edit ] The Aalenian is named after the city of Aalen in Germany. The Aalenian was defined by Swiss geologist Karl Mayer-Eymar in 1864. The lower boundary was originally between the dark clays of the Black Jurassic and the overlying clayey sandstone and ferruginous oolite of the Brown Jurassic sequences of southwestern Germany.

[ 3 ] The GSSP for the base of the Aalenian is located at Fuentelsaz in the Iberian range near Guadalajara, Spain , and was ratified in 2000. The base of the Aalenian is defined by the first appearance of the ammonite Leioceras opalinum .

[ 11 ] Alcide d'Orbigny in 1842 named the Bajocian Stage after the town of Bayeux (Latin: Bajoce ) in Normandy, France. The GSSP for the base of the Bajocian is located in the Murtinheira section at Cabo Mondego , Portugal; it was ratified in 1997. The base of the Bajocian is defined by the first appearance of the ammonite Hyperlioceras mundum .

[ 12 ] The Bathonian is named after the city of Bath , England, introduced by Belgian geologist d'Omalius d'Halloy in 1843, after an incomplete section of oolitic limestones in several quarries in the region. The GSSP for the base of the Bathonian is Ravin du Bès, Bas-Auran area, Alpes de Haute Provence , France; it was ratified in 2009. The base of the Bathonian is defined by the first appearance of the ammonite Gonolkites convergens , at the base of the Zigzagiceras zigzag ammonite zone .

[ 13 ] The Callovian is derived from the Latinized name of the village of Kellaways in Wiltshire , England, and was named by Alcide d'Orbigny in 1852, originally the base at the contact between the Forest Marble Formation and the Cornbrash Formation . However, this boundary was later found to be within the upper part of the Bathonian.

[ 3 ] The base of the Callovian does not yet have a certified GSSP. The working definition for the base of the Callovian is the first appearance of ammonites belonging to the genus Kepplerites .

[ 14 ] Late Jurassic [ edit ] The Oxfordian is named after the city of Oxford in England and was named by Alcide d'Orbigny in 1844 in reference to the Oxford Clay . The base of the Oxfordian lacks a defined GSSP.

W. J. Arkell in studies in 1939 and 1946 placed the lower boundary of the Oxfordian as the first appearance of the ammonite Quenstedtoceras mariae (then placed in the genus Vertumniceras ). Subsequent proposals have suggested the first appearance of Cardioceras redcliffense as the lower boundary.

[ 3 ] [ 14 ] Kimmeridge Clay at Egmont Bight in the Jurassic Coast , southern England The village of Kimmeridge on the coast of Dorset , England, is the origin of the name of the Kimmeridgian. The stage was named by Alcide d'Orbigny in 1842 in reference to the Kimmeridge Clay . The GSSP for the base of the Kimmeridgian is the Flodigarry section at Staffin Bay on the Isle of Skye , Scotland, [ 15 ] which was ratified in 2021. The boundary is defined by the first appearance of ammonites marking the boreal Bauhini Zone and the subboreal Baylei Zone.

[ 14 ] The Tithonian was introduced in scientific literature by Albert Oppel in 1865. The name Tithonian is unusual in geological stage names because it is derived from Greek mythology rather than a place name.

Tithonus was the son of Laomedon of Troy and fell in love with Eos , the Greek goddess of dawn . His name was chosen by Albert Oppel for this stratigraphical stage because the Tithonian finds itself hand in hand with the dawn of the Cretaceous. The base of the Tithonian currently lacks a GSSP.

[ 3 ] The working definition for the base of the Tithonian is the first appearance of the ammonite genus Gravesia .

[ 14 ] The upper boundary of the Jurassic is currently undefined, and the Jurassic–Cretaceous boundary is currently the only system boundary to lack a defined GSSP. Placing a GSSP for this boundary has been difficult because of the strong regionality of most biostratigraphic markers, and lack of any chemostratigraphic events, such as isotope excursions (large sudden changes in ratios of isotopes ), that could be used to define or correlate a boundary.

Calpionellids , an enigmatic group of planktonic protists with urn-shaped calcitic tests briefly abundant during the latest Jurassic to earliest Cretaceous, have been suggested to represent the most promising candidates for fixing the Jurassic–Cretaceous boundary [ 16 ] In particular, the first appearance Calpionella alpina , co-inciding with the base of the eponymous Alpina subzone, has been proposed as the definition of the base of the Cretaceous.

[ 17 ] The working definition for the boundary has often been placed as the first appearance of the ammonite Strambergella jacobi , formerly placed in the genus Berriasella , but its use as a stratigraphic indicator has been questioned, as its first appearance does not correlate with that of C. alpina .

[ 18 ] Mineral and hydrocarbon deposits [ edit ] The Kimmeridge Clay and equivalents are the major source rock for the North Sea oil .

[ 19 ] The Arabian Intrashelf Basin, deposited during the Middle and Late Jurassic, is the setting of the world's largest oil reserves, including the Ghawar Field , the world's largest oil field.

[ 20 ] The Jurassic-aged Sargelu [ 21 ] and Naokelekan formations [ 22 ] are major source rocks for oil in Iraq . Over 1500 gigatons of Jurassic coal reserves are found in north-west China, primarily in the Turpan-Hami Basin and the Ordos Basin .

[ 23 ] Impact structures [ edit ] Major impact structures include the Morokweng impact structure , a 70 km diameter impact structure buried beneath the Kalahari desert in northern South Africa. The impact is dated to the Tithonian, approximately 146.06 ± 0.16 Ma.

[ 24 ] Another major structure is the Puchezh-Katunki crater , 40 kilometres in diameter, buried beneath Nizhny Novgorod Oblast in western Russia. The impact has been dated to the Sinemurian, 195.9 ± 1.0 Ma.

[ 25 ] Paleogeography and tectonics [ edit ] Map of geography during the Early Jurassic, around 190 million years ago At the beginning of the Jurassic, all of the world's major landmasses were coalesced into the supercontinent Pangaea , which during the Early Jurassic began to break up into northern supercontinent Laurasia and the southern supercontinent Gondwana .

[ 26 ] The rifting between North America and Africa was the first to initiate, beginning in the early Jurassic, associated with the emplacement of the Central Atlantic Magmatic Province .

[ 27 ] Map of Europe during the Toarcian Age During the Jurassic, the North Atlantic Ocean remained relatively narrow, while the South Atlantic did not open until the Cretaceous.

[ 28 ] [ 27 ] The continents were surrounded by Panthalassa , with the Tethys Ocean between Gondwana and Asia. At the end of the Triassic, there was a marine transgression in Europe, flooding most parts of central and western Europe transforming it into an archipelago of islands surrounded by shallow seas.

[ 29 ] During the Jurassic, both the North and South Pole were covered by oceans.

[ 26 ] Beginning in the Early Jurassic, the Boreal Ocean was connected to the proto-Atlantic by the "Viking corridor" or Transcontinental Laurasian Seaway, a passage between the Baltic Shield and Greenland several hundred kilometers wide.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] During the Callovian, the Turgai Epicontinental Sea formed, creating a marine barrier between Europe and Asia.

[ 33 ] Map of global geography during the Late Jurassic, around 155 million years ago Madagascar and Antarctica began to rift away from Africa during the late Early Jurassic in association with the eruption of the Karoo-Ferrar large igneous provinces , opening the western Indian Ocean and beginning the fragmentation of Gondwana.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] At the beginning of the Jurassic, North and South America remained connected, but by the beginning of the Late Jurassic they had rifted apart to form the Caribbean Seaway, also known as the Hispanic Corridor, which connected the North Atlantic Ocean with eastern Panthalassa. Palaeontological data suggest that the seaway had been open since the Early Jurassic.

[ 36 ] As part of the Nevadan orogeny , which began during the Triassic, the Cache Creek Ocean closed, and various terranes including the large Wrangellia Terrane accreted onto the western margin of North America.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] By the Middle Jurassic the Siberian plate and the North China-Amuria block had collided, resulting in the closure of the Mongol-Okhotsk Ocean .

[ 39 ] Formation of the Pacific Plate during the Early Jurassic During the Early Jurassic, around 190 million years ago, the Pacific Plate originated at the triple junction of the Farallon , Phoenix , and Izanagi tectonic plates , the three main oceanic plates of Panthalassa. The previously stable triple junction had converted to an unstable arrangement surrounded on all sides by transform faults because of a kink in one of the plate boundaries, resulting in the formation of the Pacific Plate at the centre of the junction.

[ 40 ] During the Middle to early Late Jurassic, the Sundance Seaway , a shallow epicontinental sea , covered much of northwest North America.

[ 41 ] Grainstone with calcitic ooids and sparry calcite cement; Carmel Formation , Middle Jurassic, of southern Utah, US The eustatic sea level is estimated to have been close to present levels during the Hettangian and Sinemurian, rising several tens of metres during the late Sinemurian–Pliensbachian before regressing to near present levels by the late Pliensbachian. There seems to have been a gradual rise to a peak of ~75 m above present sea level during the Toarcian. During the latest part of the Toarcian, the sea level again dropped by several tens of metres. It progressively rose from the Aalenian onwards, aside from dips of a few tens of metres in the Bajocian and around the Callovian–Oxfordian boundary, peaking possibly as high as 140 metres above present sea level at the Kimmeridgian–Tithonian boundary. The sea levels falls in the late Tithonian, perhaps to around 100 metres, before rebounding to around 110 metres at the Tithonian–Berriasian boundary.

The sea level within the long-term trends across the Jurassic was cyclical, with 64 fluctuations, 15 of which were over 75 metres. The most noted cyclicity in Jurassic rocks is fourth order, with a periodicity of approximately 410,000 years.

[ 42 ] During the Early Jurassic the world's oceans transitioned from an aragonite sea to a calcite sea chemistry, favouring the dissolution of aragonite and precipitation of calcite .

[ 43 ] The rise of calcareous plankton during the Middle Jurassic profoundly altered ocean chemistry, with the deposition of biomineralized plankton on the ocean floor acting as a buffer against large CO 2 emissions.

[ 44 ] Climate [ edit ] The climate of the Jurassic was generally warmer than that of present, by around 5–10 °C (9–18 °F), with atmospheric carbon dioxide likely about four times higher. Intermittent "cold snap" intervals are known to have occurred during this time period, however, interrupting the otherwise warm greenhouse climate.

[ 45 ] Forests likely grew near the poles, where they experienced warm summers and cold, sometimes snowy winters; there were unlikely to have been ice sheets given the high summer temperatures that prevented the accumulation of snow, though there may have been mountain glaciers.

[ 46 ] Dropstones and glendonites in northeastern Siberia during the Early to Middle Jurassic indicate cold winters.

[ 47 ] The ocean depths were likely 8 °C (14 °F) warmer than present, and coral reefs grew 10° of latitude further north and south. The Intertropical Convergence Zone likely existed over the oceans, resulting in large areas of desert and scrubland in the lower latitudes between 40° N and S of the equator.

Tropical rainforest and tundra biomes are likely to have been rare or absent.

[ 46 ] The Jurassic also witnessed the decline of the Pangaean megamonsoon that had characterised the preceding Permian and Triassic periods.

[ 48 ] Variation in the frequency of wildfire activity in the Jurassic was governed by the 405 kyr eccentricity cycle.

[ 49 ] Thanks to the breakup of Pangaea, the hydrological cycle during the Jurassic was significantly enhanced.

[ 50 ] The beginning of the Jurassic was likely marked by a thermal spike corresponding to the Triassic–Jurassic extinction and eruption of the Central Atlantic magmatic province. The first part of the Jurassic was marked by the Early Jurassic Cool Interval between 199 and 183 million years ago.

[ 47 ] It has been proposed that glaciation was present in the Northern Hemisphere during both the early Pliensbachian [ 51 ] and the latest Pliensbachian.

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] There was a spike in global temperatures of around 4–8 °C (7–14 °F) during the early part of the Toarcian corresponding to the Toarcian Oceanic Anoxic Event and the eruption of the Karoo-Ferrar large igneous provinces in southern Gondwana, with the warm interval extending to the end of the Toarcian around 174 million years ago.

[ 47 ] During the Toarcian Warm Interval, ocean surface temperatures likely exceeded 30 °C (86 °F), and equatorial and subtropical (30°N–30°S) regions are likely to have been extremely arid, with temperatures in the interior of Pangea likely in excess of 40 °C (104 °F).The Toarcian Warm Interval is followed by the Middle Jurassic Cool Interval (MJCI) between 174 and 164 Ma, [ 47 ] which may have been punctuated by brief, ephemeral icehouse intervals.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] During the Aalenian, precessionally forced climatic changes dictated peatland wildfire magnitude and frequency.

[ 56 ] The European climate appears to have become noticeably more humid at the Aalenian-Bajocian boundary but then became more arid during the middle Bajocian.

[ 57 ] A transient ice age possibly occurred in the late Bajocian.

[ 58 ] The Callovian-Oxfordian boundary at the end of the MJCI witnessed particularly notable global cooling, [ 59 ] [ 60 ] potentially even an ice age.

[ 61 ] This is followed by the Kimmeridgian Warm Interval (KWI) between 164 and 150 Ma.

[ 47 ] Based on fossil wood distribution, this was one of the wettest intervals of the Jurassic.

[ 62 ] The Pangaean interior had less severe seasonal swings than in previous warm periods as the expansion of the Central Atlantic and Western Indian Ocean provided new sources of moisture.

[ 47 ] A prominent drop in temperatures occurred during the Tithonian, known as the Early Tithonian Cooling Event (ETCE).

[ 60 ] The end of the Jurassic was marked by the Tithonian–early Barremian Cool Interval (TBCI), beginning 150 Ma and continuing into the Early Cretaceous .

[ 47 ] Climatic events [ edit ] Toarcian Oceanic Anoxic Event [ edit ] Main article: Toarcian Oceanic Anoxic Event The Toarcian Oceanic Anoxic Event (TOAE), also known as the Jenkyns Event, was an episode of widespread oceanic anoxia during the early part of the Toarcian Age, c. 183 Ma. It is marked by a globally documented high amplitude negative carbon isotope excursion, [ 63 ] [ 64 ] as well as the deposition of black shales [ 65 ] and the extinction and collapse of carbonate-producing marine organisms, associated with a major rise in global temperatures.

[ 66 ] The TOAE is often attributed to the eruption of the Karoo-Ferrar large igneous provinces and the associated increase of carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere, as well as the possible associated release of methane clathrates .

[ 66 ] This likely accelerated the hydrological cycle and increased silicate weathering , as evidenced by an increased amount of organic matter of terrestrial origin found in marine deposits during the TOAE.

[ 67 ] Groups affected include ammonites, [ 68 ] ostracods , [ 65 ] [ 69 ] foraminifera , [ 70 ] [ 71 ] bivalves , [ 65 ] cnidarians , and especially brachiopods , [ 72 ] [ 73 ] [ 74 ] for which the TOAE represented one of the most severe extinctions in their evolutionary history.

[ 75 ] While the event had significant impact on marine invertebrates, it had little effect on marine reptiles.

[ 76 ] During the TOAE, the Sichuan Basin was transformed into a giant lake , probably three times the size of modern-day Lake Superior , represented by the Da'anzhai Member of the Ziliujing Formation . The lake likely sequestered ~460 gigatons (Gt) of organic carbon and ~1,200 Gt of inorganic carbon during the event.

[ 77 ] Seawater pH , which had already substantially decreased prior to the event, increased slightly during the early stages of the TOAE, before dropping to its lowest point around the middle of the event.

[ 78 ] This ocean acidification is the probable cause of the collapse of carbonate production.

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] Additionally, anoxic conditions were exacerbated by enhanced recycling of phosphorus back into ocean water as a result of high ocean acidity and temperature inhibiting its mineralisation into apatite; the abundance of phosphorus in marine environments caused further eutrophication and consequent anoxia in a positive feedback loop.

[ 81 ] End-Jurassic transition [ edit ] Main article: Tithonian extinction event The end-Jurassic transition was originally considered one of eight mass extinctions, but is now considered to be a complex interval of faunal turnover, with the increase in diversity of some groups and decline in others, though the evidence for this is primarily European, probably controlled by changes in eustatic sea level.

[ 82 ] Flora [ edit ] End-Triassic extinction [ edit ] There is no evidence of a mass extinction of plants at the Triassic–Jurassic boundary.

[ 83 ] At the Triassic–Jurassic boundary in Greenland, the sporomorph (pollen and spores) record suggests a complete floral turnover.

[ 84 ] An analysis of macrofossil floral communities in Europe suggests that changes were mainly due to local ecological succession .

[ 85 ] At the end of the Triassic, the Peltaspermaceae became extinct in most parts of the world, with Lepidopteris persisting into the Early Jurassic in Patagonia.

[ 86 ] Dicroidium , a corystosperm seed fern that was a dominant part of Gondwanan floral communities during the Triassic, also declined at the Triassic–Jurassic boundary, surviving as a relict in Antarctica into the Early Jurassic.

[ 87 ] Floral composition [ edit ] Conifers [ edit ] Petrified Araucaria mirabilis cone from the Middle Jurassic of Argentina Conifers formed a dominant component of Jurassic floras. The Late Triassic and Jurassic was a major time of diversification of conifers, with most modern conifer groups appearing in the fossil record by the end of the Jurassic, having evolved from voltzialean ancestors.

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] Araucarian conifers have their first unambiguous records during the Early Jurassic, and members of the modern genus Araucaria were widespread across both hemispheres by the Middle Jurassic.

[ 89 ] [ 90 ] [ 91 ] Also abundant during the Jurassic is the extinct family Cheirolepidiaceae , often recognised through their highly distinctive Classopolis pollen. Jurassic representatives include the pollen cone Classostrobus and the seed cone Pararaucaria . Araucarian and Cheirolepidiaceae conifers often occur in association.

[ 92 ] The oldest definitive record of the cypress family ( Cupressaceae ) is Austrohamia minuta from the Early Jurassic (Pliensbachian) of Patagonia, known from many parts of the plant.

[ 93 ] The reproductive structures of Austrohamia have strong similarities to those of the primitive living cypress genera Taiwania and Cunninghamia .

By the Middle to Late Jurassic Cupressaceae were abundant in warm temperate–tropical regions of the Northern Hemisphere, most abundantly represented by the genus Elatides .

[ 94 ] The Jurassic also saw the first appearances of some modern genera of cypresses, such as Sequoia .

[ 95 ] Members of the extinct genus Schizolepidopsis which likely represent a stem-group to the pine family ( Pinaceae ), were widely distributed across Eurasia during the Jurassic.

[ 96 ] [ 97 ] The oldest unambiguous record of Pinaceae is the pine cone Eathiestrobus , known from the Late Jurassic (Kimmeridgian) of Scotland, which remains the only known unequivocal fossil of the group before the Cretaceous.

[ 98 ] Despite being the earliest known member of the Pinaceae, Eathiestrobus appears to be a member of the pinoid clade of the family, suggesting that the initial diversification of Pinaceae occurred earlier than has been found in the fossil record.

[ 99 ] [ 89 ] The earliest record of the yew family ( Taxaceae ) is Palaeotaxus rediviva , from the Hettangian of Sweden, suggested to be closely related to the living Austrotaxus , while Marskea jurassica from the Middle Jurassic of Yorkshire, England and material from the Callovian–Oxfordian Daohugou Bed in China are thought to be closely related to Amentotaxus , with the latter material assigned to the modern genus, indicating that Taxaceae had substantially diversified by the end of the Jurassic.

[ 100 ] The oldest unambiguous members of Podocarpaceae are known from the Jurassic, found across both hemispheres, including Scarburgia and Harrisiocarpus from the Middle Jurassic of England, as well as unnamed species from the Middle-Late Jurassic of Patagonia.

[ 101 ] During the Early Jurassic, the flora of the mid-latitudes of Eastern Asia were dominated by the extinct deciduous broad leafed conifer Podozamites , which appears to not be closely related to any living family of conifer. Its range extended northwards into polar latitudes of Siberia and then contracted northward in the Middle to Late Jurassic, corresponding to the increasing aridity of the region.

[ 102 ] Ginkgoales [ edit ] Leaves of Ginkgo huttonii from the Middle Jurassic of England Ginkgoales , of which the sole living species is Ginkgo biloba , were more diverse during the Jurassic: they were among the most important components of Eurasian Jurassic floras and were adapted to a wide variety of climatic conditions.

[ 103 ] The earliest representatives of the genus Ginkgo , represented by ovulate and pollen organs similar to those of the modern species, are known from the Middle Jurassic in the Northern Hemisphere.

[ 103 ] Several other lineages of ginkgoaleans are known from Jurassic rocks, including Yimaia , Grenana , Nagrenia and Karkenia . These lineages are associated with Ginkgo- like leaves, but are distinguished from living and fossil representatives of Ginkgo by having differently arranged reproductive structures.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] Umaltolepis from the Jurassic of Asia has strap-shaped ginkgo-like leaves with highly distinct reproductive structures with similarities to those of peltasperm and corystosperm seed ferns, has been suggested to be a member of Ginkgoales sensu lato.

[ 105 ] Bennettitales [ edit ] Restoration of a member of Bennettitales belonging to Williamsoniaceae.

Bennettitales , having first become widespread during the preceding Triassic, were diverse and abundant members of Jurassic floras across both hemispheres.

[ 106 ] The foliage of Bennettitales bears strong similarities to those of cycads, to such a degree that they cannot be reliably distinguished on the basis of morphology alone. Leaves of Bennettitales can be distinguished from those of cycads their different arrangement of stomata , and the two groups are not thought to be closely related.

[ 107 ] Jurassic Bennettitales predominantly belong to the group Williamsoniaceae , [ 106 ] which grew as shrubs and small trees. The Williamsoniaceae are thought to have had a divaricate branching habit, similar to that of living Banksia , and adapted to growing in open habitats with poor soil nutrient conditions.

[ 108 ] Bennettitales exhibit complex, flower -like reproductive structures some of which are thought to have been pollinated by insects. Several groups of insects that bear long proboscis, including extinct families such as kalligrammatid lacewings [ 109 ] and extant ones such as acrocerid flies, [ 110 ] are suggested to have been pollinators of bennettitales, feeding on nectar produced by bennettitalean cones.

Cycads [ edit ] Cycads reached their apex of diversity during the Jurassic and Cretaceous Periods.

[ 111 ] Despite the Mesozoic sometimes being called the "Age of Cycads", cycads are thought to have been a relatively minor component of mid-Mesozoic floras, with the Bennettitales and Nilssoniales , which have cycad-like foliage, being dominant.

[ 112 ] The Nilssoniales have often been considered cycads or cycad relatives, but have been found to be distinct on chemical grounds, and perhaps more closely allied with Bennettitales.

[ 113 ] The relationships of most Mesozoic cycads to living groups are ambiguous, [ 112 ] with no Jurassic cycads belonging to either of the two modern groups of cycads, though some Jurassic cycads possibly represent stem-group relatives of modern Cycadaceae , like the leaf genus Paracycas known Europe, and Zamiaceae , like some European species of the leaf genus Pseudoctenis . Also widespread during the Jurassic was the extinct Ctenis lineage, which appears to be distantly related to modern cycads.

[ 114 ] Modern cycads are pollinated by beetles, and such an association is thought to have formed by the Early Jurassic.

[ 111 ] Other seed plants [ edit ] Although there have been several claimed records, there are no widely accepted Jurassic fossil records of flowering plants , which make up 90% of living plant species, and fossil evidence suggests that the group diversified during the following Cretaceous.

[ 115 ] The earliest known gnetophytes , one of the four main living groups of gymnosperms , appeared by the end of the Jurassic, with the oldest unequivocal gnetophyte being the seed Dayvaultia from the Late Jurassic of North America.

[ 116 ] Life restoration of the stem and leaves of a member of the extinct seed plant order Caytoniales , a group which reached its apex of abundance during the Jurassic, and which may be closely related to living flowering plants .

"Seed ferns" ( Pteridospermatophyta ) is a collective term to refer to disparate lineages of fern like plants that produce seeds but have uncertain affinities to living seed plant groups. A prominent group of Jurassic seed ferns is the Caytoniales , which reached their zenith during the Jurassic, with widespread records in the Northern Hemisphere, though records in the Southern Hemisphere remain rare. Due to their berry -like seed-bearing capsules, they have often been suggested to have been closely related or perhaps ancestral to flowering plants, but the evidence for this is inconclusive.

[ 117 ] Corystosperm -aligned seed ferns, such as Pachypteris and Komlopteris were widespread across both hemispheres during the Jurassic.

[ 118 ] Czekanowskiales , also known as Leptostrobales, are a group of seed plants uncertain affinities with persistent heavily dissected leaves borne on deciduous short shoots, subtended by scale-like leaves, known from the Late Triassic (possibly Late Permian [ 119 ] ) to Cretaceous.

[ 120 ] They are thought to have had a tree- or shrub-like habit and formed a conspicuous component of Northern Hemisphere Mesozoic temperate and warm-temperate floras.

[ 119 ] The genus Phoenicopsis was widespread in Early-Middle Jurassic floras of Eastern Asia and Siberia.

[ 121 ] The Pentoxylales , a small but clearly distinct group of liana -like seed plants of obscure affinities, first appeared during the Jurassic. Their distribution appears to have been confined to Eastern Gondwana.

[ 122 ] Ferns and allies [ edit ] Living families of ferns widespread during the Jurassic include Dipteridaceae , Matoniaceae , Gleicheniaceae , Osmundaceae and Marattiaceae .

[ 123 ] [ 124 ] Polypodiales , which make up 80% of living fern diversity, have no record from the Jurassic and are thought to have diversified in the Cretaceous, [ 125 ] though the widespread Jurassic herbaceous fern genus Coniopteris , historically interpreted as a close relative of tree ferns of the family Dicksoniaceae , has recently been reinterpreted as an early relative of the group.

[ 126 ] The Cyatheales , the group containing most modern tree ferns, appeared during the Late Jurassic, represented by members of the genus Cyathocaulis , which are suggested to be early members of Cyatheaceae on the basis of cladistic analysis.

[ 127 ] Only a handful of possible records exist of the Hymenophyllaceae from the Jurassic, including Hymenophyllites macrosporangiatus from the Russian Jurassic.

[ 128 ] The oldest remains of modern horsetails of the genus Equisetum first appear in the Early Jurassic, represented by Equisetum dimorphum from the Early Jurassic of Patagonia [ 129 ] and Equisetum laterale from the Early to Middle Jurassic of Australia.

[ 130 ] [ 131 ] Silicified remains of Equisetum thermale from the Late Jurassic of Argentina exhibit all the morphological characters of modern members of the genus.

[ 132 ] The estimated split between Equisetum bogotense and all other living Equisetum is estimated to have occurred no later than the Early Jurassic.

[ 131 ] Lower plants [ edit ] Quillworts virtually identical to modern species are known from the Jurassic onwards.

Isoetites rolandii from the Middle Jurassic of Oregon is the earliest known species to represent all major morphological features of modern Isoetes . More primitive forms such as Nathorstiana , which retain an elongated stem, persisted into the Early Cretaceous.

[ 133 ] The moss Kulindobryum from the Middle Jurassic of Russia, which was found associated with dinosaur bones, is thought to be related to the Splachnaceae , which grow on animal caracasses.

[ 134 ] Bryokhutuliinia from the same region is thought to be related to Dicranales .

[ 134 ] Heinrichsiella from the Jurassic of Patagonia is thought to belong to either Polytrichaceae or Timmiellaceae .

[ 135 ] The liverwort Pellites hamiensis from the Middle Jurassic Xishanyao Formation of China is the oldest record of the family Pelliaceae .

[ 136 ] Pallaviciniites sandaolingensis from the same deposit is thought to belong to the subclass Pallaviciniineae within the Pallaviciniales .

[ 137 ] Ricciopsis sandaolingensis , also from the same deposit, is the only Jurassic record of Ricciaceae .

[ 138 ] Fauna [ edit ] Dinosaurs [ edit ] Dinosaurs , which had morphologically diversified in the Late Triassic, experienced a major increase in diversity and abundance during the Early Jurassic in the aftermath of the end-Triassic extinction and the extinction of other reptile groups, becoming the dominant vertebrates in terrestrial ecosystems.

[ 139 ] [ 140 ] Chilesaurus , a morphologically aberrant herbivorous dinosaur from the Late Jurassic of South America, has uncertain relationships to the three main groups of dinosaurs, having been recovered as a member of all three in different analyses.

[ 141 ] Theropods [ edit ] Advanced theropods belonging to Neotheropoda first appeared in the Late Triassic. Basal neotheropods, such as coelophysoids and dilophosaurs , persisted into the Early Jurassic, but became extinct by the Middle Jurassic.

[ 142 ] The earliest averostrans appear during the Early Jurassic, with the earliest known member of Ceratosauria being Saltriovenator from the early Sinemurian (199.3–197.5 Ma) of Italy.

[ 143 ] The unusual ceratosaur Limusaurus from the Late Jurassic of China had a herbivorous diet, with adults having edentulous beaked jaws, [ 144 ] making it the earliest known theropod to have converted from an ancestrally carnivorous diet.

[ 145 ] The earliest members of the Tetanurae appeared during the late Early Jurassic or early Middle Jurassic.

[ 146 ] The Megalosauridae represent the oldest radiation of the Tetanurae, first appearing in Europe during the Bajocian.

[ 147 ] The oldest member of Allosauroidea has been suggested to be Asfaltovenator from the Middle Jurassic of South America.

[ 146 ] Coelurosaurs first appeared during the Middle Jurassic, including early tyrannosaurs such as Proceratosaurus from the Bathonian of Britain.

[ 148 ] Some coelurosaurs from the Late Jurassic of China including Shishugounykus and Haplocheirus are suggested to represent early alvarezsaurs , [ 149 ] however, this has been questioned.

[ 150 ] Scansoriopterygids , a group of small feathered coelurosaurs with membraneous, bat-like wings for gliding, are known from the Middle to Late Jurassic of China.

[ 151 ] The oldest record of troodontids is suggested to be Hesperornithoides from the Late Jurassic of North America. Tooth remains suggested to represent those of dromaeosaurs are known from the Jurassic, but no body remains are known until the Cretaceous.

[ 152 ] Skeleton of Ceratosaurus , a ceratosaurid from the Late Jurassic of North America Skeleton of Monolophosaurus , a basal tetanuran from the Middle Jurassic of China Restoration of Yi qi , a scansoriopterygid from the Middle to Late Jurassic of China Birds [ edit ] Archaeopteryx lithographica from the Late Jurassic (Tithonian) of Germany The earliest avialans , which include birds and their ancestors, appear during the Middle to Late Jurassic, definitively represented by Archaeopteryx from the Late Jurassic of Germany. Avialans belong to the clade Paraves within Coelurosauria, which also includes dromaeosaurs and troodontids. The Anchiornithidae from the Middle-Late Jurassic of Eurasia have frequently suggested to be avialans, but have also alternatively found as a separate lineage of paravians.

[ 153 ] Skeleton of Heterodontosaurus , a primitive ornithischian from the Early Jurassic of South Africa Ornithischians [ edit ] The earliest definitive ornithischians appear during the Early Jurassic, represented by basal ornithischians like Lesothosaurus , heterodontosaurids , and early members of Thyreophora . The earliest members of Ankylosauria and Stegosauria appear during the Middle Jurassic.

[ 154 ] The basal neornithischian Kulindadromeus from the Middle Jurassic of Russia indicates that at least some ornithischians were covered in protofeathers .

[ 155 ] The earliest members of Ankylopollexia , which become prominent in the Cretaceous, appeared during the Late Jurassic, represented by bipedal forms such as Camptosaurus .

[ 156 ] Ceratopsians first appeared in the Late Jurassic of China, represented by members of Chaoyangsauridae .

[ 157 ] Sauropodomorphs [ edit ] Skeleton of Mamenchisaurus sinocanadorum from the Middle-Late Jurassic of China Sauropods became the dominant large herbivores in terrestrial ecosystems during the Jurassic.

[ 158 ] Some Jurassic sauropods reached gigantic sizes, becoming the largest organisms to have ever lived on land.

[ 159 ] Basal bipedal sauropodomorphs , such as massospondylids , continued to exist into the Early Jurassic, but became extinct by the beginning of the Middle Jurassic.

[ 158 ] Quadrupedal sauropomorphs appeared during the Late Triassic. The quadrupedal Ledumahadi from the earliest Jurassic of South Africa reached an estimated weight of 12 tons, far in excess of other known basal sauropodomorphs.

[ 160 ] Gravisaurian sauropods first appeared during the Early Jurassic, with the oldest definitive record being Vulcanodon from Zimbabwe, likely of Sinemurian age.

[ 161 ] Eusauropods first appeared during the late Early Jurassic (Toarcian) and diversified during the Middle Jurassic; [ 158 ] these included cetiosaurids , turiasaurs , [ 162 ] and mamenchisaurs .

[ 163 ] Neosauropods such as macronarians and diplodocoids first appeared during the Middle Jurassic, before becoming abundant and globally distributed during the Late Jurassic.

[ 164 ] Other reptiles [ edit ] Crocodylomorphs [ edit ] Holotype specimen of Platysuchus , a telosaurid thalattosuchian The Triassic–Jurassic extinction decimated pseudosuchian diversity, with crocodylomorphs , which originated during the early Late Triassic, being the only group of pseudosuchians to survive. All other pseudosuchians, including the herbivorous aetosaurs and carnivorous " rauisuchians ", became extinct.

[ 165 ] The morphological diversity of crocodylomorphs during the Early Jurassic was around the same as that of Late Triassic pseudosuchians, but they occupied different areas of morphospace, suggesting that they occupied different ecological niches to their Triassic counterparts and that there was an extensive and rapid radiation of crocodylomorphs during this interval.

[ 166 ] While living crocodilians are mostly confined to an aquatic ambush predator lifestyle, Jurassic crocodylomorphs exhibited a wide variety of life habits. An unnamed protosuchid known from teeth from the Early Jurassic of Arizona represents the earliest known herbivorous crocodylomorph, an adaptation that appeared several times during the Mesozoic.

[ 167 ] The Thalattosuchia , a clade of predominantly marine crocodylomorphs, first appeared during the Early Jurassic and became a prominent part of marine ecosystems.

[ 168 ] Within Thalattosuchia, the Metriorhynchidae became highly adapted for life in the open ocean, including the transformation of limbs into flippers, the development of a tail fluke, and smooth, scaleless skin.

[ 169 ] The morphological diversity of crocodylomorphs during the Early and Middle Jurassic was relatively low compared to that in later time periods and was dominated by terrestrial small-bodied, long-legged sphenosuchians , early crocodyliforms and thalattosuchians.

[ 170 ] [ 168 ] The Neosuchia , a major group of crocodylomorphs, first appeared during the Early to Middle Jurassic. The Neosuchia represents the transition from an ancestrally terrestrial lifestyle to a freshwater aquatic ecology similar to that occupied by modern crocodilians.

[ 171 ] The timing of the origin of Neosuchia is disputed. The oldest record of Neosuchians has been suggested to be Calsoyasuchus , from the Early Jurassic of Arizona, which in many analyses has been recovered as the earliest branching member of the neosuchian family Goniopholididae , which radically alters times of diversification for crocodylomorphs. However, this placement has been disputed, with some analyses finding it outside Neosuchia, which would place the oldest records of Neosuchia in the Middle Jurassic.

[ 171 ] Razanandrongobe from the Middle Jurassic of Madagascar has been suggested to represent the oldest record of Notosuchia , a primarily Gondwanan clade of mostly terrestrial crocodylomorphs, otherwise known from the Cretaceous and Cenozoic.

[ 172 ] Turtles [ edit ] Thalassemys , a thalassochelydian sea turtle known from the Late Jurassic of Germany Stem-group turtles ( Testudinata ) diversified during the Jurassic. Jurassic stem-turtles belong to two progressively more advanced clades, the Mesochelydia and Perichelydia .

[ 173 ] It is thought that the ancestral condition for mesochelydians is aquatic, as opposed to terrestrial for testudinates.

[ 174 ] The two modern groups of turtles ( Testudines ), Pleurodira and Cryptodira , diverged by the beginning of the Late Jurassic.

[ 173 ] The oldest known pleurodires, the Platychelyidae , are known from the Late Jurassic of Europe and the Americas, [ 175 ] while the oldest unambiguous cryptodire, Sinaspideretes , an early relative of softshell turtles , is known from the Late Jurassic of China.

[ 176 ] The Thalassochelydia , a diverse lineage of marine turtles unrelated to modern sea turtles , are known from the Late Jurassic of Europe and South America.

[ 177 ] Lepidosaurs [ edit ] Rhynchocephalians (the sole living representative being the tuatara ) had achieved a global distribution by the beginning of the Jurassic, [ 178 ] and represented the dominant group of small reptiles during the Jurassic globally.

[ 179 ] Rhynchocephalians reached their highest morphological diversity in their evolutionary history during the Jurassic, occupying a wide range of lifestyles, including the aquatic pleurosaurs with long snake-like bodies and reduced limbs, the specialized herbivorous eilenodontines , as well as the sapheosaurs which had broad tooth plates indicative of durophagy .

[ 180 ] Rhynchocephalians disappeared from Asia after the Early Jurassic.

[ 178 ] The last common ancestor of living squamates (which includes lizards and snakes ) is estimated to have lived around 190 million years ago during the Early Jurassic, with the major divergences between modern squamate lineages estimated to have occurred during the Early to Middle Jurassic.

[ 181 ] Squamates first appear in the fossil record during the Middle Jurassic [ 182 ] including members of modern clades such as Scincomorpha , [ 183 ] though many Jurassic squamates have unclear relationships to living groups.

[ 184 ] Eichstaettisaurus from the Late Jurassic of Germany has been suggested to be an early relative of geckos and displays adaptations for climbing.

[ 185 ] Dorsetisaurus from the Late Jurassic of North America and Europe represents the oldest widely accepted record of Anguimorpha .

[ 186 ] Marmoretta from the Middle Jurassic of Britain has been suggested to represent a late surviving lepidosauromorph outside both Rhynchocephalia and Squamata, though some studies have recovered it as a stem-squamate.

[ 187 ] Vadasaurus herzogi , a rynchocephalian from the Upper Jurassic Solnhofen Limestone of Germany Homeosaurus maximiliani , a rynchocephalian from the Solnhofen Limestone Pleurosaurus , , an aquatic rhynchocephalian from the Late Jurassic of Europe Eichstaettisaurus schroederi , , an extinct lizard from the Solnhofen Limestone Choristoderes [ edit ] Skeleton of Coeruleodraco The earliest known remains of Choristodera , a group of freshwater aquatic reptiles with uncertain affinities to other reptile groups, are found in the Middle Jurassic. Only two genera of choristodere are known from the Jurassic. One is the small lizard-like Cteniogenys , thought to be the most basal known choristodere; it is known from the Middle to Late Jurassic of Europe and Late Jurassic of North America, with similar remains also known from the upper Middle Jurassic of Kyrgyzstan and western Siberia.

[ 188 ] The other is Coeruleodraco from the Late Jurassic of China, which is a more advanced choristodere, though still small and lizard-like in morphology.

[ 189 ] Ichthyosaurs [ edit ] Fossil of Ichthyosaurus somersetensis at the Natural History Museum, London Ichthyosaurs suffered an evolutionary bottleneck during the end-Triassic extinction, with all non- neoichthyosaurians becoming extinct. Ichthyosaurs reached their apex of species diversity during the Early Jurassic, with an array of morphologies including the huge apex predator Temnodontosaurus and swordfish-like Eurhinosaurus , though Early Jurassic ichthyosaurs were significantly less morphologically diverse than their Triassic counterparts.

[ 190 ] [ 191 ] At the Early–Middle Jurassic boundary, between the end of the Toarcian and the beginning of the Bajocian, most lineages of ichythosaur appear to have become extinct, with the first appearance of the Ophthalmosauridae , the clade that would encompass almost all ichthyosaurs from then on, during the early Bajocian.

[ 192 ] Ophthalmosaurids were diverse by the Late Jurassic, but failed to fill many of the niches that had been occupied by ichthyosaurs during the Early Jurassic.

[ 192 ] [ 190 ] [ 191 ] Plesiosaurs [ edit ] Rhomaleosaurus cramptoni at the Natural History Museum, London Plesiosaurs originated at the end of the Triassic (Rhaetian). By the end of the Triassic, all other sauropterygians , including placodonts and nothosaurs , had become extinct. At least six lineages of plesiosaur crossed the Triassic–Jurassic boundary.

[ 193 ] Plesiosaurs were already diverse in the earliest Jurassic, with the majority of plesiosaurs in the Hettangian-aged Blue Lias belonging to the Rhomaleosauridae . Early plesiosaurs were generally small-bodied, with body size increasing into the Toarcian.

[ 194 ] There appears to have been a strong turnover around the Early–Middle Jurassic boundary, with microcleidids and rhomaleosaurids becoming extinct and nearly extinct respectively after the end of the Toarcian with the first appearance of the dominant clade of plesiosaurs of the latter half of the Jurassic, the Cryptoclididae during the Bajocian.

[ 192 ] The Middle Jurassic saw the evolution of short-necked and large-headed thalassophonean pliosaurs from ancestrally small-headed, long-necked forms .

[ 195 ] [ 192 ] Some thalassophonean pliosaurs, such as some species of Pliosaurus , had skulls up to two metres in length with body lengths estimated around 10–12 meters (33–39 ft), making them the apex predators of Late Jurassic oceans.

[ 196 ] [ 192 ] Plesiosaurs invaded freshwater environments during the Jurassic, with indeterminate remains of small-bodied pleisosaurs known from freshwater sediments from the Jurassic of China and Australia.

[ 197 ] [ 198 ] Pterosaurs [ edit ] Skeleton of Rhamphorhynchus muensteri at Teylers Museum , Haarlem Pterosaurs first appeared in the Late Triassic. A major radiation of Jurassic pterosaurs is the Rhamphorhynchidae , which first appeared in the late Early Jurassic (Toarcian); [ 199 ] they are thought to been piscivorous .

[ 200 ] Anurognathids , which first appeared in the Middle Jurassic, possessed short heads and densely furred bodies, and are thought to have been insectivores.

[ 200 ] Derived monofenestratan pterosaurs such as wukongopterids appeared in the late Middle Jurassic. Advanced short-tailed pterodactyloids first appeared at the Middle–Late Jurassic boundary. Jurassic pterodactyloids include the ctenochasmatids , like Ctenochasma , which have closely spaced needle-like teeth that were presumably used for filter feeding .

[ 200 ] The bizarre Late Jurassic ctenochasmatoid Cycnorhamphus had a jaw with teeth only at the tips, with bent jaws like those of living openbill storks that may have been used to hold and crush hard invertebrates.

[ 200 ] Amphibians [ edit ] Skeleton of Karaurus sharovi , a stem-group salamander from the Middle to Late Jurassic of Kazakhstan The diversity of temnospondyls had progressively declined through the Late Triassic, with only brachyopoids surviving into the Jurassic and beyond.

[ 201 ] Members of the family Brachyopidae are known from Jurassic deposits in Asia, [ 202 ] while the chigutisaurid Siderops is known from the Early Jurassic of Australia.

[ 203 ] Modern lissamphibians began to diversify during the Jurassic. The Early Jurassic Prosalirus thought to represent the first frog relative with a morphology capable of hopping like living frogs.

[ 204 ] Morphologically recognisable stem-frogs like the South American Notobatrachus are known from the Middle Jurassic, [ 205 ] with modern crown-group frogs like Enneabatrachus and Rhadinosteus appearing by the Late Jurassic.

[ 206 ] While the earliest salamander-line amphibians are known from the Triassic, [ 207 ] crown group salamanders first appear during the Middle to Late Jurassic in Eurasia, alongside stem-group relatives. Many Jurassic stem-group salamanders, such as Marmorerpeton and Kokartus , are thought to have been neotenic .

[ 208 ] Early representatives of crown group salamanders include Chunerpeton , Pangerpeton and Linglongtriton from the Middle to Late Jurassic Yanliao Biota of China. Some of these are suggested to belong to Cryptobranchoidea , which contains living Asiatic and giant salamanders .

[ 209 ] Beiyanerpeton , and Qinglongtriton from the same biota are thought to be early members of Salamandroidea , the group which contains all other living salamanders.

[ 210 ] [ 211 ] Salamanders dispersed into North America by the end of the Jurassic, as evidenced by Iridotriton , found in the Late Jurassic Morrison Formation .

[ 212 ] The stem- caecilian Eocaecilia is known from the Early Jurassic of Arizona.

[ 213 ] The fourth group of lissamphibians, the extinct salamander-like albanerpetontids , first appeared in the Middle Jurassic, represented by Anoualerpeton priscus from the Bathonian of Britain, as well as indeterminate remains from equivalently aged sediments in France and the Anoual Formation of Morocco.

[ 214 ] Henkelotherium , a likely arboreal dyolestoid from the Late Jurassic of Portugal Mammaliaformes [ edit ] Mammaliaformes , including mammals , having originated from cynodonts at the end of the Triassic, diversified extensively during the Jurassic.

[ 215 ] While most Jurassic mammalaliaforms are solely known from isolated teeth and jaw fragments, exceptionally preserved remains have revealed a variety of lifestyles.

[ 215 ] The docodontan Castorocauda was adapted to aquatic life, similarly to the platypus and otters .

[ 216 ] Some members of Haramiyida [ 217 ] and the eutriconodontan tribe Volaticotherini [ 218 ] had a patagium akin to those of flying squirrels , allowing them to glide through the air. The aardvark -like mammal Fruitafossor , of uncertain taxonomy, was likely a specialist on colonial insects, similarly to living anteaters .

[ 219 ] Australosphenida , a group of mammals possibly related to living monotremes , first appeared in the Middle Jurassic of Gondwana.

[ 220 ] The earliest records of multituberculates , one of the longest lasting and most successful orders of mammals, are known from the Middle Jurassic.

[ 221 ] Therian mammals, represented today by living placentals and marsupials , diversified meteorically during the Middle Jurassic.

[ 222 ] They have their earliest records during the early Late Jurassic, represented by Juramaia , a eutherian mammal closer to the ancestry of placentals than marsupials.

[ 223 ] Juramaia is much more advanced than expected for its age, as other therian mammals are not known until the Early Cretaceous, and it has been suggested that Juramaia may also originate from the Early Cretaceous instead.

[ 224 ] Two groups of non-mammaliaform cynodonts persisted beyond the end of the Triassic. The insectiviorous Tritheledontidae has a few records from the Early Jurassic. The Tritylodontidae , a herbiviorous group of cynodonts that first appeared during the Rhaetian, has abundant records from the Jurassic, overwhelmingly from the Northern Hemisphere.

[ 225 ] [ 226 ] Fish [ edit ] Jawless fish [ edit ] Fossils and life restorations of the two species of Yanliaomyzon , a lamprey known from the Middle Jurassic of China The last known species of conodont , a class of jawless fish whose hard, tooth-like elements are key index fossils, finally became extinct during the earliest Jurassic after over 300 million years of evolutionary history, with an asynchronous extinction occurring first in the Tethys and eastern Panthalassa and survivors persisting into the earliest Hettangian of Hungary and central Panthalassa.

[ 227 ] End-Triassic conodonts were represented by only a handful of species and had been progressively declining through the Middle and Late Triassic.

[ 228 ] Yanliaomyzon from the Middle Jurassic of China represents the oldest post Paleozoic lamprey , and the oldest lamprey to have the toothed feeding apparatus and likely the three stage life cycle typical of modern members of the group.

[ 229 ] Sarcopterygii [ edit ] Coelacanth from the Solnhofen Limestone Lungfish (Dipnoi) were present in freshwater environments of both hemispheres during the Jurassic.

[ 230 ] Some studies have proposed that the last common ancestor of all living lungfish lived during the Jurassic.

[ 231 ] Mawsoniids , a marine and freshwater/brackish group of coelacanths , which first appeared in North America during the Triassic, expanded into Europe and South America by the end of the Jurassic.

[ 232 ] The marine Latimeriidae , which contains the living coelacanths of the genus Latimeria , were also present in the Jurassic, having originated in the Triassic, with a number of records from the Jurassic of Europe including Swenzia , thought to be the closest known relative of living coelacanths.

[ 233 ] Actinopterygii [ edit ] Fossil of Thrissops , an ichthyodectid stem-group teleost from the Late Jurassic Solnhofen Limestone of Germany, showing preserved colouration Ray-finned fish ( Actinopterygii ) were major components of Jurassic freshwater and marine ecosystems. Archaic " palaeoniscoid " fish, which were common in both marine and freshwater habitats during the preceding Triassic declined during the Jurassic, being largely replaced by more derived actinopterygian lineages.

[ 234 ] The oldest known Acipenseriformes , the group that contains living sturgeon and paddlefish , are from the Early Jurassic.

[ 235 ] Amiiform fish (which today only includes the bowfin ) first appeared during the Early Jurassic, represented by Caturus from the Pliensbachian of Britain; after their appearance in the western Tethys, they expanded to Africa, North America and Southeast and East Asia by the end of the Jurassic, [ 236 ] with the modern family Amiidae appearing during the Late Jurassic.

[ 237 ] Pycnodontiformes , which first appeared in the western Tethys during the Late Triassic, expanded to South America and Southeast Asia by the end of the Jurassic, having a high diversity in Europe during the Late Jurassic.

[ 236 ] During the Jurassic, the Ginglymodi , the only living representatives being gars (Lepisosteidae) were diverse in both freshwater and marine environments. The oldest known representatives of anatomically modern gars appeared during the Late Jurassic.

[ 238 ] Stem-group teleosts , which make up over 99% of living Actinopterygii, had first appeared during the Triassic in the western Tethys; they underwent a major diversification beginning in the Late Jurassic, with early representatives of modern teleost clades such as Elopomorpha and Osteoglossoidei appearing during this time.

[ 239 ] [ 240 ] The Pachycormiformes , a group of marine stem-teleosts, first appeared in the Early Jurassic and included both tuna -like predatory and filter-feeding forms, the latter included the largest bony fish known to have existed: Leedsichthys , with an estimated maximum length of over 15 metres, known from the late Middle to Late Jurassic.

[ 241 ] Chondrichthyes [ edit ] Fossil of Pseudorhina from the Late Jurassic of Germany, a close relative of modern angelsharks .

During the Early Jurassic, the shark-like hybodonts , which represented the dominant group of chondrichthyans during the preceding Triassic, were common in both marine and freshwater settings; however, by the Late Jurassic, hybodonts had become minor components of most marine communities, having been largely replaced by modern neoselachians , but remained common in freshwater and restricted marine environments.

[ 242 ] [ 243 ] The Neoselachii, which contains all living sharks and rays, radiated beginning in the Early Jurassic.

[ 244 ] The oldest known ray ( Batoidea ) is Antiquaobatis from the Pliensbachian of Germany.

[ 245 ] Jurassic batoids known from complete remains retain a conservative, guitarfish -like morphology.

[ 246 ] The oldest known Hexanchiformes and carpet sharks (Orectolobiformes) are from the Early Jurassic (Pliensbachian and Toarcian, respectively) of Europe.

[ 247 ] [ 248 ] The oldest known members of the Heterodontiformes , the only living members of which are the bullhead shark ( Heterodontus ), first appeared in the Early Jurassic, with representatives of the living genus appearing during the Late Jurassic.

[ 249 ] The oldest record of angelsharks ( Squatiniformes ) is Pseudorhina from the Late Jurassic (Oxfordian–Tithonian) of Europe, which already has a bodyform similar to members of the only living genus of the order, Squatina .

[ 250 ] The oldest known remains of Carcharhiniformes , the largest order of living sharks, first appear in the late Middle Jurassic (Bathonian) of the western Tethys (England and Morocco). Known dental and exceptionally preserved body remains of Jurassic Carchariniformes are similar to those of living catsharks .

[ 251 ] Synechodontiformes , an extinct group of sharks closely related to Neoselachii, were also widespread during the Jurassic.

[ 252 ] The oldest remains of modern chimaeras are from the Early Jurassic of Europe, with members of the living family Callorhinchidae appearing during the Middle Jurassic. Unlike most living chimaeras, Jurassic chimeras are often found in shallow water environments.

[ 253 ] The closely related myriacanthids and the flattened Squaloraja are also known from the Jurassic of Europe.

[ 254 ] Insects and arachnids [ edit ] Lichnomesopsyche daohugouensis , an extinct mesopsychid scorpionfly from the Late Jurassic of China There appears to have been no major extinction of insects at the Triassic–Jurassic boundary.

[ 83 ] Many important insect fossil localities are known from the Jurassic of Eurasia, the most important being the Karabastau Formation of Kazakhstan and the various Yanliao Biota deposits in Inner Mongolia, China, such as the Daohugou Bed, dating to the Callovian–Oxfordian. The diversity of insects stagnated throughout the Early and Middle Jurassic, but during the latter third of the Jurassic origination rates increased substantially while extinction rates remained flat.

[ 255 ] The increasing diversity of insects in the Middle–Late Jurassic corresponds with a substantial increase in the diversity of insect mouthparts .

[ 256 ] The Middle to Late Jurassic was a time of major diversification for beetles , [ 257 ] particularly for the suborder Polyphaga , which represents 90% of living beetle species but which was rare during the preceding Triassic.

[ 258 ] Weevils first appear in the fossil record during the Middle to Late Jurassic, but are suspected to have originated during the Late Triassic to Early Jurassic.

[ 259 ] Orthopteran diversity had declined during the Late Triassic, but recovered during the Early Jurassic, [ 260 ] with the Hagloidea , a superfamily of ensiferan orthopterans today confined to a few living species, being particularly diverse during the Jurassic.

[ 261 ] The oldest known lepidopterans (the group containing butterflies and moths) are known from the Triassic–Jurassic boundary, with wing scales belonging to the suborder Glossata and Micropterigidae -grade moths from the deposits of this age in Germany.

[ 262 ] Modern representatives of both dragonflies and damselflies also first appeared during the Jurassic.

[ 263 ] Although modern representatives are not known until the Cenozoic, ectoparasitic insects thought to represent primitive fleas , belonging to the family Pseudopulicidae , are known from the Middle Jurassic of Asia. These insects are substantially different from modern fleas, lacking the specialised morphology of the latter and being larger.

[ 264 ] [ 265 ] Parasitoid wasps ( Apocrita ) first appeared during the Early Jurassic and subsequently became widespread, reshaping terrestrial food webs.

[ 266 ] The Jurassic saw also saw the first appearances of several other groups of insects, including Phasmatodea (stick insects), [ 267 ] Mantophasmatidae (gladiators), [ 268 ] Embioptera (webspinners), [ 269 ] and Raphidioptera (snakeflies).

[ 270 ] The earliest scale insect (Coccomorpha) i s known from amber dating to the Late Jurassic, though the group probably originated earlier during the Triassic.

[ 271 ] Mongolarachne from the Late Jurassic of China Only a handful of records of mites are known from the Jurassic, including Jureremus , an oribatid mite belonging to the family Cymbaeremaeidae known from the Late Jurassic of Britain and Russia, [ 272 ] and a member of the still living orbatid genus Hydrozetes from the Early Jurassic of Sweden.

[ 273 ] Spiders diversified through the Jurassic.

[ 274 ] The Early Jurassic Seppo koponeni may represent a stem group to Palpimanoidea .

[ 275 ] Eoplectreurys from the Middle Jurassic of China is considered a stem lineage of Synspermiata . The oldest member of the family Archaeidae , Patarchaea , is known from the Middle Jurassic of China.

[ 274 ] Mongolarachne from the Middle Jurassic of China is among the largest known fossil spiders, with legs over 5 centimetres long.

[ 276 ] The only scorpion known from the Jurassic is Liassoscorpionides from the Early Jurassic of Germany, of uncertain placement.

[ 277 ] Eupnoi harvestmen ( Opiliones ) are known from the Middle Jurassic of China, including members of the family Sclerosomatidae .

[ 278 ] [ 279 ] Marine invertebrates [ edit ] End-Triassic extinction [ edit ] During the end-Triassic extinction, 46%–72% of all marine genera became extinct. The effects of the end Triassic extinction were greatest at tropical latitudes and were more severe in Panthalassa than the Tethys or Boreal oceans. Tropical reef ecosystems collapsed during the event, and would not fully recover until much later in the Jurassic.

Sessile filter feeders and photosymbiotic organisms were among those most severely affected.

[ 280 ] Marine ecosystems [ edit ] Having declined at the Triassic–Jurassic boundary, reefs substantially expanded during the Late Jurassic, including both sponge reefs and scleractinian coral reefs . Late Jurassic reefs were similar in form to modern reefs but had more microbial carbonates and hypercalcified sponges , and had weak biogenic binding. Reefs sharply declined at the close of the Jurassic, [ 281 ] which caused an associated drop in diversity in decapod crustaceans.

[ 282 ] The earliest planktonic foraminifera, which constitute the suborder Globigerinina , are known from the late Early Jurassic (mid-Toarcian) of the western Tethys, expanding across the whole Tethys by the Middle Jurassic and becoming globally distributed in tropical latitudes by the Late Jurassic.

[ 283 ] Coccolithophores and dinoflagellates , which had first appeared during the Triassic, radiated during the Early to Middle Jurassic, becoming prominent members of the phytoplankton .

[ 284 ] Microconchid tube worms, the last remaining order of Tentaculita , a group of animals of uncertain affinities that were convergent on Spirorbis tube worms, were rare after the Triassic and had become reduced to the single genus Punctaconchus , which became extinct in the late Bathonian.

[ 285 ] The oldest known diatom is from Late Jurassic–aged amber from Thailand, assigned to the living genus Hemiaulus .

[ 286 ] Echinoderms [ edit ] Crinoids diversified throughout the Jurassic, reaching their peak Mesozoic diversity during the Late Jurassic, primarily due to the radiation of sessile forms belonging to the orders Cyrtocrinida and Millericrinida .

[ 287 ] Echinoids (sea urchins) underwent substantial diversification beginning in the Early Jurassic, primarily driven by the radiation of irregular (asymmetrical) forms, which were adapting to deposit feeding. Rates of diversification sharply dropped during the Late Jurassic.

[ 288 ] Crustaceans [ edit ] Eryon , a polychelidan decapod crustacean from the Late Jurassic of Germany.

The Jurassic was a significant time for the evolution of decapods .

[ 282 ] The first true crabs ( Brachyura ) are known from the Early Jurassic, with the earliest being Eocarcinus praecursor from the early Pliensbachian of England, which lacked the crab-like morphology ( carcinisation ) of modern crabs, [ 289 ] and Eoprosopon klugi from the late Pliensbachian of Germany, which may belong to the living family Homolodromiidae .

[ 290 ] Most Jurassic crabs are known only from carapace pieces, which makes it difficult to determine their relationships.

[ 291 ] While rare in the Early and Middle Jurassic, crabs became abundant during the Late Jurassic as they expanded from their ancestral silty sea floor habitat into hard substrate habitats like reefs, with crevices in reefs providing refuge from predators.

[ 291 ] [ 282 ] Hermit crabs also first appeared during the Jurassic, with the earliest known being Schobertella hoelderi from the late Hettangian of Germany.

[ 292 ] Early hermit crabs are associated with ammonite shells rather than those of gastropods.

[ 293 ] Glypheids , which today are only known from two species, reached their peak diversity during the Jurassic, with around 150 species out of a total fossil record of 250 known from the period.

[ 294 ] Jurassic barnacles were of low diversity compared to present, [ 295 ] but several important evolutionary innovations are known, including the first appearances of calcite shelled forms and species with an epiplanktonic mode of life.

[ 296 ] Brachiopods [ edit ] Brachiopod diversity declined during the Triassic–Jurassic extinction. Spire-bearing brachiopods ( Spiriferinida and Athyridida ) did not recover their biodiversity, becoming extinct in the TOAE.

[ 297 ] Rhynchonellida and Terebratulida also declined during the Triassic–Jurassic extinction but rebounded during the Early Jurassic; neither clade underwent much morphological variation.

[ 298 ] Brachiopods substantially declined in the Late Jurassic; the causes are poorly understood. Proposed reasons include increased predation, competition with bivalves, enhanced bioturbation or increased grazing pressure .

[ 299 ] Bryozoans [ edit ] Like the preceding Triassic, bryozoan diversity was relatively low compared to the Paleozoic. The vast majority of Jurassic bryozoans are members of Cyclostomatida , which experienced a radiation during the Middle Jurassic, with all Jurassic representatives belonging to the suborders Tubuliporina and Cerioporina .

Cheilostomata , the dominant group of modern bryozoans, first appeared during the Late Jurassic.

[ 300 ] Molluscs [ edit ] Gastropods [ edit ] Marine gastropods were significantly affected by the T-J extinction, with around 56% of genera going extinct, with Neritimorpha being particularly strongly effected, while Heterobranchia suffered much lower losses than other groups.

[ 301 ] While present, the diversity of freshwater and land snails was much lower during the Jurassic than in contemporary ecosystems, with the diversity of these groups not reaching levels comparable to modern times until the following Cretaceous.

[ 302 ] Bivalves [ edit ] The end-Triassic extinction had a severe impact on bivalve diversity, though it had little impact on bivalve ecological diversity. The extinction was selective, having less of an impact on deep burrowers, but there is no evidence of a differential impact between surface-living (epifaunal) and burrowing (infaunal) bivalves.

[ 303 ] Bivalve family level diversity after the Early Jurassic was static, though genus diversity experienced a gradual increase throughout the period.

[ 304 ] Rudists , the dominant reef-building organisms of the Cretaceous, first appeared in the Late Jurassic (mid-Oxfordian) in the northern margin of the western Tethys, expanding to the eastern Tethys by the end of the Jurassic.

[ 305 ] Cephalopods [ edit ] Fossil specimen of Proteroctopus from the Middle Jurassic of France, formerly thought to be world's oldest known octopus Ammonites were devastated by the end-Triassic extinction, with only a handful of genera belonging to the family Psiloceratidae of the suborder Phylloceratina surviving and becoming ancestral to all later Jurassic and Cretaceous ammonites. Ammonites explosively diversified during the Early Jurassic, with the orders Psiloceratina , Ammonitina , Lytoceratina , Haploceratina , Perisphinctina and Ancyloceratina all appearing during the Jurassic. Ammonite faunas during the Jurassic were regional, being divided into around 20 distinguishable provinces and subprovinces in two realms, the northern high latitude Pan-Boreal realm, consisting of the Arctic, northern Panthalassa and northern Atlantic regions, and the equatorial–southern Pan-Tethyan realm, which included the Tethys and most of Panthalassa.

[ 306 ] Ammonite diversifications occurred coevally with marine transgressions , while their diversity nadirs occurred during marine regressions .

[ 307 ] The oldest definitive records of the squid-like belemnites are from the earliest Jurassic (Hettangian–Sinemurian) of Europe and Japan; they expanded worldwide during the Jurassic.

[ 308 ] Belemnites were shallow-water dwellers, inhabiting the upper 200 metres of the water column on the continental shelves and in the littoral zone . They were key components of Jurassic ecosystems, both as predators and prey, as evidenced by the abundance of belemnite guards in Jurassic rocks.

[ 309 ] The earliest vampyromorphs , of which the only living member is the vampire squid , first appeared during the Early Jurassic.

[ 310 ] The earliest octopuses appeared during the Middle Jurassic, having split from their closest living relatives, the vampyromorphs, during the Triassic to Early Jurassic.

[ 311 ] All Jurassic octopuses are solely known from the hard gladius .

[ 311 ] [ 312 ] Octopuses likely originated from bottom-dwelling ( benthic ) ancestors which lived in shallow environments.

[ 311 ] Proteroctopus from the late Middle Jurassic La Voulte-sur-Rhône lagerstätte , previously interpreted as an early octopus, is now thought to be a basal taxon outside the clade containing vampyromorphs and octopuses.

[ 313 ] References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ "International Chronostratigraphic Chart" (PDF) .

International Commission on Stratigraphy . December 2024 . Retrieved January 1, 2025 .

^ "Dictionary.com | Meanings & Definitions of English Words" .

Dictionary.com . 2024-04-17 . Retrieved 2024-04-18 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Ogg, J.G.; Hinnov, L.A.; Huang, C. (2012), "Jurassic" , The Geologic Time Scale , Elsevier, pp.

731– 791, doi : 10.1016/b978-0-444-59425-9.00026-3 , ISBN 978-0-444-59425-9 , retrieved 2020-12-05 ^ Brongniart, Alexandre (1829).

Tableau des terrains qui composent l'écorce du globe ou essai sur la structure de la partie connue de la terre [ Description of the Terrains that Constitute the Crust of the Earth or Essay on the Structure of the Known Lands of the Earth ] (in French). Strasbourg, France: F.G. Levrault – via Gallica.

From p. 221, footnote 2: "Souvent aussi calcaire oolithique moyen ou principal (great oolithe ) ; mais le nom de terrains jurassiques nous paroît préférable […] analogue à celle de la chaîne du Jura." (Often also middle or principal oolitic limestone (great oolithe); but the name of "Jurassic terrains" seems to us preferable, because it is more general, because it indicates a terrain composed of different rocks, being in a geognostic position analogous to that of the Jura chain.) ^ von Buch, L., 1839. Über den Jura in Deutschland. Der Königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Berlin, p. 87.

^ Cohen, K.M., Finney, S.C., Gibbard, P.L. & Fan, J.-X. (2013; updated) The ICS International Chronostratigraphic Chart . Episodes 36: 199–204.

^ Hillebrandt, A.v.; Krystyn, L.; Kürschner, W.M.; Bonis, N.R.; Ruhl, M.; Richoz, S.; Schobben, M. A. N.; Urlichs, M.; Bown, P.R.; Kment, K.; McRoberts, C.A. (2013-09-01).

"The Global Stratotype Sections and Point (GSSP) for the base of the Jurassic System at Kuhjoch (Karwendel Mountains, Northern Calcareous Alps, Tyrol, Austria)" .

Episodes .

36 (3): 162– 198.

doi : 10.18814/epiiugs/2013/v36i3/001 .

ISSN 0705-3797 .

^ Bloos, Gert; Page, Kevin N. (2002-03-01).

"Global Stratotype Section and Point for base of the Sinemurian Stage (Lower Jurassic)" .

Episodes .

25 (1): 22– 28.

doi : 10.18814/epiiugs/2002/v25i1/003 .

ISSN 0705-3797 .

^ Meister, Christian; Aberhan, Martin; Blau, Joachim; Dommergues, Jean-Louis; Feist-Burkhardt, Susanne; Hailwood, Ernie A.; Hart, Malcom; Hesselbo, Stephen P.; Hounslow, Mark W.; Hylton, Mark; Morton, Nicol (2006-06-01).

"The Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP) for the base of the Pliensbachian Stage (Lower Jurassic), Wine Haven, Yorkshire, UK" .

Episodes .

29 (2): 93– 106.

doi : 10.18814/epiiugs/2006/v29i2/003 .

ISSN 0705-3797 .

^ Rocha, Rogério Bordalo da; Mattioli, Emanuela; Duarte, Luís Vítor; Pittet, Bernard; Elmi, Serge; Mouterde, René; Cabral, Maria Cristina; Comas-Rengifo, Maria José; Gómez, Juan José; Goy, António; Hesselbo, Stephen P. (2016-09-01).

"Base of the Toarcian Stage of the Lower Jurassic defined by the Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP) at the Peniche section (Portugal)" .

Episodes .

39 (3): 460– 481.

doi : 10.18814/epiiugs/2016/v39i3/99741 .

hdl : 10261/140775 .

ISSN 0705-3797 .

S2CID 131791652 .

^ Barrón, Eduardo; Ureta, Soledad; Goy, Antonio; Lassaletta, Luis (August 2010).

"Palynology of the Toarcian–Aalenian Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP) at Fuentelsaz (Lower–Middle Jurassic, Iberian Range, Spain)" .

Review of Palaeobotany and Palynology .

162 (1): 11– 28.

Bibcode : 2010RPaPa.162...11B .

doi : 10.1016/j.revpalbo.2010.04.003 .

^ Pavia, G.; Enay, R. (1997-03-01).

"Definition of the Aalenian-Bajocian Stage boundary" .

Episodes .

20 (1): 16– 22.

doi : 10.18814/epiiugs/1997/v20i1/004 .

ISSN 0705-3797 .

^ López, Fernández; Rafael, Sixto; Pavia, Giulio; Erba, Elisabetta; Guiomar, Myette; Paiva Henriques, María Helena; Lanza, Roberto; Mangold, Charles; Morton, Nicol; Olivero, Davide; Tiraboschi, Daniele (2009).

"The Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP) for base of the Bathonian Stage (Middle Jurassic), Ravin du Bès Section, SE France" .

Episodes .

32 (4): 222– 248.

doi : 10.18814/epiiugs/2009/v32i4/001 .

S2CID 51754708 .

^ a b c d "International Commission on Stratigraphy-Subcommission on Jurassic Stratigraphy" .

jurassic.stratigraphy.org . Retrieved 2021-04-09 .

^ BARSKI, Marcin (2018-09-06).

"Dinoflagellate cyst assemblages across the Oxfordian/Kimmeridgian boundary (Upper Jurassic) at Flodigarry, Staffin Bay, Isle of Skye, Scotland – a proposed GSSP for the base of the Kimmeridgian" .

Volumina Jurassica .

XV (1): 51– 62.

doi : 10.5604/01.3001.0012.4594 .

ISSN 1731-3708 .

S2CID 133861564 .

^ WIMBLEDON, William A.P. (2017-12-27).

"Developments with fixing a Tithonian/Berriasian (J/K) boundary" .

Volumina Jurassica .

15 (1): 107– 112.

doi : 10.5604/01.3001.0010.7467 .

ISSN 1731-3708 .

^ Wimbledon, William A.P.; Rehakova, Daniela; Svobodová, Andrea; Schnabl, Petr; Pruner, Petr; Elbra, Tiiu; Šifnerová, Kristýna; Kdýr, Šimon; Frau, Camille; Schnyder, Johann; Galbrun, Bruno (2020-02-11).

"Fixing a J/K boundary: A comparative account of key Tithonian–Berriasian profiles in the departments of Drôme and Hautes-Alpes, France" .

Geologica Carpathica .

71 (1).

Bibcode : 2020GCarp..71..1.3W .

doi : 10.31577/GeolCarp.71.1.3 .

S2CID 213694912 .

^ Frau, Camille; Bulot, Luc G.; Reháková, Daniela; Wimbledon, William A.P.; Ifrim, Christina (November 2016).

"Revision of the ammonite index species Berriasella jacobi Mazenot, 1939 and its consequences for the biostratigraphy of the Berriasian Stage" .

Cretaceous Research .

66 : 94– 114.

Bibcode : 2016CrRes..66...94F .

doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2016.05.007 .

^ Gautier D.L. (2005).

"Kimmeridgian Shales Total Petroleum System of the North Sea Graben Province" (PDF) . United States Geological Survey . Retrieved 2 November 2018 .

^ Wilson, A. O. (2020).

"Chapter 1 Introduction to the Jurassic Arabian Intrashelf Basin" .

Geological Society, London, Memoirs .

53 (1): 1– 19.

doi : 10.1144/M53.1 .

ISSN 0435-4052 .

S2CID 226967035 .

^ Abdula, Rzger A. (August 2015).

"Hydrocarbon potential of Sargelu Formation and oil-source correlation, Iraqi Kurdistan" .

Arabian Journal of Geosciences .

8 (8): 5845– 5868.

Bibcode : 2015ArJG....8.5845A .

doi : 10.1007/s12517-014-1651-0 .

ISSN 1866-7511 .

S2CID 129120960 .

^ Soran University; Abdula, Rzger A. (2016-10-16).

"Source Rock Assessment of Naokelekan Formation in Iraqi Kurdistan" .

Journal of Zankoy Sulaimani – Part A .

19 (1): 103– 124.

doi : 10.17656/jzs.10589 .

^ Ao, Weihua; Huang, Wenhui; Weng, Chengmin; Xiao, Xiuling; Liu, Dameng; Tang, Xiuyi; Chen, Ping; Zhao, Zhigen; Wan, Huan; Finkelman, Robert B. (January 2012).

"Coal petrology and genesis of Jurassic coal in the Ordos Basin, China" .

Geoscience Frontiers .

3 (1): 85– 95.

Bibcode : 2012GeoFr...3...85A .

doi : 10.1016/j.gsf.2011.09.004 .

^ Kenny, Gavin G.; Harrigan, Claire O.; Schmitz, Mark D.; Crowley, James L.; Wall, Corey J.; Andreoli, Marco A. G.; Gibson, Roger L.; Maier, Wolfgang D. (2021-08-01).

"Timescales of impact melt sheet crystallization and the precise age of the Morokweng impact structure, South Africa" .

Earth and Planetary Science Letters .

567 : 117013.

Bibcode : 2021E&PSL.56717013K .

doi : 10.1016/j.epsl.2021.117013 .

ISSN 0012-821X .

S2CID 235666971 .

^ Holm-Alwmark, Sanna; Jourdan, Fred; Ferrière, Ludovic; Alwmark, Carl; Koeberl, Christian (15 May 2021).

"Resolving the age of the Puchezh-Katunki impact structure (Russia) against alteration and inherited 40Ar* – No link with extinctions" .

Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta .

301 : 116– 140.

Bibcode : 2021GeCoA.301..116H .

doi : 10.1016/j.gca.2021.03.001 .

S2CID 233620694 .

^ a b Scotese, Christopher R. (2021-05-30).

"An Atlas of Phanerozoic Paleogeographic Maps: The Seas Come In and the Seas Go Out" .

Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences .

49 (1): 679– 728.

Bibcode : 2021AREPS..49..679S .

doi : 10.1146/annurev-earth-081320-064052 .

ISSN 0084-6597 .

S2CID 233708826 .

^ a b Frizon de Lamotte, Dominique; Fourdan, Brendan; Leleu, Sophie; Leparmentier, François; de Clarens, Philippe (24 April 2015).

"Style of rifting and the stages of Pangea breakup" .

Tectonics .

34 (5): 1009– 1029.

Bibcode : 2015Tecto..34.1009F .

doi : 10.1002/2014TC003760 .

S2CID 135409359 .

^ Hosseinpour, Maral; Williams, Simon; Seton, Maria; Barnett-Moore, Nicholas; Müller, R. Dietmar (2016-10-02).

"Tectonic evolution of Western Tethys from Jurassic to present day: coupling geological and geophysical data with seismic tomography models" .

International Geology Review .

58 (13): 1616– 1645.

Bibcode : 2016IGRv...58.1616H .

doi : 10.1080/00206814.2016.1183146 .

hdl : 2123/20835 .

ISSN 0020-6814 .

S2CID 130537970 .

^ Barth, G.; Franz, M.; Heunisch, C.; Ernst, W.; Zimmermann, J.; Wolfgramm, M. (2018-01-01).

"Marine and terrestrial sedimentation across the T–J transition in the North German Basin" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

489 : 74– 94.

Bibcode : 2018PPP...489...74B .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2017.09.029 .

ISSN 0031-0182 .

^ Korte, Christoph; Hesselbo, Stephen P.; Ullmann, Clemens V.; Dietl, Gerd; Ruhl, Micha; Schweigert, Günter; Thibault, Nicolas (December 2015).

"Jurassic climate mode governed by ocean gateway" .

Nature Communications .

6 (1): 10015.

Bibcode : 2015NatCo...610015K .

doi : 10.1038/ncomms10015 .

ISSN 2041-1723 .

PMC 4682040 .

PMID 26658694 .

^ Bjerrum, Christian J.; Surlyk, Finn; Callomon, John H.; Slingerland, Rudy L. (August 2001).

"Numerical paleoceanographic study of the Early Jurassic Transcontinental Laurasian Seaway" .

Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology .

16 (4): 390– 404.

Bibcode : 2001PalOc..16..390B .

doi : 10.1029/2000PA000512 .

S2CID 128465643 .

^ Mitchell, Andrew J.; Allison, Peter A.; Gorman, Gerald J.; Piggott, Matthew D.; Pain, Christopher C. (1 March 2011).

"Tidal circulation in an ancient epicontinental sea: The Early Jurassic Laurasian Seaway" .

Geology .

39 (3): 207– 210.

Bibcode : 2011Geo....39..207M .

doi : 10.1130/G31496.1 . Retrieved 21 April 2023 .

^ Upchurch, Paul; Hunn, Craig A.; Norman, David B. (22 March 2002).

"An analysis of dinosaurian biogeography: evidence for the existence of vicariance and dispersal patterns caused by geological events" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

269 (1491): 613– 621.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2001.1921 .

PMC 1690931 .

PMID 11916478 .

^ Geiger, Markus; Clark, David Norman; Mette, Wolfgang (March 2004).

"Reappraisal of the timing of the breakup of Gondwana based on sedimentological and seismic evidence from the Morondava Basin, Madagascar" .

Journal of African Earth Sciences .

38 (4): 363– 381.

Bibcode : 2004JAfES..38..363G .

doi : 10.1016/j.jafrearsci.2004.02.003 .

^ Nguyen, Luan C.; Hall, Stuart A.; Bird, Dale E.; Ball, Philip J. (June 2016).

"Reconstruction of the East Africa and Antarctica continental margins: AFRICA-ANTARCTICA RECONSTRUCTION" .

Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth .

121 (6): 4156– 4179.

doi : 10.1002/2015JB012776 .

^ Iturralde-Vinent, Manuel A. (2003-01-01).

"The Conflicting Paleontologic versus Stratigraphic Record of the Formation of the Caribbean Seaway" .

The Circum-Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean: Hydrocarbon Habitats, Basin Formation and Plate Tectonics . Vol. 79.

American Association of Petroleum Geologists .

doi : 10.1306/M79877 .

ISBN 978-1-62981-054-6 .

^ Blakey, Ronald C.; Ranney, Wayne D. (2018), "The Arrival of Wrangellia and the Nevadan Orogeny: Late Triassic to Late Jurassic: Ca. 240–145 Ma" , Ancient Landscapes of Western North America , Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp.

89– 101, doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-59636-5_7 , ISBN 978-3-319-59634-1 , retrieved 2021-04-10 ^ Clennett, Edward J.; Sigloch, Karin; Mihalynuk, Mitchell G.; Seton, Maria; Henderson, Martha A.; Hosseini, Kasra; Mohammadzaheri, Afsaneh; Johnston, Stephen T.; Müller, R. Dietmar (August 2020).

"A Quantitative Tomotectonic Plate Reconstruction of Western North America and the Eastern Pacific Basin" .

Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems .

21 (8): e09117.

Bibcode : 2020GGG....2109117C .

doi : 10.1029/2020GC009117 .

ISSN 1525-2027 .

S2CID 225443040 .

^ Yi, Zhiyu; Meert, Joseph G. (2020-08-16).

"A Closure of the Mongol-Okhotsk Ocean by the Middle Jurassic: Reconciliation of Paleomagnetic and Geological Evidence" .

Geophysical Research Letters .

47 (15).

Bibcode : 2020GeoRL..4788235Y .

doi : 10.1029/2020GL088235 .

ISSN 0094-8276 .

S2CID 225430978 .

^ Boschman, Lydian M.; van Hinsbergen, Douwe J. J. (July 2016).

"On the enigmatic birth of the Pacific Plate within the Panthalassa Ocean" .

Science Advances .

2 (7): e1600022.

Bibcode : 2016SciA....2E0022B .

doi : 10.1126/sciadv.1600022 .

ISSN 2375-2548 .

PMC 5919776 .

PMID 29713683 .

^ Danise, Silvia; Holland, Steven M. (July 2018).

"A Sequence Stratigraphic Framework for the Middle to Late Jurassic of the Sundance Seaway, Wyoming: Implications for Correlation, Basin Evolution, and Climate Change" .

The Journal of Geology .

126 (4): 371– 405.

Bibcode : 2018JG....126..371D .

doi : 10.1086/697692 .

ISSN 0022-1376 .

S2CID 133707199 .

^ Haq, Bilal U. (2018-01-01).

"Jurassic Sea-Level Variations: A Reappraisal" .

GSA Today : 4– 10.

doi : 10.1130/GSATG359A.1 .

^ Vulpius, Sara; Kiessling, Wolfgang (January 2018).

"New constraints on the last aragonite–calcite sea transition from early Jurassic ooids" .

Facies .

64 (1): 3.

Bibcode : 2018Faci...64....3V .

doi : 10.1007/s10347-017-0516-x .

ISSN 0172-9179 .

S2CID 135202813 .

^ Eichenseer, Kilian; Balthasar, Uwe; Smart, Christopher W.; Stander, Julian; Haaga, Kristian A.; Kiessling, Wolfgang (August 2019).

"Jurassic shift from abiotic to biotic control on marine ecological success" .

Nature Geoscience .

12 (8): 638– 642.

Bibcode : 2019NatGe..12..638E .

doi : 10.1038/s41561-019-0392-9 .

hdl : 10026.1/14472 .

ISSN 1752-0894 .

S2CID 197402218 .

^ Dai, Xianduo; Du, Yuansheng; Ziegler, Martin; Wang, Chaowen; Ma, Qianli; Chai, Rong; Guo, Hua (1 January 2022).

"Middle Triassic to Late Jurassic climate change on the northern margin of the South China Plate: Insights from chemical weathering indices and clay mineralogy" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

585 : 110744.

Bibcode : 2022PPP...58510744D .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2021.110744 .

hdl : 1874/419504 .

S2CID 243463781 . Retrieved 9 January 2023 .

^ a b Sellwood, Bruce W.; Valdes, Paul J. (2008).

"Jurassic climates" .

Proceedings of the Geologists' Association .

119 (1): 5– 17.

Bibcode : 2008PrGA..119....5S .

doi : 10.1016/S0016-7878(59)80068-7 .

^ a b c d e f g Scotese, Christopher R.; Song, Haijun; Mills, Benjamin J.W.; van der Meer, Douwe G. (April 2021).

"Phanerozoic paleotemperatures: The earth's changing climate during the last 540 million years" .

Earth-Science Reviews .

215 : 103503.

Bibcode : 2021ESRv..21503503S .

doi : 10.1016/j.earscirev.2021.103503 .

ISSN 0012-8252 .

S2CID 233579194 . Archived from the original on 8 January 2021.

Alt URL ^ Landwehrs, Jan; Feulner, Georg; Petri, Stefan; Sames, Benjamin; Wagreich, Michael (20 May 2021).

"Investigating Mesozoic Climate Trends and Sensitivities With a Large Ensemble of Climate Model Simulations" .

Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology .

36 (6): e2020PA004134.

Bibcode : 2021PaPa...36.4134L .

doi : 10.1029/2020PA004134 .

PMC 8251552 .

PMID 34240008 .

^ Zhang, Zhihui; Lv, Dawei; Lu, Man; Yu, Zicheng; Gao, Yuan; Wang, Tiantian; Gao, Jie; Wang, Chengshan (March 2023).

"Wildfire activity driven by the 405-kyr orbital climate cycles in the Middle Jurassic" .

Global and Planetary Change .

222 : 104069.

Bibcode : 2023GPC...22204069Z .

doi : 10.1016/j.gloplacha.2023.104069 .

S2CID 257059454 . Retrieved 16 September 2023 .

^ Allmon, Warren D.; Martin, Ronald E. (Spring 2014).

"Seafood through time revisited: the Phanerozoic increase in marine trophic resources and its macroevolutionary consequences" .

Paleobiology .

40 (2): 256– 287.

doi : 10.1666/13065 .

ISSN 0094-8373 .

S2CID 86765146 . Retrieved 16 September 2023 .

^ Bougeault, Cédric; Pellenard, Pierre; Deconinck, Jean-François; Hesselbo, Stephen P.; Dommergues, Jean-Louis; Bruneau, Ludovic; Cocquerez, Théophile; Laffont, Rémi; Huret, Emilia; Thibault, Nicholas (February 2017).

"Climatic and palaeoceanographic changes during the Pliensbachian (Early Jurassic) inferred from clay mineralogy and stable isotope (C-O) geochemistry (NW Europe)" .

Global and Planetary Change .

149 : 139– 152.

Bibcode : 2017GPC...149..139B .

doi : 10.1016/j.gloplacha.2017.01.005 .

hdl : 10871/25335 . Retrieved 14 May 2023 .

^ Ruebsam, Wolfgang; Mayer, Bernhard; Schwark, Lorenz (January 2019).

"Cryosphere carbon dynamics control early Toarcian global warming and sea level evolution" .

Global and Planetary Change .

172 : 440– 453.

Bibcode : 2019GPC...172..440R .

doi : 10.1016/j.gloplacha.2018.11.003 .

S2CID 133660136 .

^ Ruebsam, Wolfgang; Schwark, Lorenz (2021-05-11).

"Impact of a northern-hemispherical cryosphere on late Pliensbachian–early Toarcian climate and environment evolution" .

Geological Society, London, Special Publications .

514 (1): SP514–2021–11.

Bibcode : 2021GSLSP.514..359R .

doi : 10.1144/SP514-2021-11 .

ISSN 0305-8719 .

S2CID 236600012 .

^ Ikeda, Masayuki; Bôle, Maximilien; Baumgartner, Peter O. (1 September 2016).

"Orbital-scale changes in redox condition and biogenic silica/detrital fluxes of the Middle Jurassic Radiolarite in Tethys (Sogno, Lombardy, N-Italy): Possible link with glaciation?" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

457 : 247– 257.

Bibcode : 2016PPP...457..247I .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2016.06.009 . Retrieved 10 April 2023 .

^ Li, Jun; Huang, Cheng-Min; Yang, Guo-Lin; Pan, Yuan-Yuan; Wen, Xing-Yue (January 2022).

"Middle Jurassic climate oscillations from paleosol records of the Sichuan Basin, SW China" .

Journal of Palaeogeography .

11 (1): 97– 122.

Bibcode : 2022JPalG..11...97L .

doi : 10.1016/j.jop.2022.01.003 .

S2CID 252949484 .

^ Zhang, Zhihui; Wang, Chengshan; Lv, Dawei; Hay, William W.; Wang, Tiantian; Cao, Shuo (1 January 2020).

"Precession-scale climate forcing of peatland wildfires during the early middle Jurassic greenhouse period" .

Global and Planetary Change .

184 : 103051.

Bibcode : 2020GPC...18403051Z .

doi : 10.1016/j.gloplacha.2019.103051 .

ISSN 0921-8181 . Retrieved 26 February 2024 – via Elsevier Science Direct.

^ Hesselbo, Stephen P.; Morgans-Bell, Helen S.; McElwain, Jennifer C.; Rees, P. McAllister; Robinson, Stuart A.; Ross, C. Elizabeth (May 2003).

"Carbon-Cycle Perturbation in the Middle Jurassic and Accompanying Changes in the Terrestrial Paleoenvironment" .

The Journal of Geology .

111 (3): 259– 276.

Bibcode : 2003JG....111..259H .

doi : 10.1086/373968 .

ISSN 0022-1376 . Retrieved 4 May 2024 – via The University of Chicago Press Journals.

^ Wierzbowski, H.; Joachimski, M. (22 October 2007).

"Reconstruction of late Bajocian–Bathonian marine palaeoenvironments using carbon and oxygen isotope ratios of calcareous fossils from the Polish Jura Chain (central Poland)" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

254 ( 3– 4): 523– 540.

Bibcode : 2007PPP...254..523W .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2007.07.010 . Retrieved 10 April 2023 .

^ Jenkyns, Hugh C.; Schouten-Huibers, L.; Schouten, S.; Sinninghe Damsté, Jaap S. (2 February 2012).

"Warm Middle Jurassic–Early Cretaceous high-latitude sea-surface temperatures from the Southern Ocean" .

Climate of the Past .

8 (1): 215– 226.

Bibcode : 2012CliPa...8..215J .

doi : 10.5194/cp-8-215-2012 .

S2CID 203095372 . Retrieved 8 April 2023 .

^ a b Li, Gaojie; Xia, Guoqing; Yi, Haisheng; Wu, Chihua; Wagreich, Michael (15 September 2022).

"Climate changes as recorded in stable carbon isotopic compositions of the Late Jurassic marine sedimentary succession in the Qiangtang Basin, Northern Tibet" .

Journal of Asian Earth Sciences .

236 : 105317.

Bibcode : 2022JAESc.23605317L .

doi : 10.1016/j.jseaes.2022.105317 .

S2CID 250103419 . Retrieved 8 January 2023 .

^ Dromart, G.; Garcia, J.-P.; Picard, S.; Atrops, F.; Lécuyer, C.; Sheppard, S. M. F. (25 August 2003).

"Ice age at the Middle–Late Jurassic transition?" .

Earth and Planetary Science Letters .

213 ( 3– 4): 205– 220.

Bibcode : 2003E&PSL.213..205D .

doi : 10.1016/S0012-821X(03)00287-5 . Retrieved 8 January 2023 .

^ Philippe, Marc; Puijalon, Sara; Suan, Guillaume; Mousset, Sylvain; Thévenard, Frédéric; Mattioli, Emanuela (15 January 2017).

"The palaeolatitudinal distribution of fossil wood genera as a proxy for European Jurassic terrestrial climate" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

466 : 373– 381.

Bibcode : 2017PPP...466..373P .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2016.11.029 . Retrieved 10 June 2023 .

^ Them, T.R.; Gill, B.C.; Caruthers, A.H.; Gröcke, D.R.; Tulsky, E.T.; Martindale, R.C.; Poulton, T.P.; Smith, P.L. (February 2017).

"High-resolution carbon isotope records of the Toarcian Oceanic Anoxic Event (Early Jurassic) from North America and implications for the global drivers of the Toarcian carbon cycle" .

Earth and Planetary Science Letters .

459 : 118– 126.

Bibcode : 2017E&PSL.459..118T .

doi : 10.1016/j.epsl.2016.11.021 .

^ Ros-Franch, Sonia; Echevarría, Javier; Damborenea, Susana E.; Manceñido, Miguel O.; Jenkyns, Hugh C.; Al-Suwaidi, Aisha; Hesselbo, Stephen P.; Riccardi, Alberto C. (1 July 2019).

"Population response during an Oceanic Anoxic Event: The case of Posidonotis (Bivalvia) from the Lower Jurassic of the Neuquén Basin, Argentina" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

525 : 57– 67.

Bibcode : 2019PPP...525...57R .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2019.04.009 .

hdl : 11336/128130 .

S2CID 146525666 . Retrieved 23 November 2022 .

^ a b c Wignall, Paul B.; Bond, David P. G. (2008).

"The end-Triassic and Early Jurassic mass extinction records in the British Isles" .

Proceedings of the Geologists' Association .

119 (1): 73– 84.

Bibcode : 2008PrGA..119...73W .

doi : 10.1016/S0016-7878(08)80259-3 . Retrieved 23 November 2022 .

^ a b Reolid, Matías; Mattioli, Emanuela; Duarte, Luís V.; Ruebsam, Wolfgang (2021-09-22).

"The Toarcian Oceanic Anoxic Event: where do we stand?" .

Geological Society, London, Special Publications .

514 (1): 1– 11.

Bibcode : 2021GSLSP.514....1R .

doi : 10.1144/SP514-2021-74 .

ISSN 0305-8719 .

S2CID 238683028 .

^ Rodrigues, Bruno; Duarte, Luís V.; Silva, Ricardo L.; Mendonça Filho, João Graciano (15 September 2020).

"Sedimentary organic matter and early Toarcian environmental changes in the Lusitanian Basin (Portugal)" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

554 : 109781.

Bibcode : 2020PPP...55409781R .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2020.109781 .

S2CID 219059687 . Retrieved 27 September 2022 .

^ Dera, Guillaume; Neige, Pascal; Dommergues, Jean-Louis; Fara, Emmanuel; Laffont, Rémi; Pellenard, Pierre (January 2010).

"High-resolution dynamics of Early Jurassic marine extinctions: the case of Pliensbachian–Toarcian ammonites (Cephalopoda)" .

Journal of the Geological Society .

167 (1): 21– 33.

Bibcode : 2010JGSoc.167...21D .

doi : 10.1144/0016-76492009-068 .

ISSN 0016-7649 .

S2CID 128908746 .

^ Arias, Carmen (1 October 2013).

"The early Toarcian (early Jurassic) ostracod extinction events in the Iberian Range: The effect of temperature changes and prolonged exposure to low dissolved oxygen concentrations" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

387 : 40– 55.

Bibcode : 2013PPP...387...40A .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2013.07.004 . Retrieved 23 November 2022 .

^ Hess, Silvia; Nagy, Jenő; Laursen, Gitte Vestergaard (28 January 2014).

"Benthic foraminifera from the Lower Jurassic transgressive mudstones of the south-western Barents Sea—a possible high-latitude expression of the global Pliensbachian–Toarcian turnover?" .

Polar Research .

33 (1): 20206.

doi : 10.3402/polar.v33.20206 .

S2CID 128492520 .

^ Reolid, Matías; Copestake, Philip; Johnson, Ben (15 October 2019).

"Foraminiferal assemblages, extinctions and appearances associated with the Early Toarcian Oceanic Anoxic Event in the Llanbedr (Mochras Farm) Borehole, Cardigan Bay Basin, United Kingdom" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

532 : 109277.

Bibcode : 2019PPP...53209277R .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2019.109277 .

S2CID 200072488 . Retrieved 23 November 2022 .

^ Danise, Silvia; Clémence, Marie-Emilie; Price, Gregory D.; Murphy, Daniel P.; Gómez, Juan J.; Twitchett, Richard J. (15 June 2019).

"Stratigraphic and environmental control on marine benthic community change through the early Toarcian extinction event (Iberian Range, Spain)" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

524 : 183– 200.

Bibcode : 2019PPP...524..183D .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2019.03.039 .

hdl : 10026.1/13668 .

S2CID 134835736 . Retrieved 23 November 2022 .

^ Caruthers, Andrew H.; Smith, Paul L.; Gröcke, Darren R. (September 2013).

"The Pliensbachian–Toarcian (Early Jurassic) extinction, a global multi-phased event" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

386 : 104– 118.

Bibcode : 2013PPP...386..104C .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2013.05.010 .

^ Vörös, Attila; Kocsis, Ádám; Pálfy, József (1 September 2016).

"Demise of the last two spire-bearing brachiopod orders (Spiriferinida and Athyridida) at the Toarcian (Early Jurassic) extinction event" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

457 : 233– 241.

Bibcode : 2016PPP...457..233V .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2016.06.022 . Retrieved 29 October 2022 .

^ Joran, Fernando García; Baeza-Carratalá, José Francisco; Goy, Antonio (1 October 2018).

"Changes in brachiopod body size prior to the Early Toarcian (Jurassic) Mass Extinction" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

506 : 242– 249.

Bibcode : 2018PPP...506..242G .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2018.06.045 .

hdl : 10045/77781 .

S2CID 135368506 . Retrieved 29 October 2022 .

^ Maxwell, Erin E.; Vincent, Peggy (2015-11-06).

"Effects of the early Toarcian Oceanic Anoxic Event on ichthyosaur body size and faunal composition in the Southwest German Basin" .

Paleobiology .

42 (1): 117– 126.

doi : 10.1017/pab.2015.34 .

ISSN 0094-8373 .

S2CID 131623205 .

^ Xu, Weimu; Ruhl, Micha; Jenkyns, Hugh C.; Hesselbo, Stephen P.; Riding, James B.; Selby, David; Naafs, B. David A.; Weijers, Johan W. H.; Pancost, Richard D.; Tegelaar, Erik W.; Idiz, Erdem F. (February 2017).

"Carbon sequestration in an expanded lake system during the Toarcian oceanic anoxic event" .

Nature Geoscience .

10 (2): 129– 134.

Bibcode : 2017NatGe..10..129X .

doi : 10.1038/ngeo2871 .

hdl : 10871/24965 .

ISSN 1752-0894 .

^ Müller, Tamás; Jurikova, Hana; Gutjahr, Marcus; Tomašových, Adam; Schlögl, Jan; Liebetrau, Volker; Duarte, Luís v.; Milovský, Rastislav; Suan, Guillaume; Mattioli, Emanuela; Pittet, Bernard (2020-12-01).

"Ocean acidification during the early Toarcian extinction event: Evidence from boron isotopes in brachiopods" .

Geology .

48 (12): 1184– 1188.

Bibcode : 2020Geo....48.1184M .

doi : 10.1130/G47781.1 .

hdl : 10023/20595 .

ISSN 0091-7613 .

^ Trecalli, Alberto; Spangenberg, Jorge; Adatte, Thierry; Föllmi, Karl B.; Parente, Mariano (December 2012).

"Carbonate platform evidence of ocean acidification at the onset of the early Toarcian oceanic anoxic event" .

Earth and Planetary Science Letters .

357– 358: 214– 225.

Bibcode : 2012E&PSL.357..214T .

doi : 10.1016/j.epsl.2012.09.043 .

^ Ettinger, Nicholas P.; Larson, Toti E.; Kerans, Charles; Thibodeau, Alyson M.; Hattori, Kelly E.; Kacur, Sean M.; Martindale, Rowan C. (2020-09-23). Eberli, Gregor (ed.).

"Ocean acidification and photic-zone anoxia at the Toarcian Oceanic Anoxic Event: Insights from the Adriatic Carbonate Platform" .

Sedimentology .

68 : 63– 107.

doi : 10.1111/sed.12786 .

ISSN 0037-0746 .

S2CID 224870464 .

^ Papadomanolaki, Nina M.; Lenstra, Wytze K.; Wolthers, Mariette; Slomp, Caroline P.

(1 July 2022).

"Enhanced phosphorus recycling during past oceanic anoxia amplified by low rates of apatite authigenesis" .

Science Advances .

8 (26): eabn2370.

Bibcode : 2022SciA....8N2370P .

doi : 10.1126/sciadv.abn2370 .

hdl : 1874/421467 .

PMC 10883373 .

PMID 35776794 .

S2CID 250218660 .

^ Tennant, Jonathan P.; Mannion, Philip D.; Upchurch, Paul (2016-09-02).

"Sea level regulated tetrapod diversity dynamics through the Jurassic/Cretaceous interval" .

Nature Communications .

7 (1): 12737.

Bibcode : 2016NatCo...712737T .

doi : 10.1038/ncomms12737 .

ISSN 2041-1723 .

PMC 5025807 .

PMID 27587285 .

^ a b Lucas, Spencer G.; Tanner, Lawrence H. (October 2015).

"End-Triassic nonmarine biotic events" .

Journal of Palaeogeography .

4 (4): 331– 348.

Bibcode : 2015JPalG...4..331L .

doi : 10.1016/j.jop.2015.08.010 .

^ Mander, Luke; Kürschner, Wolfram M.; McElwain, Jennifer C. (2010-08-31).

"An explanation for conflicting records of Triassic–Jurassic plant diversity" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

107 (35): 15351– 15356.

Bibcode : 2010PNAS..10715351M .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1004207107 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 2932585 .

PMID 20713737 .

^ Barbacka, Maria; Pacyna, Grzegorz; Kocsis, Ádam T.; Jarzynka, Agata; Ziaja, Jadwiga; Bodor, Emese (August 2017).

"Changes in terrestrial floras at the Triassic-Jurassic Boundary in Europe" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

480 : 80– 93.

Bibcode : 2017PPP...480...80B .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2017.05.024 .

^ Elgorriaga, Andrés; Escapa, Ignacio H.; Cúneo, N. Rubén (July 2019).

"Relictual Lepidopteris (Peltaspermales) from the Early Jurassic Cañadón Asfalto Formation, Patagonia, Argentina" .

International Journal of Plant Sciences .

180 (6): 578– 596.

Bibcode : 2019IJPlS.180..578E .

doi : 10.1086/703461 .

ISSN 1058-5893 .

S2CID 195435840 .

^ Bomfleur, Benjamin; Blomenkemper, Patrick; Kerp, Hans; McLoughlin, Stephen (2018), "Polar Regions of the Mesozoic–Paleogene Greenhouse World as Refugia for Relict Plant Groups" , Transformative Paleobotany , Elsevier, pp.

593– 611, doi : 10.1016/b978-0-12-813012-4.00024-3 , ISBN 978-0-12-813012-4 , retrieved 2020-11-12 ^ Atkinson, Brian A.; Serbet, Rudolph; Hieger, Timothy J.; Taylor, Edith L. (October 2018).

"Additional evidence for the Mesozoic diversification of conifers: Pollen cone of Chimaerostrobus minutus gen. et sp. nov. (Coniferales), from the Lower Jurassic of Antarctica" .

Review of Palaeobotany and Palynology .

257 : 77– 84.

Bibcode : 2018RPaPa.257...77A .

doi : 10.1016/j.revpalbo.2018.06.013 .

S2CID 133732087 .

^ a b c Leslie, Andrew B.; Beaulieu, Jeremy; Holman, Garth; Campbell, Christopher S.; Mei, Wenbin; Raubeson, Linda R.; Mathews, Sarah (September 2018).

"An overview of extant conifer evolution from the perspective of the fossil record" .

American Journal of Botany .

105 (9): 1531– 1544.

doi : 10.1002/ajb2.1143 .

PMID 30157290 .

S2CID 52120430 .

^ Stockey, Ruth A.; Rothwell, Gar W. (July 2020).

"Diversification of crown group Araucaria : the role of Araucaria famii sp. nov. in the Late Cretaceous (Campanian) radiation of Araucariaceae in the Northern Hemisphere" .

American Journal of Botany .

107 (7): 1072– 1093.

doi : 10.1002/ajb2.1505 .

ISSN 0002-9122 .

PMID 32705687 .

S2CID 225568264 .

^ Escapa, Ignacio H.; Catalano, Santiago A. (October 2013).

"Phylogenetic Analysis of Araucariaceae: Integrating Molecules, Morphology, and Fossils" .

International Journal of Plant Sciences .

174 (8): 1153– 1170.

Bibcode : 2013IJPlS.174.1153E .

doi : 10.1086/672369 .

hdl : 11336/3583 .

ISSN 1058-5893 .

S2CID 56238574 .

^ Stockey, Ruth A.; Rothwell, Gar W. (March 2013).

"Pararaucaria carrii sp. nov., Anatomically Preserved Evidence for the Conifer Family Cheirolepidiaceae in the Northern Hemisphere" .

International Journal of Plant Sciences .

174 (3): 445– 457.

Bibcode : 2013IJPlS.174..445S .

doi : 10.1086/668614 .

ISSN 1058-5893 .

S2CID 59269291 .

^ Escapa, Ignacio; Cúneo, Rubén; Axsmith, Brian (September 2008).

"A new genus of the Cupressaceae (sensu lato) from the Jurassic of Patagonia: Implications for conifer megasporangiate cone homologies" .

Review of Palaeobotany and Palynology .

151 ( 3– 4): 110– 122.

Bibcode : 2008RPaPa.151..110E .

doi : 10.1016/j.revpalbo.2008.03.002 .

^ Contreras, Dori L.; Escapa, Ignacio H.; Iribarren, Rocio C.; Cúneo, N. Rubén (October 2019).

"Reconstructing the Early Evolution of the Cupressaceae: A Whole-Plant Description of a New Austrohamia Species from the Cañadón Asfalto Formation (Early Jurassic), Argentina" .

International Journal of Plant Sciences .

180 (8): 834– 868.

Bibcode : 2019IJPlS.180..834C .

doi : 10.1086/704831 .

ISSN 1058-5893 .

S2CID 202862782 .

^ Ma, Qing-Wen; K. Ferguson, David; Liu, Hai-Ming; Xu, Jing-Xian (2020).

"Compressions of Sequoia (Cupressaceae sensu lato) from the Middle Jurassic of Daohugou, Ningcheng, Inner Mongolia, China" .

Palaeobiodiversity and Palaeoenvironments .

1 (9): 1.

doi : 10.1007/s12549-020-00454-z .

S2CID 227180592 . Retrieved 9 March 2021 .

^ Domogatskaya, Ksenia V.; Herman, Alexei B. (May 2019).

"New species of the genus Schizolepidopsis (conifers) from the Albian of the Russian high Arctic and geological history of the genus" .

Cretaceous Research .

97 : 73– 93.

Bibcode : 2019CrRes..97...73D .

doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2019.01.012 .

S2CID 134849082 .

^ Matsunaga, Kelly K. S.; Herendeen, Patrick S.; Herrera, Fabiany; Ichinnorov, Niiden; Crane, Peter R.; Shi, Gongle (2021-05-10).

"Ovulate Cones of Schizolepidopsis ediae sp. nov. Provide Insights into the Evolution of Pinaceae" .

International Journal of Plant Sciences .

182 (6): 490– 507.

Bibcode : 2021IJPlS.182..490M .

doi : 10.1086/714281 .

ISSN 1058-5893 .

S2CID 235426888 .

^ Rothwell, Gar W.; Mapes, Gene; Stockey, Ruth A.; Hilton, Jason (April 2012). "The seed cone Eathiestrobus gen. nov.: Fossil evidence for a Jurassic origin of Pinaceae".

American Journal of Botany .

99 (4): 708– 720.

Bibcode : 2012AmJB...99..708R .

doi : 10.3732/ajb.1100595 .

PMID 22491001 .

^ Smith, Selena Y.; Stockey, Ruth A.; Rothwell, Gar W.; Little, Stefan A. (2017-01-02).

"A new species of Pityostrobus (Pinaceae) from the Cretaceous of California: moving towards understanding the Cretaceous radiation of Pinaceae" .

Journal of Systematic Palaeontology .

15 (1): 69– 81.

Bibcode : 2017JSPal..15...69S .

doi : 10.1080/14772019.2016.1143885 .

ISSN 1477-2019 .

S2CID 88292891 .

^ Dong, Chong; Shi, Gongle; Herrera, Fabiany; Wang, Yongdong; Herendeen, Patrick S; Crane, Peter R (2020-06-18).

"Middle–Late Jurassic fossils from northeastern China reveal morphological stasis in the catkin-yew" .

National Science Review .

7 (11): 1765– 1767.

doi : 10.1093/nsr/nwaa138 .

ISSN 2095-5138 .

PMC 8288717 .

PMID 34691509 .

^ Andruchow-Colombo, Ana; Escapa, Ignacio H; Aagesen, Lone; Matsunaga, Kelly K S (2023-08-04).

"In search of lost time: tracing the fossil diversity of Podocarpaceae through the ages" .

Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society .

203 (4): 315– 336.

doi : 10.1093/botlinnean/boad027 .

hdl : 11336/227952 .

ISSN 0024-4074 .

^ Pole, Mike; Wang, Yongdong; Bugdaeva, Eugenia V.; Dong, Chong; Tian, Ning; Li, Liqin; Zhou, Ning (2016-12-15).

"The rise and demise of Podozamites in east Asia—An extinct conifer life style" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . Mesozoic ecosystems – Climate and Biota.

464 : 97– 109.

Bibcode : 2016PPP...464...97P .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2016.02.037 .

ISSN 0031-0182 .

^ a b c Zhou, Zhi-Yan (March 2009).

"An overview of fossil Ginkgoales" .

Palaeoworld .

18 (1): 1– 22.

doi : 10.1016/j.palwor.2009.01.001 .

^ Nosova, Natalya (October 2013).

"Revision of the genus Grenana Samylina from the Middle Jurassic of Angren, Uzbekistan" .

Review of Palaeobotany and Palynology .

197 : 226– 252.

Bibcode : 2013RPaPa.197..226N .

doi : 10.1016/j.revpalbo.2013.06.005 .

^ Dong, Chong; Shi, Gongle; Zhang, Xiaoqing; Wang, Zixi; Wang, Yongdong (November 2022).

"Middle-Late Jurassic fossils from Northeast China confirm the affiliation of Umaltolepis seed-bearing structures and Pseudotorellia leaves" .

Review of Palaeobotany and Palynology .

306 : 104763.

Bibcode : 2022RPaPa.30604763D .

doi : 10.1016/j.revpalbo.2022.104763 .

S2CID 251917169 .

^ a b Popa, Mihai E. (June 2014).

"Early Jurassic bennettitalean reproductive structures of Romania" .

Palaeobiodiversity and Palaeoenvironments .

94 (2): 327– 362.

Bibcode : 2014PdPe...94..327P .

doi : 10.1007/s12549-014-0165-9 .

ISSN 1867-1594 .

S2CID 128411467 .

^ Taylor, T (2009), "Cycadophytes" , Biology and Evolution of Fossil Plants , Elsevier, pp.

703– 741, doi : 10.1016/b978-0-12-373972-8.00017-6 , ISBN 978-0-12-373972-8 , retrieved 2020-12-12 ^ Pott, Christian; McLoughlin, Stephen (2014-06-01).

"Divaricate growth habit in Williamsoniaceae (Bennettitales): unravelling the ecology of a key Mesozoic plant group" .

Palaeobiodiversity and Palaeoenvironments .

94 (2): 307– 325.

Bibcode : 2014PdPe...94..307P .

doi : 10.1007/s12549-014-0157-9 .

ISSN 1867-1608 .

S2CID 84440045 .

^ Labandeira, Conrad C.; Yang, Qiang; Santiago-Blay, Jorge A.; Hotton, Carol L.; Monteiro, Antónia; Wang, Yong-Jie; Goreva, Yulia; Shih, ChungKun; Siljeström, Sandra; Rose, Tim R.; Dilcher, David L. (2016-02-10).

"The evolutionary convergence of mid-Mesozoic lacewings and Cenozoic butterflies" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

283 (1824): 20152893.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2015.2893 .

ISSN 0962-8452 .

PMC 4760178 .

PMID 26842570 .

^ Khramov, Alexander V.

; Lukashevich, Elena D. (July 2019).

"A Jurassic dipteran pollinator with an extremely long proboscis" .

Gondwana Research .

71 : 210– 215.

Bibcode : 2019GondR..71..210K .

doi : 10.1016/j.gr.2019.02.004 .

S2CID 134847380 .

^ a b Cai, Chenyang; Escalona, Hermes E.; Li, Liqin; Yin, Ziwei; Huang, Diying; Engel, Michael S. (September 2018).

"Beetle Pollination of Cycads in the Mesozoic" .

Current Biology .

28 (17): 2806–2812.e1.

Bibcode : 2018CBio...28E2806C .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2018.06.036 .

PMID 30122529 .

S2CID 52038878 .

^ a b Coiro, Mario; Pott, Christian (December 2017).

"Eobowenia gen. nov. from the Early Cretaceous of Patagonia: indication for an early divergence of Bowenia?" .

BMC Evolutionary Biology .

17 (1): 97.

Bibcode : 2017BMCEE..17...97C .

doi : 10.1186/s12862-017-0943-x .

ISSN 1471-2148 .

PMC 5383990 .

PMID 28388891 .

^ Vajda, Vivi; Pucetaite, Milda; McLoughlin, Stephen; Engdahl, Anders; Heimdal, Jimmy; Uvdal, Per (August 2017).

"Molecular signatures of fossil leaves provide unexpected new evidence for extinct plant relationships" .

Nature Ecology & Evolution .

1 (8): 1093– 1099.

Bibcode : 2017NatEE...1.1093V .

doi : 10.1038/s41559-017-0224-5 .

ISSN 2397-334X .

PMID 29046567 .

S2CID 3604369 .

^ Coiro, Mario; Allio, Rémi; Mazet, Nathan; Seyfullah, Leyla J.; Condamine, Fabien L. (2023-06-11).

"Reconciling fossils with phylogenies reveals the origin and macroevolutionary processes explaining the global cycad biodiversity" .

New Phytologist .

240 (4): 1616– 1635.

Bibcode : 2023NewPh.240.1616C .

doi : 10.1111/nph.19010 .

ISSN 0028-646X .

PMC 10953041 .

PMID 37302411 .

S2CID 259137975 .

^ Bateman, Richard M (2020-01-01). Ort, Donald (ed.).

"Hunting the Snark: the flawed search for mythical Jurassic angiosperms" .

Journal of Experimental Botany .

71 (1): 22– 35.

doi : 10.1093/jxb/erz411 .

ISSN 0022-0957 .

PMID 31538196 .

^ Coiro, Mario; Roberts, Emily A.; Hofmann, Christa-Ch.; Seyfullah, Leyla J. (2022-12-14).

"Cutting the long branches: Consilience as a path to unearth the evolutionary history of Gnetales" .

Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution .

10 : 1082639.

Bibcode : 2022FrEEv..1082639C .

doi : 10.3389/fevo.2022.1082639 .

ISSN 2296-701X .

^ Elgorriaga, Andrés; Escapa, Ignacio H.; Cúneo, N. Rubén (2019-09-02).

"Southern Hemisphere Caytoniales: vegetative and reproductive remains from the Lonco Trapial Formation (Lower Jurassic), Patagonia" .

Journal of Systematic Palaeontology .

17 (17): 1477– 1495.

Bibcode : 2019JSPal..17.1477E .

doi : 10.1080/14772019.2018.1535456 .

ISSN 1477-2019 .

S2CID 92287804 .

^ Slodownik, Miriam; Hill, Robert S.; McLoughlin, Stephen (October 2023).

"Komlopteris: A persistent lineage of post-Triassic corystosperms in Gondwana" .

Review of Palaeobotany and Palynology .

317 : 104950.

Bibcode : 2023RPaPa.31704950S .

doi : 10.1016/j.revpalbo.2023.104950 .

S2CID 260015702 .

^ a b Kustatscher, Evelyn; Visscher, Henk; van Konijnenburg-van Cittert, Johanna H. A. (2019-09-01).

"Did the Czekanowskiales already exist in the late Permian?" .

PalZ .

93 (3): 465– 477.

Bibcode : 2019PalZ...93..465K .

doi : 10.1007/s12542-019-00468-9 .

ISSN 1867-6812 .

S2CID 199473893 .

^ Taylor, T (2009), "Gymnosperms with obscure affinities" , Biology and Evolution of Fossil Plants , Elsevier, pp.

757– 785, doi : 10.1016/b978-0-12-373972-8.00019-x , ISBN 978-0-12-373972-8 , retrieved 2020-12-13 ^ Sun, Chunlin; Li, Yunfeng; Dilcher, David L.; Wang, Hongshan; Li, Tao; Na, Yuling; Wang, Anping (November 2015).

"An introductory report on the biodiversity of Middle Jurassic Phoenicopsis (Czekanowskiales) from the Ordos Basin, China" .

Science Bulletin .

60 (21): 1858– 1865.

Bibcode : 2015SciBu..60.1858S .

doi : 10.1007/s11434-015-0904-y .

S2CID 140617907 .

^ Pattemore, G.A., Rigby, J.F. and Playford, G., 2015. Triassic-Jurassic pteridosperms of Australasia: speciation, diversity and decline. Boletín Geológico y Minero, 126 (4): 689–722 ^ Skog, Judith E. (April 2001).

"Biogeography of Mesozoic leptosporangiate ferns related to extant ferns" .

Brittonia .

53 (2): 236– 269.

Bibcode : 2001Britt..53..236S .

doi : 10.1007/bf02812701 .

ISSN 0007-196X .

S2CID 42781830 .

^ Tian, Ning; Wang, Yong-Dong; Zhang, Wu; Zheng, Shao-Lin; Zhu, Zhi-Peng; Liu, Zhong-Jian (2018-03-01).

"Permineralized osmundaceous and gleicheniaceous ferns from the Jurassic of Inner Mongolia, NE China" .

Palaeobiodiversity and Palaeoenvironments .

98 (1): 165– 176.

Bibcode : 2018PdPe...98..165T .

doi : 10.1007/s12549-017-0313-0 .

ISSN 1867-1608 .

S2CID 134149095 .

^ Regalado, Ledis; Schmidt, Alexander R.; Müller, Patrick; Niedermeier, Lisa; Krings, Michael; Schneider, Harald (July 2019).

"Heinrichsia cheilanthoides gen. et sp. nov., a fossil fern in the family Pteridaceae (Polypodiales) from the Cretaceous amber forests of Myanmar" .

Journal of Systematics and Evolution .

57 (4): 329– 338.

Bibcode : 2019JSyEv..57..329R .

doi : 10.1111/jse.12514 .

ISSN 1674-4918 .

S2CID 182754946 .

^ Li, Chunxiang; Miao, Xinyuan; Zhang, Li-Bing; Ma, Junye; Hao, Jiasheng (January 2020).

"Re-evaluation of the systematic position of the Jurassic–Early Cretaceous fern genus Coniopteris" .

Cretaceous Research .

105 : 104136.

Bibcode : 2020CrRes.10504136L .

doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2019.04.007 .

S2CID 146355798 .

^ Korall, Petra; Pryer, Kathleen M. (February 2014). Parmakelis, Aristeidis (ed.).

"Global biogeography of scaly tree ferns (Cyatheaceae): evidence for Gondwanan vicariance and limited transoceanic dispersal" .

Journal of Biogeography .

41 (2): 402– 413.

Bibcode : 2014JBiog..41..402K .

doi : 10.1111/jbi.12222 .

ISSN 0305-0270 .

PMC 4238398 .

PMID 25435648 .

^ Axsmith, Brian J.; Krings, Michael; Taylor, Thomas N. (September 2001).

"A filmy fern from the Upper Triassic of North Carolina (USA)" .

American Journal of Botany .

88 (9): 1558– 1567.

Bibcode : 2001AmJB...88.1558A .

doi : 10.2307/3558399 .

ISSN 0002-9122 .

JSTOR 3558399 .

PMID 21669688 .

^ Elgorriaga, Andrés; Escapa, Ignacio H.; Bomfleur, Benjamin; Cúneo, Rubén; Ottone, Eduardo G. (February 2015).

"Reconstruction and Phylogenetic Significance of a New Equisetum Linnaeus Species from the Lower Jurassic of Cerro Bayo (Chubut Province, Argentina)" .

Ameghiniana .

52 (1): 135– 152.

Bibcode : 2015Amegh..52..135E .

doi : 10.5710/AMGH.15.09.2014.2758 .

hdl : 11336/66623 .

ISSN 0002-7014 .

S2CID 6134534 .

^ Gould, R. E. 1968. Morphology of Equisetum laterale Phillips, 1829, and E. bryanii sp. nov. from the Mesozoic of south‐eastern Queensland. Australian Journal of Botany 16: 153–176.

^ a b Elgorriaga, Andrés; Escapa, Ignacio H.; Rothwell, Gar W.; Tomescu, Alexandru M. F.; Rubén Cúneo, N. (August 2018).

"Origin of Equisetum : Evolution of horsetails (Equisetales) within the major euphyllophyte clade Sphenopsida" .

American Journal of Botany .

105 (8): 1286– 1303.

doi : 10.1002/ajb2.1125 .

PMID 30025163 .

^ Channing, Alan; Zamuner, Alba; Edwards, Dianne; Guido, Diego (2011).

"Equisetum thermale sp. nov. (Equisetales) from the Jurassic San Agustín hot spring deposit, Patagonia: Anatomy, paleoecology, and inferred paleoecophysiology" .

American Journal of Botany .

98 (4): 680– 697.

Bibcode : 2011AmJB...98..680C .

doi : 10.3732/ajb.1000211 .

hdl : 11336/95234 .

ISSN 1537-2197 .

PMID 21613167 .

^ Wood, Daniel; Besnard, Guillaume; Beerling, David J.; Osborne, Colin P.; Christin, Pascal-Antoine (2020-06-18).

"Phylogenomics indicates the "living fossil" Isoetes diversified in the Cenozoic" .

PLOS ONE .

15 (6): e0227525.

Bibcode : 2020PLoSO..1527525W .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0227525 .

ISSN 1932-6203 .

PMC 7302493 .

PMID 32555586 .

^ a b Mamontov, Yuriy S.; Ignatov, Michael S. (July 2019).

"How to rely on the unreliable: Examples from Mesozoic bryophytes of Transbaikalia" .

Journal of Systematics and Evolution .

57 (4): 339– 360.

Bibcode : 2019JSyEv..57..339M .

doi : 10.1111/jse.12483 .

ISSN 1674-4918 .

S2CID 92268163 .

^ Bippus, Alexander C.; Savoretti, Adolfina; Escapa, Ignacio H.; Garcia-Massini, Juan; Guido, Diego (October 2019).

"Heinrichsiella patagonica gen. et sp. nov.: A Permineralized Acrocarpous Moss from the Jurassic of Patagonia" .

International Journal of Plant Sciences .

180 (8): 882– 891.

Bibcode : 2019IJPlS.180..882B .

doi : 10.1086/704832 .

ISSN 1058-5893 .

S2CID 202859471 .

^ Li, Ruiyun; Li, Xiaoqiang; Deng, Shenghui; Sun, Bainian (August 2020).

"Morphology and microstructure of Pellites hamiensis nov. sp., a Middle Jurassic liverwort from northwestern China and its evolutionary significance" .

Geobios .

62 : 23– 29.

Bibcode : 2020Geobi..62...23L .

doi : 10.1016/j.geobios.2020.07.003 .

S2CID 225500594 .

^ Li, Rui-Yun; Wang, Xue-lian; Chen, Jing-Wei; Deng, Sheng-Hui; Wang, Zi-Xi; Dong, Jun-Ling; Sun, Bai-Nian (June 2016).

"A new thalloid liverwort: Pallaviciniites sandaolingensis sp. nov. from the Middle Jurassic of Turpan–Hami Basin, NW China" .

PalZ .

90 (2): 389– 397.

Bibcode : 2016PalZ...90..389L .

doi : 10.1007/s12542-016-0299-3 .

ISSN 0031-0220 .

S2CID 131295547 .

^ Li, Ruiyun; Li, Xiaoqiang; Wang, Hongshan; Sun, Bainian (2019).

"Ricciopsis sandaolingensis sp. nov., a new fossil bryophyte from the Middle Jurassic Xishanyao Formation in the Turpan-Hami Basin, Xinjiang, Northwest China" .

Palaeontologia Electronica .

22 (2): 917.

Bibcode : 2019PalEl..22..917L .

doi : 10.26879/917 .

ISSN 1094-8074 .

^ Brusatte, Stephen L; Benton, Michael J; Ruta, Marcello; Lloyd, Graeme T (2008-12-23).

"The first 50 Myr of dinosaur evolution: macroevolutionary pattern and morphological disparity" .

Biology Letters .

4 (6): 733– 736.

doi : 10.1098/rsbl.2008.0441 .

PMC 2614175 .

PMID 18812311 .

^ Brusatte, S. L.; Benton, M. J.; Ruta, M.; Lloyd, G. T. (2008-09-12).

"Superiority, Competition, and Opportunism in the Evolutionary Radiation of Dinosaurs" (PDF) .

Science .

321 (5895): 1485– 88.

Bibcode : 2008Sci...321.1485B .

doi : 10.1126/science.1161833 .

hdl : 20.500.11820/00556baf-6575-44d9-af39-bdd0b072ad2b .

PMID 18787166 .

S2CID 13393888 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2014-06-24 . Retrieved 2012-01-14 .

^ Temp Müller, Rodrigo; Augusto Pretto, Flávio; Kerber, Leonardo; Silva-Neves, Eduardo; Dias-da-Silva, Sérgio (28 March 2018).

"Comment on 'A dinosaur missing-link? Chilesaurus and the early evolution of ornithischian dinosaurs' " .

Biology Letters .

14 (3): 20170581.

doi : 10.1098/rsbl.2017.0581 .

ISSN 1744-9561 .

PMC 5897605 .

PMID 29593074 .

^ Zahner, Marion; Brinkmann, Winand (August 2019).

"A Triassic averostran-line theropod from Switzerland and the early evolution of dinosaurs" .

Nature Ecology & Evolution .

3 (8): 1146– 1152.

Bibcode : 2019NatEE...3.1146Z .

doi : 10.1038/s41559-019-0941-z .

ISSN 2397-334X .

PMC 6669044 .

PMID 31285577 .

^ Sasso, Cristiano Dal; Maganuco, Simone; Cau, Andrea (2018-12-19).

"The oldest ceratosaurian (Dinosauria: Theropoda), from the Lower Jurassic of Italy, sheds light on the evolution of the three-fingered hand of birds" .

PeerJ .

6 : e5976.

doi : 10.7717/peerj.5976 .

ISSN 2167-8359 .

PMC 6304160 .

PMID 30588396 .

^ Wang, Shuo; Stiegler, Josef; Amiot, Romain; Wang, Xu; Du, Guo-hao; Clark, James M.; Xu, Xing (January 2017).

"Extreme Ontogenetic Changes in a Ceratosaurian Theropod" .

Current Biology .

27 (1): 144– 148.

Bibcode : 2017CBio...27..144W .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2016.10.043 .

PMID 28017609 .

S2CID 441498 .

^ Zanno, Lindsay E.; Makovicky, Peter J. (2011-01-04).

"Herbivorous ecomorphology and specialization patterns in theropod dinosaur evolution" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

108 (1): 232– 237.

Bibcode : 2011PNAS..108..232Z .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1011924108 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 3017133 .

PMID 21173263 .

^ a b Rauhut, Oliver W. M.; Pol, Diego (2019-12-11).

"Probable basal allosauroid from the early Middle Jurassic Cañadón Asfalto Formation of Argentina highlights phylogenetic uncertainty in tetanuran theropod dinosaurs" .

Scientific Reports .

9 (1): 18826.

Bibcode : 2019NatSR...918826R .

doi : 10.1038/s41598-019-53672-7 .

ISSN 2045-2322 .

PMC 6906444 .

PMID 31827108 .

^ Benson, R.B.J (2010).

"A description of Megalosaurus bucklandii (Dinosauria: Theropoda) from the Bathonian of the UK and the relationships of Middle Jurassic theropods" .

Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society .

158 (4): 882– 935.

doi : 10.1111/j.1096-3642.2009.00569.x .

^ Rauhut, Oliver W. M.; Milner, Angela C.; Moore-Fay, Scott (2010).

"Cranial osteology and phylogenetic position of the theropod dinosaur Proceratosaurus bradleyi(Woodward, 1910) from the Middle Jurassic of England" .

Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society .

158 : 155– 195.

doi : 10.1111/j.1096-3642.2009.00591.x .

^ Qin, Z., Clark, J., Choiniere, J., & Xu, X. (2019). A new alvarezsaurian theropod from the Upper Jurassic Shishugou Formation of western China. Scientific Reports, 9: 11727.

doi : 10.1038/s41598-019-48148-7 ^ Agnolín, Federico L.; Lu, Jun-Chang; Kundrát, Martin; Xu, Li (2021-06-02).

"Alvarezsaurid osteology: new data on cranial anatomy" .

Historical Biology .

34 (3): 443– 452.

doi : 10.1080/08912963.2021.1929203 .

ISSN 0891-2963 .

S2CID 236221732 .

^ Wang, Min; O’Connor, Jingmai K.; Xu, Xing; Zhou, Zhonghe (May 2019).

"A new Jurassic scansoriopterygid and the loss of membranous wings in theropod dinosaurs" .

Nature .

569 (7755): 256– 259.

Bibcode : 2019Natur.569..256W .

doi : 10.1038/s41586-019-1137-z .

ISSN 1476-4687 .

PMID 31068719 .

S2CID 148571099 .

^ Hartman, Scott; Mortimer, Mickey; Wahl, William R.; Lomax, Dean R.; Lippincott, Jessica; Lovelace, David M. (2019-07-10).

"A new paravian dinosaur from the Late Jurassic of North America supports a late acquisition of avian flight" .

PeerJ .

7 : e7247.

doi : 10.7717/peerj.7247 .

ISSN 2167-8359 .

PMC 6626525 .

PMID 31333906 .

^ Rauhut, Oliver W. M.; Foth, Christian (2020), Foth, Christian; Rauhut, Oliver W. M. (eds.), "The Origin of Birds: Current Consensus, Controversy, and the Occurrence of Feathers" , The Evolution of Feathers: From Their Origin to the Present , Fascinating Life Sciences, Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp.

27– 45, doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-27223-4_3 , ISBN 978-3-030-27223-4 , S2CID 216372010 , retrieved 2021-01-05 ^ Norman, David B (2021-01-01).

"Scelidosaurus harrisonii (Dinosauria: Ornithischia) from the Early Jurassic of Dorset, England: biology and phylogenetic relationships" .

Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society .

191 (1): 1– 86.

doi : 10.1093/zoolinnean/zlaa061 .

ISSN 0024-4082 .

^ Godefroit, Pascal; Sinitsa, Sofia M.; Cincotta, Aude; McNamara, Maria E.; Reshetova, Svetlana A.; Dhouailly, Danielle (2020), Foth, Christian; Rauhut, Oliver W. M. (eds.), "Integumentary Structures in Kulindadromeus zabaikalicus, a Basal Neornithischian Dinosaur from the Jurassic of Siberia" , The Evolution of Feathers: From Their Origin to the Present , Fascinating Life Sciences, Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp.

47– 65, doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-27223-4_4 , ISBN 978-3-030-27223-4 , S2CID 216261986 , retrieved 2021-01-05 ^ McDonald, Andrew T. (2012-05-22). Farke, Andrew A. (ed.).

"Phylogeny of Basal Iguanodonts (Dinosauria: Ornithischia): An Update" .

PLOS ONE .

7 (5): e36745.

Bibcode : 2012PLoSO...736745M .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0036745 .

ISSN 1932-6203 .

PMC 3358318 .

PMID 22629328 .

^ Han, Fenglu; Forster, Catherine A.; Clark, James M.; Xu, Xing (2015-12-09).

"A New Taxon of Basal Ceratopsian from China and the Early Evolution of Ceratopsia" .

PLOS ONE .

10 (12): e0143369.

Bibcode : 2015PLoSO..1043369H .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0143369 .

ISSN 1932-6203 .

PMC 4674058 .

PMID 26649770 .

^ a b c Pol, D.; Ramezani, J.; Gomez, K.; Carballido, J. L.; Carabajal, A. Paulina; Rauhut, O. W. M.; Escapa, I. H.; Cúneo, N. R. (2020-11-25).

"Extinction of herbivorous dinosaurs linked to Early Jurassic global warming event" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

287 (1939): 20202310.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2020.2310 .

ISSN 0962-8452 .

PMC 7739499 .

PMID 33203331 .

^ Sander, P. Martin; Christian, Andreas; Clauss, Marcus; Fechner, Regina; Gee, Carole T.; Griebeler, Eva-Maria; Gunga, Hanns-Christian; Hummel, Jürgen; Mallison, Heinrich; Perry, Steven F.; Preuschoft, Holger (February 2011).

"Biology of the sauropod dinosaurs: the evolution of gigantism" .

Biological Reviews .

86 (1): 117– 155.

doi : 10.1111/j.1469-185X.2010.00137.x .

PMC 3045712 .

PMID 21251189 .

^ McPhee, Blair W.; Benson, Roger B.J.; Botha-Brink, Jennifer; Bordy, Emese M.; Choiniere, Jonah N. (8 October 2018).

"A Giant Dinosaur from the Earliest Jurassic of South Africa and the Transition to Quadrupedality in Early Sauropodomorphs" .

Current Biology .

28 (19): 3143–3151.e7.

Bibcode : 2018CBio...28E3143M .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2018.07.063 .

PMID 30270189 .

S2CID 52890502 .

^ Viglietti, Pia A.; Barrett, Paul M.; Broderick, Tim J.; Munyikwa, Darlington; MacNiven, Rowan; Broderick, Lucy; Chapelle, Kimberley; Glynn, Dave; Edwards, Steve; Zondo, Michel; Broderick, Patricia (January 2018).

"Stratigraphy of the Vulcanodon type locality and its implications for regional correlations within the Karoo Supergroup" .

Journal of African Earth Sciences .

137 : 149– 156.

Bibcode : 2018JAfES.137..149V .

doi : 10.1016/j.jafrearsci.2017.10.015 .

^ Royo-Torres, Rafael; Cobos, Alberto; Mocho, Pedro; Alcalá, Luis (2021-01-01).

"Origin and evolution of turiasaur dinosaurs set by means of a new 'rosetta' specimen from Spain" .

Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society .

191 (1): 201– 227.

doi : 10.1093/zoolinnean/zlaa091 .

ISSN 0024-4082 .

^ Ren, Xin-Xin; Huang, Jian-Dong; You, Hai-Lu (2020-05-27).

"The second mamenchisaurid dinosaur from the Middle Jurassic of Eastern China" .

Historical Biology .

32 (5): 602– 610.

Bibcode : 2020HBio...32..602R .

doi : 10.1080/08912963.2018.1515935 .

ISSN 0891-2963 .

S2CID 91927243 .

^ Ren, Xin-Xin; Jiang, Shan; Wang, Xu-Ri; Peng, Guang-Zhao; Ye, Yong; Jia, Lei; You, Hai-Lu (2022-11-14).

"Re-examination of Dashanpusaurus dongi (Sauropoda: Macronaria) supports an early Middle Jurassic global distribution of neosauropod dinosaurs" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

610 : 111318.

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2022.111318 .

ISSN 0031-0182 .

^ Allen, Bethany J.; Stubbs, Thomas L.; Benton, Michael J.; Puttick, Mark N. (March 2019). Mannion, Philip (ed.).

"Archosauromorph extinction selectivity during the Triassic-Jurassic mass extinction" .

Palaeontology .

62 (2): 211– 224.

Bibcode : 2019Palgy..62..211A .

doi : 10.1111/pala.12399 .

hdl : 1983/e3fc2e40-c849-42ed-99fe-ea17fc26b2ec .

S2CID 55009185 .

^ Toljagić, Olja; Butler, Richard J. (2013-06-23).

"Triassic–Jurassic mass extinction as trigger for the Mesozoic radiation of crocodylomorphs" .

Biology Letters .

9 (3): 20130095.

doi : 10.1098/rsbl.2013.0095 .

ISSN 1744-9561 .

PMC 3645043 .

PMID 23536443 .

^ Melstrom, Keegan M.; Irmis, Randall B. (July 2019).

"Repeated Evolution of Herbivorous Crocodyliforms during the Age of Dinosaurs" .

Current Biology .

29 (14): 2389–2395.e3.

Bibcode : 2019CBio...29E2389M .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2019.05.076 .

PMID 31257139 .

S2CID 195699188 .

^ a b Stubbs, Thomas L.; Pierce, Stephanie E.; Elsler, Armin; Anderson, Philip S. L.; Rayfield, Emily J.; Benton, Michael J. (2021-03-31).

"Ecological opportunity and the rise and fall of crocodylomorph evolutionary innovation" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

288 (1947): 20210069.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2021.0069 .

PMC 8059953 .

PMID 33757349 .

S2CID 232326789 .

^ Spindler, Frederik; Lauer, René; Tischlinger, Helmut; Mäuser, Matthias (2021-07-05).

"The integument of pelagic crocodylomorphs (Thalattosuchia: Metriorhynchidae)" .

Palaeontologia Electronica .

24 (2): 1– 41.

doi : 10.26879/1099 .

ISSN 1094-8074 .

^ Irmis, Randall B.; Nesbitt, Sterling J.; Sues, Hans-Dieter (2013).

"Early Crocodylomorpha" .

Geological Society, London, Special Publications .

379 (1): 275– 302.

Bibcode : 2013GSLSP.379..275I .

doi : 10.1144/SP379.24 .

ISSN 0305-8719 .

S2CID 219190410 .

^ a b Wilberg, Eric W.; Turner, Alan H.; Brochu, Christopher A. (2019-01-24).

"Evolutionary structure and timing of major habitat shifts in Crocodylomorpha" .

Scientific Reports .

9 (1): 514.

Bibcode : 2019NatSR...9..514W .

doi : 10.1038/s41598-018-36795-1 .

ISSN 2045-2322 .

PMC 6346023 .

PMID 30679529 .

^ Dal Sasso, C.; Pasini, G.; Fleury, G.; Maganuco, S. (2017).

" Razanandrongobe sakalavae , a gigantic mesoeucrocodylian from the Middle Jurassic of Madagascar, is the oldest known notosuchian" .

PeerJ .

5 : e3481.

doi : 10.7717/peerj.3481 .

PMC 5499610 .

PMID 28690926 .

^ a b Joyce, Walter G. (April 2017).

"A Review of the Fossil Record of Basal Mesozoic Turtles" (PDF) .

Bulletin of the Peabody Museum of Natural History .

58 (1): 65– 113.

Bibcode : 2017BPMNH..58...65J .

doi : 10.3374/014.058.0105 .

ISSN 0079-032X .

S2CID 54982901 .

^ Sterli, Juliana; de la Fuente, Marcelo S.; Rougier, Guillermo W. (2018-07-04).

"New remains of Condorchelys antiqua (Testudinata) from the Early-Middle Jurassic of Patagonia: anatomy, phylogeny, and paedomorphosis in the early evolution of turtles" .

Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology .

38 (4): (1)–(17).

Bibcode : 2018JVPal..38....1S .

doi : 10.1080/02724634.2018.1480112 .

hdl : 11336/99525 .

ISSN 0272-4634 .

S2CID 109556104 .

^ Sullivan, Patrick M.; Joyce, Walter G. (August 2017).

"The shell and pelvic anatomy of the Late Jurassic turtle Platychelys oberndorferi based on material from Solothurn, Switzerland" .

Swiss Journal of Palaeontology .

136 (2): 323– 343.

Bibcode : 2017SwJP..136..323S .

doi : 10.1007/s13358-017-0136-7 .

ISSN 1664-2376 .

S2CID 90587841 .

^ Evers, Serjoscha W.; Benson, Roger B. J. (January 2019). Smith, Andrew (ed.).

"A new phylogenetic hypothesis of turtles with implications for the timing and number of evolutionary transitions to marine lifestyles in the group" .

Palaeontology .

62 (1): 93– 134.

Bibcode : 2019Palgy..62...93E .

doi : 10.1111/pala.12384 .

S2CID 134736808 .

^ Anquetin, Jérémy; Püntener, Christian; Joyce, Walter G. (October 2017).

"A Review of the Fossil Record of Turtles of the Clade Thalassochelydia" .

Bulletin of the Peabody Museum of Natural History .

58 (2): 317– 369.

Bibcode : 2017BPMNH..58..317A .

doi : 10.3374/014.058.0205 .

ISSN 0079-032X .

S2CID 31091127 .

^ a b Evans, Susan E.; Jones, Marc E.H. (2010), "The Origin, Early History and Diversification of Lepidosauromorph Reptiles" , New Aspects of Mesozoic Biodiversity , Lecture Notes in Earth Sciences, vol. 132, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp.

27– 44, Bibcode : 2010LNES..132...27E , doi : 10.1007/978-3-642-10311-7_2 , ISBN 978-3-642-10310-0 , retrieved 2021-01-07 ^ Brownstein, Chase D.; Meyer, Dalton L.; Fabbri, Matteo; Bhullar, Bhart-Anjan S.; Gauthier, Jacques A. (2022-11-29).

"Evolutionary origins of the prolonged extant squamate radiation" .

Nature Communications .

13 (1): 7087.

Bibcode : 2022NatCo..13.7087B .

doi : 10.1038/s41467-022-34217-5 .

ISSN 2041-1723 .

PMC 9708687 .

PMID 36446761 .

^ Herrera-Flores, Jorge A.; Stubbs, Thomas L.; Benton, Michael J. (2017).

"Macroevolutionary patterns in Rhynchocephalia: is the tuatara (Sphenodon punctatus) a living fossil?" .

Palaeontology .

60 (3): 319– 328.

Bibcode : 2017Palgy..60..319H .

doi : 10.1111/pala.12284 .

ISSN 1475-4983 .

^ Burbrink, Frank T; Grazziotin, Felipe G; Pyron, R Alexander; Cundall, David; Donnellan, Steve; Irish, Frances; Keogh, J Scott; Kraus, Fred; Murphy, Robert W; Noonan, Brice; Raxworthy, Christopher J (2020-05-01). Thomson, Robert (ed.).

"Interrogating Genomic-Scale Data for Squamata (Lizards, Snakes, and Amphisbaenians) Shows no Support for Key Traditional Morphological Relationships" .

Systematic Biology .

69 (3): 502– 520.

doi : 10.1093/sysbio/syz062 .

ISSN 1063-5157 .

PMID 31550008 .

^ Cleary, Terri J.; Benson, Roger B. J.; Evans, Susan E.; Barrett, Paul M. (21 March 2018).

"Lepidosaurian diversity in the Mesozoic–Palaeogene: the potential roles of sampling biases and environmental drivers" .

Royal Society Open Science .

5 (3): 171830.

Bibcode : 2018RSOS....571830C .

doi : 10.1098/rsos.171830 .

PMC 5882712 .

PMID 29657788 .

^ Evans, S. E. (1998). "Crown group lizards (Reptilia, Squamata) from the Middle Jurassic of the British Isles".

Palaeontographica, Abteilung A .

250 ( 4– 6): 123– 154.

Bibcode : 1998PalAA.250..123E .

doi : 10.1127/pala/250/1998/123 .

S2CID 246932992 .

^ Dong, Liping; Wang, Yuan; Mou, Lijie; Zhang, Guoze; Evans, Susan E. (2019-09-13).

"A new Jurassic lizard from China" .

Geodiversitas .

41 (16): 623.

Bibcode : 2019Geodv..41..623D .

doi : 10.5252/geodiversitas2019v41a16 .

ISSN 1280-9659 .

S2CID 204256127 .

^ Simões, Tiago R.; Caldwell, Michael W.; Nydam, Randall L.; Jiménez-Huidobro, Paulina (September 2016). "Osteology, phylogeny, and functional morphology of two Jurassic lizard species and the early evolution of scansoriality in geckoes".

Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society .

doi : 10.1111/zoj.12487 .

^ Daza, J. D.; Bauer, A. M.; Stanley, E. L.; Bolet, A.; Dickson, B.; Losos, J. B. (2018-11-01).

"An Enigmatic Miniaturized and Attenuate Whole Lizard from the Mid-Cretaceous Amber of Myanmar" .

Breviora .

563 (1): 1.

doi : 10.3099/MCZ49.1 .

hdl : 1983/0955fcf4-a32a-4498-b920-1421dcea67de .

ISSN 0006-9698 .

S2CID 91589111 .

^ Griffiths, Elizabeth F.; Ford, David P.; Benson, Roger B.J.; Evans, Susan E. (September 2021). Ruta, Marcello (ed.).

"New information on the Jurassic lepidosauromorph Marmoretta oxoniensis" .

Papers in Palaeontology .

7 (4): 2255– 2278.

Bibcode : 2021PPal....7.2255G .

doi : 10.1002/spp2.1400 .

ISSN 2056-2799 .

S2CID 239140732 .

^ Matsumoto, R.; Evans, S. E. (2010).

"Choristoderes and the freshwater assemblages of Laurasia" .

Journal of Iberian Geology .

36 (2): 253– 274.

Bibcode : 2010JIbG...36..253M .

doi : 10.5209/rev_JIGE.2010.v36.n2.11 .

ISSN 1698-6180 .

^ Matsumoto, Ryoko; Dong, Liping; Wang, Yuan; Evans, Susan E. (2019-06-18).

"The first record of a nearly complete choristodere (Reptilia: Diapsida) from the Upper Jurassic of Hebei Province, People's Republic of China" .

Journal of Systematic Palaeontology .

17 (12): 1031– 1048.

Bibcode : 2019JSPal..17.1031M .

doi : 10.1080/14772019.2018.1494220 .

ISSN 1477-2019 .

S2CID 92421503 .

^ a b Thorne, P. M.; Ruta, M.; Benton, M. J. (2011-05-17).

"Resetting the evolution of marine reptiles at the Triassic-Jurassic boundary" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

108 (20): 8339– 8344.

Bibcode : 2011PNAS..108.8339T .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1018959108 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 3100925 .

PMID 21536898 .

^ a b Moon, Benjamin C.; Stubbs, Thomas L. (2020-02-13).

"Early high rates and disparity in the evolution of ichthyosaurs" .

Communications Biology .

3 (1): 68.

doi : 10.1038/s42003-020-0779-6 .

ISSN 2399-3642 .

PMC 7018711 .

PMID 32054967 .

^ a b c d e Fischer, Valentin; Weis, Robert; Thuy, Ben (2021-02-22).

"Refining the marine reptile turnover at the Early–Middle Jurassic transition" .

PeerJ .

9 : e10647.

doi : 10.7717/peerj.10647 .

ISSN 2167-8359 .

PMC 7906043 .

PMID 33665003 .

^ Wintrich, Tanja; Hayashi, Shoji; Houssaye, Alexandra; Nakajima, Yasuhisa; Sander, P. Martin (2017-12-01).

"A Triassic plesiosaurian skeleton and bone histology inform on evolution of a unique body plan" .

Science Advances .

3 (12): e1701144.

Bibcode : 2017SciA....3E1144W .

doi : 10.1126/sciadv.1701144 .

ISSN 2375-2548 .

PMC 5729018 .

PMID 29242826 .

^ Benson, Roger B. J.; Evans, Mark; Druckenmiller, Patrick S. (2012-03-16).

"High Diversity, Low Disparity and Small Body Size in Plesiosaurs (Reptilia, Sauropterygia) from the Triassic–Jurassic Boundary" .

PLOS ONE .

7 (3): e31838.

Bibcode : 2012PLoSO...731838B .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0031838 .

ISSN 1932-6203 .

PMC 3306369 .

PMID 22438869 .

^ O'Keefe, F. Robin (2002).

"The evolution of plesiosaur and pliosaur morphotypes in the Plesiosauria (Reptilia: Sauropterygia)" .

Paleobiology .

28 (1): 101– 112.

Bibcode : 2002Pbio...28..101O .

doi : 10.1666/0094-8373(2002)028<0101:TEOPAP>2.0.CO;2 .

ISSN 0094-8373 .

S2CID 85753943 .

^ Benson, Roger B. J.; Evans, Mark; Smith, Adam S.; Sassoon, Judyth; Moore-Faye, Scott; Ketchum, Hilary F.; Forrest, Richard (2013-05-31).

"A Giant Pliosaurid Skull from the Late Jurassic of England" .

PLOS ONE .

8 (5): e65989.

Bibcode : 2013PLoSO...865989B .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0065989 .

ISSN 1932-6203 .

PMC 3669260 .

PMID 23741520 .

^ Gao, Ting; Li, Da-Qing; Li, Long-Feng; Yang, Jing-Tao (2019-08-13).

"The first record of freshwater plesiosaurian from the Middle Jurassic of Gansu, NW China, with its implications to the local palaeobiogeography" .

Journal of Palaeogeography .

8 (1): 27.

Bibcode : 2019JPalG...8...27G .

doi : 10.1186/s42501-019-0043-5 .

ISSN 2524-4507 .

S2CID 199547716 .

^ Kear, Benjamin P. (2 August 2012).

"A revision of Australia's Jurassic plesiosaurs" .

Palaeontology .

55 (5): 1125– 1138.

Bibcode : 2012Palgy..55.1125K .

doi : 10.1111/j.1475-4983.2012.01183.x .

^ O’Sullivan, Michael; Martill, David M. (2017-11-17).

"The taxonomy and systematics of Parapsicephalus purdoni (Reptilia: Pterosauria) from the Lower Jurassic Whitby Mudstone Formation, Whitby, U.K" .

Historical Biology .

29 (8): 1009– 1018.

Bibcode : 2017HBio...29.1009O .

doi : 10.1080/08912963.2017.1281919 .

ISSN 0891-2963 .

S2CID 132532024 .

^ a b c d Bestwick, Jordan; Unwin, David M.; Butler, Richard J.; Henderson, Donald M.; Purnell, Mark A. (November 2018).

"Pterosaur dietary hypotheses: a review of ideas and approaches: Pterosaur dietary hypotheses" .

Biological Reviews .

93 (4): 2021– 2048.

doi : 10.1111/brv.12431 .

PMC 6849529 .

PMID 29877021 .

^ Lucas, Spencer G. (2018), Tanner, Lawrence H. (ed.), "Late Triassic Terrestrial Tetrapods: Biostratigraphy, Biochronology and Biotic Events" , The Late Triassic World , Topics in Geobiology, vol. 46, Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp.

351– 405, doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-68009-5_10 , ISBN 978-3-319-68008-8 , retrieved 2021-04-25 ^ Averianov, Alexander O.; Martin, Thomas; Skutschas, Pavel P.; Rezvyi, Anton S.; Bakirov, Aizek A. (March 2008).

"Amphibians from the Middle Jurassic Balabansai Svita in the Fergana Depression, Kyrgyzstan (Central Asia)" .

Palaeontology .

51 (2): 471– 485.

Bibcode : 2008Palgy..51..471A .

doi : 10.1111/j.1475-4983.2007.00748.x .

^ Warren, A. A.; Hutchinson, M. N.; Hill, Dorothy (1983-09-13).

"The last Labyrinthodont? A new brachyopoid (Amphibia, Temnospondyli) from the early Jurassic Evergreen formation of Queensland, Australia" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. B, Biological Sciences .

303 (1113): 1– 62.

Bibcode : 1983RSPTB.303....1W .

doi : 10.1098/rstb.1983.0080 .

^ Reilly, Stephen M.; Jorgensen, Michael E. (February 2011). "The evolution of jumping in frogs: Morphological evidence for the basal anuran locomotor condition and the radiation of locomotor systems in crown group anurans".

Journal of Morphology .

272 (2): 149– 168.

doi : 10.1002/jmor.10902 .

PMID 21210487 .

S2CID 14217777 .

^ Báez, Ana Maria; Nicoli, Laura (March 2008).

"A new species of Notobatrachus (Amphibia, Salientia) from the Middle Jurassic of northwestern Patagonia" .

Journal of Paleontology .

82 (2): 372– 376.

Bibcode : 2008JPal...82..372B .

doi : 10.1666/06-117.1 .

hdl : 11336/135748 .

ISSN 0022-3360 .

S2CID 130032431 .

^ Marjanović, David; Laurin, Michel (2014-07-04).

"An updated paleontological timetree of lissamphibians, with comments on the anatomy of Jurassic crown-group salamanders (Urodela)" .

Historical Biology .

26 (4): 535– 550.

Bibcode : 2014HBio...26..535M .

doi : 10.1080/08912963.2013.797972 .

ISSN 0891-2963 .

S2CID 84581331 .

^ Schoch, Rainer R.; Werneburg, Ralf; Voigt, Sebastian (2020-05-26).

"A Triassic stem-salamander from Kyrgyzstan and the origin of salamanders" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

117 (21): 11584– 11588.

Bibcode : 2020PNAS..11711584S .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.2001424117 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 7261083 .

PMID 32393623 .

^ Skutschas, Pavel; Stein, Koen (April 2015).

"Long bone histology of the stem salamander Kokartus honorarius (Amphibia: Caudata) from the Middle Jurassic of Kyrgyzstan" .

Journal of Anatomy .

226 (4): 334– 347.

doi : 10.1111/joa.12281 .

PMC 4386933 .

PMID 25682890 .

^ Jia, Jia; Gao, Ke-Qin (2019-03-04).

"A new stem hynobiid salamander (Urodela, Cryptobranchoidea) from the Upper Jurassic (Oxfordian) of Liaoning Province, China" .

Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology .

39 (2): e1588285.

Bibcode : 2019JVPal..39E8285J .

doi : 10.1080/02724634.2019.1588285 .

ISSN 0272-4634 .

S2CID 164310171 .

^ Gao, K.-Q.; Shubin, N. H. (2012-04-10).

"Late Jurassic salamandroid from western Liaoning, China" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

109 (15): 5767– 5772.

Bibcode : 2012PNAS..109.5767G .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1009828109 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 3326464 .

PMID 22411790 .

^ Jia, Jia; Gao, Ke-Qin (2016-05-04).

"A New Basal Salamandroid (Amphibia, Urodela) from the Late Jurassic of Qinglong, Hebei Province, China" .

PLOS ONE .

11 (5): e0153834.

Bibcode : 2016PLoSO..1153834J .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0153834 .

ISSN 1932-6203 .

PMC 4856324 .

PMID 27144770 .

^ Evans, S. E.; Lally, C.; Chure, D. C.; Elder, A.; Maisano, J. A. (2005).

"A Late Jurassic salamander (Amphibia: Caudata) from the Morrison Formation of North America" .

Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society .

143 (4): 599– 616.

doi : 10.1111/j.1096-3642.2005.00159.x .

^ Santos, Rodolfo Otávio; Laurin, Michel; Zaher, Hussam (2020-11-03).

"A review of the fossil record of caecilians (Lissamphibia: Gymnophionomorpha) with comments on its use to calibrate molecular timetrees" .

Biological Journal of the Linnean Society .

131 (4): 737– 755.

doi : 10.1093/biolinnean/blaa148 .

ISSN 0024-4066 .

^ Haddoumi, Hamid; Allain, Ronan; Meslouh, Said; Metais, Grégoire; Monbaron, Michel; Pons, Denise; Rage, Jean-Claude; Vullo, Romain; Zouhri, Samir (January 2016).

"Guelb el Ahmar (Bathonian, Anoual Syncline, eastern Morocco): First continental flora and fauna including mammals from the Middle Jurassic of Africa" (PDF) .

Gondwana Research .

29 (1): 290– 319.

Bibcode : 2016GondR..29..290H .

doi : 10.1016/j.gr.2014.12.004 .

ISSN 1342-937X .

^ a b Lee, Michael S.Y.; Beck, Robin M.D. (31 August 2015).

"Mammalian Evolution: A Jurassic Spark" .

Current Biology .

25 (17): R759 – R761 .

Bibcode : 2015CBio...25.R759L .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2015.07.008 .

PMID 26325137 .

S2CID 11088107 .

^ Ji, Q.; Luo, Z.-X.; Yuan, C.-X.; Tabrum, A. R. (2006).

"A swimming mammaliaform from the Middle Jurassic and ecomorphological diversification of early mammals" (PDF) .

Science .

311 (5, 764): 1, 123– 1, 127.

Bibcode : 2006Sci...311.1123J .

doi : 10.1126/science.1123026 .

PMID 16497926 .

S2CID 46067702 .

^ Meng, Qing-Jin; Grossnickle, David M.; Liu, Di; Zhang, Yu-Guang; Neander, April I.; Ji, Qiang; Luo, Zhe-Xi (August 2017).

"New gliding mammaliaforms from the Jurassic" .

Nature .

548 (7667): 291– 296.

Bibcode : 2017Natur.548..291M .

doi : 10.1038/nature23476 .

ISSN 1476-4687 .

PMID 28792929 .

S2CID 205259206 .

^ Meng, J.; Hu, Y.-M.; Wang, Y.-Q.; Wang, X.-L.; Li, C.-K. (2007). "Corrigendum: A Mesozoic gliding mammal from northeastern China". Nature 446 (7131): 102.

Bibcode : 2007Natur.446Q.102M .

doi : 10.1038/nature05639 .

^ Luo, Z.-X.; Wible, J.R. (2005). "A Late Jurassic Digging Mammal and Early Mammalian Diversification".

Science .

308 (5718): 103– 107.

Bibcode : 2005Sci...308..103L .

doi : 10.1126/science.1108875 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 15802602 .

S2CID 7031381 .

^ Luo, Zhe-Xi; Cifelli, Richard L.; Kielan-Jaworowska, Zofia (January 2001).

"Dual origin of tribosphenic mammals" .

Nature .

409 (6816): 53– 57.

Bibcode : 2001Natur.409...53L .

doi : 10.1038/35051023 .

ISSN 0028-0836 .

PMID 11343108 .

S2CID 4342585 .

^ Mao, Fangyuan; Brewer, Philippa; Hooker, Jerry J.; Meng, Jin (2022-12-31).

"New allotherian specimens from the Middle Jurassic Woodeaton Quarry (Oxfordshire) and implications for haramiyidan diversity and phylogeny" .

Journal of Systematic Palaeontology .

20 (1): 1– 37.

doi : 10.1080/14772019.2022.2097021 .

ISSN 1477-2019 .

^ Close, Roger A.; Friedman, Matt; Lloyd, Graeme T.; Benson, Roger B. J. (17 August 2015).

"Evidence for a Mid-Jurassic Adaptive Radiation in Mammals" .

Current Biology .

25 (16): 2137– 2142.

Bibcode : 2015CBio...25.2137C .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2015.06.047 .

PMID 26190074 . Retrieved 4 November 2024 – via Elsevier Science Direct.

^ Zhe-Xi Luo; Chong-Xi Yuan; Qing-Jin Meng; Qiang Ji (25 August 2011).

"A Jurassic eutherian mammal and divergence of marsupials and placentals" (PDF) .

Nature .

476 (7361): 442– 445.

Bibcode : 2011Natur.476..442L .

doi : 10.1038/nature10291 .

PMID 21866158 .

S2CID 205225806 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 November 2013.

Electronic supplementary material ^ King, Benedict; Beck, Robin M. D. (2020-06-10).

"Tip dating supports novel resolutions of controversial relationships among early mammals" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

287 (1928): 20200943.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2020.0943 .

PMC 7341916 .

PMID 32517606 .

^ Ruta, Marcello; Botha-Brink, Jennifer; Mitchell, Stephen A.; Benton, Michael J. (2013-10-22).

"The radiation of cynodonts and the ground plan of mammalian morphological diversity" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

280 (1769): 20131865.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2013.1865 .

ISSN 0962-8452 .

PMC 3768321 .

PMID 23986112 .

^ Abdala, Fernando; Gaetano, Leandro C. (2018), Tanner, Lawrence H. (ed.), "The Late Triassic Record of Cynodonts: Time of Innovations in the Mammalian Lineage" , The Late Triassic World , Topics in Geobiology, vol. 46, Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp.

407– 445, doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-68009-5_11 , ISBN 978-3-319-68008-8 , retrieved 2021-05-24 ^ Du, Yixing; Chiari, Marco; Karádi, Viktor; Nicora, Alda; Onoue, Tetsuji; Pálfy, József; Roghi, Guido; Tomimatsu, Yuki; Rigo, Manuel (April 2020).

"The asynchronous disappearance of conodonts: New constraints from Triassic-Jurassic boundary sections in the Tethys and Panthalassa" .

Earth-Science Reviews .

203 : 103176.

Bibcode : 2020ESRv..20303176D .

doi : 10.1016/j.earscirev.2020.103176 .

hdl : 11577/3338908 .

S2CID 216173452 .

^ Ginot, Samuel; Goudemand, Nicolas (December 2020).

"Global climate changes account for the main trends of conodont diversity but not for their final demise" .

Global and Planetary Change .

195 : 103325.

Bibcode : 2020GPC...19503325G .

doi : 10.1016/j.gloplacha.2020.103325 .

S2CID 225005180 .

^ Wu, Feixiang; Janvier, Philippe; Zhang, Chi (2023-10-31).

"The rise of predation in Jurassic lampreys" .

Nature Communications .

14 (1): 6652.

Bibcode : 2023NatCo..14.6652W .

doi : 10.1038/s41467-023-42251-0 .

ISSN 2041-1723 .

PMC 10618186 .

PMID 37907522 .

^ Kemp, Anne; Cavin, Lionel; Guinot, Guillaume (April 2017).

"Evolutionary history of lungfishes with a new phylogeny of post-Devonian genera" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

471 : 209– 219.

Bibcode : 2017PPP...471..209K .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2016.12.051 .

^ Brownstein, Chase Doran; Harrington, Richard C; Near, Thomas J. (July 2023).

"The biogeography of extant lungfishes traces the breakup of Gondwana" .

Journal of Biogeography .

50 (7): 1191– 1198.

Bibcode : 2023JBiog..50.1191B .

doi : 10.1111/jbi.14609 .

ISSN 0305-0270 .

^ Cavin, Lionel; Cupello, Camila; Yabumoto, Yoshitaka; Léo, Fragoso; Deersi, Uthumporn; Brito, Paul M. (2019).

"Phylogeny and evolutionary history of mawsoniid coelacanths" (PDF) .

Bulletin of the Kitakyushu Museum of Natural History and Human History, Series A .

17 : 3– 13.

^ Clement, Gaël (2005-09-30).

"A new coelacanth (Actinistia, Sarcopterygii) from the Jurassic of France, and the question of the closest relative fossil to Latimeria" .

Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology .

25 (3): 481– 491.

doi : 10.1671/0272-4634(2005)025[0481:ANCASF]2.0.CO;2 .

ISSN 0272-4634 .

S2CID 86338307 .

^ Skrzycka, Roksana (2014-07-03).

"Revision of two relic actinopterygians from the Middle or Upper Jurassic Karabastau Formation, Karatau Range, Kazakhstan" .

Alcheringa: An Australasian Journal of Palaeontology .

38 (3): 364– 390.

Bibcode : 2014Alch...38..364S .

doi : 10.1080/03115518.2014.880267 .

ISSN 0311-5518 .

S2CID 129308632 .

^ Hilton, Eric J.; Grande, Lance; Jin, Fan (January 2021).

"Redescription of † Yanosteus longidorsalis Jin et al., (Chondrostei, Acipenseriformes, †Peipiaosteidae) from the Early Cretaceous of China" .

Journal of Paleontology .

95 (1): 170– 183.

Bibcode : 2021JPal...95..170H .

doi : 10.1017/jpa.2020.80 .

ISSN 0022-3360 .

S2CID 225158727 .

^ a b Poyato-Ariza, Francisco José; Martín-Abad, Hugo (2020-07-19).

"History of two lineages: Comparative analysis of the fossil record in Amiiformes and Pycnodontiformes (Osteischtyes, Actinopterygii)" .

Spanish Journal of Palaeontology .

28 (1): 79.

doi : 10.7203/sjp.28.1.17833 .

hdl : 10486/710030 .

ISSN 2255-0550 .

^ Deesri, Uthumporn; Naksri, Wilailuck; Jintasakul, Pratueng; Noda, Yoshikazu; Yukawa, Hirokazu; Hossny, Tamara El; Cavin, Lionel (2023-03-27).

"A New Sinamiin Fish (Actinopterygii) from the Early Cretaceous of Thailand: Implications on the Evolutionary History of the Amiid Lineage" .

Diversity .

15 (4): 491.

Bibcode : 2023Diver..15..491D .

doi : 10.3390/d15040491 .

ISSN 1424-2818 .

^ Brito, Paulo M.; Alvarado-Ortega, Jésus; Meunier, François J. (December 2017).

"Earliest known lepisosteoid extends the range of anatomically modern gars to the Late Jurassic" .

Scientific Reports .

7 (1): 17830.

Bibcode : 2017NatSR...717830B .

doi : 10.1038/s41598-017-17984-w .

ISSN 2045-2322 .

PMC 5736718 .

PMID 29259200 .

^ Arratia G. Mesozoic halecostomes and the early radiation of teleosts. In: Arratia G, Tintori A, editors. Mesozoic Fishes 3 – Systematics, Paleoenvironments and Biodiversity. München: Verlag Dr. Friedrich Pfeil; 2004. p. 279–315.

^ Tse, Tze-Kei; Pittman, Michael; Chang, Mee-mann (2015-03-26).

"A specimen of Paralycoptera Chang & Chou 1977 (Teleostei: Osteoglossoidei) from Hong Kong (China) with a potential Late Jurassic age that extends the temporal and geographical range of the genus" .

PeerJ .

3 : e865.

doi : 10.7717/peerj.865 .

ISSN 2167-8359 .

PMC 4380157 .

PMID 25834774 .

^ Liston, J., Newbrey, M., Challands, T., and Adams, C., 2013, "Growth, age and size of the Jurassic pachycormid Leedsichthys problematicus (Osteichthyes: Actinopterygii) in: Arratia, G., Schultze, H. and Wilson, M. (eds.) Mesozoic Fishes 5 – Global Diversity and Evolution . Verlag Dr. Friedrich Pfeil, München, Germany, pp. 145–175 ^ Rees, Jan; Underwood, Charlie J. (2008-01-17).

"Hybodont sharks of the English Bathonian and Callovian (Middle Jurassic)" .

Palaeontology .

51 (1): 117– 147.

Bibcode : 2008Palgy..51..117R .

doi : 10.1111/j.1475-4983.2007.00737.x .

^ Corso, Jacopo Dal; Bernardi, Massimo; Sun, Yadong; Song, Haijun; Seyfullah, Leyla J.; Preto, Nereo; Gianolla, Piero; Ruffell, Alastair; Kustatscher, Evelyn; Roghi, Guido; Merico, Agostino (September 2020).

"Extinction and dawn of the modern world in the Carnian (Late Triassic)" .

Science Advances .

6 (38).

Bibcode : 2020SciA....6...99D .

doi : 10.1126/sciadv.aba0099 .

PMC 7494334 .

PMID 32938682 .

^ Underwood, Charlie J. (March 2006).

"Diversification of the Neoselachii (Chondrichthyes) during the Jurassic and Cretaceous" .

Paleobiology .

32 (2): 215– 235.

Bibcode : 2006Pbio...32..215U .

doi : 10.1666/04069.1 .

ISSN 0094-8373 .

S2CID 86232401 .

^ Stumpf, Sebastian; Kriwet, Jürgen (2019-12-01).

"A new Pliensbachian elasmobranch (Vertebrata, Chondrichthyes) assemblage from Europe, and its contribution to the understanding of late Early Jurassic elasmobranch diversity and distributional patterns" .

PalZ .

93 (4): 637– 658.

Bibcode : 2019PalZ...93..637S .

doi : 10.1007/s12542-019-00451-4 .

ISSN 1867-6812 .

S2CID 181782998 .

^ Underwood, Charlie J.; Claeson, Kerin M. (June 2019).

"The Late Jurassic ray Kimmerobatis etchesi gen. et sp. nov. and the Jurassic radiation of the Batoidea" .

Proceedings of the Geologists' Association .

130 ( 3– 4): 345– 354.

Bibcode : 2019PrGA..130..345U .

doi : 10.1016/j.pgeola.2017.06.009 .

S2CID 90691006 .

^ Kriwet, Jürgen; Klug, Stefanie (December 2011).

"A new Jurassic cow shark (Chondrichthyes, Hexanchiformes) with comments on Jurassic hexanchiform systematics" .

Swiss Journal of Geosciences .

104 (S1): 107– 114.

Bibcode : 2011SwJG..104..107K .

doi : 10.1007/s00015-011-0075-z .

ISSN 1661-8726 .

S2CID 84405176 .

^ Srdic, Alex; Duffin, Christopher J.; Martill, David M. (August 2016).

"First occurrence of the orectolobiform shark Akaimia in the Oxford Clay Formation (Jurassic, Callovian) of England" .

Proceedings of the Geologists' Association .

127 (4): 506– 513.

Bibcode : 2016PrGA..127..506S .

doi : 10.1016/j.pgeola.2016.07.002 .

^ Slater, Tiffany S.; Ashbrook, Kate; Kriwet, Jürgen (August 2020). Cavin, Lionel (ed.).

"Evolutionary relationships among bullhead sharks (Chondrichthyes, Heterodontiformes)" .

Papers in Palaeontology .

6 (3): 425– 437.

Bibcode : 2020PPal....6..425S .

doi : 10.1002/spp2.1299 .

hdl : 10468/10339 .

ISSN 2056-2802 .

S2CID 214133104 .

^ López-Romero, Faviel A.; Stumpf, Sebastian; Pfaff, Cathrin; Marramà, Giuseppe; Johanson, Zerina; Kriwet, Jürgen (2020-07-28).

"Evolutionary trends of the conserved neurocranium shape in angel sharks (Squatiniformes, Elasmobranchii)" .

Scientific Reports .

10 (1): 12582.

Bibcode : 2020NatSR..1012582L .

doi : 10.1038/s41598-020-69525-7 .

ISSN 2045-2322 .

PMC 7387474 .

PMID 32724124 .

^ Stumpf, Sebastian; Scheer, Udo; Kriwet, Jürgen (2019-03-04).

"A new genus and species of extinct ground shark, †Diprosopovenator hilperti, gen. et sp. nov. (Carcharhiniformes, †Pseudoscyliorhinidae, fam. nov.), from the Upper Cretaceous of Germany" .

Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology .

39 (2): e1593185.

Bibcode : 2019JVPal..39E3185S .

doi : 10.1080/02724634.2019.1593185 .

ISSN 0272-4634 .

S2CID 155785248 .

^ Klug, Stefanie; Tütken, Thomas; Wings, Oliver; Pfretzschner, Hans-Ulrich; Martin, Thomas (September 2010).

"A Late Jurassic freshwater shark assemblage (Chondrichthyes, Hybodontiformes) from the southern Junggar Basin, Xinjiang, Northwest China" .

Palaeobiodiversity and Palaeoenvironments .

90 (3): 241– 257.

Bibcode : 2010PdPe...90..241K .

doi : 10.1007/s12549-010-0032-2 .

ISSN 1867-1594 .

S2CID 129236098 .

^ Popov, Evgeny V.; Delsate, Dominique; Felten, Roland (2019-07-02).

"A New Callorhinchid Genus (Holocephali, Chimaeroidei) from the Early Bajocian of Ottange-Rumelange, on the Luxembourg-French Border" .

Paleontological Research .

23 (3): 220.

Bibcode : 2019PalRe..23..220P .

doi : 10.2517/2018PR021 .

ISSN 1342-8144 .

S2CID 198423356 .

^ Duffin, Christopher J.; Milàn, Jesper (2017-11-14).

"A new myriacanthid holocephalian from the Early Jurassic of Denmark" .

Bulletin of the Geological Society of Denmark .

65 : 161– 170.

Bibcode : 2017BuGSD..65..161D .

doi : 10.37570/bgsd-2017-65-10 .

ISSN 2245-7070 .

^ Labandeira, Conrad C. (2018-05-23), "The Fossil History of Insect Diversity", Insect Biodiversity , Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, pp.

723– 788, doi : 10.1002/9781118945582.ch24 , ISBN 978-1-118-94558-2 ^ Nel, Patricia; Bertrand, Sylvain; Nel, André (December 2018).

"Diversification of insects since the Devonian: a new approach based on morphological disparity of mouthparts" .

Scientific Reports .

8 (1): 3516.

Bibcode : 2018NatSR...8.3516N .

doi : 10.1038/s41598-018-21938-1 .

ISSN 2045-2322 .

PMC 5824790 .

PMID 29476087 .

^ McKenna, Duane D.; Shin, Seunggwan; Ahrens, Dirk; Balke, Michael; Beza-Beza, Cristian; Clarke, Dave J.; Donath, Alexander; Escalona, Hermes E.; Friedrich, Frank; Letsch, Harald; Liu, Shanlin (2019-12-03).

"The evolution and genomic basis of beetle diversity" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

116 (49): 24729– 24737.

Bibcode : 2019PNAS..11624729M .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1909655116 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 6900523 .

PMID 31740605 .

^ Beutel, Rolf G.; Xu, Chunpeng; Jarzembowski, Edmund; Kundrata, Robin; Boudinot, Brendon E.; McKenna, Duane D.; Goczał, Jakub (13 February 2024).

"The evolutionary history of Coleoptera (Insecta) in the late Palaeozoic and the Mesozoic" .

Systematic Entomology .

49 (3): 355– 388.

Bibcode : 2024SysEn..49..355B .

doi : 10.1111/syen.12623 .

ISSN 0307-6970 .

^ Shin, Seunggwan; Clarke, Dave J; Lemmon, Alan R; Moriarty Lemmon, Emily; Aitken, Alexander L; Haddad, Stephanie; Farrell, Brian D; Marvaldi, Adriana E; Oberprieler, Rolf G; McKenna, Duane D (2018-04-01).

"Phylogenomic Data Yield New and Robust Insights into the Phylogeny and Evolution of Weevils" .

Molecular Biology and Evolution .

35 (4): 823– 836.

doi : 10.1093/molbev/msx324 .

hdl : 11336/57287 .

ISSN 0737-4038 .

PMID 29294021 .

S2CID 4366092 .

^ Xu, Chunpeng; Fang, Yanan; Fang, Yan; Wang, He; Zhou, Qian; Jiang, Xueying; Zhang, Haichun (14 February 2024).

"Early Jurassic orthopteran insects from the southern Junggar Basin, NW China, with discussion of biodiversity changes of Orthoptera across the Triassic–Jurassic boundary" .

Geological Society, London, Special Publications .

538 (1): 147– 154.

doi : 10.1144/SP538-2021-184 .

ISSN 0305-8719 . Retrieved 22 June 2024 – via Lyell Collection Geological Society Publications.

^ Woodrow, Charlie; Baker, Ed; Jonsson, Thorin; Montealegre-Z, Fernando (2022-08-10). Nityananda, Vivek (ed.).

"Reviving the sound of a 150-year-old insect: The bioacoustics of Prophalangopsis obscura (Ensifera: Hagloidea)" .

PLOS ONE .

17 (8): e0270498.

Bibcode : 2022PLoSO..1770498W .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0270498 .

ISSN 1932-6203 .

PMC 9365155 .

PMID 35947546 .

^ van Eldijk, Timo J. B.; Wappler, Torsten; Strother, Paul K.; van der Weijst, Carolien M. H.; Rajaei, Hossein; Visscher, Henk; van de Schootbrugge, Bas (January 2018).

"A Triassic-Jurassic window into the evolution of Lepidoptera" .

Science Advances .

4 (1): e1701568.

Bibcode : 2018SciA....4.1568V .

doi : 10.1126/sciadv.1701568 .

ISSN 2375-2548 .

PMC 5770165 .

PMID 29349295 .

^ Kohli, Manpreet Kaur; Ware, Jessica L.; Bechly, Günter (2016).

"How to date a dragonfly: Fossil calibrations for odonates" .

Palaeontologia Electronica .

19 (1): 576.

Bibcode : 2016PalEl..19..576K .

doi : 10.26879/576 .

^ Huang, DiYing; Engel, Michael S.; Cai, ChenYang; Nel, André (May 2013).

"Mesozoic giant fleas from northeastern China (Siphonaptera): Taxonomy and implications for palaeodiversity" .

Chinese Science Bulletin .

58 (14): 1682– 1690.

Bibcode : 2013ChSBu..58.1682H .

doi : 10.1007/s11434-013-5769-3 .

hdl : 1808/14426 .

ISSN 1001-6538 .

S2CID 53578959 .

^ Gao, Taiping; Shih, Chungkun; Rasnitsyn, Alexandr P.; Xu, Xing; Wang, Shuo; Ren, Dong (July 2013).

"New Transitional Fleas from China Highlighting Diversity of Early Cretaceous Ectoparasitic Insects" .

Current Biology .

23 (13): 1261– 1266.

Bibcode : 2013CBio...23.1261G .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2013.05.040 .

PMID 23810530 .

S2CID 9646168 .

^ Labandeira, Conrad C.; Li, Longfeng (2021), De Baets, Kenneth; Huntley, John Warren (eds.), "The History of Insect Parasitism and the Mid-Mesozoic Parasitoid Revolution" , The Evolution and Fossil Record of Parasitism , Topics in Geobiology, vol. 49, Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp.

377– 533, doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-42484-8_11 , ISBN 978-3-030-42483-1 , S2CID 236738176 , retrieved 2021-12-02 ^ Yang, Hongru; Shi, Chaofan; Engel, Michael S; Zhao, Zhipeng; Ren, Dong; Gao, Taiping (2020-04-02).

"Early specializations for mimicry and defense in a Jurassic stick insect" .

National Science Review .

8 (1): nwaa056.

doi : 10.1093/nsr/nwaa056 .

ISSN 2095-5138 .

PMC 8288419 .

PMID 34691548 .

^ Huang, Di-ying; Nel, André; Zompro, Oliver; Waller, Alain (2008-06-11).

"Mantophasmatodea now in the Jurassic" .

Naturwissenschaften .

95 (10): 947– 952.

Bibcode : 2008NW.....95..947H .

doi : 10.1007/s00114-008-0412-x .

ISSN 0028-1042 .

PMID 18545982 .

S2CID 35408984 .

^ Huang, Di-Ying; Nel, André (August 2009).

"Oldest webspinners from the Middle Jurassic of Inner Mongolia, China (Insecta: Embiodea)" .

Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society .

156 (4): 889– 895.

doi : 10.1111/j.1096-3642.2008.00499.x .

^ Engel, Michael S.; Winterton, Shaun L.; Breitkreuz, Laura C.V. (2018-01-07).

"Phylogeny and Evolution of Neuropterida: Where Have Wings of Lace Taken Us?" .

Annual Review of Entomology .

63 (1): 531– 551.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-ento-020117-043127 .

ISSN 0066-4170 .

PMID 29324039 .

^ Vršanský, P.; Sendi, H.; Kotulová, J.; Szwedo, J.; Havelcová, M.; Palková, H.; Vršanská, L.; Sakala, J.; Puškelová, L.; Golej, M.; Biroň, A.; Peyrot, D.; Quicke, D.; Néraudeau, D.; Uher, P.; Maksoud, S.; Azar, D. (2024).

"Jurassic Park approached: a coccid from Kimmeridgian cheirolepidiacean Aintourine Lebanese amber" .

National Science Review .

12 (3). nwae200.

doi : 10.1093/nsr/nwae200 .

PMC 11895504 .

PMID 40070804 .

^ Selden, Paul A.; Baker, Anne S.; Phipps, Kenneth J. (2008).

"An Oribatid Mite (arachnida: Acari) from the Oxford Clay (jurassic: Upper Callovian) of South Cave Station Quarry, Yorkshire, Uk" .

Palaeontology .

51 (3): 623– 633.

Bibcode : 2008Palgy..51..623S .

doi : 10.1111/j.1475-4983.2008.00769.x .

hdl : 1808/8353 .

ISSN 1475-4983 .

S2CID 54046836 .

^ Sivhed, Ulf; Wallwork, John A. (March 1978).

"An Early Jurassic oribatid mite from southern Sweden" .

Geologiska Föreningen i Stockholm Förhandlingar .

100 (1): 65– 70.

doi : 10.1080/11035897809448562 .

ISSN 0016-786X .

^ a b Magalhaes, Ivan L. F.; Azevedo, Guilherme H. F.; Michalik, Peter; Ramírez, Martín J. (February 2020).

"The fossil record of spiders revisited: implications for calibrating trees and evidence for a major faunal turnover since the Mesozoic" .

Biological Reviews .

95 (1): 184– 217.

doi : 10.1111/brv.12559 .

ISSN 1464-7931 .

PMID 31713947 .

S2CID 207937170 .

^ Selden, Paul A.; Dunlop, Jason A. (2014).

"The first fossil spider (Araneae: Palpimanoidea) from the Lower Jurassic (Grimmen, Germany)" .

Zootaxa .

3894 (1): 161– 168.

doi : 10.11646/zootaxa.3894.1.13 .

PMID 25544628 .

^ Selden, P. A.; Shih, C.K.; Ren, D. (2013).

"A giant spider from the Jurassic of China reveals greater diversity of the orbicularian stem group" .

Naturwissenschaften .

100 (12): 1171– 1181.

Bibcode : 2013NW....100.1171S .

doi : 10.1007/s00114-013-1121-7 .

PMC 3889289 .

PMID 24317464 .

^ Dunlop, Jason A.; Kamenz, Carsten; Scholtz, Gerhard (June 2007).

"Reinterpreting the morphology of the Jurassic scorpion Liassoscorpionides" .

Arthropod Structure & Development .

36 (2): 245– 252.

Bibcode : 2007ArtSD..36..245D .

doi : 10.1016/j.asd.2006.09.003 .

PMID 18089103 .

^ Huang, Diying; Selden, Paul A.; Dunlop, Jason A. (August 2009).

"Harvestmen (Arachnida: Opiliones) from the Middle Jurassic of China" .

Naturwissenschaften .

96 (8): 955– 962.

Bibcode : 2009NW.....96..955H .

doi : 10.1007/s00114-009-0556-3 .

ISSN 0028-1042 .

PMID 19495718 .

S2CID 9570512 .

^ Giribet, Gonzalo; Tourinho, Ana Lúcia; Shih, ChungKun; Ren, Dong (March 2012).

"An exquisitely preserved harvestman (Arthropoda, Arachnida, Opiliones) from the Middle Jurassic of China" .

Organisms Diversity & Evolution .

12 (1): 51– 56.

Bibcode : 2012ODivE..12...51G .

doi : 10.1007/s13127-011-0067-x .

ISSN 1439-6092 .

S2CID 15658216 .

^ Dunhill, Alexander M.; Foster, William J.; Sciberras, James; Twitchett, Richard J. (January 2018). Hautmann, Michael (ed.).

"Impact of the Late Triassic mass extinction on functional diversity and composition of marine ecosystems" .

Palaeontology .

61 (1): 133– 148.

Bibcode : 2018Palgy..61..133D .

doi : 10.1111/pala.12332 .

^ Kiessling, Wolfgang (December 2009).

"Geologic and Biologic Controls on the Evolution of Reefs" .

Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics .

40 (1): 173– 192.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.ecolsys.110308.120251 .

ISSN 1543-592X .

^ a b c Klompmaker, A. A.; Schweitzer, C. E.; Feldmann, R. M.; Kowalewski, M. (2013-11-01).

"The influence of reefs on the rise of Mesozoic marine crustaceans" .

Geology .

41 (11): 1179– 1182.

Bibcode : 2013Geo....41.1179K .

doi : 10.1130/G34768.1 .

ISSN 0091-7613 .

^ Hudson, Wendy; Hart, Malcolm B.; Smart, Christopher W. (2009-01-01).

"Palaeobiogeography of early planktonic foraminifera" .

Bulletin de la Société Géologique de France .

180 (1): 27– 38.

doi : 10.2113/gssgfbull.180.1.27 .

ISSN 1777-5817 .

^ Wiggan, Nickolas J.; Riding, James B.; Fensome, Robert A.; Mattioli, Emanuela (2018-05-01).

"The Bajocian (Middle Jurassic): A key interval in the early Mesozoic phytoplankton radiation" .

Earth-Science Reviews .

180 : 126– 146.

Bibcode : 2018ESRv..180..126W .

doi : 10.1016/j.earscirev.2018.03.009 .

ISSN 0012-8252 .

^ Zatoń, M.; Taylor, P.D. (2009-12-31).

"Microconchids (Tentaculita) from the Middle Jurassic of Poland" .

Bulletin of Geosciences : 653– 660.

doi : 10.3140/bull.geosci.1167 .

ISSN 1802-8225 .

^ Girard, Vincent; Saint Martin, Simona; Buffetaut, Eric; Saint Martin, Jean-Paul; Néraudeau, Didier; Peyrot, Daniel; Roghi, Guido; Ragazzi, Eugenio; Suteethorn, Varavudh (2020). Saint Martin, J.-P.; Saint Martin, S. (eds.).

"Thai amber: insights into early diatom history?" .

BSGF – Earth Sciences Bulletin .

191 : 23.

doi : 10.1051/bsgf/2020028 .

hdl : 11577/3391076 .

ISSN 1777-5817 .

^ Gorzelak, Przemysław; Salamon, Mariusz A.; Trzęsiok, Dawid; Lach, Rafał; Baumiller, Tomasz K. (April 2016).

"Diversity dynamics of post-Palaeozoic crinoids – in quest of the factors affecting crinoid macroevolution" .

Lethaia .

49 (2): 231– 244.

Bibcode : 2016Letha..49..231G .

doi : 10.1111/let.12141 .

^ Hopkins, Melanie J.; Smith, Andrew B. (2015-03-24).

"Dynamic evolutionary change in post-Paleozoic echinoids and the importance of scale when interpreting changes in rates of evolution" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

112 (12): 3758– 3763.

Bibcode : 2015PNAS..112.3758H .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1418153112 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 4378421 .

PMID 25713369 .

^ Scholtz, Gerhard (November 2020).

"Eocarcinus praecursor Withers, 1932 (Malacostraca, Decapoda, Meiura) is a stem group brachyuran" .

Arthropod Structure & Development .

59 : 100991.

Bibcode : 2020ArtSD..5900991S .

doi : 10.1016/j.asd.2020.100991 .

PMID 32891896 .

^ Schweitzer, Carrie E.; Feldmann, Rodney M. (2010-05-01).

"The Oldest Brachyura (Decapoda: Homolodromioidea: Glaessneropsoidea) Known to Date (Jurassic)" .

Journal of Crustacean Biology .

30 (2): 251– 256.

Bibcode : 2010JCBio..30..251F .

doi : 10.1651/09-3231.1 .

ISSN 0278-0372 .

S2CID 84707572 .

^ a b Guinot, Danièle (2019-11-14).

"New hypotheses concerning the earliest brachyurans (Crustacea, Decapoda, Brachyura)" .

Geodiversitas .

41 (1): 747.

Bibcode : 2019Geodv..41..747G .

doi : 10.5252/geodiversitas2019v41a22 .

ISSN 1280-9659 .

S2CID 214220075 .

^ Fraaije, René; Schweigert, Günter; Nützel, Alexander; Havlik, Philipe (2013-01-01).

"New Early Jurassic hermit crabs from Germany and France" .

Journal of Crustacean Biology .

33 (6): 802– 817.

Bibcode : 2013JCBio..33..802F .

doi : 10.1163/1937240X-00002191 .

ISSN 0278-0372 .

^ Mironenko, Aleksandr (January 2020).

"A hermit crab preserved inside an ammonite shell from the Upper Jurassic of central Russia: Implications to ammonoid palaeoecology" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

537 : 109397.

Bibcode : 2020PPP...53709397M .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2019.109397 .

^ Bracken-Grissom, Heather D.; Ahyong, Shane T.; Wilkinson, Richard D.; Feldmann, Rodney M.; Schweitzer, Carrie E.; Breinholt, Jesse W.; Bendall, Matthew; Palero, Ferran; Chan, Tin-Yam; Felder, Darryl L.; Robles, Rafael (2014-07-01).

"The Emergence of Lobsters: Phylogenetic Relationships, Morphological Evolution and Divergence Time Comparisons of an Ancient Group (Decapoda: Achelata, Astacidea, Glypheidea, Polychelida)" .

Systematic Biology .

63 (4): 457– 479.

doi : 10.1093/sysbio/syu008 .

ISSN 1063-5157 .

PMID 24562813 .

^ Chan, Benny K K; Dreyer, Niklas; Gale, Andy S; Glenner, Henrik; Ewers-Saucedo, Christine; Pérez-Losada, Marcos; Kolbasov, Gregory A; Crandall, Keith A; Høeg, Jens T (2021-02-25).

"The evolutionary diversity of barnacles, with an updated classification of fossil and living forms" .

Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society .

193 (3): 789– 846.

doi : 10.1093/zoolinnean/zlaa160 .

hdl : 11250/2990967 .

ISSN 0024-4082 .

^ Gale, Andy; Schweigert, Günter (January 2016). Hautmann, Michael (ed.).

"A new phosphatic-shelled cirripede (Crustacea, Thoracica) from the Lower Jurassic (Toarcian) of Germany – the oldest epiplanktonic barnacle" .

Palaeontology .

59 (1): 59– 70.

Bibcode : 2016Palgy..59...59G .

doi : 10.1111/pala.12207 .

S2CID 128383968 .

^ Vörös, Attila; Kocsis, Ádám T.; Pálfy, József (September 2016).

"Demise of the last two spire-bearing brachiopod orders (Spiriferinida and Athyridida) at the Toarcian (Early Jurassic) extinction event" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

457 : 233– 241.

Bibcode : 2016PPP...457..233V .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2016.06.022 .

^ Vörös, Attila; Kocsis, Ádám T.; Pálfy, József (2019).

"Mass extinctions and clade extinctions in the history of brachiopods: Brief review and a post-Paleozoic case study" .

Rivista Italiana di Paleontologia e Stratigrafia .

125 (3).

doi : 10.13130/2039-4942/12184 .

ISSN 2039-4942 . Archived from the original on 2020-09-01 . Retrieved 2020-12-25 .

^ Manojlovic, Marko; Clapham, Matthew E. (2020-11-23).

"The role of bioturbation-driven substrate disturbance in the Mesozoic brachiopod decline" .

Paleobiology .

47 : 86– 100.

doi : 10.1017/pab.2020.50 .

ISSN 0094-8373 .

^ Taylor, Paul D.; Ernst, Andrej (June 2008).

"Bryozoans in transition: The depauperate and patchy Jurassic biota" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

263 ( 1– 2): 9– 23.

Bibcode : 2008PPP...263....9T .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2008.01.028 .

^ Ferrari, Mariel; Hautmann, Michael (2022-11-02). Kiel, Steffen (ed.).

"Gastropods underwent a major taxonomic turnover during the end-Triassic marine mass extinction event" .

PLOS ONE .

17 (11): e0276329.

Bibcode : 2022PLoSO..1776329F .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0276329 .

ISSN 1932-6203 .

PMC 9629647 .

PMID 36322518 .

^ Neubauer, Thomas A. (February 2024).

"The fossil record of freshwater Gastropoda – a global review" .

Biological Reviews .

99 (1): 177– 199.

doi : 10.1111/brv.13016 .

ISSN 1464-7931 .

PMID 37698140 .

^ Ros, Sonia; De Renzi, Miquel; Damborenea, Susana E.; Márquez-Aliaga, Ana (November 2011).

"Coping between crises: Early Triassic–early Jurassic bivalve diversity dynamics" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

311 ( 3– 4): 184– 199.

Bibcode : 2011PPP...311..184R .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2011.08.020 .

hdl : 11336/81358 .

^ Mondal, Subhronil; Harries, Peter J. (February 2016).

"The Effect of Taxonomic Corrections on Phanerozoic Generic Richness Trends in Marine Bivalves with a Discussion on the Clade's Overall History" .

Paleobiology .

42 (1): 157– 171.

Bibcode : 2016Pbio...42..157M .

doi : 10.1017/pab.2015.35 .

ISSN 0094-8373 .

S2CID 87260961 .

^ Sha, J.; Cestari, R.; Fabbi, S. (April 2020).

"Paleobiogeographic distribution of rudist bivalves (Hippuritida) in the Oxfordian–early Aptian (Late Jurassic–Early Cretaceous)" .

Cretaceous Research .

108 : 104289.

Bibcode : 2020CrRes.10804289S .

doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2019.104289 .

S2CID 210248232 .

^ Page, Kevin N. (January 2008).

"The evolution and geography of Jurassic ammonoids" .

Proceedings of the Geologists' Association .

119 (1): 35– 57.

Bibcode : 2008PrGA..119...35P .

doi : 10.1016/S0016-7878(08)80257-X .

^ Sandoval, José; O'Dogherty, Jean; Guex, Jean (1 August 2001).

"Evolutionary Rates of Jurassic Ammonites in Relation to Sea-level Fluctuations" .

PALAIOS .

16 (4): 311– 335.

Bibcode : 2001Palai..16..311S .

doi : 10.1669/0883-1351(2001)016<0311:EROJAI>2.0.CO;2 .

S2CID 129982065 . Retrieved 26 August 2023 .

^ Iba, Yasuhiro; Sano, Shin-ichi; Mutterlose, Jörg (2014-05-02). Samonds, Karen E. (ed.).

"The Early Evolutionary History of Belemnites: New Data from Japan" .

PLOS ONE .

9 (5): e95632.

Bibcode : 2014PLoSO...995632I .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0095632 .

ISSN 1932-6203 .

PMC 4008418 .

PMID 24788872 .

^ Hoffmann, René; Stevens, Kevin (February 2020).

"The palaeobiology of belemnites – foundation for the interpretation of rostrum geochemistry" .

Biological Reviews .

95 (1): 94– 123.

doi : 10.1111/brv.12557 .

ISSN 1464-7931 .

PMID 31729839 .

S2CID 208036104 .

^ Fuchs, Dirk; Weis, Robert (2008-07-11).

"Taxonomy, morphology and phylogeny of Lower Jurassic loligosepiid coleoids (Cephalopoda)" .

Neues Jahrbuch für Geologie und Paläontologie – Abhandlungen .

249 (1): 93– 112.

Bibcode : 2008NJGPA.249...93F .

doi : 10.1127/0077-7749/2008/0249-0093 .

ISSN 0077-7749 .

^ a b c Fuchs, Dirk; Iba, Yasuhiro; Heyng, Alexander; Iijima, Masaya; Klug, Christian; Larson, Neal L.; Schweigert, Günter (February 2020). Brayard, Arnaud (ed.).

"The Muensterelloidea: phylogeny and character evolution of Mesozoic stem octopods" .

Papers in Palaeontology .

6 (1): 31– 92.

Bibcode : 2020PPal....6...31F .

doi : 10.1002/spp2.1254 .

ISSN 2056-2802 .

S2CID 198256507 .

^ Fuchs, Dirk; Schweigert, Günter (June 2018).

"First Middle–Late Jurassic gladius vestiges provide new evidence on the detailed origin of incirrate and cirrate octopuses (Coleoidea)" .

PalZ .

92 (2): 203– 217.

Bibcode : 2018PalZ...92..203F .

doi : 10.1007/s12542-017-0399-8 .

ISSN 0031-0220 .

S2CID 135245479 .

^ Kruta, Isabelle; Rouget, Isabelle; Charbonnier, Sylvain; Bardin, Jérémie; Fernandez, Vincent; Germain, Damien; Brayard, Arnaud; Landman, Neil (2016).

"Proteroctopus ribeti in coleoid evolution" .

Palaeontology .

59 (6): 767– 773.

Bibcode : 2016Palgy..59..767K .

doi : 10.1111/pala.12265 .

ISSN 1475-4983 .

S2CID 132420410 .

External links [ edit ] Examples of Jurassic Fossils Jurassic (chronostratigraphy scale) Jurassic fossils in Harbury, Warwickshire Jurassic Microfossils: 65+ images of Foraminifera "Jurassic" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 15 (11th ed.). 1911.

With map and table.

Portals : Geology Paleontology Jurassic at Wikipedia's sister projects : Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons v t e Jurassic Period Lower/Early Jurassic Middle Jurassic Upper/Late Jurassic Hettangian Sinemurian Pliensbachian Toarcian Aalenian Bajocian Bathonian Callovian Oxfordian Kimmeridgian Tithonian v t e Geological history of Earth Cenozoic Era (present–66.0 Ma) Quaternary (present–2.58 Ma) Holocene (present–11.7 ka) Pleistocene (11.7 ka–2.58 Ma) Neogene (2.58–23.0 Ma) Pliocene (2.59–5.33 Ma) Miocene (5.33–23.0 Ma) Paleogene (23.0–66.0 Ma) Oligocene (23.0–33.9 Ma) Eocene (33.9–56.0 Ma) Paleocene (56.0–66.0 Ma) Mesozoic Era (66.0–252 Ma) Cretaceous (66.0–145 Ma) Late (66.0–100 Ma) Early (100–145 Ma) Jurassic (145–201 Ma) Late (145–164 Ma) Middle (164–174 Ma) Early (174–201 Ma) Triassic (201–252 Ma) Late (201–237 Ma) Middle (237–247 Ma) Early (247–252 Ma) Paleozoic Era (252–539 Ma) Permian (252–299 Ma) Lopingian (252–260 Ma) Guadalupian (260–272 Ma) Cisuralian (272–299 Ma) Carboniferous (299–359 Ma) Pennsylvanian (299–323 Ma) Mississippian (323–359 Ma) Devonian (359–419 Ma) Late (359–383 Ma) Middle (383–393 Ma) Early (393–419 Ma) Silurian (419–444 Ma) Pridoli (419–423 Ma) Ludlow (423–427 Ma) Wenlock (427–433 Ma) Llandovery (433–444 Ma) Ordovician (444–485 Ma) Late (444–458 Ma) Middle (458–470 Ma) Early (470–485 Ma) Cambrian (485–539 Ma) Furongian (485–497 Ma) Miaolingian (497–509 Ma) Series 2 (509–521 Ma) Terreneuvian (521–539 Ma) Proterozoic Eon (539 Ma–2.5 Ga) Neoproterozoic (539 Ma–1 Ga) Ediacaran (539–635 Ma) Cryogenian (635–720 Ma) Tonian (720 Ma–1 Ga) Mesoproterozoic (1–1.6 Ga) Stenian (1–1.2 Ga) Ectasian (1.2–1.4 Ga) Calymmian (1.4–1.6 Ga) Paleoproterozoic (1.6–2.5 Ga) Statherian (1.6–1.8 Ga) Orosirian (1.8–2.05 Ga) Rhyacian (2.05–2.3 Ga) Siderian (2.3–2.5 Ga) Archean Eon (2.5–4 Ga) Neoarchean (2.5–2.8 Ga) Mesoarchean (2.8–3.2 Ga) Paleoarchean (3.2–3.6 Ga) Eoarchean (3.6–4 Ga) Hadean Eon (4–4.6 Ga) ka = kiloannum (thousand years ago); Ma = megaannum (million years ago); Ga = gigaannum (billion years ago).

See also: Geologic time scale • Geology portal • World portal Authority control databases National Germany United States 2 3 France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐nchxs
Cached time: 20250817155610
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 3.985 seconds
Real time usage: 4.291 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 37659/1000000
Revision size: 243946/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 1187802/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7696/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 24/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 1471519/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 2.662/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17961497/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 3722.636      1 -total
 74.66% 2779.260      2 Template:Reflist
 59.94% 2231.460    287 Template:Cite_journal
  5.75%  214.031      1 Template:Infobox_geologic_timespan
  3.61%  134.399      4 Template:Cite_web
  2.75%  102.207      2 Template:Lang
  2.74%  102.166      1 Template:Subject_bar
  2.43%   90.505      1 Template:Geological_range
  2.40%   89.224      1 Template:Short_description
  2.30%   85.453      1 Template:Phanerozoic_220px Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:15655:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817155610 and revision id 1305162656. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jurassic&oldid=1305162656 " Categories : Jurassic Geological periods Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with text in Celtic languages Articles containing German-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 12:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jurassic 102 languages Add topic

