Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Research career Toggle Research career subsection 2.1 Bose–Einstein statistics 2.1.1 Bose–Einstein condensate 2.2 Dhaka 2.3 Calcutta 2.4 Other fields 3 Honours Toggle Honours subsection 3.1 Nobel Prize nomination 4 Legacy 5 Works (selection) 6 Notes 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Satyendra Nath Bose 78 languages अंगिका العربية অসমীয়া अवधी تۆرکجه বাংলা Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan ქართული Kreyòl ayisyen Latina Latviešu Magyar मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский संस्कृतम् Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from S. N. Bose ) Indian theoretical physicist and polymath (1894–1974) For Indian nationalist belonging to the Anushilan Samiti, see Satyendranath Bosu .

Satyendra Nath Bose FRS , MP Bose in 1925 Born Satyendra Nath Bose ( 1894-01-01 ) 1 January 1894 Calcutta , Bengal Presidency , British India Died 4 February 1974 (1974-02-04) (aged 80) Calcutta , West Bengal , India [ 2 ] Alma mater Presidency College ( BSc ) Science College, Calcutta University ( MSc ) Known for Bose–Einstein condensate Bose–Einstein statistics Bose–Einstein distribution Bose–Einstein correlations Boson Spouse Ushabati Bose ( née Ghosh) [ 3 ] Awards Padma Vibhushan Fellow of the Royal Society [ 1 ] Scientific career Fields Theoretical physics , quantum mechanics , mathematics Institutions University of Calcutta University of Dhaka Visva-Bharati Academic advisors Jagadish Chandra Bose Prafulla Chandra Ray Doctoral students Purnima Sinha Partha Ghose Siva Brata Bhattacherjee Other notable students Mani Lal Bhaumik Lilabati Bhattacharjee Asima Chatterjee Ratan Lal Brahmachary Member of Parliament , Rajya Sabha In office 3 April 1952 – 2 April 1960 Preceded by office established Constituency Nominated (Education) Signature Part of a series of articles about Quantum mechanics i ℏ ℏ d d t | Ψ Ψ ⟩ ⟩ = H ^ ^ | Ψ Ψ ⟩ ⟩ {\displaystyle i\hbar {\frac {d}{dt}}|\Psi \rangle ={\hat {H}}|\Psi \rangle } Schrödinger equation Introduction Glossary History Background Classical mechanics Old quantum theory Bra–ket notation Hamiltonian Interference Fundamentals Complementarity Decoherence Entanglement Energy level Measurement Nonlocality Quantum number State Superposition Symmetry Tunnelling Uncertainty Wave function Collapse Experiments Bell's inequality CHSH inequality Davisson–Germer Double-slit Elitzur–Vaidman Franck–Hertz Leggett inequality Leggett–Garg inequality Mach–Zehnder Popper Quantum eraser Delayed-choice Schrödinger's cat Stern–Gerlach Wheeler's delayed-choice Formulations Overview Heisenberg Interaction Matrix Phase-space Schrödinger Sum-over-histories (path integral) Equations Dirac Klein–Gordon Pauli Rydberg Schrödinger Interpretations Bayesian Consciousness causes collapse Consistent histories Copenhagen de Broglie–Bohm Ensemble Hidden-variable Many-worlds Objective-collapse Quantum logic Superdeterminism Relational Transactional Advanced topics Relativistic quantum mechanics Quantum field theory Quantum information science Quantum computing Quantum chaos EPR paradox Density matrix Scattering theory Quantum statistical mechanics Quantum machine learning Scientists Aharonov Bell Bethe Blackett Bloch Bohm Bohr Born Bose de Broglie Compton Dirac Davisson Debye Ehrenfest Einstein Everett Fock Fermi Feynman Glauber Gutzwiller Heisenberg Hilbert Jordan Kramers Lamb Landau Laue Moseley Millikan Onnes Pauli Planck Rabi Raman Rydberg Schrödinger Simmons Sommerfeld von Neumann Weyl Wien Wigner Zeeman Zeilinger v t e Satyendra Nath Bose FRS , MP [ 1 ] ( / ˈ b oʊ s / ; [ 4 ] [ a ] 1 January 1894 – 4 February 1974) was an Indian theoretical physicist and mathematician . He is best known for his work on quantum mechanics in the early 1920s, in developing the foundation for Bose–Einstein statistics , and the theory of the Bose–Einstein condensate . A Fellow of the Royal Society , he was awarded India's second highest civilian award, the Padma Vibhushan , in 1954 by the Government of India .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] The eponymous particles class described by Bose's statistics, bosons , were named by Paul Dirac .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] A polymath , he had a wide range of interests in varied fields, including physics , mathematics , chemistry , biology , mineralogy , philosophy , arts , literature , and music . He served on many research and development committees in India, after independence .

[ 10 ] Early life [ edit ] Satyendra Nath Bose Birthplace Satyendra Nath Bose Residence (22, Ishwar Mill Lane, Kolkata) Entrance & Name Plate Bose was born in Calcutta (now Kolkata), the eldest of seven children in a Bengali Kayastha family.

[ 11 ] Bose's father was Surendra Nath. Bose's mother was ( Smt.

) Amodini Debi. Surendra was an accountant and worked in East India Railways .

[ 12 ] Bose was the only son, with six sisters after him. His ancestral home was in the village Bara Jagulia, in the district of Nadia , in the Bengal Presidency . His schooling began at the age of five, near his home.  When his family moved to Goabagan, he was admitted into the New Indian School.  In his final year of school, he was admitted into the Hindu School .  He passed his entrance examination ( matriculation ) in 1909 and stood fifth in the order of merit. He then joined the intermediate science course at the Presidency College , Calcutta , where his teachers included Jagadish Chandra Bose , Sarada Prasanna Das , and Prafulla Chandra Ray .

Bose received a Bachelor of Science in mixed mathematics from Presidency College ,  standing first in 1913. Then he joined Sir Ashutosh Mukherjee's newly formed Science College where he again stood first in the Master of Science (MSc) mixed mathematics exam in 1915. His marks in the MSc examination created a new record in the annals of the University of Calcutta , which is yet to be surpassed.

[ 13 ] After completing his MSc, Bose joined the Science College, Calcutta University as a research scholar in 1916 and started his studies in the theory of relativity . It was an exciting era in the history of scientific progress.

Quantum theory had just appeared on the horizon and significant results had started pouring in.

[ 13 ] His father, Surendranath Bose, worked in the Engineering Department of the East Indian Railway Company . In 1914, at age 20, Satyendra Nath Bose married Ushabati Ghosh, [ 3 ] [ 14 ] the 11-year-old daughter of a prominent Calcutta physician.

[ 15 ] They had nine children, two of whom died in early childhood. When he died in 1974, he left behind his wife, two sons, and five daughters.

[ 13 ] As a polyglot , Bose was well versed in several languages such as Bengali , English, French, German and Sanskrit as well as the poetry of Lord Tennyson , Rabindranath Tagore and Kalidasa . In Europe, he impressed his host Jacqueline Zadoc-Kahn with his knowledge of Hebrew in literature and religion.

[ 16 ] He could play the esraj , an Indian instrument similar to a violin.

[ 17 ] He was actively involved in running night schools that came to be known as the Working Men's Institute.

[ 7 ] [ 18 ] Research career [ edit ] Bose attended Hindu School in Calcutta , and later attended Presidency College , also in Calcutta, earning the highest marks at each institution, while fellow student and future astrophysicist Meghnad Saha came second.

[ 7 ] He came in contact with teachers such as Jagadish Chandra Bose , Prafulla Chandra Ray and Naman Sharma who provided inspiration to aim high in life. From 1916 to 1921, he was a lecturer in the physics department of the Rajabazar Science College under University of Calcutta . Along with Saha, Bose prepared the first book in English based on German and French translations of original papers on Einstein's special and general relativity in 1919.

In 1921, Satyendra Nath Bose joined as Reader in the Department of Physics of the recently founded University of Dhaka (in present-day Bangladesh).

[ 19 ] Bose set up whole new departments, including laboratories, to teach advanced courses for MSc and BSc honours and taught thermodynamics as well as James Clerk Maxwell 's theory of electromagnetism .

[ 20 ] Bose, along with Indian Astrophysicist Meghnad Saha , presented several papers in theoretical physics and pure mathematics from 1918 onwards. In 1924, whilst a Reader in the Physics Department of the University of Dhaka , Bose wrote a paper deriving Planck's quantum radiation law without any reference to classical physics by using a novel way of counting states with identical particles . This paper was seminal in creating the important field of quantum statistics .

[ 21 ] Though not accepted at once for publication, he sent the article directly to Albert Einstein in Germany. Einstein, recognising the importance of the paper, translated it into German himself and submitted it on Bose's behalf to the Zeitschrift für Physik . As a result of this recognition, Bose was able to work for two years in European X-ray and crystallography laboratories, during which he worked with Louis de Broglie , Marie Curie , and Einstein.

[ 7 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] Bose–Einstein statistics [ edit ] While presenting a lecture [ 25 ] at the University of Dhaka on the theory of radiation and the ultraviolet catastrophe , Bose intended to show his students that the contemporary theory was inadequate, because it predicted results not in accordance with experimental results.

In the process of describing this discrepancy, Bose for the first time took the position that the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution would not be true for microscopic particles, where fluctuations due to Heisenberg's uncertainty principle will be significant. Thus he stressed the probability of finding particles in the phase space , each state having volume h 3 , and discarding the distinct position and momentum of the particles.

Bose adapted this lecture into a short article called "Planck's Law and the Hypothesis of Light Quanta" and sent it to Albert Einstein with the following letter: [ 26 ] Respected Sir, I have ventured to send you the accompanying article for your perusal and opinion. I am anxious to know what you think of it. You will see that I have tried to deduce the coefficient 8π ν 2 / c 3 in Planck's Law independent of classical electrodynamics, only assuming that the ultimate elementary region in the phase-space has the content h 3 . I do not know sufficient German to translate the paper. If you think the paper worth publication I shall be grateful if you arrange for its publication in Zeitschrift für Physik . Though a complete stranger to you, I do not feel any hesitation in making such a request. Because we are all your pupils though profiting only by your teachings through your writings. I do not know whether you still remember that somebody from Calcutta asked your permission to translate your papers on Relativity in English. You acceded to the request. The book has since been published. I was the one who translated your paper on Generalised Relativity.

Einstein agreed with him, translated Bose's papers "Planck's Law and Hypothesis of Light Quanta" into German, and had it published in Zeitschrift für Physik under Bose's name, in 1924.

[ 27 ] Possible outcomes of flipping two coins Two heads Two tails One of each (1) There are three outcomes. What is the probability of producing two heads?

Outcome probabilities Coin 1 Head Tail Coin 2 Head HH HT Tail TH TT (2) Since the coins are distinct, there are two outcomes which produce a head and a tail. The probability of two heads is one-quarter.

The reason Bose's interpretation produced accurate results was that since photons are indistinguishable from each other, one cannot treat any two photons having equal energy as being two distinct identifiable photons. By analogy if, in an alternate universe, coins were to behave like photons and other bosons , the probability of producing two heads would indeed be one-third (tail-head = head-tail).

Bose's interpretation is now called Bose–Einstein statistics . This result derived by Bose laid the foundation of quantum statistics , and especially the revolutionary new philosophical conception of the indistinguishability of particles, as acknowledged by Einstein and Dirac.

[ 27 ] When Einstein met Bose face-to-face, he asked him whether he had been aware that he had invented a new type of statistics, and he very candidly said that no, he wasn't that familiar with Boltzmann 's statistics and didn't realize that he was doing the calculations differently.

Bose–Einstein condensate [ edit ] Standard Model of particle physics Elementary particles of the Standard Model Background Particle physics Standard Model Quantum field theory Gauge theory Spontaneous symmetry breaking Higgs mechanism Constituents Electroweak interaction Quantum chromodynamics CKM matrix Standard Model mathematics Limitations Strong CP problem Hierarchy problem Neutrino oscillations Physics beyond the Standard Model Scientists Rutherford Thomson Chadwick Bose Sudarshan Davis Jr Anderson Fermi Dirac Feynman Rubbia Gell-Mann Kendall Taylor Friedman Powell Anderson Glashow Iliopoulos Lederman Maiani Meer Cowan Nambu Chamberlain Cabibbo Schwartz Perl Majorana Weinberg Lee Ward Salam Kobayashi Maskawa Mills Yang Yukawa 't Hooft Veltman Gross Pais Pauli Politzer Reines Schwinger Wilczek Cronin Fitch Vleck Higgs Englert Brout Hagen Guralnik Kibble de Mayolo Lattes Zweig v t e Velocity-distribution data of a gas of rubidium atoms, confirming the discovery of a new phase of matter, the Bose–Einstein condensate .

[ 28 ] Left: just before the appearance of a Bose–Einstein condensate. Center: just after the appearance of the condensate. Right: after further evaporation, leaving a sample of nearly pure condensate.

Einstein also did not at first realize how radical Bose's departure was, and in his first paper after Bose, he was guided, like Bose, by the fact that the new method gave the right answer. But after Einstein's second paper using Bose's method in which Einstein predicted the Bose-Einstein condensate ( pictured left ), he started to realize just how radical it was, and he compared it to wave/particle duality, saying that some particles didn't behave exactly like particles.  Bose had already submitted his article to the British Journal Philosophical Magazine , which rejected it before he sent it to Einstein. It is not known why it was rejected.

[ 29 ] Einstein adopted the idea and extended it to atoms. This led to the prediction of the existence of phenomena which became known as Bose–Einstein condensate , a dense collection of bosons (which are particles with integer spin , named after Bose), which was demonstrated to exist by experiment in 1995.

Dhaka [ edit ] Bose at Dhaka University in the 1930s After his stay in Europe, Bose returned to Dhaka in 1926. He did not have a doctorate, and so ordinarily, under the prevailing regulations, he would not be qualified for the post of Professor he applied for, but Einstein recommended him. He was then made Head of the Department of Physics at Dhaka University . He continued guiding and teaching at Dhaka University and was the Dean of the Faculty of Science there until 1945.

Bose designed equipment himself for an X-ray crystallography laboratory. He set up laboratories and libraries to make the department a center of research in X-ray spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction, magnetic properties of matter, optical spectroscopy, wireless, and unified field theories . He also published an equation of state for real gases with Meghnad Saha .

Calcutta [ edit ] When the partition of India became imminent (1947), he returned to Calcutta (now known as Kolkata) and taught there until 1956. He insisted every student design their own equipment using local materials and local technicians. He was made professor emeritus on his retirement.

[ 22 ] [ 30 ] [ 7 ] He then became Vice-Chancellor of Visva-Bharati University in Santiniketan . He returned to the University of Calcutta to continue research in nuclear physics and complete earlier works in organic chemistry. In subsequent years, he worked in applied research such as extraction of helium in hot springs of Bakreshwar .

[ 31 ] Other fields [ edit ] Apart from physics, he did research in biotechnology and literature ( Bengali and English). He made studies in chemistry , geology, zoology , anthropology , engineering and other sciences. Being Bengali , he devoted significant time to promoting Bengali as a teaching language, translating scientific papers into it, and promoting the development of the region.

[ 23 ] [ 32 ] [ 6 ] Honours [ edit ] Bose with other scientists at the University of Calcutta Bust of Satyendra Nath Bose which is placed in the garden of Birla Industrial & Technological Museum In 1937, Rabindranath Tagore dedicated his only book on science, Visva–Parichay , to Satyendra Nath Bose. Bose was honoured with the title Padma Vibhushan by the Indian Government in 1954. In 1959, he was appointed as the National Professor, the highest honour in the country for a scholar, a position he held for 15 years. In 1986, the S.N. Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences was established by an act of Parliament, Government of India, in Salt Lake, Calcutta.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] Bose became an adviser to the then newly formed Council of Scientific and Industrial Research . He was the president of the Indian Physical Society and the National Institute of Science. He was elected general president of the Indian Science Congress . He was the vice president and then the president of Indian Statistical Institute . In 1958, he became a Fellow of the Royal Society .  He was nominated as member of Rajya Sabha .

Partha Ghose has stated that [ 7 ] Bose's work stood at the transition between the ' old quantum theory ' of Planck, Bohr and Einstein and the new quantum mechanics of Schrödinger , Heisenberg , Born , Dirac and others.

Nobel Prize nomination [ edit ] Bose was nominated by K. Banerjee (1956), D.S. Kothari (1959), S.N. Bagchi (1962), and A.K. Dutta (1962) for the Nobel Prize in Physics, for his contribution to Bose–Einstein statistics and the unified field theory . Banerjee, head of the Physics Department, University of Allahabad , in a letter of 12 January 1956 wrote to the Nobel Committee as follows: "(1). He (Bose) made very outstanding contributions to physics by developing the statistics known after his name as Bose statistics. In recent years this statistics is found to be of profound importance in the classifications of fundamental particles and has contributed immensely to the development of nuclear physics . (2). During the period from 1953 to date, he has made a number of highly interesting contributions of far-reaching consequences on the subject of Einstein's Unitary Field Theory ." Bose's work was evaluated by an expert of the Nobel Committee, Oskar Klein , who deemed his work not worthy of the Nobel Prize.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] Legacy [ edit ] Bose on a 1994 stamp of India Bosons , a class of elementary subatomic particles in particle physics were named by Dirac after Satyendra Nath Bose to commemorate his contributions to science.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] Soviet Nobel laureate Lev Landau kept a list of names of physicists which he ranked on a logarithmic scale of productivity ranging from 1 to 5. Albert Einstein was ranked 0.5. Landau awarded a rank of 1 to Bose along with the founding fathers of quantum mechanics , Niels Bohr , Werner Heisenberg , Paul Dirac and Erwin Schrödinger , and others. Landau ranked himself as a 2.5 but later promoted to a 2.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] Although seven Nobel Prizes were awarded for research related to S N Bose's concepts of the boson , Bose–Einstein statistics and Bose–Einstein condensate , Bose himself was not awarded the Nobel Prize.

In his book The Scientific Edge , physicist Jayant Narlikar observed: SN Bose's work on particle statistics (c. 1922), which clarified the behaviour of photons (the particles of light in an enclosure) and opened the door to new ideas on statistics of Microsystems that obey the rules of quantum theory, was one of the top ten achievements of 20th century Indian science and could be considered in the Nobel Prize class.

[ 42 ] When Bose himself was once asked that question, he replied, "I have got all the recognition I deserve." [ 43 ] One of the main academic buildings of University of Rajshahi , the No 1 science building has been named after him.

The 4 June 2022 Google Doodle featured Bose, on the 98th anniversary of his sending his work to Einstein.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] Works (selection) [ edit ] Bose (1924), "Plancks Gesetz und Lichtquantenhypothese", Zeitschrift für Physik (in German), 26 (1): 178– 181, Bibcode : 1924ZPhy...26..178B , doi : 10.1007/BF01327326 , S2CID 186235974 .

Notes [ edit ] ^ The English pronunciation is from the Hindustani, [səˈtjeːndrə ˈnaːtʰ ˈboːs] . The Bengali pronunciation is [ʃotːendronatʰ boʃu] .

References [ edit ] ^ a b Mehra, J. (1975). "Satyendra Nath Bose 1 January 1894 – 4 February 1974".

Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society .

21 : 116– 126.

doi : 10.1098/rsbm.1975.0002 .

S2CID 72507392 .

^ "Satyendra Nath Bose – Bengali physicist" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 3 June 2023 . Retrieved 5 December 2015 .

^ a b "S. N. Bose Biography Project" . July 2012.

Archived from the original on 17 October 2017 . Retrieved 24 July 2015 .

^ "Bose, Satyendra Nath" .

Lexico UK English Dictionary .

Oxford University Press . Archived from the original on 18 July 2021.

^ Wali 2009 , pp. xv, xxxiv.

^ a b Barran, Michel, "Bose, Satyendranath (1894–1974)", Science world (biography), Wolfram, archived from the original on 1 August 2018 , retrieved 24 January 2006 .

^ a b c d e f Mahanti, Dr Subodh.

"Satyendra Nath Bose, The Creator of Quantum Statistics" .

IN : Vigyan Prasar.

Archived from the original on 10 April 2016 . Retrieved 1 February 2012 .

^ Farmelo, Graham, "The Strangest Man", Notes on Dirac's lecture Developments in Atomic Theory at Le Palais de la Découverte, 6 December 1945 , UKNATARCHI Dirac Papers, p. 331, note 64, BW83/2/257889 .

^ Miller, Sean (18 March 2013).

Strung Together: The Cultural Currency of String Theory as a Scientific Imaginary . University of Michigan Press. p. 63.

ISBN 978-0-472-11866-3 .

^ Wali 2009 , p. xl.

^ Santimay Chatterjee; Enakshi Chattopadhyay (1987).

Satyendra Nath Bose .

National Book Trust . p. 10.

ISBN 978-81-237-0492-0 .

OCLC 857799092 .

OL 13132713M .

Wikidata Q125628281 .

Satyendra Nath was born in Calcutta on the first of January, 1894, in a high caste Kayastha family with two generations of English education behind him.

^ S J Chatterjee.

"SATYENDRA NATH BOSE (1894-1974) Foundation Fellow 1935: page 59" (PDF) .

insaindia.res.in .

Indian National Science Academy . p. 2.

^ a b c Kamble, Dr VB (January 2002).

"Vigyan Prasar" .

Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 10 December 2006 .

^ Wali 2009 , p. xvii.

^ Masters, Barry R. (April 2013).

"Satyendra Nath Bose and Bose–Einstein Statistics" (PDF) .

Optics & Photonics News .

24 (4): 41.

Bibcode : 2013OptPN..24...40M .

doi : 10.1364/OPN.24.4.000040 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 April 2016 . Retrieved 17 December 2015 .

^ Wali 2009 , p. 454-455.

^ "Vigyan Prasar – SC Bose" .

www.vigyanprasar.gov.in . Government of India.

Archived from the original on 10 April 2016 . Retrieved 14 June 2017 .

^ Wali 2009 , p. xvi.

^ Md Mahbub Murshed (2012), "Bose, Satyendra Nath" , in Sirajul Islam and Ahmed A. Jamal (ed.), Banglapedia: National Encyclopedia of Bangladesh (Second ed.), Asiatic Society of Bangladesh , archived from the original on 7 January 2019 , retrieved 6 July 2016 ^ Wali 2009 , pp. xvii, xviii, xx.

^ Bose, S. N. (1994).

"Planck's Law and the Light Quantum Hypothesis" (PDF) .

Journal of Astrophysics and Astronomy .

15 : 3– 7.

Bibcode : 1994JApA...15....3B .

doi : 10.1007/BF03010400 .

S2CID 121808581 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 October 2021 . Retrieved 2 February 2018 .

^ a b Shanbhag, MR.

"Scientist" .

Personalities . Calcutta web. Archived from the original on 2 August 2002.

^ a b O'Connor, JJ; Robertson, EF (October 2003).

"Satyendranath Bose" .

The MacTutor History of Mathematics archive . UK: St Andrew's.

Archived from the original on 18 September 2015 . Retrieved 1 February 2012 .

^ Wali 2009 , pp. xx–xxiii.

^ Shanbhag, MR.

"Satyendra Nath Bose (January 1, 1894 – February 4, 1974)" . Indian Statistical Institute.

Archived from the original on 28 May 2012 . Retrieved 1 February 2012 .

^ Venkataraman, G (1992), Bose And His Statistics , Universities Press, p. 14, ISBN 978-81-7371-036-0 ^ a b Wali 2009 , p. 414.

^ "Quantum Physics; Bose Einstein condensate" , Image Gallery , NIST, 11 March 2006, archived from the original on 16 May 2012 , retrieved 12 April 2012 .

^ A.Douglas Stone, Chapter 24, The Indian Comet , in the book Einstein and the Quantum , Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 2013.

^ Wali 2009 , pp. xxx, xxiv.

^ Wali 2009 , pp. xxxvi, xxxviii.

^ Wali 2009 , pp. xxiv, xxxix.

^ Wali 2009 , pp. xxxiv, xxxviii.

^ Ghose, Partha (3 January 2012), "Original vision" , The Telegraph (Opinion), IN , archived from the original on 25 February 2014 .

^ Singh, Rajinder (2016) India's Nobel Prize Nominators and Nominees – The Praxis of Nomination and Geographical Distribution , Shaker Publisher, Aachen, pp. 26–27.

ISBN 978-3-8440-4315-0 ^ Singh, Rajinder (2016) Die Nobelpreise und die indische Elite , Shaker Verlag, Aachen, pp. 24–25.

ISBN 978-3-8440-4429-4 ^ Singh, Rajinder (2016) Chemistry and Physics Nobel Prizes – India's Contribution , Shaker Verlag, Aachen.

ISBN 978-3-8440-4669-4 .

^ Daigle, Katy (10 July 2012).

"India: Enough about Higgs, let's discuss the boson" .

AP News .

Archived from the original on 16 March 2019 . Retrieved 10 July 2012 .

^ Bal, Hartosh Singh (19 September 2012).

"The Bose in the Boson" .

New York Times blog .

Archived from the original on 22 September 2012 . Retrieved 21 September 2012 .

^ "New Einsteins need positive environment, independent spirit" (PDF) . November 2006.

^ Montaner, Jordi (5 May 2010).

"As a student, Landau dared to correct Einstein in a lecture: Lev P. Pitaevskii" . Archived from the original on 9 November 2013.

^ Narlikar, Jayant V (2003), The Scientific Edge: The Indian Scientist from Vedic to Modern Times , Penguin Books, p. 127, ISBN 978-0-14-303028-7 .  The work of other 20th century Indian scientists which Narlikar considered to be of Nobel Prize class were Srinivasa Ramanujan , Chandrasekhara Venkata Raman and Megh Nad Saha .

^ Alikhan, Anvar (16 July 2012).

"The Spark in a Crowded Field" .

Outlook India .

Archived from the original on 9 July 2012 . Retrieved 10 July 2012 .

^ "Google Doodle : বিশ্ব মঞ্চে শ্রেষ্ঠ শিরোপা! বিজ্ঞানী Satyendra Nath Bose-কে সম্মান গুগলের" .

The Bengali Chronicle (in Bengali). 4 June 2022.

Archived from the original on 10 August 2022 . Retrieved 10 August 2022 .

^ "Celebrating Satyendra Nath Bose" .

www.google.com .

Archived from the original on 11 June 2022 . Retrieved 4 June 2022 .

^ "Satyendra Nath Bose: Google Pays Tribute To Indian Physicist With Special Doodle" .

NDTV.com .

Archived from the original on 16 June 2022 . Retrieved 4 June 2022 .

External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original works by or about: Satyendra Nath Bose Wikimedia Commons has media related to Satyendranath Bose .

Works by or about Satyendra Nath Bose at the Internet Archive Satyendra Nath Bose at the Encyclopædia Britannica Pais, Abraham (1982), Subtle is the Lord...: The Science and Life of Albert Einstein , Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, pp.

423– 34, ISBN 978-0-19-853907-0 .

Saha; Srivasthava, Heat and thermodynamics .

Pitaevskii, Lev ; Stringari, Sandro (2003), Bose–Einstein Condensation , Oxford: Clarendon Press .

Wali, Kameshwar C (2009), Satyendra Nath Bose: his life and times (selected works with commentary), Singapore: World Scientific, ISBN 978-981-279-070-5 O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Satyendra Nath Bose" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews "Bosons – The Birds That Flock and Sing Together" , Vigyan Prasar , IN , January 2002 (biography of Bose and Bose–Einstein Condensation).

S.N. Bose Scholars Program , Wisc, 25 April 2023 .

The Quantum Indians: film on Bose, Raman and Saha on YouTube by Raja Choudhury and produced by PSBT and Indian Public Diplomacy .

Academic offices Preceded by Indira Devi Chaudhurani Upacharya , Vishwa Bharati 1956–58 Succeeded by Khitishchandra Chaudhuri v t e Recipients of Padma Vibhushan Arts Ebrahim Alkazi Kishori Amonkar Prabha Atre Amitabh Bachchan Teejan Bai M. Balamuralikrishna T. Balasaraswati S. P. Balasubrahmanyam Asha Bhosle Nandalal Bose Hariprasad Chaurasia Chiranjeevi Girija Devi Kumar Gandharva Adoor Gopalakrishnan Satish Gujral Gangubai Hangal Bhupen Hazarika M. F. Husain Zakir Hussain Ilaiyaraaja Semmangudi Srinivasa Iyer Bhimsen Joshi Ali Akbar Khan Amjad Ali Khan Allauddin Khan Bismillah Khan Ghulam Mustafa Khan Yamini Krishnamurthy Dilip Kumar Kumudini Lakhia R. K. Laxman Birju Maharaj Kishan Maharaj Lata Mangeshkar Sonal Mansingh Mallikarjun Mansur Zubin Mehta Mario Miranda Chhannulal Mishra Kelucharan Mohapatra Raghunath Mohapatra Jasraj Motiram Benode Behari Mukherjee Hrishikesh Mukherjee Rajinikanth Ram Narayan D. K. Pattammal K. Shankar Pillai Balwant Moreshwar Purandare Akkineni Nageswara Rao Kaloji Narayana Rao Satyajit Ray S. H. Raza Zohra Sehgal Uday Shankar Ravi Shankar V. Shantaram Shivkumar Sharma Sharda Sinha Umayalpuram K. Sivaraman M. S. Subbulakshmi L. Subramaniam K. G. Subramanyan Kapila Vatsyayan Homai Vyarawalla K. J. Yesudas Civil service Bimala Prasad Chaliha Naresh Chandra T. N. Chaturvedi Jayanto Nath Chaudhuri Suranjan Das Rajeshwar Dayal Basanti Devi P. N. Dhar Jyotindra Nath Dixit M. S. Gill Hafiz Mohamad Ibrahim H. V. R. Iyengar Bhola Nath Jha Dattatraya Shridhar Joshi Ajudhiya Nath Khosla Rai Krishnadasa V. Krishnamurthy P. Prabhakar Kumaramangalam Pratap Chandra Lal K. B. Lall Sam Manekshaw Om Prakash Mehra Mohan Sinha Mehta M. G. K. Menon Brajesh Mishra Sumati Morarjee A. Ramasamy Mudaliar Sardarilal Mathradas Nanda Chakravarthi V. Narasimhan Braj Kumar Nehru Bhairab Dutt Pande Ghananand Pande Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit T. V. Rajeswar C. R. Krishnaswamy Rao Pattadakal Venkanna R. Rao V. K. R. V. Rao Bipin Rawat Khusro Faramurz Rustamji Harish Chandra Sarin Binay Ranjan Sen Homi Sethna Arjan Singh Harbaksh Singh Kirpal Singh Manmohan Singh Tarlok Singh Lallan Prasad Singh Balaram Sivaraman Chandrika Prasad Srivastava T. Swaminathan Arun Shridhar Vaidya Dharma Vira Narinder Nath Vohra Literature and education V. S. R. Arunachalam Jagdish Bhagwati Satyendra Nath Bose Tara Chand Suniti Kumar Chatterji D. P. Chattopadhyaya Bhabatosh Datta Avinash Dixit Mahasweta Devi John Kenneth Galbraith Sarvepalli Gopal Lakshman Shastri Joshi Kaka Kalelkar Dhondo Keshav Karve Gopinath Kaviraj Radheshyam Khemka Kuvempu O. N. V. Kurup Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis Sitakant Mahapatra John Mathai Kotha Satchidananda Murthy Giani Gurmukh Singh Musafir Basanti Dulal Nagchaudhuri M. T. Vasudevan Nair Bal Ram Nanda R. K. Narayan P. Parameswaran Amrita Pritam K. N. Raj C. Rangarajan Raja Rao Ramoji Rao Hormasji Maneckji Seervai Rajaram Shastri Kalu Lal Shrimali Govindbhai Shroff Khushwant Singh Chandeshwar Prasad Narayan Singh Premlila Vithaldas Thackersey Mahadevi Varma Bashir Hussain Zaidi Medicine Jasbir Singh Bajaj B. K. Goyal Purshotam Lal A. Lakshmanaswami Mudaliar S. I. Padmavati Autar Singh Paintal D. Nageshwara Reddy Kantilal Hastimal Sancheti Balu Sankaran V. Shanta Vithal Nagesh Shirodkar Prakash Narain Tandon Brihaspati Dev Triguna M. S. Valiathan Dilip Mahalanabis Other Sunderlal Bahuguna B. K. S. Iyengar Rambhadracharya Ravi Shankar Vishwesha Teertha Jaggi Vasudev B. V. Doshi Public affairs L. K. Advani Montek Singh Ahluwalia Aruna Asaf Ali Fazal Ali Adarsh Sein Anand Madhav Shrihari Aney Parkash Singh Badal Sikander Bakht Milon K. Banerji Mirza Hameedullah Beg P. N. Bhagwati Raja Chelliah Chandra Kisan Daphtary Niren De C. D. Deshmukh Anthony Lancelot Dias Uma Shankar Dikshit Kazi Lhendup Dorjee George Fernandes P. B. Gajendragadkar Benjamin Gilman Ismaïl Omar Guelleh Zakir Husain V. R. Krishna Iyer Jagmohan Lakshmi Chand Jain Arun Jaitley Aditya Nath Jha Murli Manohar Joshi Anerood Jugnauth Mehdi Nawaz Jung Ali Yavar Jung Vijay Kelkar Hans Raj Khanna V. N. Khare Jagdish Singh Khehar Balasaheb Gangadhar Kher Akhlaqur Rahman Kidwai Jivraj Narayan Mehta V. K. Krishna Menon Hirendranath Mukherjee Ajoy Mukherjee Pranab Mukherjee Padmaja Naidu Venkaiah Naidu Gulzarilal Nanda Govind Narain Fali Sam Nariman Hosei Norota Nanabhoy Palkhivala K. Parasaran Hari Vinayak Pataskar Sunder Lal Patwa Sharad Pawar Naryana Raghvan Pillai Sri Prakasa N. G. Ranga Ravi Narayana Reddy Y. Venugopal Reddy Ghulam Mohammed Sadiq Lakshmi Sahgal P. A. Sangma M. C. Setalvad Kalyan Singh Karan Singh Nagendra Singh Swaran Singh Walter Sisulu Soli Sorabjee Kalyan Sundaram Sushma Swaraj Chandulal Madhavlal Trivedi Atal Bihari Vajpayee M. N. Venkatachaliah Kottayan Katankot Venugopal Jigme Dorji Wangchuck S. M. Krishna Mulayam Singh Yadav Science and engineering V. K. Aatre Salim Ali Norman Borlaug Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar Rajagopala Chidambaram Charles Correa Satish Dhawan Anil Kakodkar A. P. J. Abdul Kalam Krishnaswamy Kasturirangan Har Gobind Khorana Daulat Singh Kothari Verghese Kurien Raghunath Anant Mashelkar G. Madhavan Nair Roddam Narasimha Jayant Narlikar Rajendra K. Pachauri Benjamin Peary Pal Yash Pal I. G. Patel Venkatraman Ramakrishnan K. R. Ramanathan Raja Ramanna C. R. Rao C. N. R. Rao Palle Rama Rao Udupi Ramachandra Rao Vikram Sarabhai Man Mohan Sharma Obaid Siddiqi E. Sreedharan M. R. Srinivasan George Sudarshan M. S. Swaminathan Narinder Singh Kapany S. R. Srinivasa Varadhan Social work Baba Amte Pandurang Shastri Athavale Janaki Devi Bajaj Mirabehn Kamaladevi Chattopadhyay Durgabai Deshmukh Nanaji Deshmukh Nirmala Deshpande Mohan Dharia U. N. Dhebar Valerian Gracias Veerendra Heggade Mary Clubwala Jadhav Gaganvihari Lallubhai Mehta Usha Mehta Sister Nirmala Nellie Sengupta Sports Viswanathan Anand Edmund Hillary Mary Kom Sachin Tendulkar Trade and industry Dhirubhai Ambani Ghanshyam Das Birla Ashok Sekhar Ganguly Karim Al Hussaini Aga Khan Lakshmi Mittal Anil Manibhai Naik N. R. Narayana Murthy M. Narasimham Prithvi Raj Singh Oberoi Azim Premji Prathap C. Reddy Osamu Suzuki J. R. D. Tata Ratan Tata Portal Category WikiProject v t e Bengal Renaissance People Sri Aurobindo Atul Prasad Sen Rajnarayan Basu Debendra Mohan Bose Jagadish Chandra Bose Subhash Chandra Bose Satyendra Nath Bose Madhusudan Gupta Bethune Upendranath Brahmachari Bankim Chandra Chatterjee Sarat Chandra Chattopadhyay Akshay Kumar Datta Henry Derozio Alexander Duff Michael Madhusudan Dutt Romesh Chunder Dutt Anil Kumar Gain Kadambini Ganguly Monomohun Ghose Ramgopal Ghosh David Hare Kazi Nazrul Islam Eugène Lafont Mahanambrata Brahmachari Ashutosh Mukherjee Kalikrishna Mitra Harish Chandra Mukherjee Ramakrishna Paramahamsa Upendrakishore Ray Chowdhury Raja Ram Mohan Roy Meghnad Saha Akshay Chandra Sarkar Mahendralal Sarkar Brajendra Nath Seal Girish Chandra Sen Keshub Chandra Sen Haraprasad Shastri Debendranath Tagore Rabindranath Tagore Satyendranath Tagore Jnanadanandini Devi Fanindra Nath Gooptu Sitanath Tattwabhushan Brahmabandhav Upadhyay Ram Chandra Vidyabagish Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar Swami Vivekananda Paramahansa Yogananda Begum Rokeya Culture Bengali literature Bengali poetry Bengali music Bangiya Sahitya Parishad Bhadralok Brahmoism Brahmo Samaj Gaudiya Math Mahanam Sampraday Nazrul geeti Rabindra Nritya Natya Rabindra Sangeet Sambad Prabhakar Satyagraha Self-Realization Fellowship Yogoda Satsanga Swadeshi Tattwabodhini Patrika Young Bengal Education Chittagong College Indian Statistical Institute Hindu School Jadavpur University Presidency University University of Calcutta Bethune College University of Dhaka Visva-Bharati University Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Poland Israel Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Satyendra_Nath_Bose&oldid=1301793208 " Categories : Satyendra Nath Bose 1894 births 1974 deaths Hindu School, Kolkata alumni Presidency University, Kolkata alumni Bengali Hindus Bengali mathematicians Bengali physicists Fellows of the Royal Society Fellows of the Indian National Science Academy 20th-century Indian mathematicians Thermodynamicists Scientists from Kolkata Academic staff of the University of Dhaka University of Calcutta alumni Academic staff of the University of Calcutta Recipients of the Padma Vibhushan in literature & education People associated with Santiniketan Indian theoretical physicists Nominated members of the Rajya Sabha 20th-century Indian physicists 20th-century Indian chemists Hidden categories: Pages with Hindustani IPA Pages with Bengali IPA CS1 Bengali-language sources (bn) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from October 2013 Use dmy dates from August 2017 Biography with signature Articles with hCards Pages using Template:Post-nominals with customized linking CS1 German-language sources (de) Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 18:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Satyendra Nath Bose 78 languages Add topic

