Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The common good 2 Conditions 3 Notable pluralists (alphabetical) 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References Toggle the table of contents Pluralism (political philosophy) 47 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt ייִדיש 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Recognition and affirmation of diversity and coexistence within a political body This article is about pluralism as a political philosophy. For the theory that political power in society does not lie with the electorate but is distributed between a wide number of groups, see Pluralism (political theory) . For other uses, see Pluralism (disambiguation) .

Pluralism as a political philosophy is the diversity within a political body, which is seen to permit the peaceful coexistence of different interests, convictions, ideologies and lifestyles.

[ 1 ] While not all political pluralists advocate for a pluralist democracy , this is the most common stance, because democracy is often viewed as the most fair and effective way to moderate between discrete values.

[ 2 ] Political theorist Isaiah Berlin , a strong supporter of pluralism, wrote: "let us have the courage of our admitted ignorance, of our doubts and uncertainties. At least we can try to discover what others ... require, by ... making it possible for ourselves to know men as they truly are, by listening to them carefully and sympathetically, and understanding them and their lives and their needs... ." [ 3 ] Pluralism thus tries to encourage members of society to accommodate their differences by avoiding extremism (adhering solely to one value, or at the very least refusing to recognize others as legitimate) and engaging in good faith dialogue. Pluralists also seek the construction or reform of social institutions in order to reflect and balance competing principles.

One of the more famous arguments for institutional pluralism came from James Madison in The Federalist paper number 10 . Madison feared that factionalism would lead to in-fighting in the new American republic and devotes this paper to questioning how best to avoid such an occurrence. He posits that to avoid factionalism, it is best to allow many competing factions (advocating different primary principles) to prevent any one from dominating the political system . This relies, to a degree, on a series of disturbances changing the influences of groups so as to avoid institutional dominance and ensure competition.

[ citation needed ] Like Edmund Burke , this view concerns itself with balance, and subordinating any single abstract principle to a plurality or realistic harmony of interests. Pluralism recognizes that certain conditions may make good-faith negotiation impossible, and therefore also focuses on what institutional structures can best modify or prevent such a situation. Pluralism advocates institutional design in keeping with a form of pragmatic realism here, with the preliminary adoption of suitable existing socio-historical structures where necessary. One of the problems plaguing any discussion of pluralism is that it is a multi-faceted concept. There are at least four distinct ways in which the term pluralism has been used.

[ 4 ] William E. Connolly challenges older theories of pluralism by arguing for pluralization as a goal rather than as a state of affairs. Connolly's argument for the "multiplication of factions" follows James Madison 's logic in engaging groups, constituencies, and voters at both the micro and macro level. Essentially, he has shifted the theory from a conservative theory of order, to a progressive theory of democratic contestation and engagement.

[ 5 ] Connolly introduces the distinction between pluralism and pluralization . Pluralism, whether the interest-group pluralism of Robert A. Dahl or political liberalism's "reasonable" pluralism, is oriented towards existing diversity of groups, values, and identities competing for political representation. Pluralization, by contrast, names the emergence of new interests, identities, values, and differences raising claims to representation not currently legible within the existing pluralist imaginary.

[ 6 ] The common good [ edit ] Pluralism is connected with the hope that this process of conflict and dialogue will result in a quasi- common good . This common good is not an abstract value or set in stone, however, but an attempt at balancing competing social interests and will thus constantly shift given present social conditions. Proponents in the contemporary political philosophy of such a view include Isaiah Berlin , Stuart Hampshire and Bernard Williams . An earlier version of political pluralism was a strong current in the formation of modern social democracy (to balance socialist and capitalist ideals), with theorists such as the early Harold Laski and G. D. H. Cole , as well as other leading members of the British Fabian Society . In the United States, President Dwight Eisenhower 's "middle way" was arguably motivated by a belief in political pluralism.

[ 7 ] While advocated by many pluralists, pluralism need not embrace social democracy given it does not a priori assume a desirable political system. Rather, pluralists advocate one based on the pre-existing traditions and cognizable interests of a given society, and the political structure most likely to harmonize these factors. Thus, pluralists have also included Michael Oakeshott and John Kekes , proponents of something close to liberal conservatism (although will often reject such political labels). What pluralists certainly do have in common is the notion that a single vision or ideological schema, whether Marxism or unbridled neoliberalism , is likely too simplistic and rigid to advocate human beings' natural plurality of values. Pluralists likewise reject historicism and utopian thinking. While some, like John N. Gray , repudiate historical progress altogether, others, like Edmund Burke , indicate that human progress has occurred, as a function of improved social harmony.

Conditions [ edit ] For pluralism to function and to be successful in defining the common good, all groups have to agree to a minimal consensus that shared values are at least worth pursuing. The most important baseline value is thus that of mutual respect , understanding or tolerance . If no such dialogue is possible, extremism and physical coercion are likely inevitable.

Notable pluralists (alphabetical) [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( November 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) John Adams Samuel Adams Hannah Arendt Aristotle Hilaire Belloc Isaiah Berlin Edmund Burke Thomas Carlyle G. K. Chesterton Robert Dahl Charles Darwin Dorothy Day René Descartes Paul Feyerabend (later) Benjamin Franklin Sigmund Freud Mahatma Gandhi Edward Gibbon John N. Gray Alexander Hamilton Thomas Hobbes Victor Hugo David Hume William James Thomas Jefferson John Maynard Keynes C. S. Lewis Abraham Lincoln John Locke George MacDonald James Madison Joseph de Maistre William McKinley Thomas Merton John Stuart Mill John Milton Michel de Montaigne Montesquieu John Henry Newman Friedrich Nietzsche Flannery O'Connor Michael Oakeshott (later) Thomas Paine Charles Sanders Peirce Plato Karl Popper Joseph Raz Franklin D. Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Jean-Jacques Rousseau Adam Smith Socrates Baruch Spinoza Alexis de Tocqueville J. R. R. Tolkien Mark Twain Voltaire George Washington Bernard Williams See also [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Pluralism (political philosophy) .

Anekantavada Liberal democracy Moderation Plurationalism Value pluralism Notes [ edit ] ^ "Theories of American Democracy" ^ Flathman, Richard E. (2005).

Pluralism and Liberal Democracy . Johns Hopkins University Press.

ISBN 080188215X .

^ Cherniss, Joshua; Hardy, Henry (1 January 2016). Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University – via Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

^ Kazemzadeh, Hamed (Winter 2020).

"Hamed Kazemzadeh: Democratic platform in Social Pluralism" .

Internal Journal of Acpcs (10).

^ Connolly, William E.

; Chambers, Samuel Allen; Carver, Terrell (2007).

Democracy, pluralism and political theory . London, England: Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group.

ISBN 9780415431224 .

OCLC 133465498 .

^ Connolly, William E.

(2005).

Pluralism . Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press .

ISBN 0822335549 .

OCLC 57319610 .

^ Thomas, Wagner, Steven (1 January 1999).

"Pursuing the "middle way": Eisenhower Republicanism, 1952–1964" . pp.

1– 282.

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) References [ edit ] Rajiv Krishnan Kozhikode and Jiatao Li, "Political pluralism, public policies, and organizational choices: banking branch expansion in India, 1948–2003," Academy of Management Journal , 55(2), 339–359.

Pluralism and Liberal Democracy , Richard E. Flatham (2005).

"Isaiah Berlin" Morality and Conflict , Hampshire, Stuart (1983).

From Pluralist to Patriotic Politics , Blattberg, Charles (2000).

Democratic platform in Social Pluralism , Kazemzadeh, Hamed (2020).

Liberty , Berlin, Isaiah (2002).

In the Beginning Was the Deed , Williams, Bernard (2005).

"Michael Oakeshott and Modern Conservatism" On legal pluralism and communities, see: Gad Barzilai , Communities and Law: Politics and Cultures of Legal Identities. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2003.

v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Authority control databases National Germany Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pluralism_(political_philosophy)&oldid=1302369104 " Categories : Pluralism (philosophy) Political theories Liberalism Left-wing politics Power sharing Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2022 Articles needing additional references from November 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 00:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pluralism (political philosophy) 47 languages Add topic

