Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Bioinformatic services Toggle Bioinformatic services subsection 1.1 BLAST 1.2 Clustal Omega 1.3 Ensembl 1.4 PDB 1.5 UniProt 1.6 AlphaFold DB 2 Other bioinformatics organisations 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents European Bioinformatics Institute 15 languages العربية Asturianu Català Deutsch Español Français Galego 한국어 Italiano Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Português Română 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Centre for research European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI) Abbreviation EMBL-EBI Formation 1994 [ 1 ] Location Wellcome Genome Campus , Hinxton , Cambridgeshire, UK Coordinates 52.079889, 0.186356 Director Ewan Birney [ 2 ] Associate Director Rolf Apweiler [ 2 ] Parent organization European Molecular Biology Laboratory Staff 685 [ 3 ] Website www .ebi .ac .uk The European Bioinformatics Institute ( EMBL-EBI ) is an intergovernmental organization (IGO) which, as part of the European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL) family, focuses on research and services in bioinformatics . It is located on the Wellcome Genome Campus in Hinxton near Cambridge , and employs over 600 full-time equivalent (FTE) staff.

[ 4 ] Further, the EMBL-EBI hosts training programs that teach scientists the fundamentals of the work with biological data and promote the plethora of bioinformatic tools available for their research, both EMBL-EBI-based and not so.

Bioinformatic services [ edit ] One of the roles of the EMBL-EBI is to index and maintain biological data in a set of databases, including Ensembl (housing whole genome sequence data), UniProt (protein sequence and annotation database) and Protein Data Bank (protein and nucleic acid tertiary structure database). A variety of online services and tools is provided, such as Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) or Clustal Omega sequence alignment tool, enabling further data analysis.

BLAST [ edit ] BLAST [ 5 ] is an algorithm for comparing biomacromolecule primary structure, most often nucleotide sequence of DNA /RN, and amino acid sequence of proteins, stored in the bioinformatic databases, with the query sequence. The algorithm uses scoring of the available sequences against the query by a scoring matrix such as BLOSUM 62. The highest scoring sequences represent the closest relatives of the query, in terms of functional and evolutionary similarity.

[ 6 ] The database search by BLAST requires input data to be in a correct format (e.g.

FASTA , GenBank, PIR or EMBL format). Users may also designate the specific databases to be searched, select scoring matrices to be used and other parameters prior to the tool run. The best hits in the BLAST results are ordered according to their calculated E-value (the probability of the presence of a similarly or higher-scoring hit in the database by chance).

[ 7 ] Clustal Omega [ edit ] Clustal Omega [ 8 ] is a multiple sequence alignment (MSA) tool that enables to find an optimal alignment of at least three and maximum of 4000 input DNA and protein sequences.

[ 9 ] Clustal Omega algorithm employs two profile Hidden Markov models (HMMs) to derive the final alignment of the sequences. The output of the Clustal Omega may be visualized in a guide tree (the phylogenetic relationship of the best-pairing sequences) or ordered by the mutual sequence similarity between the queries.

[ 10 ] The main advantage of Clustal Omega over other MSA tools (Muscle, ProbCons ) is its efficiency, while maintaining a significant accuracy of the results.

Ensembl [ edit ] Based at the EMBL-EBI, the Ensembl [ 11 ] is a database organized around genomic data, maintained by the Ensembl Project . Tasked with the continuous annotation of the genomes of model organisms , Ensembl provides researchers a comprehensive resource of relevant biological information about each specific genome. The annotation of the stored reference genomes is automatic and sequence-based. Ensembl encompasses a publicly available genome database which can be accessed via a web browser. The stored data can be interacted with using a graphical UI, which supports the display of data in multiple resolution levels from karyotype, through individual genes, to nucleotide sequence.

[ 12 ] Originally centered on vertebrate animals as its main field of interest, since 2009 Ensembl provides annotated data regarding the genomes of plants, fungi, invertebrates, bacteria and other species, in the sister project Ensembl Genomes . As of 2020, [update] the various Ensembl project databases together house over 50,000 reference genomes.

[ 13 ] PDB [ edit ] Protein Data Bank (PDB) [ 14 ] is a database of three dimensional structures of biological macromolecules, such as proteins and nucleic acids. The data are typically obtained by X-ray crystallography or nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR spectroscopy), and submitted manually by structural biologists worldwide through PDB member organizations – PDBe , RCSB, PDBj and BMRB. The database can be accessed through the webpages of its members, including PDBe (housed at the EMBL-EBI). As a member of the Worldwide Protein Data Bank (wwPDB) consortium, PDBe aids in the joint mission of archiving and maintenance of macromolecular structure data.

[ 15 ] UniProt [ edit ] UniProt is an online repository of protein sequence and annotation data, distributed in UniProt Knowledgebase (UniProt KB), UniProt Reference Clusters (UniRef) and UniProt Archive (UniParc) databases. Originally conceived as the individual ventures of EMBL-EBI, Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB) (together maintaining Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL) and Protein Information Resource (PIR) (housing Protein Sequence Database), the increase in the global protein data generation led to their collaboration in the creation of UniProt in 2002.

[ 16 ] The protein entries stored in UniProt are cataloged by a unique UniProt identifier. The annotation data collected for the each entry are organized in logical sections (e.g. protein function, structure, expression, sequence or relevant publications), allowing a coordinated overview about the protein of interest. Links to external databases and original sources of data are also provided. In addition to standard search by the protein name/identifier, UniProt webpage houses tools for BLAST searching, sequence alignment or searching for proteins containing specific peptides.

[ 17 ] AlphaFold DB [ edit ] The AlphaFold Protein Structure Database (AlphaFold DB) is a collaborative project with Google DeepMind to make predicted protein structures from the AlphaFold AI system freely available to the scientific community.

[ 18 ] The first release of the database was in 2021; as of 2024 [update] , AlphaFold DB provides access to over 214 million protein structures.

[ 19 ] Other bioinformatics organisations [ edit ] National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI), United States National Library of Medicine National Institute of Genetics ( DNA Data Bank of Japan ) Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB: Expasy ) Australia Bioinformatics Resource BIG Data Center (National Genomics Data Center), Beijing Institute of Genomics , Chinese Academy of Sciences The European Bioinformatics Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, UK See also [ edit ] Alternative splicing and transcript diversity database BioJS - open-source project for bioinformatics data on the web BioSamples European Molecular Biology Organization European Nucleotide Archive References [ edit ] ^ "Background | European Bioinformatics Institute" . Ebi.ac.uk. 16 May 2018 . Retrieved 29 October 2019 .

^ a b "Leadership" .

www.ebi.ac.uk . Retrieved 21 August 2024 .

^ "EMBL-EBI Highlights 2023" (PDF) (Press release). EMBL-EBI. 8 April 2024. p. 4.

^ "Scientific report" (PDF) .

www.embl.de . 2017 . Retrieved 29 October 2019 .

^ "NCBI BLAST at EMBL-EBI" .

www.ebi.ac.uk . Retrieved 3 November 2021 .

^ Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ (October 1990). "Basic local alignment search tool".

Journal of Molecular Biology .

215 (3): 403– 410.

doi : 10.1016/S0022-2836(05)80360-2 .

PMID 2231712 .

S2CID 14441902 .

^ Wheeler D, Bhagwat M (2007).

BLAST QuickStart . Methods in Molecular Biology. Vol. 395. Humana Press. pp.

149– 176.

PMC 4780883 .

PMID 17993672 .

^ "Clustal Omega at EMBL-EBI" .

ebi.ac.uk . Retrieved 3 November 2021 .

^ "Clustal Omega Documentation at EMBL-EBI" .

ebi.ac.uk . Retrieved 3 November 2021 .

^ Sievers F, Higgins DG (January 2018).

"Clustal Omega for making accurate alignments of many protein sequences" .

Protein Science .

27 (1): 135– 145.

doi : 10.1002/pro.3290 .

PMC 5734385 .

PMID 28884485 .

^ "Ensembl homepage" .

ensembl.org . Retrieved 3 November 2021 .

^ Howe KL, Achuthan P, Allen J, Allen J, Alvarez-Jarreta J, Amode MR, et al. (January 2021).

"Ensembl 2021" .

Nucleic Acids Research .

49 (D1): D884 – D891 .

doi : 10.1093/nar/gkaa942 .

PMC 7778975 .

PMID 33137190 .

^ "About the Ensembl Project" .

ensembl.org . Retrieved 3 November 2021 .

^ Burley, Stephen K.; et al. (January 2019).

"Protein Data Bank: the single global archive for 3D macromolecular structure data" .

Nucleic Acids Research .

47 (D1): D520 – D528 .

doi : 10.1093/nar/gky949 .

PMC 6324056 .

PMID 30357364 .

^ "About PDBe" .

ebi.ac.uk . Retrieved 3 November 2021 .

^ "About UniProt" .

uniprot.org . Retrieved 3 November 2021 .

^ Bateman, Alex; et al. (January 2021).

"UniProt: the universal protein knowledgebase in 2021" .

Nucleic Acids Research .

49 (D1): D480 – D489 .

doi : 10.1093/nar/gkaa1100 .

PMC 7778908 .

PMID 33237286 .

^ "AlphaFold Protein Structure Database" .

alphafold.ebi.ac.uk . Retrieved 22 August 2024 .

^ Varadi, Mihaly; Bertoni, Damian; Magana, Paulyna; Paramval, Urmila; Pidruchna, Ivanna; Radhakrishnan, Malarvizhi; Tsenkov, Maxim; Nair, Sreenath; Mirdita, Milot; Yeo, Jingi; Kovalevskiy, Oleg; Tunyasuvunakool, Kathryn; Laydon, Agata; Žídek, Augustin; Tomlinson, Hamish; Hariharan, Dhavanthi; Abrahamson, Josh; Green, Tim; Jumper, John; Birney, Ewan; Steinegger, Martin; Hassabis, Demis; Velankar, Sameer (5 January 2024).

"AlphaFold Protein Structure Database in 2024: providing structure coverage for over 214 million protein sequences" .

Nucleic Acids Research .

52 (D1): D368 – D375 .

doi : 10.1093/nar/gkad1011 .

PMC 10767828 .

v t e Bioinformatics Databases Sequence databases: GenBank , European Nucleotide Archive , DNA Data Bank of Japan and China National GeneBank Secondary databases: UniProt , database of protein sequences grouping together Swiss-Prot , TrEMBL and Protein Information Resource Other databases: BioNumbers , Protein Data Bank , Ensembl , InterPro , KEGG , and Gene Ontology Specialised genomic databases: BOLD , Saccharomyces Genome Database , FlyBase , VectorBase , WormBase , Rat Genome Database , PHI-base , Arabidopsis Information Resource , GISAID and Zebrafish Information Network Software BLAST Bowtie Clustal EMBOSS HMMER MUSCLE PANGOLIN SAMtools SOAP suite TopHat Other Server: ExPASy Rosalind (education platform) Institutions Broad Institute Computational Biology Department (CBD) Microsoft Research - University of Trento Centre for Computational and Systems Biology (COSBI) Database Center for Life Science (DBCLS) DNA Data Bank of Japan (DDBJ) European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI) European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL) Flatiron Institute J. Craig Venter Institute (JCVI) Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics (MPI-CBG) US National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Japanese Institute of Genetics Netherlands Bioinformatics Centre (NBIC) Philippine Genome Center (PGC) Scripps Research Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB) Wellcome Sanger Institute Whitehead Institute Organizations African Society for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology (ASBCB) Australia Bioinformatics Resource (EMBL-AR) European Molecular Biology network (EMBnet) International Nucleotide Sequence Database Collaboration (INSDC) International Society for Biocuration (ISB) International Society for Computational Biology (ISCB) Student Council (ISCB-SC) Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology (CSIR-IGIB) Japanese Society for Bioinformatics (JSBi) Meetings Basel Computational Biology Conference‎ ([BC 2 ]) European Conference on Computational Biology (ECCB) Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology (ISMB) International Conference on Bioinformatics (InCoB) International Conference on Computational Intelligence Methods for Bioinformatics and Biostatistics (CIBB) ISCB Africa ASBCB Conference on Bioinformatics Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing (PSB) Research in Computational Molecular Biology (RECOMB) File formats CRAM format FASTA format FASTQ format NeXML format Nexus format Pileup format SAM format Stockholm format VCF format GFF format GTF format Related topics Computational biology List of biobanks List of biological databases Molecular phylogenetics Sequencing Sequence database Sequence alignment Category Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National United States Italy Catalonia Portals : Biology Europe Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=European_Bioinformatics_Institute&oldid=1300881441 " Categories : Bioinformatics organizations Biological research institutes in the United Kingdom Buildings and structures in South Cambridgeshire District Hinxton Information technology organizations based in Europe International research institutes Molecular biology institutes Partner institutions of the University of Cambridge Research institutes established in 1992 Research institutes in Cambridgeshire Science and technology in Europe Systems science institutes 1992 establishments in England Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from May 2018 Use dmy dates from May 2018 Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2020 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2024 Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 22:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents European Bioinformatics Institute 15 languages Add topic

