Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 MIAUCE and Chaabane Djeraba 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Computer processing of body language 1 language Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( January 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The normal way that a computer functions manually is through a person that controls the computer. An individual generates computer actions with the use of either a computer mouse or keyboard .  However the latest technology and computer innovation might allow a computer to not only detect body language but also respond to it. Modern devices are being experimented with, that may potentially allow that computer related device to respond to and understand an individual's hand gesture , specific movement or facial expression .

In relation to computers and body language, research is being done with the use of mathematics in order to teach computers to interpret human movements, hand gestures and even facial expressions. This is different from the normal way people generally communicate with computers for example with the click of the mouse, keyboard, or any physical contact in general between the user and the computer.

MIAUCE and Chaabane Djeraba [ edit ] This type of research is being done by a group of European researchers and other scientists as well. There is also a project called MIAUCE (Multimodal interactions analysis and exploration of users within a Controlled Environment). This project has scientists working on making this sort of new advance in computer technology a reality.

Chaabane Djeraba , the project coordinator stated "The motivation of the project is to put humans in the loop of interaction between the computer and their environment." Researchers and scientists are trying to use their innovation and ideas in a way that can help them apply these modern technological devices to the daily needs of businesses and places people visit such as the mall or an airport. The project coordinator of MIAUCE stated "We would like to have a form of ambient intelligence where computers are completely hidden…this means a multimodal interface so people can interact with their environment. The computer sees their behavior and then extracts information useful for the user." This specific research group has developed a couple of different real life models of computer technology that will use body language as a means of communication and way to function.

See also [ edit ] Emotion recognition Facial recognition system Facial Action Coding System Machine translation of sign languages 3D pose estimation References [ edit ] Moursund, David. Brief Introduction to Educational Implications of Artificial Intelligence. Oregon: Dave Moursund, 2006. Print.

Braffort, Annelies.

Gesture-based Communication in Human-computer Interaction: International Gesture Workshop , GW '99, Gif-sur-Yvette, France, March 17–19, 1999 : Proceedings. Berlin: Springer, 1999. Print.

Fred, Ina.

"Gates: Natal to Bring Gesture Recognition to Windows Too." Cnetnews 14 July 2009: 1.

http://news.cnet.com . Ina Fred, 14 July 2009. Web. 18 Nov. 2010. < http://news.cnet.com/8301-13860_3-10286309-56.html >.

Hansen, Evan.

"Building a Better Computer Mouse." CNET News. CNET, 2 Oct. 2002. Web. 20 Nov. 2010. < http://news.cnet.com/2100-1023-960408.html >.

Unknown.

"How Computers Can Read Body Language." EUROPA - European Commission - Homepage. 22 Oct. 2010. Web. 22 Nov. 2010. < http://ec.europa.eu/research/headlines/news/article_10_10_22_en.html >.

Braffort, Annelies.

Gesture-based Communication in Human-computer Interaction: Proceedings . Berlin [etc.: Springer, 1999. Print.

Yang, Ming-Hsuan, and Narendra Ahuja .

Face Detection and Gesture Recognition for Human-computer Interaction . Boston: Kluwer Academic, 2001. Print.

External links [ edit ] Computers Detecting Body Language Artificial Intelligence John McCarthy Subfields of Computer Science Online Artificial Intelligence Resource Computers and Gestures Mathematics and Computer Science https://web.archive.org/web/20110717201127/http://www.faculty.iu-bremen.de/llinsen/publications/theses/Alen_Stojanov_Guided_Research_Report.pdf http://www.physorg.com/news/2010-11-human-computer-music-links-musical-gestures.html Tecce, J (1998).

"Eye movement control of computer functions" .

International Journal of Psychophysiology .

29 (3): 319– 325.

doi : 10.1016/S0167-8760(98)00020-8 .

PMID 9666385 .

v t e Nonverbal communication Modalities Physical Blushing Body language / Kinesics Body-to-body communication Facial expression Facial Action Coding System Microexpression Subtle expression Gesture List Speech-independent gestures Haptic communication Imitation Interpersonal synchrony Laughter Oculesics Eye contact Pupil dilation Olfaction Posture Proxemics Speech Affect Emotional prosody Paralanguage Intonation Loudness Prosody Rhythm Stress Tone Voice quality Social context Chronemics Conventions Display rules Habitus High-context and low-context cultures Interpersonal relationship Social norm Other Emoticon / Smiley One-bit message Missed call Silent service code Unconscious Microexpression Non-verbal leakage Multi-faceted Affect display Deception Emotion recognition First impression Intimacy Broader concepts Cognitive academic language proficiency Communication Emotional intelligence Nunchi People skills Semiotics Social behavior Social competence Social cue Social skills Unsaid Further information Disorders Aprosodia Asperger syndrome Autism Fragile X Pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified Childhood disintegrative disorder Rett syndrome Dyssemia Nonverbal learning disorder Social (pragmatic) communication disorder Neuroanatomy Limbic system / Limbic lobe Mirror neuron Applications Cold reading Lie detection Freudian slip Poker tell Targeted advertising Technology Computer processing of body language Emotion recognition in conversation Gesture recognition List of facial expression databases Sentiment analysis Key people Ray Birdwhistell Charles Darwin Paul Ekman Related Animal communication Behavioral communication Aggressive Assertive Passive Passive-aggressive Impression management Meta-communication Monastic sign lexicons Verbal communication Manual-tactile verbal Sign language Tactile signing Tadoma Art and literature Mime Mimoplastic art Subtext Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Computer_processing_of_body_language&oldid=1167593536 " Category : Human–computer interaction Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Articles lacking in-text citations from January 2012 All articles lacking in-text citations This page was last edited on 28 July 2023, at 18:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Computer processing of body language 1 language Add topic

