Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Laboratory tests Toggle Laboratory tests subsection 1.1 Shrinkage limit 1.2 Plastic limit 1.3 Liquid limit 1.3.1 Casagrande's method 1.3.2 Fall cone test 2 Derived limits Toggle Derived limits subsection 2.1 Plasticity index 2.2 Liquidity index 2.3 Consistency index 2.4 Flow index 2.5 Toughness index 2.6 Activity 3 Notes 4 References Toggle the table of contents Atterberg limits 18 languages العربية Català Čeština Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Italiano Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Geotechnical characteristics of a soil related to its water content The Atterberg limits are a basic measure of the critical water contents of a fine-grained soil : its shrinkage limit , plastic limit , and liquid limit .

Depending on its water content , soil may appear in one of four states: solid, semi-solid, plastic and liquid. In each state, the consistency and behavior of soil are different, and consequently so are its engineering properties. Thus, the boundary between each state can be defined based on a change in the soil's behavior. The Atterberg limits can be used to distinguish between silt and clay and to distinguish between different types of silts and clays. The water content at which soil changes from one state to the other is known as consistency limits, or Atterberg's limit.

These limits were created by Albert Atterberg , a Swedish chemist and agronomist , in 1911.

[ 1 ] They were later refined by Arthur Casagrande , an Austrian geotechnical engineer and a close collaborator of Karl Terzaghi (both pioneers of soil mechanics ).

Distinctions in soils are used in assessing soil which is to have a structure built on them. Soils when wet retain water, and some expand in volume ( smectite clay). The amount of expansion is related to the ability of the soil to take in water and its structural make-up (the type of minerals present: clay , silt , or sand ). These tests are mainly used on clayey or silty soils since these are the soils which expand and shrink when the moisture content varies. Clays and silts interact with water and thus change sizes and have varying shear strengths . Thus these tests are used widely in the preliminary stages of designing any structure to ensure that the soil will have the correct amount of shear strength and not too much change in volume as it expands and shrinks with different moisture contents.

Laboratory tests [ edit ] Shrinkage limit [ edit ] The shrinkage limit (SL) is the water content where further loss of moisture will not result in more volume reduction.

[ 2 ] The test to determine the shrinkage limit is ASTM International D4943. The shrinkage limit is much less commonly used than the liquid and plastic limits.

Plastic limit [ edit ] The plastic limit (PL) is determined by rolling out a thread of the fine portion of a soil on a flat, non-porous surface. The procedure is defined in ASTM Standard D 4318. If the soil is at a moisture content where its behavior is plastic, this thread will retain its shape down to a very narrow diameter.  The sample can then be remolded and the test repeated. As the moisture content falls due to evaporation, the thread will begin to break apart at larger diameters.

The plastic limit is defined as the gravimetric moisture content where the thread breaks apart at a diameter of 3.2 mm (about 1/8 inch). A soil is considered non-plastic if a thread cannot be rolled out down to 3.2 mm at any moisture possible.

[ 3 ] Liquid limit [ edit ] Casagrande cup in action The liquid  limit (LL) is conceptually defined as the water content at which the behavior of a clayey soil changes from the plastic state to the liquid state. However, the transition from plastic to liquid behavior is gradual over a range of water contents, and the shear strength of the soil is not actually zero at the liquid limit. The precise definition of the liquid limit is based on standard test procedures described below.

Casagrande's method [ edit ] Atterberg's original liquid limit test involved mixing a pat of clay in a round-bottomed porcelain bowl of 10–12 cm diameter. A groove was cut through the pat of clay with a spatula, and the bowl was then struck many times against the palm of one hand. Casagrande subsequently standardized the apparatus (by incorporating a crank-rotated cam mechanism to standardize the dropping action) and the procedures to make the measurement more repeatable. Soil is placed into the metal cup (Casagrande cup) portion of the device and a groove is made down at its center with a standardized tool of 2 millimetres (0.079 in) width. The cup is repeatedly dropped 10 mm onto a hard rubber base at a rate of 120 blows per minute, during which the groove closes up gradually as a result of the impact. The number of blows for the groove to close is recorded. The moisture content at which it takes 25 drops of the cup to cause the groove to close over a distance of 12.7 millimetres (0.50 in) is defined as the liquid limit. The test is normally run at several moisture contents, and the moisture content which requires 25 blows to close the groove is interpolated from the test results. The liquid limit test is defined by ASTM standard test method D 4318.

[ 4 ] The test method also allows running the test at one moisture content where 20 to 30 blows are required to close the groove; then a correction factor is applied to obtain the liquid limit from the moisture content.

[ 5 ] Fall cone test [ edit ] Another method for measuring the liquid limit is the fall cone test , also called the cone penetrometer test. It is based on the measurement of penetration into the soil of a standardized stainless steel cone of specific apex angle, length and mass. Although the Casagrande test is widely used across North America, the fall cone test is much more prevalent in Europe and elsewhere due to being less dependent on the operator in determining the liquid limit.

[ 6 ] Advantages over Casagrande Method It is easier to perform in laboratory.

The results from the cone penetrometer do not depend on the skills or the judgement of the operator. So, the results obtained are more reliable.

The results can be used to estimate the undrained shear strength of soils.

[ 7 ] Derived limits [ edit ] The values of these limits are used in several ways. There is also a close relationship between the limits and properties of soil, such as compressibility , permeability , and strength . This is thought to be very useful because as limit determination is relatively simple, it is more difficult to determine these other properties. Thus, the Atterberg limits are used to identify the soil's classification and allow for empirical correlations for some other engineering properties.

Plasticity index [ edit ] The plasticity index (PI) is a measure of the plasticity of soil. The plasticity index is the size of the range of water contents where the soil exhibits plastic properties. The PI is the difference between the liquid and plastic limits (PI = LL-PL). Soils with a high PI tend to be clay, those with a lower PI tend to be silt, and those with a PI of 0 (non-plastic) tend to have little or no silt or clay.

Soil descriptions based on PI: [ 8 ] (0) – Non-plastic (<7) – Slightly plastic (7-17) – Medium plastic (>17) – Highly plastic Liquidity index [ edit ] The liquidity index (LI) is used to scale the natural water content of a soil sample to the limit. It can be calculated as a ratio of the difference between natural water content, plastic limit, and liquid limit: LI=(W-PL)/(LL-PL), where W is the natural water content.

Consistency index [ edit ] The consistency index (Ic) indicates a soil's consistency (firmness). It is calculated as CI = (LL-W)/(LL-PL) , where W is the existing water content. The soil at the liquid limit will have a consistency index of 0, the soil at the plastic limit will have a consistency index of 1, and if W > LL, Ic is negative. That means the soil is in the liquid state. Moreover, the sum of the Liquidity index and Consistency index is equal to 1 (one) Flow index [ edit ] The curve obtained from the graph of water content against the log of blows while determining the liquid limit is almost straight and is known as the flow curve.

The equation for flow curve is: W = - I f Log N + C Where 'I f is the slope of flow curve and is termed as "Flow Index" [ 9 ] Toughness index [ edit ] The shearing strength of clay at the plastic limit is a measure of its toughness. It is the ratio of the plasticity index to the flow index. It gives us an idea of the shear strength of the soil.

[ 9 ] Activity [ edit ] The activity of soil is the ratio of the plasticity index to the clay size fraction . If activity is less than 0.75, the soil is inactive. If activity exceeds 1.4, then the soil is termed active. If activity lies within the above values, then the soil will be moderately active.

[ 10 ] Soil texture and Plasticity data NO Description Sand Silt Clay LL PI 1 Well graded loamy sand 88 10 2 16 NP 2 Well graded sandy loam 72 15 13 16 NP 3 Med graded sandy loam 73 9 18 22 4 4 Lean sandy silty clay 32 33 35 28 9 5 Lean silty clay 5 64 31 36 15 6 Loessial silt 5 85 10 26 2 7 Heavy clay 6 22 72 67 40 8 Poorly graded sand 94 6 6 NP NP Atterberg Limit Values for the Clay Minerals Mineral LL, % PL, % SL, % Montmorillonite 100-900 50-100 8.5-15 Nontronite 37-72 19-27 Illite 60-120 35-60 15-17 Kaolinite 30-110 25-40 25-29 Hydrated halloysite 50-70 47-60 Dehydrated halloysite 35-55 30-45 Attapulgite 160-230 100-120 Chlorite 44-47 36-40 Allopphane (undried) 200-250 130-140 Notes [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Atterberg limits .

^ "Brief history of Swedish Soil Mechanics" . Archived from the original on 2007-03-25 . Retrieved 2007-01-15 .

^ "Shrinkage Limit Test" (PDF) .

United States Army Corps of Engineers . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-01-02 . Retrieved 2006-12-21 .

^ Jamal, Haseeb.

"Atterberg's Limits" .

AboutCivil.Org . Retrieved 22 September 2019 .

^ "ASTM D4318 - 10 Standard Test Methods for Liquid Limit, Plastic Limit, and Plasticity Index of Soils" . ASTM. 2010 . Retrieved 2011-02-18 .

^ Seed HB, WOODWARD RJ, Lundgren R (1967).

"Fundamental Aspects of the Atterberg Limits" .

Journal of the Soil Mechanics and Foundations Division .

92 (SM4): 63– 64.

doi : 10.1061/JSFEAQ.0000685 .

^ BS 1377 part 2 ^ Llano-Serna, Marcelo A.; Contreras, Luis F. (2019-03-15).

"The effect of surface roughness and shear rate during fall-cone calibration" .

Géotechnique .

70 (4): 332– 342.

doi : 10.1680/jgeot.18.P.222 .

ISSN 0016-8505 .

S2CID 134061032 .

^ Sowers, 1979 ^ a b Jamal, Haseeb.

"Atterberg Limits Soil Classification - Liquid Limit, Plastic Limit, Shrinkage" .

www.aboutcivil.org . Retrieved 2020-07-01 .

^ Skempton, A.W. (1953).

"The Colloidal "Activity" of Clays" (PDF) . International Society For Soil Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2021-10-02 . Retrieved 2022-06-18 .

References [ edit ] Soil Physical Properties--Mechanics Seed, H.B. (1967). "Fundamental Aspects of the Atterberg Limits". Journal of Soil Mechanics and Foundations Div., 92(SM4), Retrieved from FUNDAMENTAL ASPECTS OF THE ATTERBERG LIMITS Das, B. M. (2006). Principles of geotechnical engineering. Stamford, CT: Thomson Learning College.

Sowers, 1979. Introductory Soil Mechanics and Foundations: Geotechnical Engineering, 4th Ed., Macmillan, New York. (as referenced in Coduto, 1999. Geotechnical Engineering: Principles and Practices. Prentice Hall. New Jersey.) v t e Geotechnical engineering Offshore geotechnical engineering Investigation and instrumentation Field ( in situ ) Core drill Cone penetration test Geo-electrical sounding Permeability test Load test Static Dynamic Statnamic Pore pressure measurement Piezometer Well Ram sounding Rock control drilling Rotary-pressure sounding Rotary weight sounding Sample series Screw plate test Deformation monitoring Inclinometer Settlement recordings Shear vane test Simple sounding Standard penetration test Total sounding Trial pit Visible bedrock Nuclear densometer test Exploration geophysics Crosshole sonic logging Pile integrity test Wave equation analysis Laboratory testing Soil classification Atterberg limits California bearing ratio Direct shear test Hydrometer Proctor compaction test R-value Sieve analysis Triaxial shear test Oedometer test Hydraulic conductivity tests Water content tests Soil Types Clay Silt Sand Gravel Peat Loam Loess Properties Hydraulic conductivity Water content Void ratio Bulk density Thixotropy Reynolds' dilatancy Angle of repose Friction angle Cohesion Porosity Permeability Specific storage Shear strength Sensitivity Structures ( Interaction ) Natural features Topography Vegetation Terrain Topsoil Water table Bedrock Subgrade Subsoil Earthworks Shoring structures Retaining walls Gabion Ground freezing Mechanically stabilized earth Pressure grouting Slurry wall Soil nailing Tieback Land development Landfill Excavation Trench Embankment Cut Causeway Terracing Cut-and-cover Cut and fill Fill dirt Grading Land reclamation Track bed Erosion control Earth structure Expanded clay aggregate Crushed stone Geosynthetics Geotextile Geomembrane Geosynthetic clay liner Cellular confinement Infiltration Foundations Shallow Deep Mechanics Forces Effective stress Pore water pressure Lateral earth pressure Overburden pressure Preconsolidation pressure Phenomena/ problems Permafrost Frost heaving Consolidation Compaction Earthquake Response spectrum Seismic hazard Shear wave Landslide analysis Stability analysis Mitigation Classification Sliding criterion Slab stabilisation Bearing capacity * Stress distribution in soil Numerical analysis software SEEP2D STABL SVFlux SVSlope UTEXAS Plaxis Related fields Geology Geochemistry Petrology Earthquake engineering Geomorphology Soil science Hydrology Hydrogeology Biogeography Earth materials Archaeology Agricultural science Agrology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Atterberg_limits&oldid=1291938461 " Category : Tests in geotechnical laboratories Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 08:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Atterberg limits 18 languages Add topic

