Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Socio-economic context Toggle Socio-economic context subsection 2.1 Structure of the economy 2.2 Higher education 3 Science, technology and innovation Toggle Science, technology and innovation subsection 3.1 Institutional context 3.2 Policy developments 3.3 Research trends 3.4 Performance of Vietnamese students in International Science Olympiads 4 See also 5 Sources 6 References Toggle the table of contents Science and technology in Vietnam 1 language فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The main managing agency responsible for science and technology (S&T) in Vietnam is the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST). MOST's responsibilities include scientific research, technology development and innovation activities; development of science and technology potentials; intellectual property; standards, metrology and quality control; atomic energy, radiation and nuclear safety; and state management on public services in fields under the Ministry’s management as stipulated by law.

Background [ edit ] See also: History of science and technology in China The origins of science and technology and Vietnam can be traced back to as early as 20,000 BC to the Sơn Vi culture , a late Paleolithic Age in Vietnam characterized by stone tools. Pebble tools similar to ones found around the world dating to this period have been found by archeologists in the Son La and Phu Tho provinces.

[ 1 ] Following the Stone Age, the Dong Sun Bronze Age culture dating from 1,000 BC-100 AD came about in the Red River Valley region of northern Vietnam. Dong Son culture is characterized by rice cultivation techniques, domestication of water buffalo and pigs, fishing and sailing via dugout canoe , and most notably expert bronze casting in the form of distinctive Dong Son drum decorated with geometric patterns, scenes of war, animals, and boats.

[ 2 ] Following the Dong Son period, Vietnam came into an extended period of conflict with China beginning with the Baiyue-Qin War . Via contact, many other Han discoveries that were translated into Chinese (negative numbers in math, seismometers, advancements in metallurgy, junk ships , and wheelbarrows to name just a few) made their way south to Vietnam.

Vietnamese medical discoveries employed native ingredients that had incorporated practices from Chinese traditional medicine .

Vietnam also created an imperial examination system which produced a scholar-bureaucrat class of scientific researchers and publications. In the Battle of Bạch Đằng in 938 when Ngô Quyền developed a technique of sinking intruding Chinese navy fleets. The same original technique of sinking naval fleets developed by Ngô Quyền was later employed by Vietnamese generals to repel the Mongol invasions of Vietnam , an empire that would later go on to rule much of China, Russia, Europe and the Arab world. In the 15th century Vietnamese scholar Hồ Nguyên Trừng was known for his innovations on firearms and cannons [ 3 ] and helped transfer knowledge of Vietnamese firearm technology once living in exile in China. Firearm and cannon technology developed by the Vietnamese would prove vital to the conquest of Champa by the Đại Việt in the Cham-Vietnamese War of 1471 and overall Vietnamese matchlocks during this period were considered world-class not only with Ming China but also European observers of the Trịnh–Nguyễn civil war .

[ 4 ] By the 1800s, Nguyễn rulers such as Emperor Minh Mạng claimed the legacy of Confucianism and China's Han dynasty for Vietnam in relation to its neighbouring states.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] In more recent history, Vietnamese (both domestic scientists and Overseas Vietnamese ) inventors and scientists have produced several great discoveries.

Đàm Thanh Sơn , a theoretical physicist, Eugene H. Trinh , and Bui Tuong Phong , the creator of the Phong reflection model , are three examples of Vietnamese Americans having done great scientific work. Hung Nguyen Xuan, Đái Duy Ban , Hoàng Tụy (known for the Tụy cut in global optimization) are three examples of notable scientists in Vietnam.

Ngô Bảo Châu , a citizen of Vietnam and France, was awarded a Fields Medal for his work in the mathematical theory of automorphic forms. Đỗ Đức Cường is also credited as the co-inventor of the ATM along with John Shepherd-Barron & Donald Wetzel .

AXIE Infinity was a 2018 NFT -based video game by Sky Mavis (co-created by Nguyễn Thành Trung), which had started to become immensely popular by 2021.

[ 7 ] Socio-economic context [ edit ] Structure of the economy [ edit ] Vietnam has become increasingly integrated into the world economy, particularly since its efforts to liberalize the economy enabled it to join the World Trade Organization in 2007. The manufacturing and service sectors each account for 40% of GDP. However, almost half the labor force (48%) is still employed in agriculture. One million workers a year, out of a total of 51.3 million in 2010, are projected to continue leaving agriculture for the other economic sectors in the foreseeable future.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] In manufacturing, Vietnam is expected to lose some of its current comparative advantage in low wages in the near future. It will need to compensate for this loss with productivity gains, if it is to sustain high growth rates: GDP per capita has almost doubled since 2008. High-tech exports from Vietnam grew dramatically during 2008–2013, particularly with respect to office computers and electronic communications equipment. A big challenge will be to implement strategies that increase the potential for enhancing technology and skills currently present in large multinational firms to smaller-scale domestic firms. This will require strategies to enhance technical capacity and skills among local firms that are, as yet, only weakly integrated with global production chains.

[ 9 ] Many foreign multinational firms have gravitated towards Vietnam in recent years but the number of patents nevertheless remains low: 47 were granted between 2002 and 2013. Even though 11% of Southeast Asia's high-tech exports came from Vietnam in 2013 (excluding the Republic of Korea and Japan), according to the Comtrade database, the majority of high-tech exports from Vietnam were designed elsewhere and assembled in Vietnam. Even if foreign firms change their behavior and intensify their in-house R&D, this will  only boost R&D in Vietnam if the multinationals can train a sufficient number of local personnel and work with skilled local suppliers and firms.

[ 9 ] Higher education [ edit ] Since 1995, enrolment in higher education has grown tenfold to well over 2 million in 2012. By 2014, there were 419 institutions of higher education.

[ 10 ] A number of foreign universities operate private campuses in Vietnam, including Harvard University (USA) and the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology (Australia).

[ 9 ] The government’s strong commitment to education (6.3% of GDP in 2012), in general, and higher education, in particular (1.05% of GDP in 2012), has fostered significant growth in higher education but this growth will need to be sustained to retain academics. The Law on Higher Education (2012) gives university administrators greater autonomy, although the Ministry of Education retains responsibility for quality assurance.

[ 9 ] Science, technology and innovation [ edit ] Institutional context [ edit ] There are a large number of universities and an even larger pool of research institutions in Vietnam. This poses a challenge for ministries in terms of co-ordination. To some extent, market forces are likely to eliminate the smaller and financially weaker units.

[ 9 ] The autonomy which Vietnamese research centres have enjoyed since the mid-1990s has enabled many of them to operate as quasi-private organizations, providing services such as consulting and technology development. Some have ‘spun off’ from the larger institutions to form their own semi-private enterprises, fostering the transfer of public sector personnel employed in science and technology to these semi-private establishments. One comparatively new university, Ton Duc Thang (est. 1997), has already set up 13 centres for technology transfer and services that together produce 15% of university revenue. Many of these research centres serve as valuable intermediaries bridging public research institutions, universities and firms.

[ 9 ] 60% of the population in Vietnam is below 30 years old and more than 25000 eligible engineers graduate from college every year.

[1] Policy developments [ edit ] The Law on Higher Education (2012) offers university administrators greater autonomy and there are reports that growing numbers of academic staff are also serving as advisors to NGOs and private firms. The Strategy for Science and Technology Development for 2011–2020 drawn up by the Ministry of Science and Technology in 2012, builds upon this law by promoting public–private partnerships and seeking to transform ‘public S&T organisations into self-managed and accountable mechanisms as stipulated by law’. The main emphasis is on overall planning and priority-setting, with a view to enhancing innovation capability, particularly in industrial sectors. Although the Strategy omits to fix any targets for funding, it nevertheless sets broad policy directions and priority areas for investment, including: [ 9 ] research in mathematics and physics; investigation of climate change and natural disasters; development of operating systems for computers, tablets and mobile devices; biotechnology applied particularly to agriculture, forestry, fisheries and medicine; and environmental protection.

The Strategy foresees the development of a network of organizations to support consultancy services in the field of innovation and the development of intellectual property. The Strategy also seeks to promote greater international scientific co-operation, with a plan to establish a network of Vietnamese scientists overseas and to initiate a network of ‘outstanding research centres’ linking key national science institutions with partners abroad.

[ 9 ] Vietnam has also developed a set of national development strategies for selected sectors of the economy, many of which involve science and technology. Examples are the Sustainable Development Strategy (April 2012) and the Mechanical Engineering Industry Development Strategy (2006), together with Vision 2020 (2006). These dual strategies call for a highly skilled human resource base, a strong policy for investment in research and development, fiscal policies to encourage technological upgrading in the private sector and private-sector investment and regulations to steer investment towards sustainable development.

[ 9 ] [ 11 ] Research trends [ edit ] In 2011, domestic research expenditure amounted to 0.19% of GDP, one of the lowest ratios in Southeast Asia. Women accounted for 41% of the country's researchers in 2012, one of the highest ratios in Southeast Asia.

[ 9 ] Vietnam was ranked 44th in the Global Innovation Index in 2024, it has increased its ranking considerably since 2012, where it was ranked 76th.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] The number of Vietnamese publications in Thomson Reuters' Web of Science has increased at a rate well above the average for Southeast Asia but from a low starting point: Vietnamese scientists had 570 articles catalogued in international journals in 2005 and 2 298 in 2014. By 2014, Vietnam had a modest scientific publication density of 25 publications per million inhabitants. This places Vietnam behind Thailand (94), Vanuatu (74) and the Solomon Islands (30) but ahead of the Lao Peoples' Democratic Republic (19). Vietnamese publications catalogued in international journals focus mainly on life sciences (22%), physics (13%) and engineering (13%), which is consistent with recent advances in the production of diagnostic equipment and shipbuilding. Almost 77% of all papers published between 2008 and 2014 by Vietnamese scientists had at least one international scientist in collaboration.

[ 9 ] Performance of Vietnamese students in International Science Olympiads [ edit ] Vietnam's rank based on number of Gold Medals in last 10 years(2014-2023): Physics - 6-th Chemistry - 4-th Biology - 13-th Mathematics - 5-th See also [ edit ] Ministry of Science and Technology (Vietnam) Ministry of Health (Vietnam) Vietnam Union of Science and Technology Associations Vietnam Academy of Science and Technology Ho Chi Minh City University of Science Hanoi University of Science and Technology List of Vietnamese inventions and discoveries Sources [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0. Text taken from UNESCO Science Report: towards 2030​ , 693-731, UNESCO, UNESCO Publishing.

References [ edit ] ^ "Son Vi culture" .

^ Heidhues, Mary Somers (2000).

Southeast Asia: A Concise History . London: Thames and Hudson. pp.

19– 20.

^ "Shen Qiang" . 29 October 2015.

^ "Matchlock of Ming Dynasty" . 10 November 2014.

^ "Vietnam-Champa Relations and the Malay-Islam Regional Network in the 17th–19th Centuries" . 2004-06-17. Archived from the original on 2004-06-17 . Retrieved 2021-08-21 .

^ Chandler, David P.; Owen, Norman G.; Roff, William R.; Steinberg, David Joel; Taylor, Jean Gelman; Taylor, Robert H.; Woodside, Alexander; Wyatt, David K. (2004-11-30).

The Emergence of Modern Southeast Asia: A New History . University of Hawaii Press.

ISBN 978-0-8248-2890-5 .

^ News, VietNamNet.

" 'I'm not a dollar billionaire': Axie Infinity CEO" .

VietNamNet . Retrieved 2021-08-21 .

{{ cite web }} : |last= has generic name ( help ) ^ Economist Intelligence Unit (2012).

Skilled Labor Shortfalls in Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand and Vietnam . London: Custom report for British Council.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l UNESCO Science Report: towards 2030 . Paris: UNESCO. 2015.

ISBN 978-92-3-100129-1 .

^ Brown, D. (2014).

Viet Nam's Education System: still under Construction . East Asia Forum.

^ Vuong, Quan-Hoang (January 1, 2018).

"The (ir)rational consideration of the cost of science in transition economies" .

Nature Human Behaviour .

2 (1): 5.

doi : 10.1038/s41562-017-0281-4 .

PMID 30980055 .

^ "Global Innovation Index 2021" .

World Intellectual Property Organization .

United Nations . Retrieved 2022-03-05 .

^ "Release of the Global Innovation Index 2020: Who Will Finance Innovation?" .

www.wipo.int . Retrieved 2021-09-02 .

^ "Global Innovation Index 2019" .

www.wipo.int . Retrieved 2021-09-02 .

^ "RTD - Item" .

ec.europa.eu . Retrieved 2021-09-02 .

^ "Global Innovation Index" .

INSEAD Knowledge . 2013-10-28 . Retrieved 2021-09-02 .

^ World Intellectual Property Organization (2024).

Global Innovation Index 2024. Unlocking the Promise of Social Entrepreneurship . Geneva. p. 18.

doi : 10.34667/tind.50062 .

ISBN 978-92-805-3681-2 . Retrieved 2024-10-22 .

{{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) v t e Science and technology in Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal v t e Vietnam articles History Capitals Dynasties Economic Military Monarchs Names Naval Timeline Prehistoric Ancient Chinese dominated Monarchical French colonial Modern North Vietnam State of Vietnam South Vietnam PRG Geography Borders Climate Climate change Ecoregions Environmental issues Protected areas National parks Wildlife Mammals Birds Molluscs Endangered species World Heritage Sites Divisions Provinces Municipalities Cities District-level Commune-level Electoral units Regions Northern Red River Delta Northeast Northwest Central North Central South Central Central Highlands Southern Southeast Mekong Delta Politics Censorship Constitution Fatherland Front Foreign relations Human rights LGBT Law Law enforcement Communist Party Central Committee General Secretary Permanent Member of the Secretariat History of central officeholders National Congress Politburo Central Secretariat Central Inspection Commission Central Military Commission Executive President Vice President Government Prime Minister Deputy Prime Ministers Ministers Legislative National Assembly Standing Committee Chairman Elections Judiciary Supreme People's Court Chief Justice Supreme People's Procuracy Procurator-General Military Courts Military Central Military Commission National Defense and Security Council Defense industry Armed forces Army Navy Air Force Border Guard Coast Guard Security and militia Public Security Militia and Self-Defence Force Economy Agriculture Banking Đổi Mới ("Renovation") Đồng (currency) Energy Renewable energy Nuclear power Power stations Foreign aid Foreign trade Five-Year Plans Manufacturing Standards Automotive Poverty Science and Technology Traditional medicine Measurement Inventions Telecommunications Internet Censorship Tourism Visa policy Water supply Transport Air transport Airports Rail transport Expressways Society Education Universities Health HIV/AIDS COVID-19 Crime Gambling Prostitution Sex trafficking Human trafficking Corruption Public holidays Time Women Demographics People Eunuchs Overseas community Language Alphabet Phonology Language and computers Ethnic groups Name Racism Religion Folk religions Buddhism Taoism Christianity Islam Culture Anthem Architecture Art Awards Cinema Animation Clothing Cuisine Dishes Ingredients Dance Emblem Festivals Flag Literature Poetry Mass media Television News Agency Voice Newspapers Music V-pop Traditional musical instruments Philosophy Anarchism Communism Nationalism Socialism Trotskyism Ho Chi Minh Thought Person Dignity Theory Sports Traditional games Martial arts Symbols Theater Vietnamese studies Outline Index Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Science_and_technology_in_Vietnam&oldid=1276240173 " Categories : Science and technology in Vietnam Economy of Vietnam Education in Vietnam Hidden categories: CS1 errors: generic name CS1 errors: periodical ignored CS1 maint: location missing publisher Free-content attribution Free content from UNESCO Publishing This page was last edited on 17 February 2025, at 18:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Science and technology in Vietnam 1 language Add topic

