Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types Toggle Types subsection 1.1 Biological 1.2 Mother 1.3 Father 1.4 Grandparent 2 Paternity issues 3 Roles and responsibilities Toggle Roles and responsibilities subsection 3.1 Guardianship 3.2 Parenting 4 Gender and gender mix 5 Genetics Toggle Genetics subsection 5.1 Parent–offspring conflict 5.2 Empathy 6 Happiness index 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Parent 89 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Banjar 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Bosanski Català Čeština ChiShona Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gàidhlig 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia IsiXhosa Italiano עברית Jawa کٲشُر Kaszëbsczi Қазақша Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lingála La .lojban.

Madhurâ मैथिली Македонски Malagasy 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 ߒߞߏ Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Twi Tyap Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 中文 IsiNdebele seSewula Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Caregiver of offspring in their own species For other uses, see Parent (disambiguation) .

Parents and child A parent is either the progenitor of a child or, in humans , it can refer to a caregiver or legal guardian , generally called an adoptive parent or step-parent .  Parents who are progenitors are first-degree relatives and have 50% genetic meet. A female can also become a parent through surrogacy . Some parents may be adoptive parents, who nurture and raise an offspring, but are not related to the child.

Orphans without adoptive parents can be raised by their grandparents or other family members .

A parent can also be elaborated as an ancestor removed one generation . With recent medical advances, it is possible to have more than two biological parents.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Examples of third biological parents include instances involving surrogacy or a third person who has provided DNA samples during an assisted reproductive procedure that has altered the recipients' genetic material.

[ 4 ] The most common types of parents are mothers , fathers , step-parents , and grandparents . A mother is "a woman in relation to a child or children to whom she has given birth." [ 5 ] The extent to which it is socially acceptable for a parent to be involved in their offspring's life varies from culture to culture, however one that exhibits too little involvement is sometimes said to exhibit child neglect , [ 6 ] while one that is too involved is sometimes said to be overprotective , cosseting, nosey , or intrusive .

[ 7 ] Types [ edit ] Biological [ edit ] Obama family portrait, 2011 A person's biological parents are the persons from whom the individual inherits their genes . The term is generally only used if there is a need to distinguish an individual's foster parents from their biological parents,  For example, an individual whose father has remarried may call the father's new wife their stepmother and continue to refer to their mother normally, though someone who has had little or no contact with their biological mother may address their foster parent as their mother, and their biological mother as such, or perhaps by her first name.

[ citation needed ] Mother [ edit ] Newborn baby A mother is a female who has a maternal connection with another individual, whether arising from conception , by giving birth to, or raising the individual in the role of a parent.

[ 8 ] More than one female may have such connections with an individual. Because of the complexity and differences of a mother's social, cultural, and religious definitions and roles, it is challenging to define a mother to suit a universally accepted definition. The utilization of a surrogate mother may result in explication of there being two biological mothers.

[ 9 ] Father [ edit ] Timothy L. Pesto and Kaitlyn E. Pesto play football as their father watches, Tuscaloosa, Alabama.

A father is a male parent of any type of offspring.

[ 10 ] It may be the person who shares in the raising of a child or who has provided the biological material, the sperm , which results in the birth of the child.

Grandparent [ edit ] Grandparents are the parents of a person's own parent, whether that be a father or a mother. Every sexually reproducing creature who is not a genetic chimera has a maximum of four genetic grandparents, eight genetic great-grandparents , sixteen genetic great-great-grandparents and so on. Rarely, such as in the case of sibling or half-sibling incest , these numbers are lower .

Paternity issues [ edit ] Main article: DNA paternity testing A paternity test is conducted to prove paternity, that is, whether a male is the biological father of another individual. This may be relevant in view of rights and duties of the father. Similarly, a maternity test can be carried out. This is less common, because at least during childbirth and pregnancy , except in the case of a pregnancy involving embryo transfer or egg donation , it is obvious who the mother is. However, it is used in a number of events such as legal battles where a person's maternity is challenged, where the mother is uncertain because she has not seen her child for an extended period of time, or where deceased persons need to be identified.

Although not constituting completely reliable evidence, several congenital traits such as attached earlobes , a widow's peak , or the cleft chin , may serve as tentative indicators of (non-) parenthood as they are readily observable and inherited via autosomal-dominant genes.

A more reliable way to ascertain parenthood is via DNA analysis (known as genetic fingerprinting of individuals), although older methods have included ABO blood group typing , analysis of various other proteins and enzymes , or using human leukocyte antigens . The current techniques for paternity testing use polymerase chain reaction and restriction fragment length polymorphism . For the most part, however, genetic fingerprinting has all but taken over all the other forms of testing.

Roles and responsibilities [ edit ] Guardianship [ edit ] A legal guardian is a person who has the legal authority (and the corresponding duty) to care for the personal and property interests of another person, called a ward. Guardians are typically used in three situations: guardianship for an incapacitated senior (due to old age or infirmity), guardianship for a minor, and guardianship for developmentally disabled adults.

Most countries and states have laws that provide that the parents of a minor child are the legal guardians of that child, and that the parents can designate who shall become the child's legal guardian in the event of death, subject to the approval of the court. Some jurisdictions allow a parent of a child to exercise the authority of a legal guardian without a formal court appointment. In such circumstances the parent acting in that capacity is called the natural guardian of that parent's child.

Parenting [ edit ] Main article: Parenting Parenting or child rearing is the process of promoting and supporting the physical , emotional , social, financial, and intellectual development of a child from infancy to adulthood . Parenting refers to the aspects of raising a child aside from the biological relationship.

[ 11 ] Gender and gender mix [ edit ] A child has at least one biological father and at least one biological mother , but not every family is a traditional nuclear family . There are many variants, such as adoption , shared parenting , stepfamilies , and LGBT parenting , over which there has been controversy.

The social science literature rejects the notion that there is an optimal gender mix of parents or that children and adolescents with same-sex parents suffer any developmental disadvantages compared with those with two opposite-sex parents.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] The professionals and the major associations now agree there is a well-established and accepted consensus in the field that there is no optimal gender combination of parents.

[ 14 ] The family studies literature indicates that it is family processes (such as the quality of parenting and relationships within the family) that contribute to determining children's well-being and "outcomes", rather than family structures, per se, such as the number, gender, sexuality and co-habitation status of parents.

[ 13 ] Genetics [ edit ] Parent–offspring conflict [ edit ] Main article: Parent–offspring conflict An offspring who hates their father is called a misopater, one that hates their mother is a misomater, while a parent that hates their offspring is a misopedist.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Parent–offspring conflict describes the evolutionary conflict arising from differences in optimal fitness of parents and their offspring . While parents tend to maximize the number of offspring, the offspring can increase their fitness by getting a greater share of parental investment often by competing with their siblings . The theory was proposed by Robert Trivers in 1974 and extends the more general selfish gene theory and has been used to explain many observed biological phenomena.

[ 17 ] For example, in some bird species, although parents often lay two eggs and attempt to raise two or more young, the strongest fledgling takes a greater share of the food brought by parents and will often kill the weaker sibling, an act known as siblicide .

Empathy [ edit ] David Haig has argued that human fetal genes would be selected to draw more resources from the mother than it would be optimal for the mother to give, a hypothesis that has received empirical support. The placenta , for example, secretes allocrine hormones that decrease the sensitivity of the mother to insulin and thus make a larger supply of blood sugar available to the fetus. The mother responds by increasing the level of insulin in her bloodstream, the placenta has insulin receptors that stimulate the production of insulin-degrading enzymes which counteract this effect.

[ 18 ] Happiness index [ edit ] Sinatra family 1949 In Europe, parents are generally happier than non-parents. In women, happiness increases after the first child, but having higher-order children is not associated with further increased well-being. Happiness seems to increase most in the year before and after the first childbirth.

[ 19 ] See also [ edit ] Adoption Bateman's principle Child abuse Cinderella effect Egg and sperm donation Foster care Infant Infanticide Narcissistic parent Non-paternity event Parental abuse by children Parental age (disambiguation) Parental bullying of children Parental investment Parental love Parental narcissistic abuse Parents bullying teachers Paternal bond Paternity (law) Reciprocal socialization Stepparent Surrogate mother Teachers bullying parents Honour thy father and thy mother References [ edit ] ^ Gallagher, James (2013-06-28).

"UK government backs three-person IVF" .

BBC News . Retrieved 30 June 2013 .

^ Nadine Taub ; Beth Anne Wolfson; Carla M. Palumbo.

The Law of Sex Discrimination . p. 374.

^ Browne C. Lewis (2012).

Papa's Baby: Paternity and Artificial Insemination . p. 136.

^ Louise I. Gerdes (2009).

Reproductive Technologies . p. 25.

^ "mother definition" .

www.oxforddictionaries.com . Oxford Dictionaries. Archived from the original on October 10, 2012.

^ Marian S Harris (2014).

Racial Disproportionality in Child Welfare . p. 2.

^ Bernard Roberts (2005).

Evidence in the Psychological Therapies: A Critical Guidance for Practitioners . p. 149.

^ "Definition from" . Allwords.com. 2007-09-14 . Retrieved 2011-11-04 .

^ Bromham, David (1990).

Philosophical Ethics in Reproductive Medicine . p. 57.

^ "TheFreeDictionary" . Retrieved 2014-10-07 .

^ Davies, Martin (2000).

The Blackwell encyclopedia of social work . Wiley-Blackwell. p. 245.

ISBN 978-0-631-21451-9 .

^ Lamb, Michael (2009).

Affidavit – United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts [ permanent dead link ] ^ a b Short, Elizabeth; Riggs, Damien W.; Perlesz, Amaryll; Brown, Rhonda & Kane, Graeme.

"Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender (LGBT) Parented Families – A Literature Review prepared for The Australian Psychological Society" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-03-04 . Retrieved 2011-11-04 .

^ "In The Supreme Court of Iowa No. 07–1499" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2009-12-29 . Retrieved 2011-11-04 .

^ Francis, Darryl. "Iatrologs and Iatronyms." Word Ways 4.2 (1971): 8.

^ Davies, Jon. "Imagining intergenerationality: Representation and rhetoric in the pedophile movie." GLQ: A Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies 13.2 (2007): 369-385.

^ Trivers, R.L. (1974).

"Parent–offspring conflict" .

Integrative and Comparative Biology .

14 (1): 249– 264.

doi : 10.1093/icb/14.1.249 .

JSTOR 3881986 .

^ Haig, D. (1993).

"Genetic conflicts in human pregnancy" (PDF) .

The Quarterly Review of Biology .

68 (4): 495– 532.

doi : 10.1086/418300 .

JSTOR 3037249 .

PMID 8115596 .

S2CID 38641716 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-07-19.

^ Nicoletta Balbo; Francesco C. Billari; Melinda Mills (2013).

"Fertility in Advanced Societies: A Review of Research" .

European Journal of Population .

29 (1): 1– 38.

doi : 10.1007/s10680-012-9277-y .

PMC 3576563 .

PMID 23440941 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Parents .

Look up parent in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

National Educational Network, Inc. (NENI) – free online resources for parent education, curriculum. They also have a parent blog with information about child care, after-school, trends in education, tutoring, college, grants, etc.

Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Parents" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

– A Roman Catholic view of the position of parents.

v t e Family History Rights Household Nuclear family Extended family Conjugal family Immediate family Matrifocal family First-degree relatives Parent mother father Child son daughter Sibling brother sister Second-degree relatives Grandparent Grandchild Uncle / Aunt Niece and nephew Third-degree relatives Great-grandparent Great-grandchild Great-uncle / Great-aunt Cousin Family-in-law Spouse wife husband Parent-in-law Sibling-in-law Child-in-law daughter-in-law son-in-law Stepfamily Stepparent stepfather stepmother Stepchild Stepsibling Kinship terminology Kinship Australian Aboriginal kinship Adoption Affinity Consanguinity Disownment Divorce Estrangement Family of choice Fictive kinship Marriage Nurture kinship Chinese kinship Hawaiian kinship Sudanese kinship Eskimo kinship Iroquois kinship Crow kinship Omaha kinship Genealogy and lineage Bilateral descent Cadet branch Common ancestor Family name Heirloom Heredity Inheritance Lineal descendant collateral descent Matrilineality Patrilineality Progenitor Clan Royal descent Family trees Pedigree chart Genogram Ahnentafel Genealogical numbering systems Seize quartiers Quarters of nobility Relationships Agape (parental love) Eros (marital love) Philia (brotherly love) Storge (familial love) Filial piety Polyfidelity Holidays Mother's Day U.S.

Father's Day Father–Daughter Day Siblings Day National Grandparents Day Parents' Day Children's Day Japan Family Day Canada American Family Day International Day of Families National Family Week UK National Adoption Day Related Breadwinner model Single parent Wedding anniversary Godparent Birth order Only child Middle child syndrome Sociology of the family Museum of Motherhood Astronaut family Dysfunctional family Domestic violence Incest Sibling abuse Sibling estrangement Sibling rivalry v t e Parenting Kinship terminology Parent Mother Father Adoptive Alloparenting Coparenting Extended family Foster care Noncustodial Nuclear family Orphaned Same-sex Shared parenting Single parent Blended family Surrogacy In loco parentis Theories · Areas Attachment theory Applied behavior analysis Behaviorism Child development Cognitive development Developmental psychology Human development Identity formation Introjection Love Maternal bond Nature versus nurture Parental investment Care work Cost of raising a child Paternal care Unpaid work Paternal bond Pediatrics Social emotional development Socialization Social psychology Styles Achievement ideology Atlas personality Attachment parenting Baby talk Buddha-like parenting Concerted cultivation Enmeshment Free-range parenting Gatekeeper parent Helicopter parent Nurturant parenting Reflective parenting Slow parenting Soccer mom Strict father model Taking Children Seriously Theybie Tiger parenting Work at home parent Techniques After-school activity Allowance Bedtime Child care Co-sleeping Dishabituation Education Habituation Homeschooling Identification (psychology) Introjection Kommune 1 Latchkey kid Moral development Normative social influence Parent management training Play ( date ) Role model Social integration Television The talk (race) The talk (sex education) Toy ( educational ) Positive Parenting Program Child discipline Blanket training Corporal punishment in the home Curfew Grounding Positive discipline Tactical ignoring Time-out Abuse Adverse childhood experiences Child abandonment Child abuse Child labour Child neglect Cinderella effect Codependency Deadbeat parent Dysfunctional family Effects of domestic violence Incest Management of domestic violence Narcissistic parent Parental abuse by children Parental alienation Stress in early childhood Legal Child custody Child support Disownment Family disruption Right to family life Marriage Parental leave Parental responsibility Parents' rights Paternity Shared parenting Experts Mary Ainsworth Diana Baumrind John Bowlby T. Berry Brazelton Rudolf Dreikurs David Elkind Jo Frost Haim Ginott Thomas Gordon Alan E. Kazdin Truby King Annette Lareau Penelope Leach Matthew Sanders William Sears B. F. Skinner Benjamin Spock Organizations Families Need Fathers Mothers' Union National Childbirth Trust National Fatherhood Initiative National Parents Organization Parent–teacher association Parents Against Child Exploitation v t e Infants and their care Health ( pediatrics ) Baby food Birth weight Breast pump Breastfeeding Breastfeeding and medications Breastfeeding and mental health Bottle feeding Colic Cradle cap Esotropia Failure to thrive Immunization Infant and toddler safety Infant bathing Infant feeding Infant food safety Infant formula Infant massage Infant respiratory distress syndrome Infant sleep training Neonatal intensive care unit Newborn care and safety Oral rehydration therapy Pedialyte Preterm birth Shaken baby syndrome Soy formula SIDS Development Attachment parenting Baby-led weaning Baby talk Babbling Birth defect Childbirth Crawling Gestational age Infant visual development Irritant diaper dermatitis Infant cognitive development Infant crying Kangaroo care Mother Nursery rhyme Object permanence Parent Parenting Peekaboo Play Prenatal development Prenatal development table Teething Walking Weaning Socialization and culture Attachment Babysitting Child abuse Child care Child custody Children's rights UN Child rights Circumcision Foster care Grandparent visitation Infant swimming Milk bank Nanny Wet nurse Infant care and equipment Baby bouncer Baby gate Baby monitor / Hidden camera Baby powder Baby shampoo Baby toy Baby walker Bib Baby swing Baby transport Bassinet Car seat safety Child vehicular heat stroke deaths Cloth diaper Cradle board Diaper Diaper bag Baby wipes Haberman Feeder High chair Infant bed (American 'crib' and 'cradle', British 'cot') Infant carrier Infant clothing Pacifier Playpen Stroller Supplemental nursing system Swaddling Swim diaper Teether Travel cot Other topics Baby shower Babywearing Child neglect Closed adoption Cry room Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder Infant ear piercing Open adoption Prenatal cocaine exposure Neonatal withdrawal syndrome Parental child abduction Parental responsibility Parenting plan Paternity Paternity fraud Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other NARA Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5cf665967b‐mh4zx
Cached time: 20250818153345
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.565 seconds
Real time usage: 0.784 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2801/1000000
Revision size: 16177/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 104543/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5253/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 94800/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.342/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6539974/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  636.740      1 -total
 30.75%  195.801      1 Template:Reflist
 14.01%   89.222      4 Template:Navbox
 13.62%   86.728      1 Template:Authority_control
 13.04%   83.028      1 Template:Cite_news
 12.66%   80.587      1 Template:Short_description
 12.62%   80.339      1 Template:Family
  8.73%   55.590      1 Template:Commons_category
  8.66%   55.111      2 Template:Sister_project
  8.40%   53.501      2 Template:Side_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:83441:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818153345 and revision id 1300180349. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Parent&oldid=1300180349 " Categories : Family Motherhood Fatherhood Infancy Parenting Positions of authority Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2019 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 18:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Parent 89 languages Add topic

