Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Prior to World War I 1.2 World Wars and Interwar period 1.3 Post World War II 2 Demographics Toggle Demographics subsection 2.1 2001 Census 2.2 2011 Census 2.3 2021 Census 3 Croatian Australians and sport Toggle Croatian Australians and sport subsection 3.1 Croatian Australian Socceroos 3.2 Croatian Australian Matildas 3.3 Croatian Australians in Croatian national team 3.4 Notable Croatian Australians to represent Australia in other Sports 4 Culture Toggle Culture subsection 4.1 Folklore 4.2 Events 4.3 Clubs 5 ACT 6 NSW 7 Victoria 8 Queensland 9 South Australia 10 Western Australia 11 Tasmania 12 Language and education 13 Media Toggle Media subsection 13.1 Broadcasting 13.2 Periodicals 13.3 Film 14 Charities 15 Economy Toggle Economy subsection 15.1 Wines 16 List of notable Croatian Australians Toggle List of notable Croatian Australians subsection 16.1 Entertainment and the arts 16.2 Music 16.3 Academia 16.4 Science and medicine 16.5 Business and work 16.6 Media 16.7 Politics 16.8 Other 16.9 Sport 17 See also 18 References 19 Further reading 20 External links Toggle the table of contents Croatian Australians 2 languages Hrvatski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Australian citizens of Croatian ancestry Ethnic group Croatian Australians Total population 164,362 (by ancestry, 2021 ) [ 1 ] ( 0.6% of the Australian population ) 43,302 (by birth, 2021 ) Regions with significant populations Perth , Melbourne , Sydney , Canberra , Geelong Languages Australian English , Croatian Religion Predominantly Roman Catholicism Related ethnic groups Croatian Americans Croatian New Zealanders Part of a series on Croats Recognized Croatia Bosnia and Herzegovina Serbia Kosovo Austria Italy Montenegro Romania Slovakia Hungary Czech Republic Diaspora Europe Belgium Germany Macedonia Sweden Slovakia Slovenia Switzerland North America United States Canada Mexico South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Peru Venezuela Oceania Australia New Zealand Subgroups Bunjevci Šokci Burgenland Croats Janjevci Molise Croats Krašovani Culture Literature Music Art Cinema Cuisine Dress Sport History History of Croatia Origins Rulers Language Croatian Chakavian Shtokavian Kajkavian Burgenland Molise Related nations South Slavs v t e Croatian Australians ( Croatian : Hrvatski Australci ), Australian Croats ( Australski Hrvati ) [ 2 ] or Croats in Australia ( Hrvati u Australiji ) [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] are Australian citizens of Croatian ancestry.

Croatia has been a source of migrants to Australia, particularly in the 1960s and 1970s.

History [ edit ] Prior to World War I [ edit ] Croats were first encouraged to migrate to Australia during the gold rushes of the 1850s taking place in the British colonies of Victoria and New South Wales . Although migration was relatively small, Croatian travellers and sailors employed on merchant vessels played a significant role in spreading the news of the opportunities possible in Australia.

[ 5 ] In an interesting occurrence in October 1875, sixteen Croatian sailors aboard the vessel Stefano , became shipwrecked on the Ningaloo Reef along the West Australian coast. Ten survived to reach the shore where the local Yinikutira people gave them food and water, and found their map of the coast among the shipwreck's debris. By January 1876, all but two had died from hunger or exposure. The two survivors, Baccich (aged 16) and Jurich (aged 19), became part of a Yinikutira clan and spent the following three months living with them around the North West Cape . They were rescued by a pearler looking for Aboriginal labour in April 1876 and, after a few months in Fremantle , they returned to Europe.

[ 6 ] [ 5 ] The Western Australian gold rushes in the 1890s started a significant migration of Croats (mainly from Dalmatia ) to Australia and by the early part of the 20th century, there were around 2000 to 3000 people of Croatian origin in Australia, 80% of these residing in Western Australia .

Croats in Australia began to socially organize in 1910, when the Peasant Party ( Seljačka stranka ) was founded, which operated under the influence of the Radić brothers.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Party published the newsletter Seljačke novosti ('Peasant News'), and ceased to exist in 1922.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] In Boulder-Kalgoorlie, Western Australia, the Croatian-Slavic Society ( Hrvatsko-slavjansko društvo ) was founded in 1912 .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] World Wars and Interwar period [ edit ] Around 100 Australian Croats fought for the Allies during World War I . However, during this war around 600 non-naturalised Croats were interned at the Holsworthy Internment Camp where 20 died and about 500 were later deported from Australia in 1919.

[ 5 ] During World War II , the fascist dictator Benito Mussolini and Nazi dictator Adolf Hitler established the fascist puppet-state of the Independent State of Croatia . Croatian Australian representatives during this time deplored this development as a tragedy for the Croatian people and condemned the quisling Ante Pavelić as a traitor.

[ 7 ] Tom Starcevich , a Croatian Australian born in Subiaco, Western Australia was a recipient of the Victoria Cross medal for bravery during World War II.

[ 5 ] Post World War II [ edit ] Croatian migration to Australia took on a different aspect after World War II due to unfavorable economic and political changes in Croatia. The number of Croatian emigrants in Australia increased significantly, and emigrants from the coastal and island areas continued to dominate.

[ 2 ] From 1945 to 1952, Australia's post-war immigration scheme saw around 170,000 Eastern European displaced persons , including Croatians, given residency. Some of these Croatian migrants were associated with the defeated Ustaše regime. In the context of the White Australia policy , Cold War anti-communism, and the shortage of workers at the time, the Ustaše in Australia were allowed to dominate and influence the Croatian migrant community through the establishment cultural and sporting clubs around Australia that promoted Ustaše ideals. This influence continues into 21st century Croatian-Australian society.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] During the 1960s and early 1970s, the Ustaše splinter groups in Australia led by people like Srećko Rover ran a campaign of bombings, intimidation and insurgency operations against pro-Yugoslav interests. Eventually, after a large bombing in Sydney injured many people, a crackdown on the Ustaše movement in the Croatian-Australia community occurred from late 1972. This was spearheaded by the Attorney-General, Lionel Murphy , who raided ASIO Headquarters and made public the files on the Croatian terrorist activities.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] Croatian Embassy in Canberra In November 1977, an unofficial Croatian embassy was opened in Canberra , causing a legal and diplomatic difficulty for both the Australian and Yugoslav governments.

[ 16 ] The embassy, aimed at raising awareness of Croatia as a nation and the Croatian people separate from Yugoslavia, remained open for 2 years closing in 1979. Its ambassador was Mario Despoja , the father of former Democrats leader Natasha Stott Despoja .

Since the independence of Croatia in the 1990s, an official embassy has been opened in Canberra and consulates have been opened in Melbourne , Sydney and Perth .

[ citation needed ] Since 1991, the number of Croatians who have immigrated to Australia has been 30,000 and has been steadily declining since the beginning of 2000.

[ 2 ] Demographics [ edit ] one dot denotes 100 Croatian-born Sydney residents one dot denotes 100 Croatian-born Melbourne residents As the level of immigration from Croatia has dropped significantly from the 1980s, [ 2 ] the Croatian-born population is ageing.

[ 17 ] Croatian Australians historically have an exceptionally low rate of return migration to Croatia. In December 2001, the Department of Foreign Affairs estimated that there were 1,000 Australian citizens resident in Croatia, mainly in Zagreb.

[ 18 ] 2001 Census [ edit ] In 2001, there were 51,909 Croatians born in Croatia living in Australia.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Of this number, 52.3% were men and 47.7% were women.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The largest number of Australians of Croatian origin lived in the New South Wales (35.5%), followed by Victoria (34.0%) and Western Australia (12.2%). 80.7% had both parents born outside Australia, only 6.7% had both parents born in Australia, while the remainder had one parent born in Australia and one parent born outside.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] 2011 Census [ edit ] People of Croatian ancestry according to the 2011 census results According to 2011 census, there were 126,264 Croatians (0.6% of Australian population).

[ 3 ] 2021 Census [ edit ] The 2021 Census data released by the Australian Bureau of Statistics showed that 43,302 persons resident in Australia identified themselves as having been born in Croatia , representing about 0.15% of the Australian population. The Census also noted 164,362 persons identified themselves as having Croatian ancestry, either alone or in combination with another ancestry, representing a further 0.65% of the Australian population. Most of this demographic were shown to reside in Victoria and New South Wales.

[ 17 ] [ 19 ] 57% of the Croatian-born population was aged 65 years or older at the time of the 2021 Census. The 2021 data also revealed that 15% of Croatian born Australians spoke only Croatian at home, while 24% spoke only English at home, and 72% of Croatian born Australians recorded their religion as Catholic .

[ 17 ] Croatian Australians and sport [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( July 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Fans of Sydney United 58 FC , a football club founded by Croatian Australians, at the 2022 Australia Cup Final Australia has had numerous notable athletes of Croatian heritage, but Croatian Australians are mainly found in soccer, with numerous clubs established by local Croatian communities throughout the country, [ 20 ] the most notable and successful being Sydney Croatia and Melbourne Croatia . These clubs nurtured the soccer talents of a large number of Croatian Australians, many of whom now play professionally overseas. Croatian Australians have played for both Croatia and Australia . In the 2006 World Cup , there were seven Croatian Australians playing for Australia and three playing for Croatia.  A total of 47 Croatian Australians have gone on to play for the Australian national soccer team, including 7 who captained the national team. The Australian-Croatian Soccer Tournament is the oldest running soccer competition in Australia. Notable 21st century Australian athletes to have Croatian heritage include Simon Katich [ citation needed ] , Nathan Cleary [ citation needed ] , Noah Balta [ citation needed ] , and Nicola Olyslagers .

[ citation needed ] Croatian Australian Socceroos [ edit ] Zlatko Arambasic Mark Babic Zeljko Babic Yakka Banovic Paul Bilokapic Mark Bosnich Mark Bresciano [ 21 ] Branko Buljevic Ante Covic Jason Culina (C) Ivan Franjic Eugene Galekovic Steve Horvat (C) Mile Jedinak (C) Ante Juric Frank Juric Tomi Juric Matthew Jurman Zeljko Kalac (C) Fran Karačić Steve Kokoska Eddie Krncevic (C) Tony Krlsovic Andrew Marth Frank Micic Ljubo Milicevic Ante Milicic Branko Milosevic Ante Moric Jason Petkovic Michael Petkovic Tom Pondeljak Tony Popovic Ivo Prskalo Wally Savor Josip Skoko (C) Matthew Spiranovic Mark Talajic Dario Vidosic Mark Viduka (C) Billy Vojtek Robert Zabica Ruben Zadkovich David Zdrilic Ned Zelic Croatian Australian Matildas [ edit ] Emily Gielnik Croatian Australians in Croatian national team [ edit ] Anthony Šerić Josip Šimunić Joey Didulica Notable Croatian Australians to represent Australia in other Sports [ edit ] Nathan Cleary - Rugby League Simon Katich - Cricket Max Krilich - Rugby League (C) Nicola Olyslagers - High Jumping Andrew Vlahov - Basketball Steve Erceg - UFC fighter Andrew Bogut , former NBA player Natasha Chokljat , Netball Sophie Garbin , Netball Darcee Garbin , Basketball Culture [ edit ] Folklore [ edit ] Croatian Folkloric Arts Festival is held in Adelaide [ 22 ] New South Wales Folklore Society Association in Sydney gathers and coordinates Croatian groups in the NSW area.

[ 3 ] Some of the groups include: [ 3 ] Croatian folklore group "Zagreb", Perth [ 23 ] Folklore ensemble "Vukovar", Sydney (since 1984) [ 24 ] Mladi Frankopani ('Young Frankopans '), Sydney HSF Croatia, Canberra Mladi Hrvati ('Young Croats'), Melbourne Hrvatska Zora ('Croatian Dawn'), Melbourne Hrvatsko folklorno društvo ('Croatian Folklore Association'), Melbourne HKUD Lado, Geelong Hrvatska folklorna skupina Lenek ('Croatian Folklore Group Lenek'), Adelaide KUD Hrvatski Pleter (' Croatian interlace '), Adelaide Events [ edit ] Croats in Australia from the Sali on Dugi Otok island organised themselves into "Sons of Sali" (S.O.S.) and "Sisters of Sali". They organise the Annual Sons of Sali Picnic and Bocce competition, as well as SOS Karte nights.

[ 25 ] Clubs [ edit ] Australia is home to numerous Croatian clubs and societies. Most of them are located in Sydney, Melbourne, Geelong, Perth, and Canberra, in premises owned and built by the Croatian community.

ACT [ edit ] The Australian Croatian Club (O'Connor, Canberra) Croatian Catholic Centre Canberra & Queanbeyan (Farrer, Canberra) NSW [ edit ] The Concord Community Club (Concord, Sydney) King Tomislav Croatian Club (Edensor Park, Sydney) Croatian Club Bosna (Orchard Hills, Sydney) Croatian Wickham Sports Club (Newcastle) Croatian Catholic Centre Wollongong Dalmacija Sydney Croatian Club (Terrey Hills, Sydney) St Anthony, Croatian Catholic Centre (Summer Hill, Sydney) Church of Our Lady of the Great Croatian Covenant (Blacktown, Sydney) Croatian Catholic Church of Saint Nicholas Tavelic (St John's Park, Sydney) Victoria [ edit ] Melbourne Croatia Soccer Club (Sunshine, Melbourne) The Croatian Club (Footscray, Melbourne) Croatian Club Geelong Gippsland Croatian Club (Traralgon) Croatian Senior Citizens Irymple (Mildura) Croatian Catholic Centre St. Anthony (Geelong) Croatian Catholic Centre of the Holy Spirit (Braeside, Melbourne) Croatian Church of St Nikola Tavelić (Clifton Hill, Melbourne) Croatian Catholic Centre Sunshine (Sunshine West, Melbourne) Victorian Croatian Chamber of Commerce (Melbourne, Victoria) Queensland [ edit ] The Croatian Club Brisbane (Rocklea, Brisbane) Croatian Catholic Centre (Salisbury, Brisbane) Croatian Sports Centre (Carrara, Gold Coast) South Australia [ edit ] The Croatian Club Adelaide (Brompton, Adelaide) The Croatian Sports Centre (SA) Inc (State Sports Park, Gepps Cross) Whyalla Croatia Soccer and Social Club (Whyalla Norrie, Whyalla) Western Australia [ edit ] WA Croatian Community Centre (North Fremantle, Perth) Tasmania [ edit ] Australian Croatian Club (Glenorchy) Croatian Catholic Centre (Granton, Hobart) Language and education [ edit ] Since 1975, the state-owned station SBS has been broadcasting programs in the Croatian language, and in 1989, Croatian language teaching began as an elective subject in secondary schools.

[ 2 ] Australian Croats have organized Croatian language classes in Croatian Catholic centers and Sunday schools since the 1970s.

[ 2 ] Croatian language classes are offered in the regular school system , and the Croatian Ministry of Education supports classes with textbooks and other teaching aids.

[ 2 ] The first chair of Croatian studies was established in 1983 at Macquarie University in Sydney.

[ 2 ] Since 1998, the same university has also opened a Center for Croatian Language Studies.

[ 2 ] In February 2008, the Center for Croatian Studies in the World was opened at Macquarie University, as a joint project with the University of Split .

[ 2 ] The Association of Croatian Language Teachers in Victoria, established in the 1970s, helped in developing Croatian language programs for primary and secondary schools in Victoria.

Australian Croatian Community Services (ACCS), based in Footscray , provides Croatian language courses [ 26 ] Croatian Language Center, teaching Croatian as a foreign language [ 27 ] Croatian Studies Centre (CSC) within the School of Modern Languages at Sydney's Macquarie University , established in 1994.

[ 28 ] Croatian is also learnt in Croatian schools and some language schools , for ex. in the New South Wales.

[ 29 ] Croatian is an optional (elective) subject at the graduation exam.

[ 29 ] Some of the Croatian schools in the NSW include: [ 29 ] Braća Radić School in Schofields Dr. Ante Starčević School in Beverly Hills Croatian School in Blacktown Croatian School in Summer Hill Media [ edit ] Broadcasting [ edit ] There are Croatian language programs at the SBS since 1975.

[ 2 ] First associates of the SBS's Croatian language program were Ivana Bačić Serdarević and Vesna Lušić.

[ 30 ] Among the radios, there are Croatian Radio Australia in Sydney and 3ZZ in Melbourne, Croatian Program World Radio and Radio Fremantle – Croatian Program.

[ 2 ] Independent channel 31 broadcasts a weekly television show for the Croatian community.

[ 2 ] Satellite programs of the Croatian Radio Television and international programs of Croatian Radio (24 hours) can also be followed throughout Australia.

[ 2 ] Periodicals [ edit ] Croatian Herald , newspaper in Victoria [ 31 ] Caritas Croatia , monthly bulletin of " Croatian Caritas Australia" [ 32 ] Film [ edit ] Unspoken , short film [ 33 ] Charities [ edit ] The most prominent humanitarian organizations include: [ 3 ] Australian-Croatian Community Services ( Australsko-hrvatske društvene usluge ), Melbourne, a non-profit organization that provides assistance to the elderly and disabled Adria Retirement Village, a retirement home and care facility Adria Village Limited, founded in 1989 by the voluntary work of members of the Croatian community in Canberra, officially opened in 1994 Cardinal Stepinac Village, a retirement home and care facility Croatian Caritas Australia Economy [ edit ] Wines [ edit ] Among prominent vineyards and wineries established and held by Croatian descendants in Australia are Talijancich Wines, [ 34 ] Katgully Wines, [ 35 ] Windy Creek Estate, [ 36 ] John Kosovich Wines [ 37 ] etc.

List of notable Croatian Australians [ edit ] Entertainment and the arts [ edit ] Steve Abbott – comedian, The Sandman, Russian/Croatian mother Eric Bana – actor (Croatian father) Charles Billich – artist Nathaniel Buzolic – actor Drago Marin Cherina – sculptor Ante Dabro – sculptor Silvana Gardner – poet and visual artist Robert Jozinović – actor Robert Luketić – film director Tatjana Lukić – poetry editor and poet Ivan Sen – film director – Croatian father, Aboriginal mother Marisa Siketa – actress Mark Strizic – Photographer and painter.

Emma Viskic – author – Croatian father, Irish Australian mother.

Music [ edit ] Alison Wonderland – electronic dance music producer, DJ and singer.

Philip Bračanin – composer and musicologist.

Steve Pavlovic – music entrepreneur [ 38 ] Roddy Radalj – musician, founding member of the Hoodoo Gurus , the Dubrovniks and Roddy Ray'Da & the Surfin' Caesars.

Natalie D-Napoleon – (Croatian father and mother) – Australian singer-songwriter and poet.

Simone Young – (Croatian mother) – Australian conductor Academia [ edit ] David Andrich – academic Science and medicine [ edit ] Brice Bosnich – chemist Ivan Marusic – physicist Vlado Perkovic – physician Ralph Sarich – Inventor of the revolutionary Orbital Engine, and at one stage, in the 1970s, Australia's richest person.

Frances Separovic - biophysical chemist Hrvoje Tkalčić – geophysicist Business and work [ edit ] Katarina Carroll (nee Bošnjak) – first female Police Commissioner, for the State of Queensland Juli Grbac , fashion designer who was the first winner of Project Runway Australia.

Tony Šantić – Millionaire tuna fisherman, horse breeder and owner of Makybe Diva Zeljko Ranogajec – businessman and professional gambler.

John Setka –  Australian Trade Union leader Media [ edit ] Charmaine Dragun – journalist Laura Dundovic – Top 10 finalist of Miss Universe 2008 friendlyjordies – Jordan Shanks-Markovina; independent journalist,  stand-up comedian and former model George Grljusich – sports journalist Sarah Harris – journalist Andrew O'Keefe – TV personality (Croatian mother) Amos Gill – Comedian, Radio and TV Presenter Silvio Rivier –  Television presenter (born in Croatia, migrated to Australia in 1961).

Politics [ edit ] Danica Baričević – politician ( Croatian Democratic Union ), born in Myrtleford , Victoria Mick Nanovich – politician (Liberal Party), Western Australia Maria Kovacic - politician, senator (Liberal Party), NSW Tony Krsticevic – politician (Liberal Party), Western Australia John Newman – Born John Naumenko, politician (Labor Party) NSW.

Jaye Radisich – politician (Labor Party), Western Australia Ljiljanna Ravlich – politician (Labor Party), Western Australia Zed Seselja – politician, senator (Liberal Party), ACT Natasha Stott Despoja – federal politician, senator (Australian Democrats) – South Australia Other [ edit ] Matthew Beovich – Roman Catholic priest, Archbishop of Adelaide.

Blaž Kraljević – Croatian and Bosnian general Ivan Milat – notorious serial killer (Croatian father) Vincent Serventy – a noted Australian author, ornithologist and conservationist.

Tom Starcevich – World War 2 Victoria Cross recipient Sport [ edit ] Jason Akermanis – His father, Denis Dezdjek, is Croatian.

Noah Balta – Australian rules footballer Adrian Barich – Australian rules and rugby league footballer Andrew Barisic – football (soccer) player, Kingfisher East Bengal Andrew Bogut – basketball player, Sydney Kings ; formerly with several NBA teams [ 39 ] Mark Bosnich – former football (soccer) player, Australia , now soccer TV analyst Oliver Bozanic - former football (soccer) player Mark Bresciano – football (soccer) player, Al Nasr and Australia (Croatian mother) Ivan Cleary – Rugby league coach and former player Nathan Cleary – Rugby league player Ante Čović – footballer (soccer) player, Elfsborg and Australia Jason Čulina - football (soccer) player, Gold Coast United and Australia Alan Didak – Australian rules footballer Joey Didulica – former Croatian footballer Bronko Djura – former rugby league footballer and cricketer Jelena Dokic – tennis player (Croatian mother) John Dorotich – Australian rules footballer Anthony Drmic – basketball player, Adelaide 36ers Frank Drmic – basketball player, last played for South Dragons Mate Dugandzic – football (soccer) player, Adelaide United FC Ray Gabelich – Australian rules footballer Eugene Galekovic – football (soccer) player and Socceroo Darren Gaspar – Australian rules footballer John Gerovich – Australian rules footballer Antony Golec – football (soccer) player, Central Coast Mariners , formerly Sydney FC , Sydney United and Adelaide United Brent Grgić – Australian rules footballer Ivan Henjak – former Rugby league footballer and coach Matt Henjak – Rugby union player, Toulon and formerly Australia (nephew of Ivan) Allen Jakovich – Australian rules footballer Glen Jakovich – Australian rules footballer Vedran Janjetović – football (soccer) player Mile Jedinak – footballer (soccer), Aston Villa and Australia .

Wayne Johnston – Australian rules footballer Tomi Jurić – footballer (soccer) and Socceroo Željko Kalac - former football (soccer) player, Kavala and Australia , now soccer TV analyst Anthony Kalik – footballer Simon Katich – Australian Cricket representative Max Krilich – Australian rugby league footballer who played in the 1970s and 1980s Anthony Leban – Australian footballer Dean Lukin – Olympic weight lifting gold medallist Ivan Maric – Australian rules footballer Marinko Matosevic – Tennis player Brody Mihocek – Australian rules footballer Jack Mihocek – Australian rules footballer Ante Milicic – former football (soccer) player, Rijeka and Australia Tomislav Mrčela – Australian footballer, NK Lokomotiva and Australia Nicola Olyslagers – Australian high jumper Len Pascoe – Australian Cricket representative Matthew Pavlich – Australian rules footballer Anthony Perosh – mixed martial arts fighter Val Perovic - Australian rules footballer Oscar Piastri - F1 driver Tony Popović – former football (soccer) player and current manager Jack Rocchi – Australian rules footballer Steven Salopek – Australian rules footballer Anthony Šerić – football (soccer) player, Hajduk Split and Croatia Josip Šimunić – former football (soccer) player, Hoffenheim and Croatia Elvis Sinosic – mixed martial arts fighter Josip Skoko – former football (soccer) player, Hajduk Split and Australia Ivan Soldo – Australian rules footballer Brandon Starcevich – Australian rules footballer Craig Starcevich – Australian rules footballer Peter Sumich – Australian rules footballer Erik Surjan – decathlete Jacob Surjan – Australian rules footballer Ajla Tomljanović – tennis player Bernard Tomić – tennis player Steven Ugarković – football player Mark Viduka – former football (soccer) player for numerous club teams and Australia Dennis Yagmich – cricket David Zdrilić – football (soccer) player, now soccer TV analyst Ned Zelić – former football (soccer) player for numerous club teams and Australia , now soccer TV analyst Noah Botić – football (soccer) player Andrew Vlahov – basketball and four-time Olympian See also [ edit ] Croatia portal Australia portal Australia–Croatia relations Ustaše in Australia Croatian New Zealanders European Australians Europeans in Oceania Immigration to Australia List of Croatian soccer clubs in Australia List of Croats Croatian Canadians Croatian Americans References [ edit ] ^ "2021 Australia, Census All persons QuickStats" .

Australian Bureau of Statistics . Retrieved 27 July 2022 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u "Hrvati u Australiji" [Croats in Australia].

Vijenac (in Croatian). No. 668. 10 October 2019.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Šikić, Tomislav (2 July 2019).

"Hrvati u Australiji" [Croats in Australia].

Voice of Croatia (in Croatian). Croatian Radio Television (HRT).

^ "Hrvati u Australiji" [Croats in Australia].

geografija.hr (in Croatian). 18 July 2005.

^ a b c d Smoje, Neven (5 March 2017).

"Summary of the history of Croatians in Western Australia" .

Croatians in Western Australia . Retrieved 24 April 2023 .

^ "THE LOSS OF THE "STEFANO." " .

The Herald . Vol. X, no. 16. Western Australia. 20 May 1876. p. 3 . Retrieved 24 April 2023 – via National Library of Australia.

^ "CROATIAN REGIME" .

The West Australian . Vol. 57, no. 17, 132. Western Australia. 4 June 1941. p. 5 . Retrieved 24 April 2023 – via National Library of Australia.

^ Persian, Jayne (2017).

Beautiful Balts . Sydney: UNSW Press.

ISBN 9781742234854 .

^ Aarons, Mark (2001).

War Criminals Welcome: Australia, a sanctuary for fugitive war criminals since 1945 . Melbourne: Black Inc.

ISBN 1863953701 .

^ "Croatian Liberation Movement NAA: A6122, 313" .

National Archives of Australia . Retrieved 25 April 2023 .

^ Starcevic, Seb.

"In Australia, Some Croats Openly Celebrate Fascism" .

Balkan Insight . Retrieved 25 April 2023 .

^ David McKnight. Australia's Spies and Their Secrets. Allen & Unwin. St Leonards, N.S.W. 1994.

^ Campion, Kristy (2018).

"The Ustaša in Australia: A Review of Right-Wing Ustaša Terrorism from 1963–1973, and Factors that Enable their Endurance" (PDF) .

Salus .

6 (2): 37– 58 . Retrieved 25 April 2023 .

^ "Parliament, Senate statement on terrorism" .

The Canberra Times . Vol. 47, no. 13, 394. Australian Capital Territory, Australia. 28 March 1973. p. 14 . Retrieved 25 April 2023 – via National Library of Australia.

^ Cottle, Drew; Keys, Angela (2023).

Fascism in Exile, Ustasha-linked organisations in Australia . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 9780367638139 .

^ Croatian Embassy in Canberra – 1977–1978 ^ a b c "People in Australia who were born in Croatia" .

ABS 2021 Census data . Australian Bureau of Statistics . Retrieved 24 April 2023 .

^ "Estimates of Australian Citizens Living Overseas as at December 2001" (PDF) . Southern Cross Group ( DFAT data). 14 February 2001. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 July 2008 . Retrieved 15 July 2008 .

^ "Cultural diversity" .

ABS 2021 Census data . Australian Bureau of Statistics. 12 January 2022 . Retrieved 24 April 2023 .

^ "Football gives Australia's Croatian community heart and home" .

The Guardian . 14 October 2013 . Retrieved 9 January 2016 .

^ "Snags high on Mark Bresciano's menu" .

Herald Sun . 23 November 2009 . Retrieved 21 January 2014 .

dad Prospero is Italian and mum Grace is Croatian ^ Folkloric Arts Festival 2023 Adelaide trybooking.com . Access date 11 June 2023.

^ Poljaković Popović, Bojana (3 July 2024).

"Nastup Folklorne skupine Zagreb iz Pertha na Zrinjevcu" [Performance of Folkloric group Zagreb from Perth at Zrinjevac].

msf.hr (in Croatian). Zagreb International Folklore Festival.

^ " "Vukovar" proslavio 40. obljetnicu pred oduševljenom publikom" ["Vukovar" celebrated its 40th anniversary in front of delighted public] (in Croatian). SBS. 5 November 2024.

^ "Australian sons of Croatian island immigrants off to the homeland for special anniversary" . Croatia Week. 26 June 2023 . Retrieved 28 June 2023 .

^ "ACCS Australian Croatian Community Services" .

hobsonbay.vic.gov.au . Hobsons Bay City Council . Retrieved 16 December 2023 .

^ "About CLA" .

cla-croatian.com . Croatian Language Academy . Retrieved 16 December 2023 .

^ "IMPORTANT UPDATE – THE FUTURE OF CROATIAN STUDIES AT MACQUARIE UNIVERSITY" .

croatianstudiesfoundation.com.au . Croatian Studies Foundation . Retrieved 20 November 2023 .

^ a b c "Jedinstvena proslava hrvatskog jezika u Sydneyu" .

sbs.com.au (in Croatian). SBS. 10 December 2024.

^ Bennett, Sophie; Solomon, Ana (17 December 2024).

"SBS-ovi jezični radijski programi uvršteni u legendarnu kolekciju "Zvukovi Australije" " (in Croatian). SBS.

^ Croatian Herald on Facebook. Retrieved 4 September 2023.

^ "Caritas Croata : prvi hrvatski bilten u Australii" .

dabar.srce.hr (in Croatian). SRCE. 1953 . Retrieved 2 February 2024 .

^ Buljan, Marijana (13 February 2025).

"Film o Hrvatima u Australiji odnio pobjedu na uglednom festivalu" (in Croatian). SBS.

^ "Abouts Us" . Talijancich Wines.

^ "Abouts Us" . Katgully Wines.

^ About Us Windy Creek Estate Archived 12 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine ^ John Kosovich Wines Swan Valley Archived 23 April 2019 at the Wayback Machine ^ "VIDEO: Meet the Croatian-Australian music entrepreneur once called the 'coolest guy' in Australia in the 90s" .

croatiaweek.com . Croatia Week. 4 September 2023.

^ "NBA champ Andrew Bogut: 'I grew up in Australia but was raised Croatian' " .

croatiaweek.com . 21 February 2023.

Andrew, who learned the Croatian language and about customs at home growing up, says that made the transition easy when he finally did visit Croatia. 'I consider myself both (Croatian and Australian). A lot of ideals and hardheadedness come from my Croatian side, and I think that is a good thing at times, and I am also proud of the fact that Australia has provided a lot for myself and my family.' Further reading [ edit ] Colic-Peisker, Val.(2000) Croatian and Bosnian migration to Australia in the 1990s . Studies in Western Australian history, No.21, (Being Australian women), p. 117–136.

Colic-Peisker, Val.(2004) Split lives: Croatian Australian stories North Fremantle, W. Aust.: Fremantle Arts Centre Press.

ISBN 1-920731-08-3 External links [ edit ] Australian Croatian community portal Walter F Lalich and Luka Budak – Croatian Studies Centre, Macquarie University (2008).

"Croatians" .

Dictionary of Sydney . Retrieved 4 October 2015 .

(Croatians in Sydney) v t e Ancestry of Australians Ancestral background of Australian citizens Indigenous Aboriginal Australians Torres Strait Islanders Africa Angolan Beninese Burundian Cameroonian Congolese Eritrean Ethiopian Gabonese Gambian Ghanaian Guinean Ivorian Kenyan Liberian Malawian Malian Mauritian Nigerian Rwandan Senegalese Sierra Leonean South African Tanzanian Togolese Ugandan Zambian Zimbabwean Americas American Canadian Caribbean and West Indian Australian Hispanic and Latin American Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Cuban Ecuadorian Guatemalan Honduran Mexican Panamanian Paraguayan Peruvian Puerto Rican Salvadoran Uruguayan Venezuelan Jamaican Trinidadian and Tobagonian Asia Afghan Hazara Pashtun Armenian Azerbaijani Bangladeshi Bengali Bhutanese Burmese Chin Karen Mon Cambodian Chinese Hong Kong Cantonese Taiwanese Hakka Fuzhou/Hokchiu Hoklo Hmong Mien Tibetan Uyghur East Timorese Filipino Georgian Indian Bengali Gujarati Indo-Fijian Malayali Punjabi Sindhi Tamil Telugu Indonesian Acehnese Balinese Javanese Madurese Sundanese Japanese Kazakh Korean Kyrgyz Laotian Malaysian Bruneian Kadazan Temoq Maldivian Mongolian Nepali Pakistani Baloch Hazara Pashtun Punjabi Sindhi Pathan Singaporean Sri Lankan Tamil Tajik Tatar Thai Turkmen Uzbek Vietnamese Hmong Mien Europe Albanian Anglo-Celtic Cornish English Irish Northern Irish Scottish Welsh Austrian Belgian Belarusian Bosnian Bulgarian Croatian Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch Estonian French Finnish German Greek Hungarian Icelandic Italian Latvian Lithuanian Macedonian Maltese Montenegrin Norwegian Polish Portuguese Romani Romanian Russian Serbian Slovak Slovene Spanish Swedish Swiss Ukrainian Middle East and North Africa Arab Algerian Bahraini Egyptian Emirati Iraqi Jordanian Kuwaiti Lebanese Libyan Moroccan Palestinian Saudi Somali Syrian Tunisian Assyrian Bari Berber Coptic Darfur Dinka Iranian Israeli / Jewish Kurdish Mandaean Nubian Nuer South Sudanese Sudanese Turkish Yezidi Oceania Fijian Indo-Fijian Niuean Ni-Vanuatu New Zealander Māori Papua New Guinean Samoan South Sea Islander Tongan according to Reflecting a Nation: Stories from the 2011 Census, 2012–2013 and Census of Population and Housing: Reflecting Australia - Stories from the Census, 2016 v t e Croatian diaspora Americas Argentina Bolivia Brazil Canada Chile Ecuador Mexico Peru United States Uruguay Venezuela Europe Austria Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Czech Republic France [ hr ] Germany Hungary Italy Molise Croats Kosovo Montenegro North Macedonia Romania Krashovani Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Oceania Australia New Zealand Portals : Australia Croatia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Croatian_Australians&oldid=1300924125 " Categories : Australian people of Croatian descent Croatian diaspora in Australia Hidden categories: CS1 Croatian-language sources (hr) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from November 2017 Use dmy dates from November 2017 Short description is different from Wikidata "Related ethnic groups" needing confirmation Articles using infobox ethnic group with image parameters Articles containing Croatian-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2022 Articles needing additional references from July 2008 All articles needing additional references Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 04:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Croatian Australians 2 languages Add topic

