Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Law Toggle Law subsection 2.1 Universal Declaration of Human Rights 2.2 Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms 2.3 European Convention 2.4 Italian Constitution 2.5 South African Bill of Rights 2.6 United States Constitution 3 Intimate association 4 Expressive association Toggle Expressive association subsection 4.1 Limitation 5 Organized labor 6 Democracy 7 Civil society 8 Libertarian 9 See also 10 Notes Toggle the table of contents Freedom of association 37 languages العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia עברית Latina Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Română Русский کوردی Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Right to collective action Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Freedom of association encompasses both an individual's right to join or leave groups voluntarily, the right of the group to take collective action to pursue the interests of its members, and the right of an association to accept or decline membership based on certain criteria. It can be described as the right of a person coming together with other individuals to collectively express, promote, pursue and/or defend common interests.

[ 1 ] Freedom of association is both an individual right and a collective right , guaranteed by all modern and democratic legal systems, including the United States Bill of Rights , article 11 of the European Convention on Human Rights , section 2 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms , and international law , including articles 20 and 23 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and article 22 of International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights .  The Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work by the International Labour Organization also ensures these rights.

Freedom of association is manifested through the right to join a trade union , to engage in free speech or to participate in debating societies, political parties , or any other club or association, including religious denominations and organizations , fraternities , and sport clubs and not to be compelled to belong to an association.

[ 2 ] It is closely linked with freedom of assembly , particularly under the U.S. Bill of Rights . Freedom of assembly is typically associated with political contexts. However, (e.g.

the U.S. Constitution , human rights instruments , etc.) the right to freedom of association may include the right to freedom of assembly .

The courts and delegated officers of local jurisdictions may impose restrictions on any of the rights of a convicted criminal as a condition of a legal stipulation. Rights to freedom of association and freedom of assembly are waived under certain circumstances, such as a guilty plea or conviction, restraining orders and probationer's search and seizure procedures. Freedom of association is also legally restricted in certain circumstances such as with the Civil Rights Act , in which private discrimination against certain protected classes was made illegal.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] The general freedom to associate with groups according to the choice of the individual, and for the groups to take action to promote their interests, has been a necessary feature of every democratic society. Because freedom of association necessarily recognizes pluralistic sources of power and organisation, aside from the government, it has been a primary target for repression by all dictatorial societies. In the United Kingdom , all forms of "combination" were prohibited and criminal, particularly worker organisations, until the Combination Act 1825 . After this, it was still not by the Companies Act 1856 , the Trade Union Act 1871 and the Criminal Conspiracy and Protection of Property Act 1875 that companies and then trade unions became generally lawful. In Germany, a similar set of repressive laws was put in place against both trade unions and social democrat organisations by the Bismarck government under the Sozialistengesetze (the "Socialist Acts") in 1878. These remained in force until 1890. In 1933, trade unions were once again prohibited by the Fascist dictatorship of Hitler 's National Socialist party, and the existing unions were nationalized and combined into a single government controlled German Labor Front . In West Germany after World War II , free trade unions were quickly resurrected and guaranteed by the German Grundgesetz . In the United States , trade unions were classified by various state courts, at various times, as being in restraint of trade . Under the Clayton Act of 1914 , trade unions were given a general freedom to organize and to act collectively to secure collective agreements, however further hurdles were put in place until the National Labor Relations Act of 1935 created a comprehensive labor code.

Law [ edit ] Universal Declaration of Human Rights [ edit ] Freedom of association is enshrined by Universal Declaration of Human Rights in Article 20: 1. Everyone has the right to freedom of peaceful assembly and association.
2. No one may be compelled to belong to an association.

— Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Article 20 Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms [ edit ] Section 2 of the Charter, under the heading of " Fundamental Freedoms ", states: Everyone has the following fundamental freedoms: ...

d) freedom of association.

Under Canadian jurisprudence , freedom of association has three dimensions: the "constitutive" right to form associations with other people, a "derivative" right to collectively invoke other constitutional rights, and the "purposive" right to collectively bargain in order to be on equal footing with other groups and entities.

[ 4 ] European Convention [ edit ] Main article: Article 11 ECHR Italian Constitution [ edit ] In Italy the freedom of association is established in Article 18 of the Constitution , which states: [ 5 ] Citizens have the right to form associations freely and without authorization for those ends that are not forbidden by criminal law.
Secret associations and associations that, even indirectly, pursue political aims by means of organisations having a military character shall be forbidden.

South African Bill of Rights [ edit ] Main article: Constitution of South Africa Chapter 2: Bill of Rights The South African Constitution 's Bill of Rights establishes the right to freedom of association in Section 18, which states "Everyone has the right to freedom of association." Furthermore, Section 17 states "Everyone has the right, peacefully and unarmed, to assemble, to demonstrate, to picket and to present petitions", thus establishing the right to freedom of assembly . Workers' right to freedom of association in terms of the right to form trade unions and collective bargaining is recognized separately, in Section 23.

[ 6 ] United States Constitution [ edit ] Constitutional law of the United States Overview Articles Amendments History Judicial review Principles Separation of powers Individual rights Rule of law Federalism Republicanism Equal footing Tiers of scrutiny Government structure Legislative branch Executive branch Judicial branch State government Local government Individual rights Freedom of religion Freedom of speech Freedom of the press Freedom of assembly Right to petition Freedom of association Right to keep and bear arms Right to trial by jury Criminal procedural rights Right to privacy Freedom from slavery Due process Equal protection Citizenship Voting rights Right to candidacy Comprehensible rules Theory Living Constitution Originalism Substantive due process Political process theory Judicial restraint Purposivism Textualism Strict constructionism Common good constitutionalism Unitary executive theory v t e While the United States Constitution 's First Amendment identifies the rights to assemble and to petition the government , the text of the First Amendment does not make specific mention of a right to association.  Nevertheless, the United States Supreme Court held in NAACP v. Alabama (1958) that freedom of association is an essential part of freedom of speech because, in many cases, people can engage in effective speech only when they join with others.

[ 7 ] Other Supreme Court cases involving freedom of association issues include: [ 8 ] Brotherhood of Railroad Trainmen v. Virginia , 377 U.S. 1 (1964) United Mine Workers v. Illinois State Bar Association , 389 U.S. 217 (1967) Healy v. James , 408 U.S. 169 (1972) NAACP v. Claiborne Hardware Co.

, 458 U.S. 898 (1982) Boy Scouts of America v. Dale , 530 U.S. 640 (2000) Janus v. AFSCME , No. 16-1466, 585 U.S. ___ (2018) Intimate association [ edit ] A fundamental element of personal liberty is the right to choose to enter into and maintain certain intimate human relationships.  These intimate human relationships are considered forms of "intimate association." The paradigmatic example of "intimate association" is the family.  Depending on the jurisdiction it may also extend to abortion, birth control and private, adult, non-commercial and consensual sexual relationships.

Expressive association [ edit ] In the United States, expressive associations are groups that engage in activities protected by the First Amendment – speech , assembly , press, petitioning government for a redress of grievances, and the free exercise of religion .  In Roberts v. United States Jaycees , the U.S. Supreme Court held that laws banning associations from excluding people for reasons unrelated to the group's expression are constitutional.  However, in the subsequent decisions of Hurley v. Irish-American Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Group of Boston , the Court ruled that a group may exclude people from membership if their presence would affect the group's ability to advocate a particular point of view.  The government cannot, through the use of anti-discrimination laws, force groups to include a message that they do not wish to convey.

This concept continues to apply broadly to private groups, notwithstanding the Supreme Court's ruling in Christian Legal Society v. Martinez (2010), which upheld Hastings College of Law policy that a student group on campus could not enjoy university recognition while excluding people from group activities by requiring them to undergo a religious test. The Court found that the school's conditions on recognizing student groups were viewpoint neutral and reasonable. The policy requires student organizations to allow "any student to participate, become a member, or seek leadership positions, regardless of their status or beliefs" and so, can be used to deny the group recognition as an official student organization because it had required its members to attest in writing that "I believe in: The Bible as the inspired word of God; The Deity of our Lord, Jesus Christ, God's son; The vicarious death of Jesus Christ for our sins; His bodily resurrection and His personal return; The presence and power of the Holy Spirit in the work of regeneration; [and] Jesus Christ, God's son, is Lord of my life." The Court reasoned that Hastings sought to treat all student groups equally; the CLS, on the other hand, sought an exemption to apply a religious test to their membership. Thus, the college's all-comers policy is a reasonable, viewpoint-neutral condition on access to the student organization forum.

[ 9 ] Limitation [ edit ] The implicit First Amendment right of association in the U.S. Constitution has been limited by court rulings.  For example, it is illegal in the United States to consider race in the making and enforcement of private contracts other than marriage. This limit on freedom of association results from Section 1981 of Title 42 of the United States Code , as balanced against the First Amendment in the 1976 decision of Runyon v. McCrary .

[ 10 ] Governments often require contracts of adhesion with private entities for licensing purposes, such as with Financial Industry Regulatory Authority for stock market trading in the 1938 Maloney Act amendments to the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 . These contracts often bar association with banned members, as can be seen in United States v. Merriam , 108 F.3d 1162.

Organized labor [ edit ] See also: UK labour law , US labor law , European labour law , and International labour law Part of a series on Organized labour Labour movement Conflict theories Decent work Exploitation of labour Timeline New unionism Proletariat Sectoral collective bargaining Social movement unionism Social democracy Democratic socialism Socialism Communism Syndicalism Union busting Anarcho-syndicalism National-syndicalism Workplace democracy Labour rights Annual leave Child labour Collective bargaining Diversity, equity, and inclusion Economic globalization Eight-hour day Employment discrimination Employment protection Equal pay Four-day week Freedom of association Low-cost country sourcing Legal working age Minimum wage Neurodiversity and labour rights Occupational safety and health Overwork Paid time off Professional abuse Race to the bottom Exploitation of labour Right to rest and leisure Right to sit Sabbatical Sick leave Six-hour day Toxic workplace Unfree labour Workers' right to access the toilet Trade unions Trade unions by country Trade union federations International comparisons ITUC WFTU Strike action Chronological list of strikes Hartal General strike Bandh newspapers Green bans Lockouts Overtime bans Pen-down strikes Sitdown strikes Solidarity action Walkouts Whipsaw strikes Wildcat strikes Work-to-rule Labour parties Australia Barbados Brazil Fiji Georgia Hong Kong Ireland Israel Malta New Caledonia New Zealand Netherlands Norway Portugal Singapore South Korea United Kingdom Sweden Academic disciplines Critique of work Industrial relations Labour economics Labour history Labour law Post-work society Refusal of work v t e The organization of labor was commonly resisted during the 19th century, with even relatively liberal countries such as the United Kingdom banning it for various periods (in the UK's case, between 1820 and 1824).

[ 11 ] In the international labour movement, the freedom of association is a right identified under international labour standards as the right of workers to organize and collectively bargain .  Freedom of association, in this sense, is recognized as a fundamental human right by a number of documents including the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and International Labour Organization Convention C87 and Convention C98 – two of the eight fundamental, core international labour standards. 'Freedom of association' can also refer to legal bans on private contracts negotiated between a private employer and their employees requiring workers at a particular workplace to join a union as a term and condition of employment. Supporters of this sort of private freedom of association claim that the right to join a union incorporates a right not to join a union. In the United States , the term ' right-to-work law ' is more common for this type of law.

"The Supreme Court today (1-21-1997) sharply limited the ability of labor union organizers to go onto an employer's property to distribute literature or urge workers to join the union. In a 6-to-3 opinion written by Justice Clarence Thomas, the Court said that the National Labor Relations Board had failed to give adequate protection to employers' property rights when it adopted a rule four years ago that gave union organizers greater access to areas like the parking lots of shopping centers or factories." -New York Times [ 12 ] Democracy [ edit ] See also: Free and fair election Jeremy McBride argues that respecting the freedom of association by all public authorities and the exercising of this freedom by all sections of society are essential both to establish a "genuine democracy " and to ensure that, once achieved, it remains "healthy and flourishing". In this regard he sees the formation of political parties as a significant manifestation of the freedom of association.

Civil society [ edit ] The freedom of association is not only exercised in the political sense, but also for a vast array of interests – such as culture, recreation, sport and social and humanitarian assistance. Jeremy McBride argues that the formation of non-governmental organizations ( NGOs ), which he equates with civil society , is the "fruit of associational activity".

[ 1 ] Libertarian [ edit ] Part of a series on Libertarianism Concepts Anti-capitalism Anti-statism Civil libertarianism Crypto-anarchism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Evictionism Expropriative anarchism Federalism (anarchist) Free association (Marxism and anarchism) Free market Free-market environmentalism Freedom of association Freedom of choice Freedom of contract Gift economy Homestead principle Illegalism Individualism Individualist feminism Individual reclamation Liberty Libertarianism (metaphysics) Localism Natural law Natural rights and legal rights Night-watchman state Non-aggression principle Participatory economics Property is theft!

Refusal of work Self-ownership Single tax Spontaneous order Stateless society Voluntary association Voluntary society Workers' councils Workers' self-management Issues Abortion Affirmative action Anarcho-capitalism and minarchism Capital punishment Foreign intervention Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political alliances Political parties Theories of law War on Drugs Philosophers La Boétie Locke Franklin Burke Paine Jefferson Bentham Godwin Hodgskin Warren Emerson Stirner Spooner Proudhon Andrews Bakunin Thoreau Spencer Herbert George De Cleyre Goldman Gandhi Mises Paterson Hayek Rand Friedman (Milton) Bookchin Hess Rothbard Chomsky Nozick Machan Block Friedman (David) Van Dun Konkin Hoppe Lottieri Martín Huemer Brennan Politicians Bastiat Gladstone Acton Cleveland Coolidge Goldwater Paul Korwin-Mikke Johnson Milei Hannan Polis National variants Spain United Kingdom England United States Historical background Age of Enlightenment Anarchism Aristotelianism Liberalism classical radical Related topics Abolitionism Anti-collectivism Anti-communism Anti-fascism Anti-socialism Austro-libertarianism Center for Libertarian Studies Civil libertarianism Classical liberalism Conscientious objector Constitutionalism Cultural liberalism Economic liberalism Freeman on the land movement Fusionism Geolibertarianism Georgism Green libertarianism Libertarian conservatism Libertarian Democrats Libertarian socialism Libertarian Republicans Libertarian science fiction Libertarianism in the United Kingdom Libertarianism in the United States Objectivism Public choice theory Small government Sovereign citizen movement Technolibertarianism Libertarianism portal Politics portal v t e Right-libertarians believe that while freedom of association includes the right for workers to organise as unions and to withdraw their labour it also recognises the right of an employer to replace that labour.

[ 13 ] They also believe that where unions employ coercive or violent tactics, such behaviours would be in breach of both individual rights and property rights. Some critics of unionism allege that such breaches have frequently been the case with union activity.

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Libertarianism portal Ballot access Civil liberties Free association (Marxism and anarchism) Free State Project Libertarian socialism List of banned political parties Nomination rules Self-determination United Nations Special Rapporteur on the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of association Voluntary association Voluntaryism Notes [ edit ] ^ a b McBride, Jeremy (2005).

Freedom of Association, The Essentials of Human Rights , London: Hodder Arnold, p. 18 [ ISBN missing ] ^ Universal Declaration of Human Rights , Article 20, 2 ^ Pilon, Roger (February 16, 2017).

"Freedom of Association Takes Another Hit" .

www.cato.org . Retrieved 2024-06-28 .

^ "Charterpedia – Section 2(d) – Freedom of association" .

Government of Canada Department of Justice . 1999-11-09 . Retrieved 2022-01-10 .

^ "The Italian Constitution" (PDF) . Presidency of the Italian Republic. Archived from the original on 2016-11-27.

^ Constitution of South Africa Chapter 2: Bill of Rights ^ Wayne Batchis, Citizens United and the Paradox of "Corporate Speech": From Freedom of Association to Freedom of The Association, 36 N.Y.U. Rev. L. & Soc. Change 5 Archived 2013-05-13 at the Wayback Machine (2012).

^ Hudson, David (2009-06-16).

"Freedom of Association – The First Amendment Encyclopedia" .

Middle Tennessee State University . Retrieved 2021-06-16 .

^ "Christian Legal Society Chapter v. Martinez" .

Oyez . Chicago-Kent College of Law at Illinois Tech . Retrieved 1 April 2016 .

^ 427 U.S.

160 (1976).

^ "Right of Voluntary Association" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . 1913.

^ Greenhouse, Linda (1992-01-28).

"Supreme Court Roundup; Limits Placed on Union Organizers on Employers' Property" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2019-06-26 .

^ "A free market in labour: libertarians, employment and the unions" .

Adam Smith Institute .

^ DiLorenzo, Thomas J.

(14 September 2004).

"The Myth of Voluntary Unions" .

Mises Institute .

v t e Liberty Concepts Artistic freedom Cognitive liberty Free will Freedom of conscience Freedom of expression Freedom of Expression (book) Algeria Canada India South Africa Freethought Moral responsibility Personification of Liberty Libertas Negative liberty Positive liberty Rights Self-ownership Topfreedom By type Academic Civil Economic Financial Intellectual Internet Morphological Political By right Abortion Assembly Association Asylum Cannabis Choice Civil and political Clothing Death Digital Education Fair trial Family Freedom from discrimination Food Gun Health Housing Internet access Information Life Morphological Movement Personality Press Privacy Property Protest Religion Repair Resist Self-defense Sexual and reproductive health Sexuality Silence Speech Thought To be forgotten Truth Water and sanitation Workers' right to access the toilet See also All men are created equal Anarchism Autonomy Beard and haircut laws by country Civil libertarianism Clothing laws by country Dancing ban Decriminalization of sex work Drug liberalization Human rights Left-libertarianism Legality of recording by civilians LGBTQ rights Libertarianism Liberty, equality, brotherhood Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness Photography and the law Photography Is Not a Crime Pornography laws by region Prostitution law Psilocybin decriminalization in the United States Right-libertarianism Self-determination Stanley v. Georgia Universal Declaration of Human Rights v t e Substantive human rights What is considered a human right is in some cases controversial; not all the topics listed are universally accepted as human rights Civil and political Equality before the law Freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention Freedom of assembly Freedom of association Cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment Freedom from discrimination Freedom of information Freedom of movement Freedom of religion Freedom from slavery Freedom of speech Freedom of thought Freedom from torture LGBT rights Liberty Nationality Personhood Presumption of innocence Access to justice Right of asylum Right to die Right to a fair trial Right to counsel Right to family life Right to keep and bear arms Right to life Right to petition Right to privacy Right to protest Right to refuse medical treatment Right to resist Right of return Right of self-defense Right to truth Security of person Speedy trial Suffrage right to be a candidate Right to homeland Economic, social and cultural Digital rights Equal pay for equal work Fair remuneration Labor rights Right to an adequate standard of living Right to clothing Right to development Right to education Right to food Right to health Right to a healthy environment Right to housing Right to Internet access Right to property Right to public participation Right of reply Right to rest and leisure Right of return Right to science and culture Right to social security Right to water Right to work Sexual and reproductive Abortion Family planning Family rights Freedom from involuntary female genital mutilation Freedom from forced circumcision Intersex human rights LGBT rights Sexual and reproductive health Right to sexuality v t e U.S. Supreme Court Assemble and Petition Clause case law First Amendment to the United States Constitution Freedom of assembly Incorporation United States v. Cruikshank (1876) Presser v. Illinois (1886) Protection from prosecution and state restrictions De Jonge v. Oregon (1937) Coates v. City of Cincinnati (1971) Americans for Prosperity Foundation v. Bonta (2021) Freedom of association Organizations Joint Anti-Fascist Refugee Committee v. McGrath (1951) Watkins v. United States (1957) NAACP v. Alabama (1958) Bates v. City of Little Rock (1960) NAACP v. Button (1963) Americans for Prosperity Foundation v. Bonta (2021) Future Conduct Baggett v. Bullitt (1964) Solicitation In re Primus (1978) Membership restriction Baird v. State Bar of Arizona (1971) Roberts v. United States Jaycees (1984) Dallas v. Stanglin (1989) Hurley v. Irish-American Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Group of Boston (1995) Boy Scouts of America v. Dale (2000) Christian Legal Society v. Martinez (2010) Primaries and elections Anderson v. Celebrezze (1983) California Democratic Party v. Jones (2000) New York State Board of Elections v. Lopez Torres (2008) Washington State Grange v. Washington State Republican Party (2008) Freedom to petition United States v. Cruikshank (1876) Eastern Railroad Presidents Conference v. Noerr Motor Freight, Inc.

(1961) NAACP v. Button (1963) Edwards v. South Carolina (1963) United Mine Workers v. Pennington (1965) Cox v. Louisiana (1965) California Motor Transport Co. v. Trucking Unlimited (1972) McDonald v. Smith (1985) Meyer v. Grant (1988) Buckley v. American Constitutional Law Foundation, Inc.

(1999) Doe v. Reed (2010) Borough of Duryea v. Guarnieri (2011) Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐8b7pc
Cached time: 20250816114300
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.714 seconds
Real time usage: 0.926 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3205/1000000
Revision size: 18583/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 198986/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7782/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 133451/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.440/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7469561/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  701.452      1 -total
 38.55%  270.416      3 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 26.85%  188.332      1 Template:Reflist
 20.08%  140.859      1 Template:Liberalism_sidebar
 19.67%  137.961      5 Template:Excerpt
 15.54%  109.019      1 Template:Libertarianism_sidebar
 15.47%  108.541      7 Template:Cite_web
  8.59%   60.232      1 Template:Short_description
  6.78%   47.537      1 Template:Authority_control
  5.53%   38.765      4 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:219580:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816114300 and revision id 1298243143. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Freedom_of_association&oldid=1298243143 " Categories : Freedom of association Human rights by issue Concepts in political philosophy Hidden categories: Pages with missing ISBNs Webarchive template wayback links Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 1 July 2025, at 08:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Freedom of association 37 languages Add topic

