Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Ancient 1.2 Modern 2 Adoption 3 Marriage 4 Rights of female heirs 5 Succession 6 Twin sons 7 Death 8 Gallery 9 See also 10 Citations 11 References 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Jain law 1 language ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Religious law in India Part of a series on Jainism Jains History Timeline Index Philosophy Anekantavada Cosmology Ahimsa Karma Dharma Mokṣa Kevala Jnana Dravya Tattva Brahmacarya Aparigraha Gunasthana Saṃsāra Ethics Ethics of Jainism Mahavratas (major vows) Ahiṃsā (non-violence) Satya (truth) Asteya (non-stealing) Brahmacarya (chastity) Aparigraha (non-possession) Anuvratas (further vows) Sāmāyika Sallekhana Jain prayers Bhaktamara Stotra Micchami Dukkadam Navkar Mantra Ṇamōkāra mantra Jai Jinendra Major figures The 24 Tirthankaras Rishabha Pārśva Mahavira Arihant Ganadhara Kundakunda Siddhasenadivākarasuri Samantabhadra Haribhadra Yashovijaya Major sects Schools and Branches Digambara Śvetāmbara Jain literature Samayasāra (Digambara) Pravachanasara (Digambara) Agama (Śvetāmbara) Tattvartha Sutra Dravyasamgraha (Digambara) Kalpa Sūtra (Śvetāmbara) Uttaradhyayana (Śvetāmbara) Cīvaka Cintāmaṇi Silappatikaram Valayapathi Festivals Diwali Mahavir Janma Kalyanak Paryushana Samvatsari Pilgrimages Tirth Abu Palitana Girnar Shikharji Shravanabelagola Other Ekendriya Temples Jain flag Jain symbols Parasparopagraho Jivanam Topics list Religion portal v t e Jain law or Jaina law is the modern interpretation of ancient Jain law that consists of rules for adoption, marriage, succession and death prescribed for the followers of Jainism .

History [ edit ] Ancient [ edit ] Jains regard Bharata Chakravartin as the first law giver of the present half cycle of time.

[ 1 ] Jains have their own law books.

Vardhamana Niti and Ashana Niti by the great Jain teacher Hemachandra deals with Jain law.

[ 2 ] Bhadrabahu Samhit is also considered an important book on Jaina law.

Modern [ edit ] In 1916, Barrister Jagomandar Lal Jaini (1881-1927) published a translation of Bhadrabahu Samhita , which went on to form the basis of modern Jain law. The author mentioned the full text of a judgement that he delivered in Civil Original Case No. 6 of 1914, Indore, in which Jain religious and legal scriptures were explicitly quoted and relied upon.

[ 3 ] It has been suggested that Jain mendicants kept Jain lawbooks away from the British because of the Jain laws of purity.

[ 4 ] Jain lawgivers had taken great pains to define violence, and were clear that no form of violence was permitted for Jain mendicants. The lawgivers were not so clear on the conduct of Jain laymen, assuming that a violent situation would not arise amongst a community that was numerically small.

[ 4 ] After the Montagu Declaration in 1917, the Jain Political Association was set up by the same circle of predominantly Digambara Jain intellectuals to create a unitary political representation for the Jains. In due course the society intended, after due search of the śāstric literature, to give a definite shape to Jaina Law.

[ 5 ] The culmination of this effort was the most prominent book on the subject of Jain law, written by Champat Rai Jain .

[ 6 ] In 1955, the Government of India subsumed Jain law under Hindu law, though Jain law continues in unofficial and semi-official fora.

[ 7 ] Adoption [ edit ] In 1927, Madras High Court in Gateppa v. Eramma and others reported in AIR 1927 Madras 228, the court held that in Bhadrabahu Samhita, verse 40 empowers a sonless man or woman to take a boy in adoption. Verse 83 empowers a widow to adopt a boy and make over her property to him. Verse 73 was quoted in the judgement [ 8 ] - The virtuous lady may like her husband take to herself a son of a good gotra and instal him on the estate of her husband.

Marriage [ edit ] Jain Agamas mention that there are five types of marriages .

[ 9 ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( January 2022 ) Rights of female heirs [ edit ] The rights of female heir in Jaina law are different from that of Hindu Law. Under the Jaina Law females take the inheritance absolutely.

[ 10 ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( January 2022 ) Succession [ edit ] Upon the death of a person without a son, the property is entirely passed on to the widow. The property remains with the widow even if there were to be a son. This is an important difference between Jain law and Hindu law. In Hindu law, the widow does not have the right to the deceased husband's property. In Jainism, there is no privilege accorded to a male heir, and a widow is treated as a preferential heir to her own son.

[ 11 ] Twin sons [ edit ] According to Jain law, in case of twin born sons, the first born or the eldest is entitled for more privileges at the time of partition.

[ 1 ] Death [ edit ] Main article: Sallekhana Gallery [ edit ] Champat Rai Jain , author of the modern Jaina Law The Householder's Dharma See also [ edit ] Christian personal law Hebrew law Modern Hindu law Classical Hindu law Citations [ edit ] ^ a b Jain 2004 , p. i.

^ Jain, Champat Rai (1974), Fundamentals of Jainism ^ Derrett, John Duncan Martin (1978), Essays in Classical and Modern Hindu Law: Current problems and the legacy of , ISBN 9004057536 ^ a b Sharafi, Mitra (21 April 2014), Law and Identity in Colonial South Asia , ISBN 9781139868068 ^ Flügel, Peter (2007).

"A Short History of Jaina Law" (PDF) .

International Journal of Jaina Studies .

3 (4). Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 December 2021 . Retrieved 23 February 2016 .

^ Gel, Peter Fl; Flügel, Peter (1 February 2006), Studies in Jaina History and Culture , ISBN 9781134235520 ^ Flügel, Peter (1 February 2006), Studies in Jaina History and Culture , ISBN 9781134235513 ^ "(Bobbaladi) Gateppa vs (Bobbaladi) Eramma And Ors. on 13 August, 1926" . Retrieved 23 February 2016 .

^ Caillat, Colette; Balbir, Nalini (1 January 2008), Jaina Studies , ISBN 9788120832473 ^ Jain 2004 , p. xvi.

^ Sangave, Vilas Adinath (1980), Jaina Community , ISBN 9780317123463 References [ edit ] Jain, Champat Rai (2004), Selections from the Jaina law , Jaina Vidyā Saṁsthāna, ISBN 9788188677016 Further reading [ edit ] Flügel, Dr. Peter, A Short History Of Jaina Law External links [ edit ] Media related to Jain law at Wikimedia Commons v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline v t e Jainism topics Gods Arihant Ganadhara Tirthankara Mahavira Rishabhanatha Philosophy Five Vows Ahimsa Anekantavada Cosmology Deva Naraka Siddhashila Death Dravya Jīva Ajiva Pudgala Dharma Epistemology Kevala Jnana Gunasthana Karma Causes Types Kashaya Ratnatraya Samsara Tattva Asrava Bandha Moksha Nirjara Samvara Branches Digambara Bispanthi Kanji Panth Mula Sangha Balatkara Gana Kashtha Sangha Taran Panth Terapanth Svetambara Murtipujaka Gaccha Kharatara Tapa Tristutik Sthanakavasi Practices Fasting Festivals Paryushana Kshamavani Mahamastakabhisheka Meditation Monasticism Pratikramana Samayika Rituals Sallekhana Tapas Upadhan Vegetarianism Literature Agama Aptamimamsa Bhaktamara Stotra Civaka Cintamani Culamani Kalpa Sūtra Kasayapahuda Naga Kumara Kaviyam Neelakesi Namokar Mantra Pravachanasara Samayasāra Shatkhandagama Tattvartha Sutra Uttaradhyayana Udayana Kumara Kaviyam Valayapathi Yashodhara Kaviyam Symbols Ashtamangala Auspicious dreams Jain flag Siddhachakra Shrivatsa Nandavarta Swastika Ascetics Acharya Aryika Digambara monk Kshullak Pattavali Scholars Bal Patil Champat Rai Jain Chandabai Colette Caillat Hampana Hermann Jacobi Jeffery D. Long John E. Cort Nalini Balbir Padmanabh Jaini Paul Dundas Virchand Gandhi Community Sravaka Sarak Tamil Jain Organisations Digambar Jain Mahasabha JAINA Vishwa Jain Sangathan Jainism in India Bundelkhand Delhi Goa Gujarat Haryana Karnataka North Kerala Maharashtra Mumbai Rajasthan Tamil Nadu Uttar Pradesh West Bengal Overseas Africa Australia Belgium Canada Europe Hong Kong Japan Pakistan Singapore Southeast Asia United States Jainism and Buddhism Hinduism Islam Non-creationism Sikhism Dynasties and empires Chalukya Ganga Hoysala Ikshvaku Kadamba Kalinga Maurya Pandya Rashtrakuta Santara Related Art Ekendriya History Timeline Law Mathematics Panca-Paramesthi Nigoda Panch Kalyanaka Pratima Salakapurusa Samavasarana Sexual differences Statue of Ahimsa Sculpture Stupa Temple Terms and concepts Tirtha Vira Nirvana Samvat Samvatsari Lists Jains Jain temples Jain ascetics Digambar Topics Navboxes Gods Literature Monks & nuns Scholars Temples America Bengal Religion portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jain_law&oldid=1254751676 " Categories : Jain law Indian family law Legislation in British India Ancient Indian law Legal codes Religious law Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2016 Use Indian English from February 2016 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Articles to be expanded from January 2022 All articles to be expanded Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 November 2024, at 14:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jain law 1 language Add topic

