Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Pakistan Toggle Pakistan subsection 1.1 1953 1.2 1974 riots and constitutional amendment 1.3 Ordinance XX of 1984 1.4 Shab Qadar incident 1.5 2000 1.6 2005 1.7 2008 1.8 2009 1.9 2010 1.10 2011 1.10.1 In education 1.11 2012 1.11.1 Anti-Ahmadiyya sentiment in media 1.12 2013 1.13 2014 1.14 2015 1.15 2016 1.16 2017 1.17 2018 1.17.1 Azad Jammu and Kashmir Twelfth Amendment 1.17.2 February 1.17.3 May 1.17.4 June 1.17.5 July 1.17.6 August 1.18 2019 1.19 2020 1.19.1 July 1.19.2 August 1.19.3 October 1.19.4 November 1.20 2023 1.20.1 April 1.21 2024 1.21.1 June 1.21.1.1 Eid-ul-Adha 1.21.2 August 1.22 Persecution of Ahmadi students 2 Other countries Toggle Other countries subsection 2.1 Afghanistan 2.2 Algeria 2.3 Bangladesh 2.3.1 2023 2.4 Belarus 2.5 Belgium 2.6 Bulgaria 2.7 Burkina Faso 2.8 Egypt 2.9 Gambia 2.10 India 2.10.1 2008 2.10.2 2009 2.10.3 2010 2.10.4 2011 2.10.5 2012 2.10.6 2013 2.11 Indonesia 2.11.1 2008 2.11.2 2010 2.11.3 2011 2.12 Malaysia 2.13 Palestine 2.14 Saudi Arabia 2.15 Singapore 2.16 United Kingdom 2.16.1 2009 2.16.2 2010 2.16.3 2016 2.16.3.1 Murder of Asad Shah 2.16.3.2 Hate leaflets 2.16.4 2017 2.16.5 2018 3 Anti-Ahmadiyya organisations 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Persecution of Ahmadis 7 languages العربية Deutsch Español Bahasa Indonesia Nederlands 日本語 Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Checked From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Page version status This is an accepted version of this page This is the latest accepted revision , reviewed on 25 July 2025 .

Part of a series on Ahmadiyya Beliefs and practices Tawhid Five Pillars of Islam Six articles of faith Bay'ah Distinct views Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Prophets Jesus Jihad Evolution Days of remembrance Caliphate Day Eid al-Adha Eid al-Fitr Promised Messiah Day Promised Reformer Day Foundational texts and sciences Quran Sunnah ( Hadith , Sirah ) Aqidah (creed) Tafsir (exegesis) Fiqh (jurisprudence) Sharia (law) Key literature Rūhānī Khazā᾽in Malfūzāt Tafsīr-e-Kabīr Haqā'iq al-Furqān Review of Religions Al Fazl (newspaper) The Muslim Sunrise Organizational structure Caliphs: I II III IV V Majlis al-Shura Lajna Khuddām Ansār Jalsa Salana Mosques Jamia MTA Key sites Hijaz Kaaba Masjid al-Haram Al-Masjid an-Nabawi United Kingdom Fazl Mosque Baitul Futuh Mosque Mubarak Mosque Qadian Aqsa Mosque Minaret-ul-Masih Mubarak Mosque Rabwah Aqsa Mosque Jamia Miscellaneous Persecution Mirzai Qadiani Ahmadiyya by country Ahmadiyya and other faiths List of Ahmadis Humanity First (NGO Charity) Lahore Ahmadiyya Movement Ahmadiyya translations of the Quran Roza Bal (Tomb of Jesus) Mai Mari da Ashtan (Tomb of Mary) v t e Freedom of religion Concepts Laicism Religious discrimination Religious censorship Religious liberty Religious police Religious pluralism Secularism Separation of church and state Anti-clericalism School prayer Catholic priests in public office Confessionalism Theocracy State religion Secular state Confessional state Atheist state Status by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros DR Congo Egypt Mauritania Morocco South Africa Sudan Tanzania North and South America Brazil Canada Colombia Ecuador Guyana Panama Paraguay United States Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Northern Cyprus Georgia India Indonesia Japan Kazakhstan Laos Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal North Korea Pakistan Philippines Russia Singapore South Korea Sri Lanka Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Turkey Turkmenistan Uzbekistan Vietnam Europe Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Northern Cyprus France Georgia Germany Hungary Italy Kosovo Montenegro North Macedonia Norway Romania Russia Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Middle East Bahrain Egypt Iran Iraq Israel Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Oman Palestinian territories Qatar Saudi Arabia Syria UAE Yemen Oceania Australia Topical Apostasy in Islam by country Blasphemy laws by country Female genital mutilation laws by country Legal aspects of ritual slaughter Religious male circumcision Religious persecution Traditional African religions Serers Atheism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Christophobia post–Cold War era Catholicism Catholic Church Mormonism Jehovah's Witness Eastern Orthodox Christianity Oriental Orthodox Christianity Protestantism Falun Gong Hinduism ( Anti-Hindu sentiment ) Islam Sunni Shi'a Ahmadiyya Alevism Sufis Islamophobia Persecution of non-believers Judaism Antisemitism Anti-Judaism Religious antisemitism New religious movements Christian countercult movement Neopaganism Rastafari Zoroastrianism Religion portal v t e Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e The Ahmadiyya branch of Islam has been subjected to various forms of religious persecution and discrimination since the movement's inception in 1889.

[ 1 ] The Ahmadiyya Muslim movement emerged within the Sunni tradition of Islam and its adherents believe in all of the five pillars and all of the articles of faith required of Muslims .

[ 2 ] Ahmadis are considered non-Muslims by many mainstream Muslims since they consider Mirza Ghulam Ahmad , the founder of the movement, to be the promised Mahdi and Messiah awaited by the Muslims.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] The Ahmadis are active translators of the Qur'an [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] and proselytizers for the faith.

[ 10 ] However, in a number of countries, Ahmadis have faced strong resistance. In many Muslim-majority nations, Ahmadis have been considered heretics and non-Muslim, and subjected to persecution and systematic, sometimes state-sanctioned, oppression.

[ 6 ] [ 11 ] The Second Amendment to the Constitution of Pakistan , Ordinance XX and the Twelfth Amendment of Azad Jammu and Kashmir declare Ahmadis to be non-Muslims and further deprive them of religious rights. Hundreds of Ahmadis were killed in the 1953 Lahore riots and the 1974 Anti-Ahmadiyya riots . The May 2010 Attacks on Ahmadi mosques , infamously known as the Lahore Massacre, resulted in the murder of 84 Ahmadis by suicide attack. The 1974 riots resulted in the largest number of killings of Ahmadis.

[ citation needed ] Pakistan [ edit ] See also: Persecution of Ahmadis (Pakistan) and Ahmadiyya in Pakistan Approximately 2–5 million Ahmadis live in Pakistan, which has the largest population of Ahmadis in the world.

[ 12 ] It is the only state to have officially declared the Ahmadis to be non-Muslims as they do not consider Muhammad to be the final prophet [ 13 ] and their freedom of religion has been curtailed by a series of ordinances, acts and constitutional amendments. In 1974, Pakistan 's parliament adopted a law declaring Ahmadis to be non-Muslims; [ 14 ] the country's constitution was amended to define a Muslim "as a person who believes in the finality of the Prophet Muhammad".

[ 15 ] In 1984, General Zia-ul-Haq , the then military ruler of Pakistan, issued Ordinance XX .

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] The ordinance, which was supposed to prevent "anti-Islamic activities", forbids Ahmadis to call themselves Muslim or to "pose as Muslims". This means that they are not allowed to profess the Islamic creed publicly or call their places of worship mosques.

[ 18 ] Although derogatory religious slurs, [ 19 ] the terms ' Qadiani ', 'Qadianism', 'Mirzai' and 'Mirzaian' are widely used in Pakistan to refer to Ahmadis and the term 'Qadiani' is also the term used by the government in its constitution.

[ 20 ] Ahmadis in Pakistan have often come under religious discrimination and persecution .

[ 21 ] Ahmadis in Pakistan are also barred by law from worshipping in non-Ahmadi mosques or public prayer rooms, performing the Muslim call to prayer, using the traditional Islamic greeting in public, publicly quoting from the Quran, preaching in public, seeking converts, or producing, publishing, and disseminating their religious materials. These acts are punishable by imprisonment of up to three years.

[ 22 ] In applying for a passport or a national ID card, all Pakistanis are required to sign an oath declaring Mirza Ghulam Ahmad to be an impostor prophet and all Ahmadis to be non-Muslims.

[ 23 ] As a result of the laws and constitutional amendments regarding Ahmadis in Pakistan, persecution and hate-related incidents are constantly reported from different parts of the country.

[ 21 ] Ahmadis have been the target of many attacks led by various religious groups in Pakistan.

[ 24 ] All religious seminaries and madrasas in Pakistan belonging to different sects of Islam have prescribed essential reading materials specifically targeted at refuting Ahmadiyya beliefs.

[ 25 ] In a recent survey, students from many private schools of Pakistan expressed their opinions on religious tolerance in the country. The figures assembled in the study reflect that even among the educated classes of Pakistan, Ahmadis are considered the least deserving minority in terms of equal opportunities and civil rights. The teachers from these elite schools showed lower levels of tolerance towards Ahmadis than their pupils.

[ 26 ] Another example is Abdus Salam , the only recipient of the Nobel Prize for Physics who identified as a Muslim. For his mere allegiance to the Ahmadiyya sect, he had been ignored and excommunicated. There are no monuments or universities named after him. The word "Muslim" has been erased from his grave stone.

[ 27 ] 1953 [ edit ] Main article: Lahore riots of 1953 In 1953 at the instigation of religious parties, anti-Ahmadiyya riots erupted in Pakistan, killing scores of Ahmadi Muslims and destroying their properties. There was severe agitations against the Ahmadis, including street protests, political rallies, and inflammatory articles. These agitations led to 200 Ahmadi deaths. Consequently, Governor-General Ghulam Muhammad implemented martial law and dismissed Pakistan's Federal Cabinet.

[ 28 ] 1974 riots and constitutional amendment [ edit ] Main article: 1974 Anti-Ahmadiyya riots In 1974, a violent campaign, led mainly by the Majlis-e-Ahrar-e-Islam and Jamaat-e-Islami , began against the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community in Pakistan, on the pretext of a clash between Ahmadis and non-Ahmadis at the railway station of Rabwah. This campaign resulted in several Ahmadi casualties and destruction of Ahmadiyya property, including the desecration of mosques and graves.

As a result of pressure from this agitation, legislation and constitutional changes were enacted to criminalise the religious practises of Ahmadis by preventing them from claiming they are Muslim or from "behaving" as Muslims. These changes primarily came about due to the pressure of the Saudi King at the time, King Faisal bin As-Saud, according to Dr Mubashar Hassan, Prime Minister Bhutto's close confidant at the time. Pakistan's parliament adopted a law that declares Ahmadis non-Muslims. The country's constitution was amended to define a Muslim "...as a person who believes in the finality of the Prophet Muhammad." [ 29 ] [ 30 ] Ordinance XX of 1984 [ edit ] Main article: Ordinance XX On 26 April 1984, General Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq , the president of Pakistan, issued the anti-Ahmadiyya Ordinance XX, [ 31 ] which effectively prohibited Ahmadis from preaching or professing their beliefs.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] [ 34 ] The ordinance, which was supposed to prevent "anti-Islamic activities", forbids Ahmadis to call themselves Muslim or to "pose as Muslims". This means that they are not allowed to profess the Islamic creed publicly or call their places of worship mosques . Ahmadis in Pakistan are also barred by law from worshipping in non-Ahmadi mosques or public prayer rooms, performing the Muslim call to prayer , using the traditional Islamic greeting in public, publicly quoting from the Qur'an , preaching in public, seeking converts, or producing, publishing, and disseminating their religious materials. These acts are punishable by imprisonment of up to three years.

[ 22 ] Ordinance XX and the 1974 amendment to the constitution effectively gave the state the exclusive right to determine the meaning of the term "Muslim" within Pakistan.

Many Ahmadis were arrested within days of the promulgation of this ordinance, and it gave way for widespread sanctioned as well as non-sanctioned persecution.

In 1986 it was supplemented by a new blasphemy provision [ 35 ] also applied to Ahmadis.

[ 36 ] Shab Qadar incident [ edit ] The Shab Qadar incident was a public stoning of two members of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community in the town of Shab Qadar, in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa , Pakistan in April 1995.

[ 37 ] Dr. Rashid Ahmad and his son-in law, Riaz Ahmad Khan, were attacked as they were about to attend a court hearing in Shab Qadar. As they entered the court premises, a violent mob incited by local clerics attacked the men with sticks and stones. Riaz Khan was stoned to death and his dead body stripped and dragged through the town on a rope. Rashid Ahmad was taken to a hospital in Peshawar with serious injuries. A third Ahmadi, advocate Bashir Ahmad, escaped unhurt.

[ 38 ] This murder took place in front of the police. Riaz Khan even asked a police officer for help, but instead of helping, the officer pushed him away.

[ 39 ] According to Amnesty International, the police "stood and watched", and "...later pleaded that they could not have intervened in a situation like that." No one was detained or criminally charged for the killing.

[ 40 ] The victims—senior Ahmadiyya community members from Peshawar—had come from the provincial capital to file a bail application for another Ahmadi Muslim, Daulat Khan. Daulat Khan had been harassed following his conversion to the sect. Local Muslim clergy reportedly called for his death. Daulat Khan had been arrested and imprisoned on 5 April 1995 under sections 107 (abetment) and 151 ( disturbing the peace by joining in unlawful assembly ) of the Penal Code. After the lynching of Rashid Ahmad and Riaz Ahmad Khan, Daulat Khan remained in custody and was further charged with posing as a Muslim and preaching Ahmadiyyat (section 298 C of the Penal Code) and insulting the religious sentiments of Muslims (section 295 A).

[ 37 ] 2000 [ edit ] On 30 October 2000, gunmen opened fire at an Ahmadiyya prayer meeting in the Pakistani province of Punjab , killing at least five worshippers and wounding another seven.

[ 41 ] 2005 [ edit ] Main article: 2005 attack on Ahmadi mosque in Mandi Bahauddin In a 2005 survey in Pakistan, pupils in private schools of Pakistan expressed their opinions on religious tolerance in the country. The figures assembled in the study reflect that even in the educated classes of Pakistan, Ahmadis are considered to be the least deserving minority in terms of equal opportunities and civil rights. In the same study, the teachers in these elite schools showed an even lower amount of tolerance towards Ahmadis than their pupils.

[ 42 ] Ahmadis are harassed by certain schools, universities and teachers in Pakistan's Punjab province. The harassment includes social boycott, expulsions, threats and violence against Ahmadi students by extremist students, teachers and principals of the majority sect.

[ 43 ] On 7 October 2005, masked gunmen with Kalashnikov rifles stormed a mosque belonging to the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community in a village called Mong in Mandi Bahauddin , shooting dead eight people and wounding 14.

[ 44 ] 2008 [ edit ] Two prominent members of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community were murdered on 8 and 9 September 2008 after a program by Aamir Liaquat Hussain provoking people to kill Ahmadis was aired on a prominent Pakistani television channel Geo TV a day earlier on 7 September.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] 2009 [ edit ] During the year 2009, eleven Ahmadis were killed, while numerous others became victims of attempted killings, according to a report titled "Persecution of Ahmadis in Pakistan during the year 2009" published by Nazarat Umoor-e-Aama Sadr Anjuman Ahmadia Pakistan. The report claimed that the actions of "Ahmadi opponents" had been encouraged largely by the prejudiced attitude of the authorities, and alleged that the federal government had been in denial of the human rights and religious freedom of the Ahmadis, especially the governments of Punjab and Azad Jammu and Kashmir .

[ 47 ] 2010 [ edit ] 28 May 2010 saw the worst single incident of violence against Ahmadis to date (see May 2010 attacks on Ahmadi mosques in Lahore ), when several members of an extremist religious group (allegedly Tehrik-i-Taliban Punjab ) entered two Ahmadi mosques in Lahore and opened fire; three of them later detonated themselves. In total, the attacks claimed the lives of 86 people and injured well over 100.

[ 48 ] The members were gathered in the mosques attending Friday services.

[ 49 ] In response to the attacks, Pakistan minister for minorities Shahbaz Bhatti visited the Ahmadi community.

[ citation needed ] April Around 10 pm on 1 April 2010, three Ahmadis were returning home in their vehicle from their jewellery and cloth shops situated in Rail Bazaar in Faisalabad. As their car approached the Canal Road near Faisal Hospital, four or five unidentified militants in a white car ambushed them. The three Ahmadis were seriously injured when the men opened fire at them. The attackers managed to flee from the scene. The three men died before they reached the hospital.

[ 50 ] May Lahore attacks Main article: May 2010 Lahore attacks On 28 May 2010, two mosques in Lahore belonging to the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community were attacked by the Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan Punjab Wing (Punjabi Taliban). The attacks were carried out nearly simultaneously at Mosque Darul Al Zikr, Garhi Shahu and Mosque Bait Al Noor Lahore Model Town , 15 km apart. More than 90 people were killed and 108 were injured in the incident. One attacker was killed; another was captured by worshipers.

[ 51 ] Three days later militants attacked the Intensive Care Unit of Lahore's Jinnah Hospital, where victims and one of the alleged attackers were under treatment. Twelve people, mostly police officers and hospital staff, were killed in the shootout. The assailants escaped.

[ 52 ] The Pakistani government did nothing to prevent this; as of yet they have not set up protection for Ahmadis.

[ 53 ] As of 28 May 2013 the two attackers captured had not been prosecuted, but early in 2015 courts took up the case and proceeded with sentencing.

[ 51 ] [ 54 ] [ 55 ] On 31 May 2010, an Ahmadi was stabbed to death and his son seriously injured when an assailant climbed the wall of their house with a dagger and attacked them. The son later died in hospital from serious wounds. The attacker escaped. Residents say that the assailant threatened to not leave any Ahmadi alive after having found motivation to kill them through a sermon given by a local Sunni cleric.

[ 56 ] September On 3 September 2010, an Ahmadiyya Mosque in Mardan was attacked during Friday Prayers by a terrorist when he opened fire at the Ahmadi guards there on duty. The guards fired back, injuring him. He threw grenades inside the mosque and later detonated his suicidal vest. The attack left one Ahmadi dead and three injured.

[ 57 ] 2011 [ edit ] On 7 September 2011, the mainstream Urdu newspaper Daily Jang published a special edition against Ahmadis.

[ 58 ] Throughout the year, Ahmadi students and teachers in the Pakistan's Punjab province have been systematically persecuted by schools and universities. The harassment has included social boycott, expulsions, threats and violence by students, teachers and principals of the Muslim majority sect.

[ 43 ] In education [ edit ] Ahmadi students faced discrimination in Pakistan in 2011 because of their faith.

[ 43 ] 2012 [ edit ] In Faisalabad , Quranic verses were removed from Ahmadi graves by the police.

[ 59 ] On 3 December 2012, In Lahore over 100 tombstones at an Ahmadiyya graveyard in Lahore were desecrated in the early hours of Monday by masked gunmen, who specifically targeted graves with Islamic inscriptions. They proclaimed themselves members of a banned organisation, and said the Ahmadiyyas had no right to use Quranic verses on their gravestones, as they "are not Muslims".

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] The Human Rights Commission of Pakistan (HRCP) condemned the destruction of over 100 tombstones at an Ahmadi graveyard on Monday and demanded the arrests of those responsible.

[ 62 ] Anti-Ahmadiyya sentiment in media [ edit ] Islamic fundamentalism and Islamic extremism existed in the Pakistani media , causing them to start a hate campaign against Ahmadis.

[ 63 ] 2013 [ edit ] 7 January 2013: Four Ahmadi employees of Black Arrow Printing Press accused of publishing allegedly blasphemous books, were arrested as they loaded a small truck with thousands of books and CDs.

[ 64 ] 26 March 2013: Local clerics attacked a house belonging to an Ahmadi family in the Shamsabad, a village of Kasur district of Punjab on Tuesday and subjected the family members to violence allegedly over their religious belief.

[ 65 ] The five members of Mansoor's family tried to take refuge in a room but the mob broke into the room as well. Mansoor was severely tortured , after which he lost consciousness, while his wife and his 70-year-old uncle were also beaten. Police personnel were reportedly present at the spot but took no action against the mob.

[ 65 ] International Human Rights Commission Punjab Director General Munawar Ali Shahid said, "Several people here have told me that the Ahmadis had been socially boycotted for long. Police have taken no action to stop violence against them.".

[ 66 ] 30 April 2013: In Lahore, Gulshan-i-Ravi police arrested seven members of the Ahmadi community on Monday without an FIR, after close to 300 people protested in front of what was described as a place of worship of the community. A woman and her 10-year-old son were also arrested No, although no female members of the police accompanied them.

[ 67 ] 8 May 2013: Members of the Khatm-e-Nabuwat Lawyers Forum (KNLF) (anti-Ahmadi activists) and police dragged five members of the Ahmadi community from an anti-terrorist court to a police station and detained them for several hours.

[ 68 ] 2014 [ edit ] May 2014 : American-Canadian Doctor Mehdi Ali Qamar, was gunned down in Rabwah while visiting Punjab, Pakistan to help train local doctors.

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] 100 Ahmadiyas took refuge in China after their lives were in danger in Pakistan.

[ 71 ] Three members of the same family including one woman and two minors were killed and nine other people were injured when an angry mob set a house on fire in Arafat Colony, Gujranwala.

[ 72 ] On 27 July 2014 in Gujranwala , Pakistan , a mob in an alleged case of blasphemy set fire to five houses belonging to the minority Ahmadiyya community in Islam . Three female Ahmadis were killed, including an eight-month-old and a seven-year-old girl. The attack was sparked by a Facebook post.

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] Extremists gathered outside a number of Ahmadi Muslim homes in Gujranwala in order to protest after an Ahmadi Muslim was accused of posting blasphemous material of the Ka'ba on the social networking site Facebook. Soon the protest took the shape of violence and the homes of Ahmadi Muslims were burnt, ransacked and looted. At the same time, the extremists obstructed the fire brigades and ambulances . Eight homes belonging to the Ahmadi Muslims were burnt down. In total three female Ahmadi Muslims including an eight-month and a seven-year-old girl died due to suffocation. Another seventh month pregnant woman suffered a miscarriage. Moreover, eight Ahmadi Muslims suffered injuries and were treated for burns at a nearby hospital. Although the police were present, they did little to stop the violence.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] 2015 [ edit ] 2015 Jhelum attacks Jhelum District, Pakistan Location Jhelum , Punjab , Pakistan Date 20–21 November 2015 Attack type Arson Deaths 0 On the Friday evening of 20 November 2015, a large mob, in an alleged case of blasphemy , torched down a chipboard factory, in Jhelum , Punjab, Pakistan. Ahmadi Muslim employees were accused of desecrating the Quran . The following day, rioters gathered in Kala Gujran , a town bordering Jhelum, and burned an Ahmadiyya mosque and a number of homes belonging to Ahmadi Muslims. Although no casualties have been reported, Ahmadi Muslims have been arrested, against whom a blasphemy case has been registered.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] 2016 [ edit ] A mob of around 1,000 people besieged an Ahmadi place of worship in Chakwal and had to be dispersed by police. Deputy Commissioner Chakwal Mahmood Javed Bhatti said the mob hurled stones and bricks at the place of worship before storming the building, adding that gunmen opened fire on Ahmadis in the area. The DC said that police dispersed the crowd and secured the building.

[ 79 ] 2017 [ edit ] In an address to the National Assembly, Captain Safdar Awan, the son-in-law of deposed PM Nawaz Sharif, demanded strict restrictions against Ahmadis, calling for complete curbs on Ahmadis in government, army, and private employment. He similarly questioned whether Ahmadis could be loyal to Pakistan.

[ 80 ] On 12 October 2017, 3 Ahmadis were sentenced to death for blasphemy after tearing down posters that allegedly contained anti-Ahmadi slogans, though prosecutors argued the posters carried religious significance.

[ 81 ] On 20 October, an anti-Ahmadi rally attracted 10,000 people where Ahmadis were denounced as "infidels" and "enemies of the state". After a row regarding barriers to Ahmadi's participation in elections, the Pakistani government took out ads reaffirming a religious oath requiring elected officials to vow that they do not follow anyone claiming to be a prophet after Mohammad and "nor do I belong to the Qadiani group", using a common derogatory term for Ahmadis.

[ 82 ] 2018 [ edit ] Azad Jammu and Kashmir Twelfth Amendment [ edit ] On 6 February 2018, the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Legislative Assembly approved an amendment declaring Ahmadis to be non-Muslims.

[ 83 ] [ 84 ] [ 85 ] [ 86 ] [ 87 ] February [ edit ] On 8 March 2018, Islamabad's High Court issued a judgement against Ahmadi Muslims and minorities which resulted in four major incidents against Ahmadis in Pakistan. The High Court ordered all citizens applying for any type of government job to declare their religious beliefs. Western human rights organisations have stated that this order is an attack on persecuted minorities in Pakistan, as well as a method to intercept Ahmadi politicians.

[ 88 ] May [ edit ] On 24 May 2018, a mob of several hundred people in Sialkot , Pakistan attacked and demolished a historic and culturally significant 100-year-old Ahmadi mosque.

[ 89 ] Reports of collusion between the mob and local government officials were published, but police denied such accusations. A video on social media showed a crowd cheering on a local cleric who stated "I want to thank the Sialkot administration, the DPO (District Police Officer), DC (District Commissioner), the TMA (Town Municipal Corporation), from the bottom of my heart". The US, UK and international community strongly condemned this attack.

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] June [ edit ] On 27 June 2018, in a hate crime linked to the 8 March High Court judgement, an Ahmadi was killed in Nishtar Colony, Lahore.

[ 92 ] July [ edit ] On 9 July 2018, five Ahmadi citizens in Karachi, Pakistan were shot in two incidents of hate crime. Three were injured and two were killed. In the first attack, an Ahmadi couple were attacked in their home, the wife was shot in the thigh by attackers. In the second attack, Mubeen Ahmed, 20, was killed by robbers entering his office, and two colleagues were injured.

[ 93 ] August [ edit ] On 24 August, the second day of Eid, an Ahmadi Mosque in Ghaseetpura, Faisalabad was burnt down, resulting in 30 people being injured out of which 6 were Ahmadi. Reports suggest that the violence was initiated due to a "petty dispute" over roosters.

[ 94 ] [ 95 ] [ 96 ] 2019 [ edit ] On 25 October, parts of a historic 70-year-old Ahmadi Mosque in the Murad District of Bahawalpur was demolished without notice and the Ahmadis who recorded it were charged by Police. The demolition was led by Mohammad Tayyab, Assistant Commissioner of Hasilpur .

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] 2020 [ edit ] July [ edit ] On 1 July, an Ahmadi graveyard in Chak No-79 Nawa Kot, District Sheikhupura was vandalised where Ahmadi graves were desecrated.

[ 99 ] On 13 and 14 July, Ahmadi graves were desecrated by police following a protest by religious extremists in Tirigri village , Gujranwala .

[ 100 ] [ 101 ] August [ edit ] In early August, a 61-year-old man was murdered in Peshawar .

[ 102 ] October [ edit ] At the start of the month, on 5 October, an Ahmadi doctor was murdered in Peshawar by a gunman.

[ 103 ] In Mid October, a group of people, which included the head of the Youth State Parliament of Pakistan, desecrated a portrait of Abdus Salam in Gujranwala .

[ 104 ] Later on in the month, the Institute of Business Administration had decided to cancel an online lecture hosted by Atif Mian , an Ahmadi economist, due to threats received from extremists.

[ 105 ] November [ edit ] On November 9, an 82-year-old man was killed by a gunman at a bus terminal.

[ 106 ] [ 107 ] On November 20, a teenager in Nankana Sahib opened fire on a family while they offering prayers resulting in the death of a doctor while injuring three other family members.

[ 108 ] [ 109 ] 2023 [ edit ] April [ edit ] In April 2023, an Ahmadi lawyer in Karachi was arrested and charged under Pakistan's anti-Ahmadiyya laws for using "Syed" in his name, a title traditionally associated with the descendants of the Prophet Muhammad. The lawyer, despite holding a valid legal practice license, was accused of impersonation and was charged under sections of the Pakistan Penal Code that specifically target the Ahmadiyya community. This incident sparked outrage among human rights organizations, which condemned the continued persecution of Ahmadis in Pakistan, particularly through the misuse of blasphemy laws and other discriminatory legal provisions.

[ 110 ] [ 111 ] 2024 [ edit ] June [ edit ] In early June, an 18-year old murdered two Ahmadis, a 60-year old and 30-year old Ahmadi from Mandi Bahauddin, Punjab , in a targeted killing.

[ 112 ] Eid-ul-Adha [ edit ] Ahead of the 2024 Eid al-Adha festival, the Ahmadiyya community faced an increase in persecution from fundamentalist groups such as the TLP pressuring local authorities to take preemptive measures. Three members of the community were kept in a "preventive detention" for 30 days, demanding a written order that they would not sacrifice animals.

[ 113 ] On Eid day, an Ahmadi mosque was attacked in Kotli, Azad Kashmir by a mob of more than 50 individuals which had opened fire and had destroyed the minarets and arch of the mosque.

[ 114 ] August [ edit ] Mubarak Sani in the recent history of Ahmadi persecution in Pakistan case garnered attention following his arrest and subsequent legal battles under the Punjab Holy Quran (Printing and Recording) (Amendment) Act of 2021. Sani was accused of distributing a religious text associated with the Ahmadiyya community, which led to his imprisonment for over a year. In February 2024, the Supreme Court of Pakistan granted him bail, a decision that sparked outrage among Islamist groups.

The court's initial ruling included observations on religious freedom that were later expunged due to intense pressure from religious hardliners. These groups, including prominent clerics and political figures, argued that the court's decision undermined the constitutional provisions concerning the finality of prophethood—a core issue for many in Pakistan. Under duress, the Supreme Court revised its verdict, removing the paragraphs, which were then declared unusable as a judicial precedent.

[ 115 ] [ 116 ] [ 117 ] Persecution of Ahmadi students [ edit ] Ahmadi students have faced extremist persecutions because of their faith in most popular universities and colleges of Pakistan including University of Sargodha .

[ 118 ] On 23 September 2022 a school in Punjab's Attock district on Friday expelled four Ahmadi students over their confession.

[ 119 ] Other countries [ edit ] Afghanistan [ edit ] Main article: Ahmadiyya in Afghanistan Persecution of Ahmadis in Afghanistan began in the early 20th century within the lifetime of Ghulam Ahmad, the founder of the movement. Abdur Rahman, a disciple of Sayyid Abdul Latif of Khost —a reputable religious scholar who was the tutor and adviser on religious affairs to the Prince (later Amir) Habibullah Khan —visited Qadian upon the latter's instruction. Having stayed there in the company of Ghulam Ahmad for some time and having pledged allegiance to him he returned to Afghanistan where he began preaching against the common notion of Jihad as war. This information eventually reached the King, Amir Abdur Rahman Khan , who had him arrested and he was later strangled to death while in prison. It is not clear however whether this was a state-sanctioned execution or simply murder. He is considered the first martyr of Ahmadiyya Islam.

[ 120 ] About two years later, Abdul Latif himself visited Qadian before starting on the hajj (pilgrimage to Mecca) and stayed there for a few months also joining the Ahmadiyya movement before returning to Afghanistan in 1903 to proselytise to his King, Amir Habibullah Khan. Upon reaching Khost, he wrote to some courtiers who decided to have him arrested and brought to Kabul . He was put to trial and examined, first by the Amir, then by Sirdar Nasrallah Khan, another leading cleric, and then by a jury of twelve religious clerics, only two of whom gave a verdict of apostasy against him which carried the death penalty in Afghanistan. The Amir thus charged him with apostasy.

[ 121 ] [ 122 ] On 14 July 1903, after being repeatedly asked to renounce his beliefs and recant and refusing to do so, he was stoned to death before a large crowd. Frank A. Martin, the English Engineer-in-Chief to the government of Afghanistan at the time, who had witnessed the execution, giving an account of it in his book Under the Absolute Amir , writes: Before being led away from the Amir's presence to be killed, the moullah [Abdul Latif] prophesied that a great calamity would overtake the country, and that both the Amir and the Sirdar would suffer. About nine o'clock at night the day the moullah was killed, a great storm of wind suddenly rose and raged with violence for half an hour, and then stopped as suddenly as it came. Such a wind at night was altogether unusual, so the people said that this was the passing of the soul of the Moullah. Then cholera came, and, according to former outbreaks, another visitation was not due for four years to come, and this was also regarded as part of the fulfillment of the moullah's prophecy, and hence the great fear of the Amir and the prince, who thought they saw in all this their own death and it accounts also for the prince losing control of himself when his favourite wife died.

— Frank A. Martin, Under the Absolute Amir , ISBN 978-1-4304-9488-1 , p. 204 Ahmadis see in the cholera epidemic that Kabul experienced within a month of the stoning, a sign of his and the movement's truth.

[ 123 ] By the 1920s, nearly ten Ahmadis were stoned to death in Afghanistan [ 124 ] and it is reported that a total of about three Ahmadis had been executed in Kabul during this period.

[ citation needed ] In the 1920s, King Amanullah Khan had several Ahmadiyya members forcibly reverted, and in 1924 affiliation with the Ahmadiyya became a capital offense.

[ 125 ] Since then, no Ahmadiyya Muslims have been reported in Afghanistan, but a possibility of their existence remains.

[ 126 ] Algeria [ edit ] See also: Ahmadiyya in Algeria In March 2016, Algerian authorities refused an attempt by Ahmadis to register as an association under Algerian law. In June 2016, a planned Ahmadi mosque was raided and shut down in Larbraa. Since March 2016, more than 280 Ahmadis have been arrested and have faced prosecution.  Algerian officials have publicly called Ahmadis heretics and a threat to Algeria. In June 2016, The Minister of Religious Affairs and Endowments, Mohamed Aissa, described Ahmadi presence in Algeria as part of a "prepared sectarian invasion". In February 2017, he stated that Ahmadis are "not Muslim". In April 2017, Ahmed Ouyahia, President Abdelaziz Bouteflika's chief of cabinet called on Algerians to "preserve the country from the  Qadiyani sect".

[ 127 ] Bangladesh [ edit ] Main articles: Ahmadiyya in Bangladesh and Freedom of religion in Bangladesh § Persecution of Ahmadis In Bangladesh, Ahmadis have been targeted by various protests and acts of violence, and fundamentalist Islamic groups have demanded that Ahmadis be officially declared kafirs (infidels).

[ 128 ] Some adherents of Ahmadiyya have been subject to "house arrest" and several have been killed. In late 2003 several large, violent marches, led by Moulana Moahmud Hossain Mumtazi, were directed to occupy an Ahmadi mosque. In 2004, all Ahmadiyya publications were banned.

[ 129 ] 2023 [ edit ] In March 2023, the Ahmadiyya Muslim community's annual convention, the Jalsa Salana , in Ahmednagar and Panchagarh was attacked by anti-Ahmadi protestors in Bangladesh . The protestors, who demanded a ban on activities carried out by the community, clashed with the police and were met with rubber bullets and tear gas.

[ 130 ] The clash resulted in approximately 30-50 people injured as well as two deaths, [ 131 ] as the protestors also looted several shops and around 20 homes belonging to Ahmadis, were also vandalised.

[ 132 ] Some journalists who attempted to report on the situation were also injured in the clash.

[ 133 ] Initial reports indicated that homes were not only vandalised but at least 20 to 25 were torched and the community decided to call of the event.

[ 134 ] A hate campaign was also being propagated in order to instigate further attacks.

[ 135 ] Belarus [ edit ] See also: Islam in Belarus In 2007, the Ahmadiyya Muslims were banned from practising their faith openly in the state of Belarus and given a similar status to other banned religious groups in the country. Unable to obtain state registration, Ahmadi Muslims in the country who number about 30 including 13 native Belarusians, cannot conduct their activities formally as a collectivity such as importing or distributing literature, gathering together for prayers or meetings and having an official representative.

[ 136 ] Belgium [ edit ] In 2011 the far right party Vlaams Belang organized a demonstration against the projected building of an Ahmadi mosque in the Brussels municipality of Uccle , allegedly out of fear for a "war of religions" between radical Sunnis and Ahmadis in the streets of the municipality.

[ 137 ] Bulgaria [ edit ] In 2003, persistent attempts were made in Bulgaria by a local prosecutor and the national state Religious Affairs Directorate to strip Ahmadi Muslims of their legal status. Ahmadis in Bulgaria, who (at the time) claimed some 400 members across the country, were refused registration as a religious community on the grounds that they were "against the religions that people follow here" and that "other countries—such as Pakistan—also attack the religious freedom of Ahmadis, who are considered to be heretical by many Muslims". Failing to obtain a legal status, the Ahmadiyya community decided to seek registration as a non-commercial organisation with the Blagoevgrad Regional Court, where one of its biggest congregations is based. This too was rejected on the grounds that "the community had been denied registration as a religion" and that "only registered religious communities are allowed to create non-commercial entities to promote their faith". However, the community was able to successfully challenge this latter decision and gained registration as such in December 2005. Subsequently, their legal status as a non-commercial organisation was again opposed by the Religious Affairs Directorate and the Regional Prosecutor's Office lodged a suit to the regional court calling for it to revoke the registration. The Bulgarian authorities citied the Pakistani government's legal measures against the Ahmadis as a reason to restrict their rights also. Most human rights and religious freedom activists have seen this denial of registration to the Ahmadi community as an exception.

[ 138 ] Burkina Faso [ edit ] On 11 January 2023, an Ahmadi mosque, located in the northeast of Burkina Faso , was attacked by Jihadists which led to the execution of 9 worshippers.

[ 139 ] [ 140 ] Egypt [ edit ] Main article: Ahmadiyya in Egypt There has been a recent rise of persecution of Ahmadis in Egypt. In March 2010, nine Ahmadis were detained for allegedly insulting Islam.

[ 141 ] Gambia [ edit ] Main article: Ahmadiyya in the Gambia Since its earliest history in the Gambia in the 1950s, Ahmadis have continued to face resistance and religious intolerance from certain Muslim clerics and Islamic bodies in the country. More recently, in 2014, a leading Gambian Muslim cleric, Alhaji Abdoulie Fatty, who was also the Imam of the State House of the Gambia at that time, called for the expulsion of Ahmadi Muslims from the country. Having described Ahmadi Muslims as non-Muslims, he called for a ban on the propagation of Ahmadiyya teachings in the Gambia.

[ 142 ] [ 143 ] In January 2015, the government-financed Gambia Supreme Islamic Council aired on state television and other state and print media its decision to declare the Community, as a non-Muslim group.

[ 144 ] The move was condemned by Baba Trawally, the Ameer (National President) of the Gambian Ahmadiyya community and Demba Ali Jawo, former president of the Gambia Press Union .

[ 145 ] [ 146 ] India [ edit ] In India, Ahmadis are Muslims by law.  This is supported by a verdict from the Kerala High Court on 8 December 1970 in the case of Shihabuddin Imbichi Koya Thangal vs K.P. Ahammed Koya , citation A.I.R. 1971 Ker 206 .

[ 13 ] In this landmark ruling, the court determined that Ahmadis are Muslims and that they cannot be declared apostates by other Muslim sects because they hold true to the two fundamental beliefs of Islam: that there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is a messenger of God.

[ 147 ] There were two similar judicial pronouncement that happened in Colonial India that is the 1916 Patna High Court verdict on Hakim Khalil Ahmad v Malik Israfi case and the 1922 Madras High Court verdict on Narantakath Avullah v. Parakkal Mammu case.

The Ahmadiyya counsel on both these cases was Muhammad Zafarullah Khan .

[ 148 ] [ 149 ] [ 150 ] While Ahmadis are considered Muslims by law and there are no legal restrictions on their religious activities, [ 13 ] they are not permitted by fellow Muslims of other sects to sit on the All India Muslim Personal Law Board , a body of religious leaders that the Indian government recognizes as representative of Indian Muslims .

[ 151 ] One of the most prominent holy place of Ahmadiyyas , the birthplace of founder Mirza Ghulam Ahmad is situated in Qadian , Gurdaspur district , Punjab, India .

[ 152 ] 2008 [ edit ] Ahmadis were denied permission to meet in Hyderabad because of the protests from the Islamic groups.

[ 153 ] [ 154 ] [ 155 ] On 19 August 2008 Islamic cleric named Maulvi Habib-ur-Rehman incited hatred for the people in a rally. On the night of 21/22 August 2008, three Ahmadis were attacked. Their properties were damaged. In all, six persons were attacked.

[ 156 ] 2009 [ edit ] In Chennai , the body of a 36-year-old Ahmadi woman of the community was exhumed and desecrated by "anti-social elements" from a graveyard. at Royapettah on 1 June. Ahmadis alleged the police intervention in this issue. They did a press conference. They told the detailed of the incident and persecution faced by Islamic clerics.

Madras High Court has ruled that Ahmadis are Muslims.

[ 157 ] Muslims led by Shahi Imam Habib-ur-Rehman Sani protested against Jalsa Salana . Muslims all across the state have joined hands in the protests. Indian finance minister Pranab Mukherjee was likely to attend the Jalsa Salana. Muslims damaged his office and blocked the traffic for stopping the annual convention of Ahmadis. Police imposed curfew for three days. Many people were injured and one Sikh died. When the convention was held, the protestors presented anti-Ahmadiyya document to the chief commissioner to be forwarded to Prakash Singh Badal . The protest was organized in all the big mosques of Punjab.

[ 158 ] 2010 [ edit ] Islamic clerics threatened the Mayawati government to remove mentions of the Ahmadiyya sect from the syllabus .

[ 159 ] 2011 [ edit ] In Mumbai , Darul Uloom Deoband asked Saudi Arabia 's government to ban Ahmadis from the hajj and umrah . The spokesperson said that Ahmadis do not believe in the finality prophethood therefore they cannot perform the hajj and umrah. They sent a letter to the government.

[ 160 ] In New Delhi , Ahmadis faced protests from rival Muslim sects for attempting to preach their religion. They faced protests from the Muslims of India .

All India Muslim Personal Law Board 's members were also among the protesters. Ahmadis changed the timings of the convention.

Maulana Bukhari and his protestors were detained in a police station for protesting against this.

[ 161 ] [ 162 ] [ 163 ] [ 164 ] [ 165 ] 2012 [ edit ] In February 2012, the Andhra Pradesh Wakf Board took a series of unprecedented decisions and asked the qazis in the state not to perform marriages for those belonging to Ahmadiyya community.

[ 166 ] In Hyderabad , an anti-Ahmadiyya mob attacked the mosque and said to stop the prayers. They also threw stones at the mosque.

[ 167 ] 2013 [ edit ] In May 2013, the investigations done by National Investigation Agency in Bodh Gaya bombings it was revealed that Indian Mujahideen planned a terror attack on Qadian .

[ 168 ] Indonesia [ edit ] Main article: Persecution of Ahmadis in Indonesia In June 2008, a law was passed to curtail proselytising by Ahmadiyya members.

[ 169 ] An Ahmadiyya mosque was burned.

[ 170 ] Human rights groups objected to the restrictions on religious freedom. On 6 February 2011 some Ahmadiyya members were killed at Pandeglang , Banten province.

[ 171 ] In the past few years there has been an increase in attacks on religious freedom, including incidents of physical abuse, preventing groups from performing prayers, and burning their mosques. Data from the Setara Institute for Democracy and Peace show 17, 18, and 64 incidents for the years 2008, 2009 and 2010 respectively.

[ 172 ] Although the data cover persecution of all religions, the recent persecution of Ahmadis is significant and severe, followed by persecution of Christians and persecution of other Islamic sects who claim to be "genuine/pure/fundamentalist Muslims".

As of 2011, the sect faces widespread calls for a total "ban" in Indonesia.

[ 173 ] On 6 February 2011, hundreds of mainstream Muslims surrounded an Ahmadiyya household and beat three people to death. Footage of the bludgeoning of their naked bodies—while policeman looked on—was posted on the internet and subsequently broadcast on international media.

[ 174 ] 2008 [ edit ] In 2008, many Muslims in Indonesia protested against the Ahmadiyya movement. With violence and large demonstrations, these religious conservatives put pressure on the government to monitor, and harass the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community in Indonesia.

[ 175 ] Public opinion in Indonesia is split in three ways on how Ahmadiyya should be treated: (a) some hold it should be banned outright on the basis that it is a heretical and deviant sect that is not listed as an officially recognised religion in Indonesia; (b) others hold that it should not be banned because of the freedom of religion article in the Constitution, but also should not be allowed to proselytise under the banner of "Islam" on the basis that this is misleading; (c) still others hold that it should be free to do and say as it pleases based on the Constitutional right to freedom of religion.

[ 176 ] In June 2008, a law was passed to curtail "proselytizing" by Ahmadiyya members.

[ 177 ] [ better source needed ] An Ahmadiyya mosque was burned.

[ 178 ] Human rights groups objected to the restrictions on religious freedom.

[ 179 ] A government decree adopted in 2008 under pressure from Islamic conservatives bans the sect from spreading its faith.

[ 180 ] 2010 [ edit ] In July 2010, a mob of 200 Indonesians surrounded an Ahmadi mosque in Manislor village in Kuningan district , West Java . The mob pelted the mosque with stones before being dispersed by the police.

[ 181 ] 2011 [ edit ] On 6 February 2011 three (originally reported as six, and later amended) Ahmadiyya members were killed at Pandeglang , Banten province, in a clash between locals.

[ 182 ] While the government did instruct police to hunt the killers, it also called on Ahmadiyya to abide by the 2008 decree and stop spreading their belief.

[ 183 ] In July 2011 the prosecuting sought sentences of between five and seven months for the defendants, an act that caused outcry by rights activists.

[ 184 ] The verdict given was between three and six months, slightly lighter than sought. This has trigger criticism from human right defenders and the international community including the US and the EU.

[ 185 ] In addition, a Cikeusik Ahmadi leader, Deden Darmawan Sudjana, was also sentenced to six months in prison for physical abuse and acts against the state, refusing an order from a police officer who told him to leave the house.

[ 186 ] A US State Department spokeswoman said they were "disappointed" with the verdict, while an activist of the New York–based Human Rights Watch , called it "the Talibanization of Indonesia".

[ 187 ] Malaysia [ edit ] In April 2009, the Selangor Islamic Religious Council of Malaysia issued a letter that forbade members of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community from offering Friday prayers at their central mosque. Moreover, Ahmadis' failure to comply with the order would result in imprisonment of up to one year and/or a fine up to 3000 Malaysian ringgit . A large notice outside the mosque states Qadiani Bukan Agama Islam , which translates to Qadiani [Ahmadiyyat] is not Islam.

[ 188 ] [ 189 ] Palestine [ edit ] Main article: Ahmadiyya in Palestine Ahmadis were reported to be persecuted in the Palestinian Authority –controlled areas in 2010.

[ 190 ] In 2010, Mohammed Sharif Odeh , head of the Ahmadi community in Israel , told Arutz Sheva radio that the Palestinian Authority is "encouraging the cold-blooded murder of Ahmadis" by failing to take concrete action to protect the community.

[ 190 ] Saudi Arabia [ edit ] Main articles: Ahmadiyya in Saudi Arabia and Freedom of religion in Saudi Arabia Ahmadis are persecuted in Saudi Arabia on an ongoing basis.

[ 191 ] In a 2006–2007 nationwide campaign to track down and deport Ahmadi Muslim foreign workers, the Saudi religious police arrested 56–60 persons.

[ 192 ] Although there are many foreign workers and Saudi citizens belonging to the Ahmadiyya sect in Saudi Arabia, [ 193 ] [ 194 ] [ 195 ] [ 196 ] Ahmadis are officially banned from entering the country and from performing the hajj and umrah pilgrimage to Mecca and Medina .

[ 197 ] [ 198 ] [ 199 ] On 24 January 2007, Human Rights Watch sent an open letter to the Saudi monarch King Abdullah asking him to cease religious persecution of the Ahmadi faith in Saudi Arabia. Two letters were sent in November 2006 and February 2007 asking him to remove the travel ban on critics of the Saudi government.

[ 200 ] In May 2012, Saudi authorities arrested two Saudi Sunni Muslim citizens for their conversion to Ahmadiyya Islam.

[ 201 ] They were arrested three months after joining the Ahmadiyya and refusing to abandon their beliefs. As of May 2014, the two accused of apostasy had served two years in prison awaiting trial. They have not been released since then.

[ 202 ] [ 193 ] Singapore [ edit ] Main article: Persecution of Ahmadis in Singapore United Kingdom [ edit ] Banner from the Ahmadiyya community with Muslim crossed out Ahmadis in the UK have endured killings, mass protests by other Muslims against Ahmadi mosque construction, [ 203 ] and threats and intimidation.

[ 204 ] In March 2016, the First Minister of Scotland , Nicola Sturgeon , attended the wake of an Ahmadi, Asad Shah, 40, killed by a Sunni, Tanveer Ahmed, 32, in what the police characterised as "religious prejudice".

[ 205 ] In April 2016, leaflets calling for death to Ahmadis were found in Stockwell Green mosque.

[ 206 ] [ 207 ] The mosque claimed that it was unaware of the leaflets being placed on its premises. The leaflets were authored in the name of an ex-head, Yusuf Ludhianvi , of Khatme Nubuwwat Academy —an anti-Ahmadiyya organization. The organization is fully known as Almi Majlis-e-Tahafuz Khatmi Nubuwat or the International Committee for the Protection of the Finality of Prophethood.

[ 208 ] 2009 [ edit ] In 2009 a demonstration consisting of mainly Muslims was held in Walsall to prevent Ahmadis acquiring a mosque.

[ 209 ] 2010 [ edit ] The UK-based Ummah Channel broadcast three interactive programmes against Ahmadis in the wake of Lahore massacre .

Ofcom criticized Ummah Channel for doing this.

[ 210 ] In 2010, in the wake of the May 2010 attacks on two Ahmadi mosques in Lahore, Pakistan, members of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community living in the UK were threatened and intimidated. Certain Muslim groups in South London distributed leaflets asking readers to kill Ahmadis and boycott their businesses, and Ahmadi mosques in Crawley and Newham were vandalised. In October 2010 Ofcom criticised the UK-based Ummah Channel for broadcasting three interactive television programmes before and after the Lahore massacre of Ahmadi Muslims in May 2010, in which religious leaders and callers alike said that Ahmadis should be killed. These programmes were repeated several times. Ofcom stated that the programme's abusive treatment of the religious views and beliefs of members of the Ahmadiyya community breached UK broadcasting regulations.

[ 211 ] [ 212 ] In the 2010 United Kingdom general election Nasser Butt, a Liberal Democrat parliamentary candidate for Tooting constituency , was targeted by a campaign that asked Muslims not to vote for him because of his faith. In the election, hustings in the Tooting Islamic centre, a Conservative candidate, Mark Clarke , was mistaken for Butt and had to be locked in a room for his safety.

[ 213 ] Imam Suliman Gani, of the (Sunni) Tooting Islamic Centre, called for a boycott of Ahmadi shops, stating: "Since the Qadianis are routinely deceptive about their religion, there was a potential risk of Muslims being offered meat that wasn't necessarily halal." [ 214 ] 2016 [ edit ] Murder of Asad Shah [ edit ] Main article: Murder of Asad Shah In March 2016, an Ahmadi Scottish shopkeeper, Asad Shah, was stabbed to death in Glasgow after wishing people a Happy Easter on social media.

[ 215 ] Tanveer Ahmed was arrested for the crime and confessed, stating, "if I had not done this others would".

[ 216 ] An Ahmadi anti-extremism campaign was launched in Glasgow, with attendance of Ahmadi Muslims, Christian, Sikh, and Jewish leaders, but no Muslims belonging to other sects.

[ 217 ] The murderer pleaded guilty to the "religiously-motivated murder".  Part of the family of the victim is emigrating away from Scotland.

[ 218 ] Hate leaflets [ edit ] In April 2016, leaflets were distributed across London's universities, mosques and shopping centres, calling for the killing of Ahmadis. The leaflets were by Muhammad Yusuf Ludhianvi , with the Khatme Nubuwwat organisation on the front cover.

[ 219 ] 2017 [ edit ] In October 2017, BBC Radio 4 's File on 4 programme investigated the publication and broadcasting of anti-Ahmadiyya material in the UK, and asked when and whether media regulators should intervene.

[ 220 ] 2018 [ edit ] In April 2019, amid Ahmadis' growing fears of persecution, UK-based Urdu-language TV station Channel 44 was fined £75,000 by Ofcom for anti-Ahmadi hate speech.

[ 221 ] [ 222 ] [ 223 ] Anti-Ahmadiyya organisations [ edit ] In 1973, the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (an organization of 57 member countries) declared that the Ahmadi movement was not linked to the Muslim faith.

[ 224 ] Political groups associated with the persecution of the Ahmadis include the Majlis-e-Ahrar-e-Islam , Khatme Nabuwwat movements [ 225 ] ( Majlis-e-Tahaffuz-e-Khatme Nabuwwat , Tanzeem-e-Islami and Tehreek-e-Khatme Nabuwwat), Jamaat-e-Islami , Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan and Tehreek-i-Labbaik Pakistan .

[ 226 ] See also [ edit ] Islamic schools and branches Religious discrimination in Pakistan Sectarian violence among Muslims Sectarian violence in Pakistan Qadiani Problem References [ edit ] ^ Dhume, Sadanand (December 2017).

"Pakistan Persecutes a Muslim Minority" .

Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on 2 December 2017 . Retrieved 1 December 2017 .

^ "The Ahmadi Muslim Community. Who are the Ahmadi Muslims and what do they believe? Waqar Ahmad Ahmedi gives a brief introduction to the Ahmadi branch of Islam." Archived 19 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine Times Online . 27 May 2008.

^ Naeem Osman Memon (1994).

An Enemy a Disbeliever a Liar, Claims of Hadhrat Ahmad . Islam International Publications.

ISBN 1-85372-552-8 .

Archived from the original on 27 September 2012 . Retrieved 21 January 2013 .

^ B.A Rafiq (1978).

Truth about Ahmadiyyat, Reflection of all the Prophets . London Mosque.

ISBN 0-85525-013-5 .

Archived from the original on 15 March 2013 . Retrieved 21 January 2013 .

^ Mirza Tahir Ahmad (1998).

Revelation Rationality Knowledge and Truth, Future of Revelation . Islam International Publications.

ISBN 1-85372-640-0 . Retrieved 21 January 2013 .

^ a b Lago, Colin, ed. (2011).

The Handbook of Transcultural Counselling and Psychotherapy . UK: McGraw-Hill Education (published 1 October 2011). p. 312.

ISBN 9780335238514 .

Archived from the original on 5 September 2015 . Retrieved 19 April 2015 .

^ Bedi, Manokriti (13 November 2013).

"Quran's Punjabi translation flies off the shelves" .

The Times of India . Bennett, Coleman & Co. Ltd.

Archived from the original on 12 September 2018 . Retrieved 9 September 2018 .

^ Tahana, Yvonne (14 April 2010).

"Koran's message of unity shared in te reo translation" .

The New Zealand Herald . NZME Publishing, Ltd.

Archived from the original on 10 September 2018 . Retrieved 9 September 2018 .

^ Hovel, Revital (28 August 2012).

"Muslim Sect Celebrates 25 Years Since Koran Translated into Yiddish" .

Haaretz . Haaretz Daily Newspaper Ltd.

Archived from the original on 31 July 2018 . Retrieved 9 September 2018 .

^ "Who are the Ahmadi?" .

BBC News . BBC. 28 May 2010.

Archived from the original on 30 May 2010 . Retrieved 9 September 2018 .

^ "Localising Diaspora: the Ahmadi Muslims and the problem of multi-sited ethnography".

Archived 19 August 2006 at the Wayback Machine Association of Social Anthropologists, 2004 conference panel.

^ The 1998 Pakistani census states that there are 291,000 (0.22%) Ahmadis in Pakistan. However, the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community has boycotted the census since 1974 which renders official Pakistani figures to be inaccurate. Independent groups have estimated the Pakistani Ahmadiyya population to be somewhere between 2 million and 5 million Ahmadis. However, the 4 million figure is the most quoted figure. See: over 2 million: "Pakistan: The situation of Ahmadis, including legal status and political, education and employment rights; societal attitudes toward Ahmadis (2006 – Nov. 2008)" . Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada. 4 December 2008 . Retrieved 28 June 2012 .

3 million: International Federation for Human Rights: International Fact-Finding Mission. Freedoms of Expression, of Association and of Assembly in Pakistan.

Ausgabe 408/2, Januar 2005, S. 61 ( PDF ) 3–4 million: Commission on International Religious Freedom: Annual Report of the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom.

2005, S. 130 4.910.000:  James Minahan: Encyclopedia of the stateless nations. Ethnic and national groups around the world. Greenwood Press . Westport 2002, page 52 "Pakistan: Situation of members of the Lahori Ahmadiyya Movement in Pakistan" . Retrieved 30 April 2014 .

^ a b c Hoque, Ridwanul (21 March 2004).

"On right to freedom of religion and the plight of Ahmadiyas" .

The Daily Star .

Archived from the original on 31 May 2010 . Retrieved 17 February 2010 .

^ Khan, Naveeda.

"Trespasses of the State: Ministering to Theological Dilemmas through the Copyright/Trademark" Archived 26 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine . Sarai Reader 2005: Bare Acts. p. 184.

^ "Constitution (Second Amendment) Act, 1974" . Archived from the original on 28 August 2001 . Retrieved 3 September 2014 .

^ The presentation before the parliament can be seen here: Khan, Naveeda (2012).

Mahzaharnama (PDF) . Islam International Publications.

ISBN 978-1-85372-386-5 .

^ Khan, Naveeda.

"Trespasses of the State: Ministering to Theological Dilemmas through the Copyright/Trademark" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 June 2011.

Sarai Reader 2005: Bare Acts. p. 178.

^ Heiner Bielefeldt: "Muslim Voices in the Human Rights Debate", Human rights quarterly , 1995 vol. 17 no. 4 p. 587.

^ Antonio R. Gualtieri (1989).

Conscience and Coercion: Ahmadis and Orthodoxy in Pakistan . Guernica Editions. p. 14.

ISBN 978-0-920717-41-7 .

^ "Pakistan Penal Code, Official Pakistani Government document Chap. XV "Of Offences Relating to Religion" " (PDF) . pp.

79– 81.

^ a b Uddin, Asma T. (2014).

"A Legal Analysis of Ahmadi Persecution in Pakistan" . In Kirkham, David M. (ed.).

State Responses to Minority Religions . Ashgate Inform Series on Minority Religions and Spiritual Movements.

Farnham, U.K.

and Burlington, Vermont : Ashgate Publishing / Routledge . pp.

81– 98.

ISBN 978-1-4724-1647-6 .

LCCN 2013019344 .

^ a b "Ahmadiyya Islam." Archived 4 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine GlobalSecurity.org.  26 April 2005. Retrieved 14 December 2009.

^ Hanif, Mohammed (16 June 2010).

"Why Pakistan's Ahmadi community is officially detested" .

BBC News .

^ "Persecution of the Ahmadiyya Community in Pakistan: An Analysis Under International Law and International Relations".

Archived 17 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine Harvard Human Rights Journal , Vol 16, September 2003.

"Eight die in Pakistan sect attack" Archived 30 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine , BBC News "Sect offices closed in Pakistan" Archived 2 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine , BBC News ^ Rahman, Tariq: "Denizens of Alien Worlds: A Survey of the Education System of Pakistan" .

Archived 16 June 2007 at the Wayback Machine Contemporary South Asia, 2004. p. 15.

^ Peace and Democracy in South Asia , Volume 1, Number 1, January 2005. Passports to Privilege: The English-Medium Schools in Pakistan, Tariq Rahman.

Archived 27 March 2009 at the Wayback Machine ^ Mohammed Hanif (16 June 2010).

"Why Pakistan's Ahmadi community is officially detested" .

BBC News . London: BBC .

Archived from the original on 22 May 2011 . Retrieved 30 May 2011 .

^ "Pakistan: Jamaat-i-Islami".

Archived 23 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine Library of Congress Country Studies. April 1994.

^ Constitution of Pakistan Art. 260(3) Archived 23 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine , added by Constitution (Second Amendment) Act, 1974 (XLIX of 1974) Archived 20 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine S. 3 and amended by Constitution (Third Amendment) Order, 1985 (President's Order No. 24 of 1985) Archived 3 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine S. 6 ^ Cf.

Abdur Rahman Mobashir vs. Syed Amir Ali Shah Bokhari , PLD 1978 Lahore 113 Archived 29 April 2014 at the Wayback Machine ^ PPC Ss. 298-B and 298-C Archived 24 June 2014 at the Wayback Machine , added by Anti-Islamic Activities of the Quadiani Group, Lahori Group and Ahmadis (Prohibition and Punishment) Ordinance, 1984 (XX of 1984) [ usurped ] ^ Mujibur Rehman vs. Federal Government of Pakistan , PLD 1985 FSC 8 Archived 3 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine , affirmed by Capt. (Retd.) Abdul Wajid vs. Federal Government of Pakistan , PLD 1988 SC 167 Archived 14 March 2013 at the Wayback Machine ^ Zaheeruddin vs. The State , 1993 SCMR 1718 Archived 29 April 2014 at the Wayback Machine , affirming PLD 1988 Quetta 22 Archived 14 March 2013 at the Wayback Machine and Khurshid Ahmad vs. The State , PLD 1992 Lahore 1 Archived 14 March 2013 at the Wayback Machine ^ Khan, Naveeda.

"Trespasses of the State: Ministering to Theological Dilemmas through the Copyright/Trademark" Archived 5 June 2010 at the Wayback Machine . Sarai Reader 2005: Bare Acts. p. 182.

^ PPC S. 295-C Archived 24 June 2014 at the Wayback Machine , inserted by Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 1986 (III of 1986) Archived 18 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine ^ Cf. e.g.

Khurshid Ahmad vs. The State , PLD 1992 Lahore 1 Archived 14 March 2013 at the Wayback Machine , para. 35 ^ a b Amnesty International 8 April 1995, Human Rights Commission of Pakistan, page 82 of its Annual Report (1995) Archived 26 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Implementation of the declaration on the elimination of all forms of intolerance and of discrimination based on religion of belief". Report submitted by Mr. Abdelfattah Amor, United Nations Special Rapporteur , in accordance with UN Commission on Human Rights Resolution 1995/23.

^ Plight of Ahmadi Muslims in Pakistan , page 43 ^ Amnesty International June 1997, PAKISTAN Time to take human rights seriously, page 24 Archived 26 June 2021 at amnesty.org (Error: unknown archive URL) ^ "Gunmen kill five at prayer meeting" . BBC. 30 October 2000.

Archived from the original on 4 April 2015 . Retrieved 31 May 2010 .

^ Peace and Democracy in South Asia Archived 27 March 2009 at the Wayback Machine , Volume 1, Number 1, January 2005. Passports to Privilege: The English-Medium Schools in Pakistan, Tariq Rahman.

^ a b c "Ahmadis: The lightning rod that attracts the most hatred" .

The Dawn . 28 October 2011.

^ "Eight dead in Pakistan's Ahmadi community's worship place attack" .

Dawn . Pakistan. 7 October 2005.

Archived from the original on 29 October 2010 . Retrieved 31 May 2010 .

^ "Two persons murdered after an anchor person proposed the widespread lynching of Ahmadi sect followers" . Asian Human Rights Commission. 10 September 2008.

Archived from the original on 3 June 2011 . Retrieved 12 June 2011 .

^ "KARACHI: Muttahida expels Aamir Liaquat" .

Dawn . 11 September 2008.

Archived from the original on 1 December 2012 . Retrieved 20 February 2012 .

^ "11 Ahmadis killed during 2009: report" .

Daily Times . Pakistan. 12 March 2009.

Archived from the original on 17 March 2010 . Retrieved 16 March 2019 .

^ "Clarification – 86 Ahmadis died in the Lahore attacks" . Al Islam. 12 June 2010.

^ "Pakistan mosque raids kill scores" .

BBC News . 28 May 2010.

^ "11 Ahmadis slam target-killings in Faisalabad" .

Daily Times . Pakistan. 5 April 2010.

^ a b Jajja, Sumaira (28 May 2013).

"Three years on, no justice for 86 dead Ahmadis" .

Dawn .

Archived from the original on 26 April 2014 . Retrieved 25 April 2014 .

"The 2010 Lahore incident is the only terrorist attack where the attackers were apprehended by the worshippers and handed over to the police," said Saleemuddin, spokesperson for the Ahmadiyya Jamaat Pakistan.

In a polite but jaded tone he said the attackers were presented in an anti-terrorism court but nothing came of it.

^ "Pakistan: Massacre of Minority Ahmadis" .

1 June 2010 . Human Rights Watch. June 2010.

Archived from the original on 9 April 2014 . Retrieved 25 April 2014 .

^ "Lahore attacks leave over 80 dead" . geo.tv. 28 May 2010. Archived from the original on 31 May 2010.

^ "Pakistan: Prosecute Ahmadi Massacre Suspects" .

27 May 2012 . Human Rights Watch. 27 May 2012.

Archived from the original on 22 February 2014 . Retrieved 25 April 2014 .

Two men were captured during the attack, but the government has failed to make progress on their trial, seeking repeated adjournments from the court, as has the defense.

^ "COURT ANNOUNCES DEATH SENTENCE FOR AHMADI ATTACKER" . newsweekpakistan.com. 19 January 2015.

Archived from the original on 26 March 2015 . Retrieved 12 March 2015 .

^ "Ahmadi man stabbed to death in Narowal" .

Dawn . Pakistan. 31 May 2010.

Archived from the original on 3 June 2010 . Retrieved 31 May 2010 .

^ "Ahmadiyya Archive" .

ahmadiyyaarchive.org . Retrieved 13 May 2022 .

^ "Jhang's Special Anti-Ahmadiyya Edition" . Jhang Group. Archived from the original on 18 April 2022 . Retrieved 7 September 2011 .

^ "Avoiding clash in faisalabad: Police whitewash Quranic verses from Ahmadi graves" .

The Express Tribune . 19 August 2012.

Archived from the original on 25 August 2012 . Retrieved 21 August 2012 .

^ AFP (3 December 2012).

"Gunmen desecrate Ahmadi graves in Lahore" .

Archived from the original on 26 April 2017 . Retrieved 24 April 2017 .

^ Joshua, Anita (4 December 2012).

"Grave vandalism highlights plight of Pakistan's Ahmadiyyas" .

The Hindu . Chennai, India.

Archived from the original on 6 December 2012 . Retrieved 6 December 2012 .

^ "HRCP condemns desecration of Ahmadi graves" .

The Express Tribune . 3 December 2012.

Archived from the original on 3 April 2015 . Retrieved 8 August 2015 .

^ "Anti-Ahmadi Pakistani media" . Persecution of Ahmads.

Archived from the original on 24 December 2013 . Retrieved 22 December 2013 .

^ om.pk/story/502777/ahmadi-literature-printing-press-employees-accused-of-blasphemy/ ^ a b "Clerics attack Ahmadi house, torture family in Punjab" .

The Express Tribune . 26 March 2013.

Archived from the original on 30 May 2015 . Retrieved 8 August 2015 .

^ "Hostile neighbours: Ahmadis will be 'always vulnerable', says SHO" .

The Express Tribune . 5 April 2013.

Archived from the original on 23 January 2016 . Retrieved 8 August 2015 .

^ "Neighbourly acts: Seven Ahmadis detained without an FIR" .

The Express Tribune . 29 April 2013.

Archived from the original on 23 January 2016 . Retrieved 8 August 2015 .

^ "Persecution: Anti-Ahmadi group targets community again" .

The Express Tribune .

Archived from the original on 30 July 2015 . Retrieved 8 August 2015 .

^ Jennifer Hough (26 May 2014).

"Canadian doctor Mehdi Ali Qamar gunned down as he visited gravesite in Pakistan with wife and son" .

National Post .

Archived from the original on 27 May 2014 . Retrieved 8 August 2015 .

^ Sophia Saifi (27 May 2014).

"Gunmen on motorbikes kill American doctor in Pakistan" . CNN.

Archived from the original on 23 January 2016 . Retrieved 8 August 2015 .

^ "Timesofindia.indiatimes.com is temporarily unavailable" .

The Times of India .

Archived from the original on 10 June 2015 . Retrieved 8 August 2015 .

^ "Three Ahmadis, including two minors, killed in Gujranwala" .

The Express Tribune . 27 July 2014.

Archived from the original on 12 August 2015 . Retrieved 8 August 2015 .

^ "Mob attack over alleged blasphemy" . Dawn. 28 July 2014 . Retrieved 28 July 2014 .

^ Qasim Nauman (28 July 2014).

"Mob Kills Three Ahmadis in Pakistan" . Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 28 July 2014 .

^ "Pakistani mob murder three Ahmadi Muslims" . Ahmadiyya Muslim Community International Press & Media Office. Archived from the original on 28 July 2014 . Retrieved 28 July 2014 .

^ "Ahmadi woman and children killed after Pakistani mob torches homes" .

The Guardian . 28 July 2014 . Retrieved 28 July 2014 .

^ "Mob torches factory in Pakistan following blasphemy accusation" . Yahoo News. 22 November 2015.

Archived from the original on 23 November 2015 . Retrieved 22 November 2015 .

^ "Ahmadi place of worship set ablaze in Jhelum, riots erupt after blasphemy allegations" . 21 November 2015.

Archived from the original on 22 November 2015 . Retrieved 22 November 2015 .

^ Gabol, Imran (12 December 2016).

"Mob 'besieging' Ahmadi place of worship in Chakwal dispersed by police" .

Dawn . AP.

Archived from the original on 11 May 2017 . Retrieved 24 April 2017 .

^ "Nawaz Sharif's son-in-law calls for 'complete curbs' on Ahmadis" .

Daily Pakistan . 10 October 2017.

Archived from the original on 10 October 2017 . Retrieved 10 October 2017 .

^ "Three Ahmadis sentenced to death for blasphemy" . Al Jazeera. 12 October 2017.

Archived from the original on 13 October 2017 . Retrieved 13 October 2017 .

^ "Pakistan's long-persecuted Ahmadi minority fear becoming election scapegoat" .

Reuters . 16 November 2017.

Archived from the original on 18 November 2017 . Retrieved 17 November 2017 .

^ "Ahmadis are not Muslims, decides AJK" . TheNews. 7 February 2018.

Archived from the original on 7 February 2018 . Retrieved 7 February 2018 .

^ "Interim Constitution (Twelfth Amendment) Act, 2018 (I of 2018)" (PDF) .

Law department AJ&K . 16 February 2018.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 April 2020 . Retrieved 2 April 2020 .

" 'Muslim' means a person, who believes in the unity and oneness of Almighty Allah, in the absolute and unqualified finality of the Prophethood of Muhammad (peace be upon him), the last of the prophets, and does not believe in, or recognize as a prophet or religious reformer, any person who claimed or claims to be a prophet, in any sense of the word or of any description whatsoever, after Muhammad (peace be upon him); 'Non-Muslim' means a person, who is not a Muslim and includes a person belonging to the Christian, Jew, Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist or Parsi community, a person of the Quadiani group or the Lahori group (who call themselves 'Ahmadis' or by any other name), or a Bahai, or any person who does not fulfill the requirements of a Muslim;" ^ Hamid Rao, Altaf (7 February 2018).

"AJK Parliament declares Ahmadis as non-Muslims" .

The Nation . Retrieved 4 April 2020 .

^ Reporter Name, Not mentioned (2 February 2018).

"Amendment declaring Ahmadis as non-Muslim proposed in AJK" .

Pakistan Today . Retrieved 4 April 2020 .

^ Reporter Name, Not Mentioned (2 February 2018).

"AJK Interim Constitution Act 2018 tabled in AJKLA" .

Radio Pakistan . Retrieved 4 April 2020 .

^ Sayeed, Saad.

"In blow to minorities, Pakistani court orders citizens to declare..." U.K . Archived from the original on 14 July 2018 . Retrieved 14 July 2018 .

^ "Pakistani mob attack against Ahmadi Mosque prompts global condemnation" .

rabwah.net . 25 May 2018.

Archived from the original on 12 July 2018 . Retrieved 12 July 2018 .

^ Sayeed, Saad.

"Pakistani mob destroys 100-year-old minority Ahmadi mosque" .

U.K . Archived from the original on 12 July 2018 . Retrieved 12 July 2018 .

^ "Mob demolishes mosque belonging to Ahmadi sect in Pakistan's Sialkot, no one injured – Firstpost" .

firstpost.com .

Archived from the original on 12 July 2018 . Retrieved 12 July 2018 .

^ "Five Ahmedis shot, injured in two incidents – Daily Times" .

Daily Times . 9 July 2018.

Archived from the original on 14 July 2018 . Retrieved 14 July 2018 .

^ "Five Ahmedis shot, injured in two incidents - Daily Times" .

Archived from the original on 14 July 2018 . Retrieved 14 July 2018 .

^ Staff Report (24 August 2018).

"Ahmedi worship place burnt down, 30 injured in Faisalabad" .

Pakistan Today . Retrieved 3 April 2020 .

^ Hussain, Kashif (24 August 2018).

"Ahmadi place of worship damaged, set on fire following spat between two youth groups in Faisalabad" .

DAWN News . Retrieved 3 April 2020 .

^ "One killed, scores injured as 'minor brawl' sparks communal violence" .

The Express Tribune . 24 August 2018 . Retrieved 3 April 2020 .

^ "Pakistan destroys Mosque of Ahmadi Muslim minority" .

Rabwah Times . 25 October 2019 . Retrieved 4 April 2020 .

^ "Ahmadi mosque demolished partially" .

Daily Times (Pakistan) . 28 October 2019 . Retrieved 4 April 2020 .

^ "شیخوپورہ میں احمدی برادری کا انتظامیہ اور مقامی افراد پر قبروں کی بے حرمتی کا الزام" [Administration and locals accused of desecrating graves of the Ahmadiyya Community in Sheikhapura].

BBC News اردو (in Urdu). 3 July 2020.

Archived from the original on 4 July 2020 . Retrieved 5 July 2020 .

^ "Graves of minority Ahmadis desecrated in Pakistan's Punjab: Community member" .

The Tribune . 16 July 2020 . Retrieved 20 July 2020 .

^ Ahmadiyya Press Section on Twitter ^ "پشاور میں 61 سالہ احمدی شہری معراج احمد کا قتل" .

BBC News اردو (in Urdu) . Retrieved 25 December 2020 .

^ "Professor's murder" .

Dawn (Editorial). 7 October 2020 . Retrieved 25 December 2020 .

^ "Bigotry continues" .

Daily Times . 18 October 2020 . Retrieved 25 December 2020 .

^ "IBA cancels economist's lecture over 'threats' " .

DAWN.COM . 23 October 2020 . Retrieved 25 December 2020 .

^ "پشاور میں ایک اور احمدی شہری محبوب احمد کا قتل" .

BBC News اردو (in Urdu) . Retrieved 25 December 2020 .

^ "Ahmadi man, 82, shot dead by gunmen in Pakistan's Peshawar" .

www.aljazeera.com . Retrieved 25 December 2020 .

^ Gabol, Imran (20 November 2020).

"Teenage boy guns down Ahmadi doctor, injures 3 others at their home in Nankana" .

Dawn . Retrieved 25 December 2020 .

^ "پنجاب کے ضلع ننکانہ میں فائرنگ: ایک احمدی ڈاکٹر ہلاک، تین زخمی" .

BBC News اردو (in Urdu) . Retrieved 25 December 2020 .

^ "Ahmadi lawyer charged for having 'Syed' in his name under anti-Ahmadiyya laws in Karachi, Pakistan" .

Freedom of Conscience . 18 April 2023 . Retrieved 28 August 2024 .

^ "Ahmadi lawyer booked, arrested in Karachi for having 'Syed' in his name" .

Dawn . 20 April 2023 . Retrieved 28 August 2024 .

^ "منڈی بہاؤالدین میں دو احمدیوں کا قتل: 'دونوں افراد کو ٹارگٹ کیا گیا، ملزم مذہبی شخصیات کی کچھ ویڈیوز سے متاثر تھا' " .

BBC News اردو (in Urdu). 9 June 2024 . Retrieved 17 June 2024 .

^ "Ahmadis in Pakistan say intimidated ahead of Eid al-Adha feast" .

France 24 . 15 June 2024 . Retrieved 17 June 2024 .

^ "Ahmadiyya place of worship destroyed in AJK's Kotli: community" .

Aaj English TV . 17 June 2024 . Retrieved 17 June 2024 .

^ "Supreme Court of Pakistan removes 'controversial' paragraphs from Mubarak Sani case ruling" .

Dawn . 23 August 2024 . Retrieved 28 August 2024 .

^ "SC removes 'controversial' paras from Mubarak Sani case ruling" .

Daily Times . 23 August 2024 . Retrieved 28 August 2024 .

^ "Supreme Court of Pakistan bows to Islamist threats in Mubarak Sani case" .

The Christian Post . 23 August 2024 . Retrieved 28 August 2024 .

^ "Perseuction of Ahmadi students" . Persecutions of Ahmadis students.

Archived from the original on 24 December 2013 . Retrieved 21 December 2013 .

^ "Attock School Expels Students 'For Being Ahmadi' " .

The Friday Times - Naya Daur . 23 September 2022 . Retrieved 21 November 2022 .

^ Adil Hussain Khan.

"From Sufism to Ahmadiyya: A Muslim Minority Movement in South Asia" Archived 4 February 2017 at the Wayback Machine Indiana University Press, 6 April 2015 p 130 ^ Frank A. Martin.

"Under the Absolute Amir" Archived 15 February 2017 at the Wayback Machine Harper & Brothers, 1907 p 203-4 ^ Adil Hussain Khan.

"From Sufism to Ahmadiyya: A Muslim Minority Movement in South Asia" Archived 4 February 2017 at the Wayback Machine Indiana University Press, 6 April 2015 p 131 ^ Argument Number 10 – Prophecies: Prophecy No. 1: Afghan martyrs Archived 22 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine ^ Adil Hussain Khan.

"From Sufism to Ahmadiyya: A Muslim Minority Movement in South Asia" Archived 4 February 2017 at the Wayback Machine Indiana University Press, 6 April 2015 p 133 ^ Vincent Littrell. [Islam: Ahmadiyya]. World Association of International Studies, 17 February 2006 ^ Yohanan Friedmann: Prophecy Continuous: Aspects of Ahmadi Religious Thought and Its Medieval Background , Oxford University Press India 2003, pp. 26–29 ^ Algeria: Wave of arrests and prosecutions of hundreds of Ahmadis Archived 29 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine Amnesty International. 19 June 2017 ^ Rahman, Waliur.

"Violent Dhaka rally against sect".

Archived 28 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine BBC News. 23 December 2005.

^ "Bangladesh: The Ahmadiyya Community – their rights must be protected".

Archived 30 September 2012 at the Wayback Machine Amnesty International. 22 April 2004.

^ " تازہ ترین: اَللّٰھُمَّ مَزِّقْھُمْ کُلَّ مُمَزَّقٍ وَ سَحِّقْھُمْ تَسْحِیْقًا (بنگلہ دیش، پاکستان، برکینا فاسو اور الجزائر کے احمدیوں کے لیے دعا کی تحریک) " .

الفَضل انٹرنیشنل (in Urdu). 3 March 2023 . Retrieved 3 March 2023 .

بنگلہ دیش میں آج کل جلسہ سالانہ ہو رہا ہے۔ آج ہی ان کا پہلا دن تھا۔ لیکن وہاں مخالفین نے جلسہ گاہ پر حملہ کیا۔ کئی لوگ زخمی بھی ہوئے ہیں۔ ابھی تک جو خبر آئی ہے اس کے مطابق انہوں نے کچھ اس طرح حملہ کیا کہ بعض شدید زخمی بھی ہوئے ہیں۔ پھراس علاقے کے احمدیوں کے گھروں کو جلا بھی رہے ہیں۔ ابھی پورا اندازا نہیں کہ کتنا نقصان ہوا ہے۔ ^ "Kamal: BNP behind communal violence in Panchagarh" .

www.dhakatribune.com . 6 March 2023 . Retrieved 7 March 2023 .

^ "One killed in clash over Ahmadiyya congregation in Panchagarh, BGB deployed" .

Prothom Alo . Retrieved 3 March 2023 .

^ "30 injured in clash between police, locals in Panchagarh" .

The Business Standard . 3 March 2023 . Retrieved 3 March 2023 .

^ "Panchagarh simmers with tension as homes torched in violent anti-Ahmadiyya protests" .

bdnews24.com . Retrieved 3 March 2023 .

^ "Jamaat releases statement condemning Ahmadiyya community" .

Dhaka Tribune . 6 March 2023 . Retrieved 7 March 2023 .

^ "Belarus: Ahmadiyya Muslims among banned religious organisations" . Forum18.org.

Archived from the original on 22 April 2016 . Retrieved 20 May 2013 .

^ (in French) " Le Vlaams Belang manifeste contre la construction d’une mosquée Archived 23 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine ", Le Soir , 13 October 2011 ^ "Bulgaria: Ahmadis barred "because it is against the religions that people follow here" " . Forum18.org.

Archived from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 24 April 2016 .

^ "Nine Killed In Mosque Attack In Burkina Faso" .

www.barrons.com . Agence France Presse . Retrieved 14 January 2023 .

^ "Nine Ahmadi Muslims Murdered in Brutal Terrorist Attack on Mosque in Burkina Faso" .

Press Ahmadiyya . 12 January 2023 . Retrieved 14 January 2023 .

^ "Egypt Ahmadis detained" . Archived from the original on 18 May 2010 . Retrieved 24 April 2017 .

^ "Imam Fatty says Ahmadis should be banned" . 10 October 2014 . Retrieved 6 August 2015 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Gambian Cleric Calls for the Expulsion of Ahmadis" . 4 November 2014. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016 . Retrieved 6 August 2015 .

^ "Gambia: Supreme Islamic Council States Position on Ahmadiya Jammat" . AllAfrica.

Archived from the original on 28 January 2015 . Retrieved 11 February 2015 .

^ "Gambia: Ahmadiyya Reacts to Allegations" . AllAfrica.

Archived from the original on 4 February 2015 . Retrieved 11 February 2015 .

^ "Supreme Islamic Council poses danger to national cohesion" . The Voice Gambia. Archived from the original on 11 February 2015 . Retrieved 11 February 2015 .

^ "Shihabuddin Imbichi Koya Thangal vs K.P. Ahammed Koya on 8 December 1970" . Indian Kanoon.

Archived from the original on 5 August 2011 . Retrieved 28 October 2011 .

The various texts quoted in the ruling dispel doubts about Ahamadis on the crucial twin tests "that there is no God but Allah ...............and Mohammad is the servant and Messenger of God." ^ "Ahmadis and an unsung hero" .

The Indian Express . 17 August 2016 . Retrieved 23 June 2021 .

^ Hussin, Iza (2017), Orloff, Ann Shola; Morgan, Kimberly J. (eds.), "Making Legibility between Colony and Empire: Translation, Conflation, and the Making of the Muslim State" , The Many Hands of the State: Theorizing Political Authority and Social Control , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.

349– 368, doi : 10.1017/9781316471586.015 , ISBN 978-1-107-13529-1 , S2CID 191922066 , retrieved 23 June 2021 ^ De, Rohit (November 2010).

"The Two Husbands of Vera Tiscenko: Apostasy, Conversion, and Divorce in Late Colonial India" .

Law and History Review .

28 (4): 1011– 1041.

doi : 10.1017/S0738248010000751 .

ISSN 1939-9022 .

S2CID 145719142 .

^ Naqvi, Jawed (1 September 2008).

"Religious violence hastens India's leap into deeper obscurantism" .

Dawn . Archived from the original on 23 November 2008 . Retrieved 23 December 2009 .

^ Katiyar, Prerna.

"In their prophet's shadow: Ahmadis and their plight as a community" .

The Economic Times . Retrieved 23 June 2021 .

^ "Ahmadiya community denied permission for Hyderabad meet" . Persecution.org.

Archived from the original on 1 February 2011 . Retrieved 21 February 2012 .

^ "Permission for Hyderabad Ahmadiyya meet cancelled" . Perseuction.org.

Archived from the original on 1 February 2011 . Retrieved 21 February 2012 .

^ "Liberty abridged The Pioneer Edit Desk Ahmadiyas are Indians, too" . Perseuction.org.

Archived from the original on 1 February 2011 . Retrieved 21 February 2012 .

^ "Religious fanatics attack Ahmadis' houses in Saharanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India; six persons injured" . Persecution.org.

Archived from the original on 1 February 2011 . Retrieved 21 February 2012 .

^ "Exhumation annoys Ahmadiyya sect" . Persecution.org.

Archived from the original on 9 June 2013 . Retrieved 21 February 2012 .

^ "Ahmadiyya convention faces heat" . Persecution.org.

Archived from the original on 10 June 2013 . Retrieved 21 February 2012 .

^ "Should The Mayawati Government Remove Ahamadiyya Sect From Syllabus" . Persecution.org.

Archived from the original on 30 November 2010 . Retrieved 21 February 2012 .

^ "Darul Uloom asks Saudi Arabia to ban Ahmadiyas from Mecca visit" . Perseuction.org.

Archived from the original on 7 February 2012 . Retrieved 21 February 2012 .

^ "Ahmadiyyas face protest at peace mission" . Persecution.org.

Archived from the original on 29 January 2012 . Retrieved 21 February 2012 .

^ "Exhibition on teachings of Quran denounced" . Persecution.org.

Archived from the original on 9 June 2013 . Retrieved 21 February 2012 .

^ "Fearing row, Bukhari detained" .

Archived from the original on 9 June 2013 . Retrieved 21 February 2012 .

^ "Delhi: Quran exhibition called off after protests" . Persecution.org.

Archived from the original on 9 June 2013 . Retrieved 21 February 2012 .

^ "Heretical' Ahmadiyya sect raises Muslim hackles" . Persecution.org.

Archived from the original on 29 January 2012 . Retrieved 21 February 2012 .

^ Courtesy: Two Circles (20 February 2012).

"Don't perform nikaah of Qadiyanis: AP Wakf board to Qazis" . Siasat Urdu Daily, Hyderabad . Retrieved 10 March 2012 .

^ "Mosque attacked" .

The Times of India .

Archived from the original on 24 December 2013 . Retrieved 21 December 2013 .

^ "Bodhgaya blasts: Ahmadiyya sect had been targeted" .

Hindustan Times . 23 June 2014 . Retrieved 23 June 2021 .

^ "Indonesia to ban Ahmadi activities" . AsiaNews.IT. 6 September 2008.

^ Anti-Ahmadiyya Mullah Burning Ahmadiyya Mosques – Indonesia . Al Jazeera.

^ "Six killed in clash between villagers and Ahmadiyah followers" .

The Jakarta Post . 6 February 2011. Archived from the original on 27 August 2011.

^ Gillian Terzis (18 February 2011).

"Indonesia is no longer a poster child for pluralism" .

The Guardian .

^ McGeown, Kate. " Islamic sect Ahmadiyah faces ban in Indonesia " BBC . 21 April 2011. (Video) ^ Allard, Tom.

Trial begins after shocking mob violence ends in slaying Archived 3 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine .

The Sydney Morning Herald . 27 April 2011.

^ Indonesia to ban Ahmadi activities Archived 24 July 2009 at the Wayback Machine , 6 September 2008 ^ " Ahmadiyya Ban and Human Rights ", Fazil Jamal on Jakarta Post [ dead link ] ^ Indonesia to ban Ahmadi activities Archived 24 July 2009 at the Wayback Machine , AsiaNews.IT ^ Anti-Ahmadiyya Mullah Burning Ahmadiyya Mosques – Indonesia Archived 25 July 2015 at the Wayback Machine , Al Jazeera News Report ^ Indonesia's religious tolerance under threat-group Archived 24 June 2009 at the Wayback Machine , 10 June 2008.

^ "Religious clash in Indonesia kills up to six, Straits Times, 6 Feb 2011" .

Archived from the original on 9 February 2011 . Retrieved 24 April 2017 .

^ Indonesia mob attacks Muslim sect Archived 5 August 2010 at the Wayback Machine . Al Jazeera.  29 July 2010 ^ "Six killed in clash between villagers and Ahmadiyah followers" .

The Jakarta Post . 6 February 2011. Archived from the original on 27 August 2011 . Retrieved 17 August 2011 .

^ "Govt instructs police to hunt killers, calls on Ahmadiyah to abide by decree" .

The Jakarta Post . 6 February 2011. Archived from the original on 8 February 2011 . Retrieved 17 August 2011 .

^ Elisabeth Oktofani & Chrestella Tan (8 July 2011).

"Activists Cry Foul at 'Lenient' Prosecutors in Ahmadiyah Trial" .

Jakarta Globe . Archived from the original on 10 August 2011 . Retrieved 28 July 2011 .

^ "Cikeusik verdict 'chilling' message to minorities" .

The Jakarta Post . Archived from the original on 12 October 2012 . Retrieved 29 July 2011 .

^ "Cikeusik Ahmadi leader gets 6 months prison" . 15 August 2011. Archived from the original on 12 December 2011 . Retrieved 16 August 2011 .

^ "The Reason Why US 'Disappointed' with Indonesia Court Ruling" . 16 August 2011. Archived from the original on 7 October 2011 . Retrieved 16 August 2011 .

^ "MAIS forbids Ahmadiyya worship" . thenutgraph. 28 April 2009.

Archived from the original on 13 January 2011 . Retrieved 26 October 2010 .

^ "ISLAMIC COUNCIL IN MALAYSIA ISSUES NOTICE TO AHMADIYYA MUSLIM JAMAAT PREVENTING USE OF CENTRAL MOSQUE" . thepersecution.

Archived from the original on 23 October 2010 . Retrieved 26 October 2010 .

^ a b "Palestinian Muslims who reject violence are persecuted" .

israeltoday.co.il .

Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 24 April 2016 .

^ "Persecution of Ahmadis in Saudi Arabia" . Persecution.org . Retrieved 11 March 2012 .

^ Depending on the source there were 56–60 Ahmadis arrested in the years 2006–2007 ^ a b "Saudi Arabia: 2 Years Behind Bars on Apostasy Accusation" . Human Rights Watch. 15 May 2014.

Archived from the original on 4 March 2015 . Retrieved 1 March 2015 .

^ "Saudi Arabia: International Religious Freedom Report 2007" . U.S. Department of State . Retrieved 7 March 2015 .

^ "Saudi Arabia" (PDF) . United States Commission on International Religious Freedom.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 July 2014 . Retrieved 7 March 2015 .

^ "Persecution of Ahmadis in Saudi Arabia" . Persecution.org.

Archived from the original on 23 February 2011 . Retrieved 11 March 2012 .

^ Daurius Figueira (2002).

Jihad in Trinidad and Tobago, July 27, 1990 . iUniverse. p. 47.

ISBN 978-0595228348 .

^ Gerhard Böwering, Patricia Crone (2013).

The Princeton Encyclopedia of Islamic Political Thought . Princeton University Press. p. 25-26.

ISBN 978-0691134840 .

^ Maria Grazia Martino (2014).

The State as an Actor in Religion Policy: Policy Cycle and Governance . Springer.

ISBN 978-3658069452 . Retrieved 1 March 2015 .

^ "Letter to King Abdullah" . Human Rights Watch. 8 February 2007. Archived from the original on 23 November 2008 . Retrieved 23 October 2011 .

^ U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor, International Religious Freedom Report for 2012: Saudi Arabia (20 May 2013).

^ HAW urges Saudi to free two Ahmadis held for apostasy , The Daily Star, Lebanon News (15 May 2014).

^ Bunglawala, Inayat (8 December 2009).

"Freedom of worship for Ahmadis" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 8 December 2010 .

^ Porter, Tom (8 April 2016).

"Hate leaflets calling for killing of Ahmadi Muslims distributed across London" .

^ Asad Shah: Nicola Sturgeon joins 500 people at vigil as defiant locals declare 'This is not who we are' dailyrecord.co.uk 25 March 2016.

^ " 'Kill Ahmadis' leaflets found in UK mosque – BBC News" . Retrieved 15 August 2016 .

^ "The Muslim Council of Britain is failing Ahmadis like Asad Shah" .

The Guardian . 25 April 2016.

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 15 August 2016 .

^ "Renowned Scholar Maulana Yusuf Ludhianvi Martyred in Karachi" .

albalagh.net . Retrieved 15 August 2016 .

^ Bunglawala, Inayat (8 December 2009).

"Freedom of worship for Ahmadis" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 8 September 2013 . Retrieved 8 December 2010 .

^ Jerome, Taylor.

"Hardliners call for deaths of Surrey Muslims" .

Independent . Retrieved 2 April 2020 .

^ Taylor, Jerome (21 October 2010).

"Hardliners call for deaths of Surrey Muslims" .

The Independent . London.

Archived from the original on 6 June 2014 . Retrieved 21 October 2010 .

^ "Ahmadiyya Debate" . Parliament of United Kingdom.

Archived from the original on 25 July 2011 . Retrieved 22 October 2010 .

^ "Tooting election race infected by anti-Ahmadiyya hate campaign" .

Wimbledon Guardian . 14 October 2010.

Archived from the original on 21 October 2010 . Retrieved 5 April 2011 .

^ Oakes, Omar.

"Worshippers told at Tooting Islamic Centre to boycott Ahmadiyya shops" .

Wimbledon Guardian . No. 14 October 2010.

Archived from the original on 12 August 2016 . Retrieved 10 August 2016 .

Ahmadi shopkeepers face financial ruin after clerics demanded a boycott of their shops.  Imam Suliman Gani, of the TIC, admitted he personally pleaded with the owner of the Lahore Halal Meat in Tooting not to sell his business to an Ahmadi man.  He said: "Since the Qadianis are routinely deceptive about their religion, there was a potential risk of Muslims being offered meat that wasn't necessarily halal." ^ "Asad Shah death: Man in court charged with murder" . BBC. 29 March 2016.

Archived from the original on 29 March 2016 . Retrieved 29 March 2016 .

^ Cramb, Auslan (6 April 2016).

"Man from Bradford admits killing Glasgow shopkeeper Asad Shah" .

Archived from the original on 8 April 2016 . Retrieved 7 April 2016 .

said it was because he "disrespected" Islam.   Tanveer Ahmed, 32, said in a statement that he killed Asad Shah, 40, claiming: "if I had not done this others would".

^ Brooks, Libby (18 April 2016).

"Scottish Muslim groups fail to attend Ahmadi anti-extremism event" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 28 March 2017 . Retrieved 24 April 2017 .

^ "Asad Shah killing: 'Disrespecting Islam' murderer jailed" . BBC. 9 August 2016.

Archived from the original on 14 March 2017 . Retrieved 24 April 2017 .

^ Porter, Tom (8 April 2016).

"Hate leaflets calling for killing of Ahmadi Muslims distributed across London" .

Archived from the original on 15 April 2017 . Retrieved 24 April 2017 .

^ Presenter: Manveen Rana ; Producers:  Richard Fenton-Smith & Sajid Iqbal; Editor: Gail Champion (3 October 2017).

"Extremism: Hidden in Plain Sight" .

File on 4 . BBC.

BBC Radio 4 . Retrieved 3 October 2017 .

^ Murphy, Simon (15 April 2019).

"UK-based TV station fined for anti-Ahmadi Muslim hate speech" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 2 April 2020 .

^ "Ofcom Annual report 2018-2019" (PDF) .

Ofcom GOV UK . p. 33.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 July 2019 . Retrieved 2 April 2020 .

We are currently considering imposing sanctions for other serious breaches. These include: prolonged hate speech against the Ahmadiyya community which was not justified by the context (broadcast on Channel 44) ^ Tobitt, Charlotte (15 April 2019).

"Ofcom fines UK Urdu-language news channel £75,000 for 'hate speech' against Muslim group" .

Press Gazette . Retrieved 2 April 2020 .

^ Belalloufi, Amal (25 August 2021).

"Algeria's Ahmadis, an Israeli plot, forced to worship behind closed doors" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 9 August 2021 .

^ Al-Hammarneh, Ala; Thielmann, Jorn (January 2008).

Islam and Muslims in Germany . Brill Academic Publishers. p.

317 .

^ Saeed, S. (2007), Pakistani Nationalism and the State Marginalisation of the Ahmadiyya Community in Pakistan. Studies in Ethnicity and Nationalism, 7: 132–152.

doi : 10.1111/j.1754-9469.2007.tb00166.x External links [ edit ] Website about persecution of Ahmadis Ahmadis Murdered During 2009 v t e Religious persecution and discrimination By group Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Methods Censorship Blasphemy law Blood libel Communal violence Cultural genocide Deprogramming Desecration Domicide Discrimination Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Extrajudicial killing Extrajudicial punishment Exclusivism Forced conversion Forced displacement Hate crime Iconoclasm Intolerance Pogrom Police Political violence Population cleansing Population transfer Sectarian violence Social cleansing Segregation State atheism State religion Terrorism Violence War Events Golden calf massacre (c.1250 BC) Persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire (64–313) Persecution of pagans in the late Roman Empire (c. 324–c. 491) Decline of Buddhism in the Indian subcontinent (c.550–c. 1200) Yellow Turban Rebellion (c.184–c. 205) Battle of Tours (732) Rhineland massacres (1096) Jerusalem massacre (1099) Muslim conquests in the Indian subcontinent (643–1526) Inquisition (1184–1908) Massacre at Ayyadieh (1191) Northern Crusades (12th–16th cent.) Crusades against Christians (13th–15th cent.) Forced conversions of Muslims in Spain (1500–1526) European wars of religion (1522–1712) Ottoman–Habsburg wars (1526–1791) Goa Inquisition (1561–1812) French Wars of Religion (1562–1598) Expulsion of the Moriscos (1609–1614) Test Acts (1673–1829) Persecution of Muslims during the Ottoman contraction (1683–1922) Christianization of the Sámi people (1700s) French Revolutionary dechristianisation (1789–1801) Utah War (1857–1858) 1860 Mount Lebanon civil war (1860) Circassian genocide (1864) Dungan Revolt (1862–1877) Adana massacre (1909) Massacres of Albanians in the Balkan Wars (1912–1913) Greek genocide (1913–1922) Pontic Greek genocide Assyrian genocide (1914–1924) Armenian genocide (1915–1923) Persecution of Christians in the Eastern Bloc (1917–1990) Soviet persecution (1922–1991) 1917–1921 1921–1928 1928–1941 1958–1964 1970–1987 legislation Šahovići massacre (1924) White Terror (Spain) (1936–1975) Nazi boycott of Jewish businesses (1933) The Holocaust (1939–1945) Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia (1941–1945) Communist Polish persecution (1945–1989) Communist Romanian persecution (1945–1989) Noakhali riots (1946) Direct Action Day (1946) 1946 Bihar riots (1946) Rawalpindi massacres (1947) Persecution of Hindus in Pakistan (1947–ongoing) Violence against Muslims in India (1947–ongoing) Violence against Hindus in independent India (1947–ongoing) 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight (1948) Jewish exodus from the Muslim world (1948–1980) Antireligious campaigns in China (1949–ongoing) Persecution of Tibetans (1950–ongoing) Exodus of Turks from Bulgaria (1950) Religious violence in Nigeria (1953–ongoing) Istanbul pogrom (1955) Persecution of Papuans (1962–ongoing) Buddhist crisis (1963) Huế Phật Đản shootings (1963) Thích Quảng Đức (1963) Xá Lợi Pagoda raids (1963) Cultural Revolution (1966–1976) Four Olds (1966) Famen Temple (1966) Bangladesh genocide (1971) Persecution of Hindus in Bangladesh (1971–ongoing) Lebanese Civil War (1975–1990) Cambodian genocide (1975–1979) East Timor genocide (1975–1999) 1984 anti-Sikh riots (1984) Revival Process (1984–1989) 1989 expulsion of Turks from Bulgaria (1989) Exodus of Kashmiri Hindus (1990) Yugoslav Wars (1991–2001) Ethnic cleansing in the Bosnian War (1992–1996) Bosnian genocide (1995) War crimes in the Kosovo War (1999) Walisongo school massacre (2000) Kosheh massacres (2000) September 11 attacks (2001) 2002 Gujarat riots (2002) South Thailand insurgency (2004–ongoing) Boko Haram insurgency (2009–ongoing) Maspero demonstrations (2011) Attacks by Islamic extremists in Bangladesh (2013–2016) Yazidi genocide (2014–2017) Genocide of Christians by ISIL (2014–ongoing) Iraqi Turkmen genocide (2014–2017) Persecution of Uyghurs in China (2014–ongoing) Rohingya genocide (2016–ongoing) Christchurch mosque shootings (2019) 2019 Sri Lanka Easter bombings (2019) 2020 Delhi riots (2020) 2024 Istanbul church shooting Crocus City Hall attack (2024) Mar Elias Church attack (2025) Religion v t e Ahmadiyya topics Beliefs and practices Five Pillars of Islam Six articles of faith Quran Hadith Sunnah Distinct views Prophets Jesus Jihad Evolution Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Writings Literature Barahin-e-Ahmadiyya The Philosophy of the Teachings of Islam Jesus in India Noor-ul-Haq Victory of Islam Malfūzāt Tafseer-e-Kabeer Ahmadiyya Muslim Community Successors of the Messiah: I II III IV V Jalsa Salana Mosques MTA International Humanity First (International Aid Charity) Miscellaneous Persecution Ahmadiyya by country Ahmadiyya and other faiths List of Ahmadis Lahore Ahmadiyya Movement Ordinance XX Category v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Persecution_of_Ahmadis&oldid=1302419305 " Categories : Persecution of Ahmadis History of Islam in Pakistan History of Islam in Bangladesh History of Islam in India History of Islam in Indonesia Persecution by Muslims Sectarian violence Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Webarchive template unknown archives CS1 Urdu-language sources (ur) Twitter username not in Wikidata Articles with French-language sources (fr) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1: unfit URL Articles with dead external links from June 2016 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pending changes protected pages Use dmy dates from September 2020 Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2011 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2012 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from April 2015 This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 08:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Persecution of Ahmadis 7 languages Add topic

