Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Issues Toggle Issues subsection 1.1 Indiscernibility of identicals 2 Overview 3 See also 4 Footnotes 5 Notes 6 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Propositional attitude 14 languages العربية Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Nederlands Polski Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept in epistemology This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( April 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A propositional attitude is a mental state held by an agent or organism toward a proposition . In philosophy , propositional attitudes can be considered to be neurally realized, causally efficacious, content-bearing internal states (personal principles/values).

[ 1 ] Linguistically , propositional attitudes are denoted by a verb (e.g.

believed ) governing an embedded "that" clause, for example, 'Sally believed that she had won'.

Propositional attitudes are often assumed to be the fundamental units of thought and their contents, being propositions, are true or false from the perspective of the person. An agent can have different propositional attitudes toward the same proposition (e.g., " S believes that her ice-cream is cold," and " S fears that her ice-cream is cold"). Propositional attitudes have directions of fit : some are meant to reflect the world, others to influence it.

[ 1 ] One topic of central concern is the relation between the modalities of assertion and belief, as well as intention. A person's assertions may not conform to their beliefs. When the departure of assertion from belief is intentional, it is called a lie .

[ 1 ] Other comparisons of multiple modalities that frequently arise are the relationships between belief and knowledge and the discrepancies that occur among observations, expectations, and intentions.  Deviations of observations from expectations are commonly perceived as surprises , phenomena that call for explanations to reduce the shock of amazement.

Issues [ edit ] In logic , the formal properties of verbs like assert , believe , command , consider , deny , doubt , imagine , judge , know , want , wish , and a host of others that involve attitudes or intentions toward propositions are notorious for their recalcitrance to analysis.
(Quine 1956).

Indiscernibility of identicals [ edit ] Further information: Use–mention distinction One of the fundamental principles governing identity is that of substitutivity [ clarification needed ] , also known as fungibility — or, as it might well be called, that of indiscernibility of identicals .  It provides that, given a true statement of identity, one of its two terms may be substituted for the other in any true statement and the result will be true . It is easy to find cases contrary to this principle. For example, the statements: (1) Giorgione = Barbarelli, (2) Giorgione was so called because of his size.

are true;  however, replacement of the name Giorgione by the name Barbarelli turns (2) into the falsehood: (3) Barbarelli was so called because of his size.

[ 2 ] Quine's example here refers to Giorgio Barbarelli 's sobriquet "Giorgione", an Italian name roughly glossed as "Big George." The basis of the paradox here is that while the two names signify the same individual (the meaning of the first statement), the names are not themselves identical; the second statement refers to an attribute (origin) that they do not share.

[ A ] Overview [ edit ] Bertrand Russell introduced the idea of handling propositions like this: [ 3 ] What sort of name shall we give to verbs like 'believe' and 'wish' and so forth?  I should be inclined to call them 'propositional verbs'.  This is merely a suggested name for convenience, because they are verbs which have the form of relating an object to a proposition.  As I have been explaining, that is not what they really do, but it is convenient to call them propositional verbs.  Of course you might call them 'attitudes', but I should not like that because it is a psychological term, and although all the instances in our experience are psychological, there is no reason to suppose that all the verbs I am talking of are psychological.  There is never any reason to suppose that sort of thing.

[ 3 ] How one feels about or regards a proposition is different than what a proposition is – they can be accepted, asserted, believed, commanded, contested, declared, denied, doubted, enjoined, exclaimed, or expected, for example.  Different attitudes toward propositions are called propositional attitudes ; they are also discussed under the headings of intentionality and linguistic modality .

Many problematic situations in real life arise from the circumstance that many different propositions in many different modalities are in the air at once.  In order to compare propositions of different colours and flavours, as it were, there is no basis for comparison but to examine the underlying propositions themselves, returning to matters of language and logic.  Despite the name, propositional attitudes are not regarded as psychological attitudes proper, since the formal disciplines of linguistics and logic are concerned with nothing more concrete than what can be said in general about their formal properties and their patterns of interaction.

See also [ edit ] Accessibility relation Affect (linguistics) Attitude Belief Disposition Embedded clause Habit Intensionality Jerry Fodor Knowledge Responsive predicate Qualia Self-fulfilling prophecy Truth Footnotes [ edit ] ^ See " Who's on First?

." Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c "Propositional Attitudes" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 2023-03-07 .

^ W. V. O. Quine , Quintessence, extensions, Reference and Modality , p. 361 ^ a b Russell 1918, 227 Bibliography [ edit ] Awbrey, J. and Awbrey, S.(1995), "Interpretation as Action: The Risk of Inquiry", Inquiry: Critical Thinking Across the Disciplines 15, 40–52.

Cresswell, M.J.

(1985), Structured meanings. The semantics of propositional attitudes . MIT Press, Cambridge & London 1985.

Quine, W.V.

(1956), "Quantifiers and Propositional Attitudes", Journal of Philosophy 53 (1956).  Reprinted, pp. 185–196 in Quine (1976), Ways of Paradox .

Quine, W.V. (1976), The Ways of Paradox, and Other Essays , 1st edition, 1966.  Revised and enlarged edition, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1976.

Quine, W.V. (1980 a), From a Logical Point of View, Logico-Philosophical Essays , 2nd edition, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Quine, W.V. (1980 b), "Reference and Modality", pp. 139–159 in Quine (1980 a), From a Logical Point of View .

Ramsey, F.P.

(1927), "Facts and Propositions", Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume 7 , 153–170.  Reprinted, pp. 34–51 in F.P. Ramsey, Philosophical Papers , David Hugh Mellor (ed.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1990.

Ramsey, F.P. (1990), Philosophical Papers , David Hugh Mellor (ed.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Runes, Dagobert D.

(ed.), Dictionary of Philosophy , Littlefield, Adams, and Company, Totowa, NJ, 1962.

Russell, Bertrand (1912), The Problems of Philosophy , 1st published 1912.  Reprinted, Galaxy Book, Oxford University Press, New York, NY, 1959.  Reprinted, Prometheus Books, Buffalo, NY, 1988.

Russell, Bertrand (1918), "The Philosophy of Logical Atomism", The Monist , 1918.  Reprinted, pp. 177–281 in Logic and Knowledge: Essays 1901–1950 , Robert Charles Marsh (ed.), Unwin Hyman, London, UK, 1956.  Reprinted, pp. 35–155 in The Philosophy of Logical Atomism , David Pears (ed.), Open Court, La Salle, IL, 1985.

Russell, Bertrand (1956), Logic and Knowledge: Essays 1901–1950 , Robert Charles Marsh (ed.), Unwin Hyman, London, UK, 1956.  Reprinted, Routledge, London, UK, 1992.

Russell, Bertrand (1985), The Philosophy of Logical Atomism , David Pears (ed.), Open Court, La Salle, IL.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Propositional attitudes at Wikimedia Commons Propositional Attitudes , Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy v t e Philosophy of mind Philosophers G. E. M. Anscombe Aristotle Armstrong Thomas Aquinas J. L. Austin Alexander Bain George Berkeley Henri Bergson Ned Block Franz Brentano C. D. Broad Tyler Burge David Chalmers Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Andy Clark Dharmakirti Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett René Descartes Fred Dretske Fodor Goldman Martin Heidegger David Hume Edmund Husserl William James Frank Cameron Jackson Immanuel Kant David Lewis (philosopher) John Locke Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Maurice Merleau-Ponty Marvin Minsky Thomas Nagel Alva Noë Derek Parfit Plato Hilary Putnam Richard Rorty Gilbert Ryle John Searle Wilfrid Sellars Baruch Spinoza Alan Turing Michael Tye Vasubandhu Ludwig Wittgenstein Stephen Yablo Zhuangzi more...

Theories Behaviorism Biological naturalism Dualism Eliminative materialism Emergent materialism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Interactionism Naïve realism Neurophenomenology Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Occasionalism Parallelism Phenomenalism Phenomenology Physicalism Type physicalism Property dualism Representational Solipsism Substance dualism Concepts Abstract object Animal machine Chinese room Creativity Cognition Cognitive closure Concept Consciousness Hard problem of consciousness Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Intelligence Artificial Human Intentionality Introspection Intuition Language of thought Mental event Mental image Mental process Mental property Mental representation Mind Mind–body problem Pain Problem of other minds Propositional attitude Qualia Tabula rasa Understanding Zombie Related Metaphysics Philosophy of artificial intelligence / information / perception / self Category Philosophers category Project Task Force v t e Formal semantics (natural language) Central concepts Compositionality Denotation Entailment Extension Generalized quantifier Intension Logical form Presupposition Proposition Reference Scope Speech act Syntax–semantics interface Truth conditions Topics Areas Anaphora Ambiguity Binding Conditionals Definiteness Disjunction Evidentiality Focus Indexicality Lexical semantics Modality Negation Propositional attitudes Tense–aspect–mood Quantification Vagueness Phenomena Antecedent-contained deletion Cataphora Coercion Conservativity Counterfactuals Crossover effects Cumulativity De dicto and de re De se Deontic modality Discourse relations Donkey anaphora Epistemic modality Exhaustivity Faultless disagreement Free choice inferences Givenness Homogeneity (linguistics) Hurford disjunction Inalienable possession Intersective modification Logophoricity Mirativity Modal subordination Opaque contexts Performatives Polarity items Privative adjectives Quantificational variability effect Responsive predicate Rising declaratives Scalar implicature Sloppy identity Subsective modification Subtrigging Telicity Temperature paradox Veridicality Formalism Formal systems Alternative semantics Categorial grammar Combinatory categorial grammar Discourse representation theory (DRT) Dynamic semantics Generative grammar Glue semantics Inquisitive semantics Intensional logic Lambda calculus Mereology Montague grammar Segmented discourse representation theory (SDRT) Situation semantics Supervaluationism Type theory TTR Concepts Autonomy of syntax Context set Continuation Conversational scoreboard Downward entailing Existential closure Function application Meaning postulate Monads Plural quantification Possible world Quantifier raising Quantization Question under discussion Semantic parsing Squiggle operator Strawson entailment Strict conditional Type shifter Universal grinder See also Cognitive semantics Computational semantics Distributional semantics Formal grammar Inferentialism Logic translation Linguistics wars Philosophy of language Pragmatics Semantics of logic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐djhv8
Cached time: 20250812030906
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.269 seconds
Real time usage: 0.350 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1052/1000000
Revision size: 8774/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 52449/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2033/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 26154/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.158/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4327587/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  280.909      1 -total
 26.23%   73.695      4 Template:Navbox
 24.78%   69.605      2 Template:Reflist
 23.88%   67.092      1 Template:Philosophy_of_mind
 20.87%   58.616      1 Template:Cite_web
 16.77%   47.106      1 Template:Short_description
 13.71%   38.503      1 Template:More_footnotes
 11.94%   33.536      1 Template:Ambox
  9.88%   27.760      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.68%   15.948      1 Template:Commonscat-inline Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:425467:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812030906 and revision id 1282179862. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Propositional_attitude&oldid=1282179862 " Categories : Propositional attitudes Psycholinguistics Psychological attitude Concepts in epistemology Formal semantics (natural language) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from April 2009 All articles lacking in-text citations Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2011 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 March 2025, at 20:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Propositional attitude 14 languages Add topic

