Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ukrainophobic stereotypes 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 In the Russian Empire 2.2 Soviet Union 2.3 Anti-Ukrainian hate speech during the Russian invasion of Ukraine 3 By country Toggle By country subsection 3.1 Nazi Germany 3.2 Ukraine 3.2.1 Minister of Education of Ukraine 3.3 Russia 3.4 Hungary 3.5 Poland 3.5.1 Situation after 24 February 2022 3.6 Portugal 3.7 Canada 3.8 Latvia 3.9 North Korea 4 Slang references to Ukrainians and Ukrainian culture Toggle Slang references to Ukrainians and Ukrainian culture subsection 4.1 Ethnic slurs 4.2 Political insults and historical nicknames 4.3 Other 5 Anti-Ukrainian sentiment in culture and media 6 See also 7 References and footnotes 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Anti-Ukrainian sentiment 19 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Čeština Français Galego Հայերեն Hrvatski Latviešu Norsk bokmål Polski Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hostility, prejudice, or discrimination against Ukrainians Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Anti-Ukrainian sentiment ( Ukrainian : Проти Українські настрої , romanized : Proty Ukrainski nastroi ), Ukrainophobia ( Ukrainian : Українофобія , romanized : Ukrainofobiia ) or anti-Ukrainianism ( Ukrainian : Протиукраїзм , romanized : Protyukraizm ) is animosity towards Ukrainians , Ukrainian culture , the Ukrainian language , Ukraine as a nation, or all of the above.

[ 1 ] Modern scholars divide anti-Ukrainian sentiment into two types. One type consists of discrimination against Ukrainians based on their ethnic or cultural origin, typical forms of xenophobia , racism , and broader anti-Slavic sentiment . Another type consists of the conceptual rejection of Ukrainians as an actual ethnic group and the rejection of the Ukrainian culture and language , based on the belief that they are unnatural because they were artificially formed; at the turn of the 20th century, several Russian nationalist authors asserted that the Ukrainian identity and language had both been artificially created in order to undermine Russia.

[ 2 ] Since then, this argument has also been made by other Russian nationalist authors.

[ 1 ] Ukrainophobic stereotypes [ edit ] Within Russian nationalist narratives and propaganda , Ukrainophobic stereotypes range from mockery to ascribing negative traits to the whole Ukrainian nation and people of Ukrainian descent include: Ukrainians eat lots of salo .

[ 3 ] Ukrainians are greedy.

[ 3 ] Ukrainians are sly and cunning.

[ 3 ] Ukrainians are dishonest.

[ 3 ] Ukrainians are not educated and have no culture.

[ 3 ] Ukrainians are homosexuals.

Ukrainian women are prostitutes.

Ukrainians are antisemites .

[ 3 ] Ukrainian language is a broken dialect of Russian .

[ 4 ] Ukrainian nationalism is claimed to be associated with neo-Nazism . This is a recurring theme in Russian disinformation within the ongoing Russo-Ukrainian War , usually in the following narratives: Ukrainians are sympathizers of nationalist leaders Stepan Bandera ( Banderovtsy ) and Roman Shukhevych , collaborators of Nazi Germany in World War II . Despite the stereotype, 4.5 million Ukrainians served the Red Army during World War II against Nazi Germany.

[ 5 ] Ukrainians were also considered Untermenschen by the Nazis for being Slavic and treated accordingly. Although Bandera initially worked with the Nazis, he was later imprisoned in a Nazi concentration camp during World War II.

[ 6 ] Ukrainians are sympathizers of the pro-independence hetman Ivan Mazepa , who wish to betray "the unity between Russian and Ukrainian people".

[ needs context ] The whole of Ukrainian society is dominated by neo-Nazis and ultranationalists who persecuted ethnic Russians and Russian-speakers ; this stereotype was used by the Russian government to justify invading Ukraine in 2022 , with the claimed goal of "demilitarisation" and "denazification".

History [ edit ] In the Russian Empire [ edit ] See also: Russification of Ukraine The rise and spread of Ukrainian self-awareness around the time of the Revolutions of 1848 produced an anti-Ukrainian sentiment within some layers of society within the Russian Empire . In order to retard and control this movement, the use of Ukrainian language within the Russian empire was initially restricted by official government decrees such as the Valuev Circular (18 July 1863) and later banned by the Ems ukaz (18 May 1876) from any use in print (with the exception of reprinting of old documents). Popularly the anti-Ukrainian sentiment was promulgated by such organizations as the " Black Hundreds ", which were vehemently opposed to Ukrainian self-determination . Some restrictions on the use of Ukrainian language were relaxed in 1905–1907. They ceased to be policed after the February Revolution in 1917.

Russian gendarmes in 1914 at the Taras Shevchenko burial.

Besides the Ems ukaz and Valuev Circular , there was a series of anti-Ukrainian language edicts starting from the 17th century, when Russia was governed by the House of Romanov . In 1720 Peter the Great issued an edict prohibiting printing books in the Ukrainian language, and since 1729 all edicts and instructions have only been in the Russian language . In 1763 Catherine the Great issued an edict prohibiting lectures in the Ukrainian language at the Kyiv-Mohyla Academy . In 1769 the Most Holy Synod prohibited printing and using the Ukrainian alphabet book . In 1775 the Zaporizhian Sich was destroyed. In 1832 all studying at schools of the Right-bank Ukraine transitioned to exclusively Russian language. In 1847 the Russian government persecuted all members of the Brotherhood of Saints Cyril and Methodius and prohibited the works of Taras Shevchenko , Panteleimon Kulish , Mykola Kostomarov (Nikolai Kostomarov) and others. In 1862 all free Sunday schools for adults in Ukraine were closed. In 1863 the Russian Minister of Interior Valuev decided that the Little Russian language (Ukrainian language) had never existed and could not ever exist. During that time in the winter of 1863–64, the January Uprising took place at the western regions of the Russian Empire, uniting peoples of the former Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth . Next year in 1864 the "Regulation about elementary school" claimed that all teaching should be conducted in the Russian language. In 1879 the Russian Minister of Education Dmitry Tolstoy (later the Russian Minister of Interior) officially and openly stated that all people of the Russian Empire should be Russified . In the 1880s several edicts were issued prohibiting education in the Ukrainian language at private schools, theatric performances in Ukrainian, any use of Ukrainian in official institutions, and christening Ukrainian names. In 1892 another edict prohibited translation from the Russian to Ukrainian. In 1895 the Main Administration of Publishing prohibited printing children books in Ukrainian. In 1911 the resolution adopted at the 7th Congress of Noblemen in Moscow prohibited the use of any languages other than Russian. In 1914 the Russian government officially prohibited celebrations of the 100th Anniversary of Shevchenko's birthday and posted gendarmes at the Chernecha Hill . The same year Nicholas II of Russia issued an edict prohibiting the Ukrainian press.

See also: Ems Ukaz Soviet Union [ edit ] "In their time Marko Kropyvnytsky , Ivan Tobilevych, Mykola Sadovsky, Maria Zankovetska , Panas Saksahansky all should have been hanged. Then no one would even have heard about Ukraine." — Mikhail Artemyevich Muravyov , Red Commander [ 7 ] See also: Persecuted bandurists Under Soviet rule in Ukraine, a policy of korenization was adopted after the defeat of the Ukrainian People's Republic and it initially supported Ukrainian cultural self-awareness. This policy was phased out in 1928 and in 1932, it was entirely terminated in favor of Russification .

In 1929 Mykola Kulish wrote a theatrical play "Myna Mazailo" in which the author cleverly describes the cultural situation in Ukraine. There was supposedly no anti-Ukrainian sentiment within the Soviet government, which began to repress all aspects of Ukrainian culture and language, a policy which was contrary to the ideology of Proletarian Internationalism.

In 1930 the Union for the Freedom of Ukraine process was established in Kharkiv , after which, a number of former Ukrainian politicians and their relatives were deported to Central Asia .

[ 8 ] During the Great Purge a whole generation of Ukrainian poets, writers and interpreters was prosecuted and executed, which further gained its own name of Executed Renaissance .

[ 9 ] During the Soviet era , the population of Ukraine was reduced by the artificial famine which was called the Holodomor in 1932–33 along with the population of other nearby agrarian areas of the USSR.

Collectivization in the Soviet Union and a lack of favored industries were the primary contributors to famine mortality (52% of excess deaths), and evidence shows that ethnic Ukrainians and Germans were targeted.

[ 10 ] According to a Centre for Economic Policy Research paper published in 2021 by Andrei Markevich, Natalya Naumenko, and Nancy Qian, regions with higher Ukrainian population shares were struck harder with centrally planned policies corresponding to famine, and Ukrainian populated areas were given lower amounts of tractors which were correlated to a reduction in famine mortality, ultimately concluding that 92% of famine deaths in Ukraine alone along with 77% of famine deaths in Ukraine, Russia, and Belarus combined can be explained by systematic bias against Ukrainians.

[ 11 ] Many prominent Ukrainians were labelled nationalists or anti-revolutionaries, and many of them were repressed and executed as enemies of the people .

[ 12 ] In January 1944, during a session of the Politbureau of the Central Committee of the All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks), Stalin personally made a speech "About anti-Lenin mistakes and nationalistic perversions in a film-tale of Alexander Dovzhenko , Ukraine in Flames .

[ 13 ] On 2 July 1951, the Communist newspaper Pravda published an article "On Ideological Perversions in Literature" with regard to the Volodymyr Sosyura 's poem "Love Ukraine" which contained the following passage: "This poem could have been signed by such foes of the Ukrainian people as Petliura and Bandera ... For Sosiura writes about Ukraine and the love of it outside the limits of time and space. This is an ideologically vicious work. Contrary to the truth of life, the poet sings praises of a certain 'eternal' Ukraine full of flowers, curly willows, birds, and waves on the Dnipro." [ 14 ] Modern analysis indicates that the Ukrainian language was underrepresented in Soviet media productions.

[ 15 ] Anti-Ukrainian hate speech during the Russian invasion of Ukraine [ edit ] Inciting and dehumanizing anti-Ukrainian narratives that keep recurring in this context on social media platforms have been analyzed. They have been compared with hate speech that in the past has been used to justify violence against groups such as the victims of the Holocaust, groups targeted by the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia, Tutsi people during the Rwanda genocide of 1994 and the Rohingya in Myanmar.

In the case of the Russo-Ukrainian war, approving and promoting the violence includes i.a. celebrating Russian war crimes such as the Bucha massacre , or Russian missile strike on an apartment building in Dnipro in January 2023, which killed more than 40 civilians. Social media accounts posting on such themes often simultaneously target sexual and gender minorities, promote conspiracy theories such as "biolabs in Ukraine", QANON and tend to express support for Donald Trump .

[ 16 ] By country [ edit ] Nazi Germany [ edit ] Under Nazi ideology, Ukrainians—along with other Slavic peoples—were viewed as Untermenschen (“subhumans”) and were thus subjected to extreme racial prejudice and exploitation. Nazi Germany did not recognize Ukrainians as a distinct nation or ethnic group worthy of sovereignty; instead, they were seen as a fragmented rural population to be subjugated, enslaved, or displaced in service of German expansionist aims.

Adolf Hitler and other key Nazi theorists considered Slavs racially inferior and politically incapable of self-rule. In Mein Kampf , Hitler referred to Slavs as racially “inferior” and praised the Germanic right to conquer eastern lands.

[ 17 ] The 1942 Generalplan Ost , developed by Heinrich Himmler’s SS, laid out a vision of the mass expulsion and enslavement of tens of millions of Slavs, including Ukrainians. The plan envisioned that only a small fraction of the local population—10% or less—would be “Germanized,” while the rest would be forcibly removed or left to die under conditions of starvation and forced labor.

[ 18 ] Despite some initial Ukrainian support for Germany in 1941—particularly among nationalists who hoped for independence—the Nazi regime quickly cracked down on Ukrainian autonomy. The short-lived Ukrainian National Government, declared in Lviv by the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists (OUN-B), was dissolved by the Gestapo within days, and its leaders (including Yaroslav Stetsko and Stepan Bandera) were arrested.

[ 19 ] Reichskommissar Erich Koch , appointed to administer occupied Ukraine, openly declared contempt for the local population: “We are a master race… I will squeeze the last drop out of the country. I did not come to spread bliss.”
— Erich Koch, Reichskommissar of Ukraine [ 20 ] Under Koch’s brutal rule, millions of Ukrainians were subjected to forced labor, starvation policies, and mass executions. An estimated 2.2 million Ukrainians were deported to work as Ostarbeiter (“Eastern workers”) in Germany under slave-like conditions.

[ 21 ] Nazi propaganda and administrative documents routinely dehumanized Ukrainians. A 1942 directive from the SS stated: “Ukrainians, like all Russians, are to be viewed as primitive people. They should be taught only simple labor, not politics, culture, or higher learning.” [ 22 ] This systematic denial of education, cultural development, and self-determination exemplified the Nazis’ broader strategy: to erase Ukrainian identity and absorb the territory into a racially stratified German empire.

Ukraine [ edit ] On Sunday 15 July 2012, the national television broadcasting station in Ukraine First National in its news program "Weekly overview" ( Ukrainian : Підсумки тижня , romanized : Pidsumky tyzhnia ) showed a video footage on a development of anti-Ukrainian sentiments within Ukraine.

[ 23 ] Caricature from Vidsich : the Russian language is shown as a big man, telling a girl representing the Ukrainian language: "Little girl, move over! You're oppressing me!" in Russian. There is a pun on grammatical genders : the noun for "language" in Russian, Jazyk , is masculine, while the Ukrainian word for "language", Mova , is feminine.

A propaganda article posted on the website of the Kremenchuk department of the Communist Party of Ukraine argues that history that was published during the Soviet regime was the true history, and that new historical facts being uncovered from the archives are false.

[ 24 ] The article also denies the existence of the Ukrainian culture .

Mykola Levchenko, a Ukrainian parliamentarian from Party of Regions , and the deputy of Donetsk City Council states that there should be only one language, Russian. He says that the Ukrainian language is impractical and should be avoided. Levchenko called Ukrainian the language of folklore and anecdotes. However, he says he will speak the literary Ukrainian language on principle, once Russian is adopted as the sole state language.

[ 25 ] Anna German, the spokesperson of the same party, highly criticized those statements.

[ 26 ] Mykhailo Bakharev, the vice-speaker of the Crimean Autonomous Republic parliament (and chief editor of Krymskaya Pravda ), openly says that there is no Ukrainian language and that it is the language of the non-educated part of population. He claims that it was invented by Taras Shevchenko and others. He also believes that there is no Ukraine nation, there is no future for the Ukrainian State, and that Ukrainization needs to be stopped.

[ 27 ] Minister of Education of Ukraine [ edit ] The former Ukrainian Minister of Science and Education, Dmytro Tabachnyk , sparked protests calling him anti-Ukrainian in some parts of Ukraine due to his statements about Western Ukrainians, his preference for the Russian language, and his denial of the Holodomor .

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] Tabachnyk's view of Ukraine's history includes the thesis that western Ukrainians aren't really Ukrainian . In an article for the Russian newspaper Izvestia Tabachnyk wrote in 2009: " Halychany (western Ukrainians) practically don't have anything in common with the people of Great Ukraine , not in mentality, not in religion, not in linguistics, not in the political arena". "We have different enemies and different allies. Furthermore, our allies and even brothers are their enemies, and their "heroes" ( Stepan Bandera , Roman Shukhevych ) for us are killers, traitors and abettors of Hitler 's executioners." [ 28 ] By 17 March 2010, four of western Ukraine's regional councils had passed resolutions calling for the minister's dismissal. A host of civic and student organizations from all over the country (including Kherson in southern Ukraine and Donetsk in eastern Ukraine ), authors and former Soviet dissidents also signed petitions calling for his removal.

[ 28 ] Tabachnik also had stated that Ukrainian history textbooks contained "simply false" information and announced his intention to rewrite them.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] Russia [ edit ] See also: Russia–Ukraine relations The bust of Ukrainian national poet Taras Shevchenko in Borodianka with a bullet hole in the head during the Russian invasion of Ukraine .

In response to Ukraine's 1991 declaration of independence, a prominent Russian poet Joseph Brodsky wrote a deeply offensive poem On the Independence of Ukraine . The poem was rediscovered and popularized by Russian state media in 2015 on the peak of the war in Donbas .

[ 32 ] In a poll held by Levada Center in June 2009 in Russia 75% of Russian respondents respected Ukrainians as ethnic group but 55% were negative about Ukraine as the state. In May 2009, 96% of Ukrainians polled by Kyiv International Sociology Institute were positive about Russians as ethnic group, 93% respected the Russian Federation and 76% respected the Russian establishment.

[ 33 ] Some Russian media seem to try to discredit Ukraine.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] [ 38 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] [ 41 ] [ excessive citations ] Anti-Ukrainian attitude persists among several Russian politicians, such as the former mayor of Moscow, Yuri Luzhkov , and the former leader of the Liberal Democratic Party of Russia and former Deputy Speaker of the Russian Parliament , Vladimir Zhirinovsky .

[ 42 ] Russian state officials have made anti-Ukrainian statements, for example, Deputy Chair of Russian Security Council Dimitry Medvedev said in April 2022 that "the very essence of Ukrainianness, fed by anti-Russian venom and lies about its identity, is one big sham. Ukrainian identity does not exist and never has".

[ 43 ] In 2006, in letters to Vladimir Putin , Viktor Yushchenko and Vasily Duma , the Ukrainian Cultural Centre of Bashkortostan complained of anti-Ukrainian sentiment in Russia, which they claim includes wide use of anti-Ukrainian ethnic slurs in the mainstream Russian media, television and film.

[ 44 ] The Urals Association of Ukrainians also made a similar complaint in a letter they addressed to the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe in 2000.

[ 45 ] According to the Ukrainian Cultural Centre of Bashkortostan, despite their significant presence in Russia, Ukrainians in that country have less access to Ukrainian-language schools and Ukrainian churches than do other ethnic groups.

[ 45 ] In Vladivostok, according to the head of the Ukrainian government's department of Ukrainian Diaspora Affairs, local Russian officials banned a Ukrainian Sunday school in order not to " accentuate national issues " [ 46 ] According to the president of the Ukrainian World Congress in 2001, persistent requests to register a Ukrainian Orthodox Church – Kyiv Patriarchate or a Ukrainian Catholic Church were hampered due to "particular discrimination" against them, while other Catholic, Muslim and Jewish denominations fared much better.

[ 47 ] According to the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church , by 2007 their denomination had only one church building in all of Russia.

[ 48 ] In 2008 Nikolai Smirnov released a documentary in which he claims that Ukraine is part of one whole Russia that was split away by different western powers such as Poland, particularly.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] In November 2010, the High Court of Russia cancelled registration of one of the biggest civic communities of the Ukrainian minority, the " Federal nation-cultural autonomy of the Ukrainians in Russia " (FNCAUR).

[ 51 ] According to the author Mykhailo Ratushniy Ukrainian activists continue to face discrimination and bigotry in much of Russia.

[ 52 ] Hungary [ edit ] See also: Hungary–Ukraine relations Poland [ edit ] See also: Kresy myth and Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Anti-Ukrainian banner carried at a march in Warsaw on the 80th anniversary of the Volhynia massacre in 2023 From the 14th to the early 20th century, Polish aristocracy dominated large parts of Ukraine. Ukrainians were mostly peasants, and despised by Polish nobility for being of lower class and for their Orthodox religion. Under the Second Polish Republic , Ukrainians were routinely discriminated against (along with other minorities). They were excluded from public jobs, Polish peasants were favoured when land from nobles' estates was divided during land reform, and the Polish government went so far as to raze Orthodox churches and to plan the expulsion of all Ukrainians from the Kholm region. During the Second World War , some Ukrainians initially supported Soviet and German occupation over continued Polish rule. Polish and Ukrainian militant organisations fought an underground war during and after the German occupation. Many Poles consider the destruction of Polish villages and killing of civilians during the conflict as genocide of Poles , although Polish underground organisations also massacred Ukrainians (e.g. during the Pawlokoma massacre , which occurred after the Volhynia massacre).

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] [ 55 ] [ 56 ] [ 57 ] In late 1995, Ukrainian organization "ZUwP" was demanded to be banned [ 58 ] following the wave of anti-Ukrainian actions that have erupted during the festival of Ukrainian culture in Poland in the border town of Przemyśl in 1995 where numerous threats against participants and numerous acts of vandalism took place. A rise in incidences of graffiti with anti-Ukrainian slogans, and the office of "Związek Ukraińców w Polsce" was set alight.

[ 59 ] In some [ which?

] cities anti-Ukrainian assaults, vandalism acts of an organised character have targeted centres of Ukrainian culture, schools, churches, memorials.

[ 60 ] Ukrainophobic and antisemitic authors (mainly interbellum Endecja activists) published by Polish publishing house Nortom [ 61 ] include: Roman Dmowski , [ 62 ] Janusz Dobrosz , Jędrzej Giertych , Jan Ludwik Popławski , Maciej Giertych , Stanisław Jastrzębski and Edward Prus .

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] In 2000, Nortom was forced to withdraw its 12 controversial titles from the Frankfurt Book Fair by the Polish Ministry of Culture representative Andrzej Nowakowski overlooking the Polish exposition. Nortom was accused of selling anti-German, anti-Ukrainian and antisemitic books, especially the following titles: "Być czy nie być" by Stanisław Bełza, "Polska i Niemcy" by Jędrzej Giertych and "I tak nie przemogą. Antykościół, antypolonizm, masoneria" by his son Maciej Giertych. As a result of the above request, the president of the Polish delegation Andrzej Chrzanowski from Polska Izba Książki decided to penalise Nortom by removing it from the 2000 book fair altogether.

[ 61 ] With the outbreak of the Russo-Ukrainian War in 2014, the number of Ukrainian people in Poland increased, especially those emigrating for work purposes, whose number began to grow in 2015.

[ 65 ] At that time, a stereotype of a Ukrainian as a cheap worker working illegally or as a person taking jobs from Poles in Poland emerged [ 66 ] and increase in anti-immigrant sentiments by some political parties.

Situation after 24 February 2022 [ edit ] 24 February 2022, armed forces of the Russian Federation invaded Ukraine . As a result, by November 2023, over 17 million Ukrainian citizens had crossed the Polish-Ukrainian border.

[ 67 ] The government and Polish society decided to help Ukraine, but the situation caused by the Ukrainian refugee crisis also resulted in a negative attitude towards Ukrainians among some Poles. Politicians Grzegorz Braun and Janusz Korwin-Mikke are often associated with anti-Ukrainian statements along with the Confederation Liberty and Independence party.

[ 68 ] There were critical voices regarding aid for Ukraine and the alleged disarmament of the Polish Army from which newly purchased equipment was supposed to be sent to Ukraine. While some of these votes were right, some of them were mainly related to Russian propaganda. In 2022 the hashtag #StopUkrainizacjiPolski (Stop the ukrainization of Poland) was popularized. Anti-Ukrainian sentiments were not only related to economic topics and war, but also appeared with various incidents such as the murder on Nowy Świat street in Warsaw in May 2022, for which a Ukrainian citizen was allegedly responsible, or the missile explosion incident in Przewodów .

[ 69 ] A few smaller incidents also sparked anti-Ukrainian sentiments, [ 70 ] but in some incidents some media incorrectly attributed Ukrainian nationality to the welders an example of which is the situation with 2 May 2023 when during the Polish Cup final in Warsaw a man who attacked police officers with an ax was wrongly presented as a Ukrainian citizen, even though he was a Polish citizen.

[ 71 ] Recently, the most negative feelings among Polish society have been aroused by military support for Ukraine, which is defined as the transfer of military equipment and some necessary logistic supplies for free, and the problem related to Ukrainian grain , which caused farmers' protests on the Polish-Ukrainian border related to the massive flooding of the market with Ukrainian grain, lowering local prices.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] Portugal [ edit ] See also: Portugal–Ukraine relations Anti-Ukrainian sentiment in Portugal has grown since the arrival of Ukrainian immigrants to Portuguese territory in the 1990s.

[ citation needed ] Most Ukrainians in Portugal work in low-skill and low wages jobs, particularly on cleaning services, construction, manufacturing industries, transport services, hotels and restaurants.

[ 74 ] In March 2020, a Ukrainian citizen named Ihor Humenyuk was interrogated and tortured to death at Lisbon airport while trying to immigrate to Portugal irregularly.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] Canada [ edit ] Anti-Ukrainian discrimination was present in Canada from the arrival of Ukrainians in Canada around 1891 until the late 20th century. In one sense this was part of a larger trend towards nativism in Canada during the period. But Ukrainians were singled out for special discrimination because of their large numbers, visibility (due to dress, non-western European appearance, and language), and political activism. During the First World War, around 8,000 Ukrainian Canadians were interned by the Canadian government as "enemy aliens" (because they came from the Austrian Empire). In the interwar period all Ukrainian cultural and political groups, no matter what their ideology was, were monitored by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and many of their leaders were deported.

[ 77 ] This attitude began to slowly change after the Second World War , as Canadian immigration and cultural policies generally moved from being explicitly nativist to a more pluralistic one. Ukrainian nationalists were now seen as victims of communism, rather than dangerous subversives.

[ citation needed ] Ukrainians began to hold high offices, and one, Senator Paul Yuzyk was one of the earliest proponents of a policy of " multiculturalism " which would end official discrimination and acknowledge the contribution of non-English, non-French Canadians. The Royal Commission on Bilingualism and Biculturalism of the 1960s, which had originally been formed only to deal with French-Canadian grievances, began the transition to multiculturalism in Canada because of Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau 's desire to court Ukrainian votes in Western Canada. The commission also included a Ukrainian Canadian commissioner, Jaroslav Rudnyckyj .

Since the adoption of official multiculturalism under Section Twenty-seven of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms in 1982, Ukrainians in Canada have had legal protection against discrimination.

[ citation needed ] Ukrainian Canadians have held high offices including Governor General ( Ray Hnatyshyn ), Deputy Prime Minister ( Chrystia Freeland ), Leader of the Opposition ( Rona Ambrose ), and several premiers of provinces.

Latvia [ edit ] According to researcher Mārtiņš Kaprāns of Center for European Policy Analysis , disinformation about Ukraine is dominant in Latvia's pro-Kremlin and Russian language media , which has contributed to a negative image of Ukraine in its Russian-speaking population, while ethnic Latvians are largely supportive of Ukraine. He has named Tatyana Zhdanok , Alexander Gaponenko [ lv ; ru ] and vesti.lv as some of the sources of anti-Ukrainian statements in Latvia.

[ 78 ] On 20 May 2022, a man in Riga was ordered to pay 6034.55 euros as material and moral damages and sentenced to 200 hours of community service for attacking a young man with a flag of Ukraine on his shoulders.

[ 79 ] A police officer and an alleged spouse of the attacker present at the moment of the attack was fired from the State Police for negligence .

[ 80 ] On 24 June 2022, a criminal case was launched against two young people for burning a flag of Ukraine at Vērmane Garden with the intention of posting the video on TikTok to gain popularity and provoke Ukrainians.

[ 81 ] North Korea [ edit ] On 23 June 2024, Pak Jong-chon made a statement in which he compares Ukrainians to neo-Nazis.

[ 82 ] Slang references to Ukrainians and Ukrainian culture [ edit ] The use of ethnic slurs and stereotypes in relation to Ukrainians in Russian media [ 83 ] is one of Ukrainian community's concerns in Russia.

[ 44 ] Ethnic slurs [ edit ] khokhol – derived from a term for a traditional Cossack-style haircut.

[ 84 ] saloyed – literally " salo eater"; based on a stereotype and a running joke that salo is a national food favorite of the Ukrainians.

Ukr , plural Ukry – after gaining independence, Ukrainians started rebuilding their history after a long period of Polonization and Russification . This nation-building drive was derided by Russians. A Russian running joke is that Ukrainians derive the name of the country Ukraine from the name of the supposed ancient tribe of "Ukrs". Also derisively called Great Ukrs, Velikiie Ukry .

Ukrop – literally " dill ", a pun: Ukr ainian = ukr op.

[ 85 ] The slur was reappropriated by Ukrainians during the war in Donbas [ 86 ] and later adopted by the UKROP party.

Szoszon – in Poland, an imitation of the Polish word "Co" ?

, literally "what?" - Ukrainians struggle to pronounce "Co?" And instead say the word "Szo?" -, and a pun on the Shoshone tribe of North America.

[ 87 ] Hunky – in North America (historically) [ 88 ] Political insults and historical nicknames [ edit ] Maloross – Ukrainian, " Little Russian ", "dweller of Malorossiya ". Revival of a nineteenth-century imperial Russian term dismissive of independent Ukrainian nationality. Ukrainians often use this to describe culturally russified Ukrainians.

There are a number of Russian insults based on the alleged opposition of all Ukrainians to all things Russian (or all things Soviet , in the past): Mazepinets – Mazepite, Ivan Mazepa supporter, archaic.

Pietliurovets – Petlyurite, Symon Petliura supporter.

[ 89 ] Banderivets , or Banderovets, a lso variants Bandera , Banderlog , Benderovets . – " Banderite ", a term used to associate Ukrainian national identity with radical nationalism.

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] [ 92 ] [ 93 ] Historically, referred to supporters of far-right nationalist politician Stepan Bandera (1909–59).

Zhydobandera , Zhidobandera , or Zhydobanderovets – "Yid-Banderite" or "Judeo-Banderite" a conflation of Zhyd (i.e., a Kike ) and a Bandera follower. This is an ironic self-appellation coined by Ukrainian Jewish activists during the Euromaidan protests to highlight the inconsistency of Russian propaganda which demonized Ukrainian pro-Europe and pro-democracy activism as fascist to the West and as Jewish to Ukrainians, with reference to " Judeo-Bolshevism ".

[ 94 ] Maidaun – a conflation of the Maidan protest movement and daun , person with Down syndrome .

[ 95 ] Maidanutyi – a conflation of the Maidan and the yebanutyi , "fucked in the head" (insane).

[ 96 ] kastruliegolovyi – literally "cooking pot-headed". A derogatory term for Euromaidan supporters.

[ 97 ] So-called " Dictatorship laws " banned, among other things, the use of helmets during mass gatherings. On 19 January 2014 some Euromaidan participants mocked the ban by wearing cookware as helmets.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] [ 100 ] [ 101 ] svidomit – a conflation of Ukrainian svidomyi , "conscious, conscientious", [ 102 ] and Russian sodomit , " sodomite ".

Banderlog – a conflation of Bandera and Bandar-log .

[ 103 ] Pigs – refers to a stereotype that Ukrainians love to eat salo and pork in general.

Other [ edit ] mova – a Russian derisive slang reference to Ukrainian language ("language" is mova in Ukrainian, yazyk in Russian).

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] nezalezhnaya – a Russian derisive slang reference to Ukraine. Borrowing of Ukrainian nezalezhna , "independent", with a Russian ending, mocking the historical Ukrainian struggle for independence (compare Russian nezavisimaya ). Sometimes used colloquially by Russians and Russian mass media to express ironic, disparaging attitude towards Ukraine.

[ 106 ] [ 105 ] Anti-Ukrainian sentiment in culture and media [ edit ] 72 Meters [ 107 ] Brother 2 [ 108 ] Taras Bulba [ 109 ] Iron Ivan [ 110 ] [ 111 ] Crimea. The Way Home [ 112 ] The Game [ 113 ] [ 114 ] Moya prekrasnaya nyanya [ 115 ] ru:20/22 [ 116 ] Ukraine on Fire [ 117 ] Hatred [ 118 ] Emily in Paris [ 119 ] [ 120 ] Lost Girl [ 121 ] 2 Broke Girls [ 122 ] Lord of War [ 122 ] The White Guard [ 123 ] [ 124 ] The Days of the Turbins [ 125 ] [ 124 ] Battle for Sevastopol [ 126 ] [ 127 ] [ 128 ] [ 129 ] Gogol. The Beginning [ 129 ] Viy [ 129 ] Trotsky [ 130 ] [ 131 ] [ 132 ] [ 133 ] Interns [ 134 ] [ 135 ] [ 136 ] [ 137 ] Black Hunters 2 [ 138 ] The Grishchenko family [ 139 ] See also [ edit ] Chronology of Ukrainian language bans Russification of Ukraine Slavophobia Dziuba, Ivan , Internationalism or Russification?

, a dissident's Marxist critique of  the national and cultural policy of the Soviet Union in the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic " What Russia should do with Ukraine " Russian allegations of fascism against Ukraine References and footnotes [ edit ] ^ a b Andriy Okara. Ukrainophobia is a gnostic problem. " n18texts Okara Archived 23 October 2018 at the Wayback Machine ". Retrieved 7 December 2008.

^ Shkandrij, Myroslav (9 October 2001).

Russia and Ukraine . McGill-Queen's Press - MQUP.

ISBN 9780773522343 . Retrieved 17 June 2015 .

^ a b c d e f "Що таке українофобія і як її розпізнати – Політичні новини | УНІАН" (in Ukrainian). unian.ua . Retrieved 25 July 2017 .

^ "The long war over the Ukrainian language – the Boston Globe" .

The Boston Globe .

^ "Soviet Army" .

The Internet Encyclopedia of Ukraine . Retrieved 18 August 2022 .

^ "Harvest of Despair — Karel C. Berkhoff" .

^ Orel, S.

Хутір Надія — колиска театру корифеїв (Khutir Nadiya – a cradle of a theater of coryphaeus) Archived 9 March 2023 at the Wayback Machine . Newspaper "Day". 2003-04-04 ^ "The Great Ukrainian Famine of 1932-33 | Sciences Po Violence de masse et Résistance - Réseau de recherche" .

sciencespo.fr (in French). 19 January 2016 . Retrieved 5 June 2023 .

^ "Життя і смерть Миколи Хвильового. Від комуніста до комунара" .

Історична правда . Retrieved 5 June 2023 .

^ Naumenko, Natalya (March 2021).

"The Political Economy of Famine: The Ukrainian Famine of 1933" .

The Journal of Economic History .

81 (1): 156– 197.

doi : 10.1017/S0022050720000625 .

ISSN 0022-0507 .

^ Markevich, Andrei; Naumenko, Natalya; Qian, Nancy (29 July 2021).

"The Political-Economic Causes of the Soviet Great Famine, 1932–33" (PDF) .

Centre for Economic Policy Research . Retrieved 26 November 2021 – via REPEC.

^ Basil Dmytryshyn, Moscow and the Ukraine, 1918–1953: A Study of Russian Bolshevik Nationality Policy , Bookman Associates, 1956 ^ Shapoval, Yu.

Гітлер, Сталін і Україна: безжальні стратегії (Hitler, Stalin and Ukraine: merciless strategies) .

Ukrayinska Pravda . 9 May 2013 ^ Siundiukov, I.

Volodymyr Sosiura and the Oppressors of National Spirit .

The Day. 17 February 2004 ^ Dovzhenko Film Studios as a mirror of Russification policy in the USSR .

Ukrayinska Pravda . 17 July 2013.

^ Strick, Benjamin (3 May 2023).

"Incitement to Kill: Tracking hate speech targeting Ukrainians during Russia's war in Ukraine" . Centre for Informati.

^ Mein Kampf, Ralph Manheim translation ^ Czesław Madajczyk, Generalplan Ost: The Nazi Plan for the East, 1990 ^ Timothy Snyder, Bloodlands: Europe Between Hitler and Stalin, 2010 ^ Alexander Dallin, German Rule in Russia, 1941–1945, 1957 ^ Karel Berkhoff, Harvest of Despair: Life and Death in Ukraine under Nazi Rule, 2004 ^ Nazi directives in Nazi Empire: German Colonialism and Imperialism from Bismarck to Hitler, Shelley Baranowski, 2011 ^ (in Ukrainian) 2012: історія русифікації від провладного телеканалу (2012: History of Russification by the pro-state TV-station) , Ukrayinska Pravda (18 July 2012) ^ Василий Витальевич Шульгин. "Украинствующие и мы" [Vasily V. Shulgin. "Ukrainophiles and us"] (in Russian). Communist Party of Ukraine. 2004. Archived from the original on 6 March 2008.

^ Антон Зікора.

"Секретар Донецької міськради Левченко – про мову, Шевченка і сифіліс" . Retrieved 17 June 2015 .

^ Анна Герман вважає провокаційною заяву Миколи Левченка щодо Української мови [Hanna Herman considers Mykola Levchenko's statement concerning the Ukrainian language to be provocative].

homin.ca (in Ukrainian). 8 March 2007. Archived from the original on 28 September 2007.

^ Semena, Nikolai (10 October 1997).

"Объявить Крым зоной интеллектуального бедсвия..." предложил вице-спикер крымского парламента Рефат Чубаров. И жизнь показала, что он не прав...

["Declare Crimea an intellectual disaster zone..." proposed the vice-speaker of the Crimean parliament, Refat Chubarov. And life has shown that he is incorrect...].

Dzerkalo Tyzhnia (in Russian).

40 (157): 4. Archived from the original on 27 September 2007.

^ a b c https://web.archive.org/web/20100419052542/http://www.kyivpost.com/news/nation/detail/62086/ "Furor over Tabachnyk appointment rising" ^ https://web.archive.org/web/20101009062917/http://www.kyivpost.com/news/opinion/op_ed/detail/84817/%22Ukrainian Education Minister Tabachnyk Confirms His Russian Nationalist Credentials" ^ Табачник: українські й російські вчителі будуть викладати історію за спільним посібником [Tabachnyk: Ukrainian and Russian teachers will be teaching history using a joint manual].

ukranews.com (in Ukrainian). 13 May 2010 . Retrieved 16 July 2015 .

^ Katya Gorchinskaya (18 March 2010).

"Tabachnyk's views are dangerous in classroom" .

Kyiv Post .

^ "Впервые доказано авторство «На независимость Украины» Бродского | Colta.ru" .

colta.ru . Retrieved 5 June 2023 .

^ "Россияне об Украине, украинцы о России – Левада-Центр" . Archived from the original on 27 June 2009 . Retrieved 17 June 2015 .

^ Russian attitudes not as icy towards Ukraine , Kyiv Post (15 October 2009) ^ Ukraine-Russia tensions are simmering in Crimea , The Washington Post (18 October 2009) ^ 56% Of Russians Disrespect Ukraine , Kyiv Post (17 June 2009) ^ Russia, Ukraine relationship going sour, say polls , Kyiv Post (2 October 2008) ^ Poll: Russians like Ukrainians half as much as the other way round , Kyiv Post (6 November 2009) ^ Report mistake , BBC (20 May 2008) ^ False Hitler Doll Reports Vex Ukraine , Deutsche Welle (15 May 2008) ^ Kremlin-loyal media make Merkel sing to Medvedev's tune , Kyiv Post (20 August 2009) ^ The Ukrainian Pravda. Why Cannot Zhirinovsky and Zatulin Wash Their Feet in the Black Sea on the Ukrainian coast?

Retrieved 11.20.07 ^ "Medvedev escalates anti-Ukrainian rhetoric" . OSW Centre for Eastern Studies. 5 April 2022.

Archived from the original on 2 January 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2022 .

^ a b "Азербайджанская диаспора Санкт-Петербурга требует от властей защиты от ультраправых экстремистов (po" . Retrieved 17 June 2015 .

^ a b Open letter to the Comissar of the OSCE from the Union of Ukrainians in the Urals Retrieved 11.20.07 ^ The Ukrainian Weekly. 2003: The Year in Review. Diaspora Developments: news from East to West.

Retrieved 11.20.07 ^ Regarding the census in Russia and the rights of Ukrainians.

Retrieved 11.20.07 ^ "The first Catholic church in Russia built in the Byzantine style has been blessed" . ugcc.org.ua. 24 October 2007. Archived from the original on 22 December 2007.

^ Smirnov, N.

History of Russia , part 57. "Novoe vremya", 2008 on YouTube ^ "waan.ru" . Archived from the original on 29 October 2017 . Retrieved 17 June 2015 .

^ Valentyn Nalyvaichenko (26 January 2011).

"Nalyvaichenko to OSCE: Rights of Ukrainians in Russia systematically violated" .

Kyiv Post . Archived from the original on 29 January 2011.

^ Mykhailo Ratushniy (6 May 2011).

"In their 'Russian world,' there is no room for Ukrainians" .

Kyiv Post . Archived from the original on 8 May 2011.

^ "Holocaust in Ukraine" (PDF) . Retrieved 19 February 2024 .

^ "Obóz" .

trawniki.hg.pl .

^ "Volunteer Auxiliaries" .

deathcamps.org .

^ "It Took Nerves of Steel" . 18 December 2007. Archived from the original on 18 December 2007.

^ Piotrowski, Tadeusz (23 January 2007).

Poland's Holocaust: Ethnic Strife, Collaboration with Occupying Forces and Genocide in the Second Republic, 1918-1947 . McFarland.

ISBN 978-0-7864-2913-4 – via Google Books.

^ Karl Cordell and Andrzej Dubczinsky, "Poland and the European Union", p.192 ^ The last besieged fortress: Peremyshl wracked by Ukrainian-Polish confrontation Petro Tyma. The Ukrainian Weekly, 21 July 1996, No. 29, Vol. LXIV ^ Assaults to Ukrainian schools in Poland.

Lvivska gazette. 31 October 2006 issue № 27 (27) ^ a b "Antisemitism Worldwide 2000/1 – Poland" . Tel Aviv University, Stephen Roth Institute. 2001. Archived from the original on 27 April 2003.

^ Tomash Matrashek (28 April 2010).

Роман Дмовський: Львів та українське питання [Roman Dmowski: Lviv and Ukrainian issues].

ZAXID.NET (in Ukrainian) . Retrieved 17 June 2015 .

^ "Ярослав Ісаєвич" . Retrieved 17 June 2015 .

^ Rafal Wnuk (2004).

"Recent Polish Historiography on Polish-Ukrainian Relations during World War II and its Aftermath" (PDF) .

Intermarium .

7 (1). Institute for National Remembrance, Lublin.

ISSN 1537-7822 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 July 2015 . Retrieved 16 July 2015 .

^ "Kryzysowa migracja Ukraińców" .

OSW Ośrodek Studiów Wschodnich (in Polish). 19 October 2015 . Retrieved 19 February 2024 .

^ Www. Ideo. Pl, Ideo -. (8 May 2017).

"Obalamy mity na temat pracowników z Ukrainy" .

Prawo.pl .

^ "Ilu uchodźców z Ukrainy jest w Polsce [AKTUALNE DANE]" . 8 February 2024 . Retrieved 19 February 2024 .

^ "340 tys. Antyukraińskich wpisów w sieci. Powielają je m.in. Grzegorz Braun i Janusz Korwin-Mikke" . 12 June 2023.

^ "Raport "Przyjdą i zabiorą: Antyukraińska mowa nienawiści na polskim Twitterze" | Helsińska Fundacja Praw Człowieka" .

^ "Ukrainiec groził bronią przechodniom we Wrocławiu? Wyjaśniamy" .

^ "Ukrainiec zaatakował policję siekierą? To był Polak" .

^ "Polish farmer blockade puts Polish-Ukrainian relations at further risk" . 13 February 2024.

^ "Jak to jest z tym ukraińskim zbożem? Wyjaśniamy, czy zalewa Polskę" . 14 February 2024.

^ "A Comunidade Ucraniana em Portugal" [The Ukrainian community in Portugal].

High Commissariat for Immigration and Intercultural Dialogue (ACIDI) (in Portuguese). 26 June 2014. Archived from the original on 13 September 2014 . Retrieved 13 September 2014 .

^ "Portugal's immigration chief resigns months after Ukrainian man dies at Lisbon airport" .

Euronews . 9 December 2020.

^ "SEF inspectors who killed Ukrainian at Lisbon airport jailed for between 7 and 9 years" .

Portugal Resident . 10 May 2020.

^ Hewitt, Steve. "Policing the Promised Land: The RCMP and Negative Nation-building in Alberta and Saskatchewan in the Interwar Period", The Prairie West as Promised Land ed. R. Douglas Francis and Chris Kitzan (Calgary: University of Calgary Press, 2007), 318–320.

^ Kaprāns, Mārtiņš (24 May 2017).

"Stirring up anti-Ukrainian sentiment in Latvia" .

Center for European Policy Analysis . Archived from the original on 13 June 2017 . Retrieved 22 July 2022 .

^ "Verdict in 'Ukrainian flag attack' case in Rīga" .

Public Broadcasting of Latvia . 15 June 2022 . Retrieved 22 July 2022 .

^ "Police officer fired for standing by 'Ukraine flag' attack" .

Public Broadcasting of Latvia .

LETA . 18 July 2022 . Retrieved 22 July 2022 .

^ "Youths detained for burning Ukrainian flag in Rīga" .

Public Broadcasting of Latvia . 27 June 2022 . Retrieved 22 July 2022 .

^ "North Korea supports Russia's war with Ukraine as 'legitimate act of self-defense' " .

Korea Times . Retrieved 24 June 2024 .

^ Моченов, Андрей; Никулин, Сергей (28 June 2002).

" ' Хохлы', 'пиндосы', 'чухонцы' и прочие 'бусурмане' в Рунете и российской прессе" ['Khokhly', 'Pindosy', 'Chukhontsy' and other 'Busurmans' in RuNet and Russian press].

СМИ (in Russian). Archived from the original on 5 July 2002.

^ Laitin, David D. (1998).

Identity in Formation: The Russian-speaking Populations in the Near Abroad . Cornell University Press. p.

175 .

ISBN 9780801484957 .

khokhol.

^ Putin unapologetic, uncompromising on war against Ukraine , Kyiv Post (18 December 2014) ^ "Як українці стають «Укропами»" , ("How Ukrainian become 'Ukrops'") Radio Liberty , Ukraininan redaction ^ Romer, Marcin (29 January 2008).

" "Przeki" i "Szoszoni" " .

Kurier Galicyjski . Archived from the original on 28 December 2020 . Retrieved 7 December 2020 .

^ "Bill Konyk, 88, Pirogi Seller Whose Nickname Was a Fighting Word, Dies" .

The New York Times . Associated Press. 16 August 2019 . Retrieved 22 June 2025 .

^ "Vladislav Berdichevskiy, MP of the People's Council of the DPR from the fraction Free Donbass about postponing of elections (VIDEO)" .

Novorossia Today . 9 October 2015.

^ Yekelchyk, Serhy (12 November 2020).

Ukraine: What Everyone Needs to Know . pp.

48– 49.

doi : 10.1093/wentk/9780197532102.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19-753210-2 .

Much in the same way as the tsarist government in its day branded all patriotic Ukrainians as "Mazepists" after Hetman Ivan Mazepa, the Russian state-controlled media have labeled EuroMaidan activists as "Banderites" after the twentieth-century nationalist leader Stepan Bandera (1909-1959). This stigmatization is unjust because radical nationalists constituted only a small minority among EuroMaidan revolutionaries, and their political parties performed poorly in the parliamentary elections that followed the revolution. Yet, it was a clever propaganda trick to associate a separate Ukrainian national identity exclusively with the most radical branch of Ukrainian nationalism. To most Russians and many Russian-speakers in eastern Ukraine, the term "Banderite" still carries negative historical connotations, established in Stalin's time. After World War II ended, the Soviet press denounced the Bandera-led insurgents, who resisted the Sovietization of eastern Galicia.

^ Portnov, Andrii (22 June 2016).

"Bandera mythologies and their traps for Ukraine" .

openDemocracy . Retrieved 23 August 2022 .

The common noun "Banderivtsi" ("Banderites") emerged around this time, and it was used to designate all Ukrainian nationalists, but also, on occasion, western Ukrainians or even any person who spoke Ukrainian. Even today, the term "Banderivtsi" in public debate is never neutral — it can be used pejoratively or proudly.

^ Esch, Christian (2015).

" 'Banderites' vs. 'New Russia' " (PDF) .

Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism . Retrieved 22 August 2022 .

In Soviet Ukraine, the nationalist project was repressed or vilified in its entirety. Hundreds of thousands of civilians from Western Ukraine were deported to forced labour camps. "Banderovets" became a label that could be attached to any real or purported enemy of Soviet power in western Ukraine. It sounded as bad as "fascist". There was no effort to recognise the UPA as an independent actor with its own agenda, and to distinguish it from outright collaborationism, i.e. the Ukrainian "Waffen-SS Division 'Galizien'" which was under German command. There was also no effort to differentiate between different currents in and periods of OUN and UPA policy, and its more democratic rhetoric towards the end of the war. Even in the 1980s Ukrainian dissidents, no matter how democratic they were, could be labelled "Banderites" or "Fascists".

^ "Banderites" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Ukraine . Retrieved 23 August 2022 .

^ Shore, Marci (10 October 2019).

The Ukrainian Night . pp.

51– 52, 272.

doi : 10.12987/9780300231533 .

ISBN 9780300231533 .

S2CID 246117701 .

^ Штирлитсс.

"Что такое Майдаун – Значение слова "Майдаун" " . Retrieved 2 May 2016 .

^ "Что такое майданутый – Значение слов "майданутый" " . Retrieved 2 May 2016 .

^ "кастрюлеголовый" . 6 December 2020 – via Wiktionary.

^ "Люди на Євромайдан вдягнули замість шапок відра, каструлі і каски" .

ТСН.ua . 19 January 2014.

^ "Каструлі, відра та каски: головні убори учасників Євромайдану" .

Gazeta.ua . 20 January 2014.

^ "Євромайдани у регіонах – DW – 19.01.2014" . Deutsche Welle.

^ c:File:Spoilt.exile 19.01.2014 (12038537144).jpg ^ "Что такое свидомит – Значение слов "свидомит" " . Retrieved 2 May 2016 .

^ Qintara, Dyandra Faza; De Archellie, Reynaldo (25 April 2025).

"The Role of Social Identity, State Ideology, and Digital War Narratives of a Russian Military Blogger on Telegram" .

Journal of Society and Media .

9 (1). State University of Surabaya: 181– 182.

doi : 10.26740/jsm.v9n1.p174-202 .

^ "«Мова» — ополяченный и искалеченный русский язык | KM.RU" . Retrieved 19 February 2024 .

^ a b " "Незалежная" Украина против украинской мовы" .

nakanune.ru .

^ "Незалежная "в положении": пустые поезда, злые таксисты и Порошенко со всех экранов" .

Kp.ru - . 12 December 2018.

^ "Declaring 'I'm Ukrainian, not Russian', Palance walks out of Russian Film Festival in Hollywood" . ukemonde.com. 11 June 2004 . Retrieved 17 June 2015 .

^ "В Украине запретили фильм "Брат 2" из-за "унизительных для украинцев сцен" " .

ТСН.ua (in Russian). 18 February 2015.

Archived from the original on 4 March 2015 . Retrieved 7 May 2024 .

^ Barry, Ellen (12 April 2009).

"A Wild Cossack Rides Into a Cultural Battle" .

Kyiv Post . Retrieved 14 April 2009 .

^ "На Украине запретили российские фильмы «Поддубный» и «Белая гвардия»" (in Russian). КоммерсантЪ. 29 July 2014.

Archived from the original on 31 July 2014 . Retrieved 30 July 2014 .

^ "Держкіно відрегулює механізм видачі прокатних посвідчень на фільми російського виробництва" (in Ukrainian). Міністерство культури України. Archived from the original on 1 August 2014 . Retrieved 30 July 2014 .

^ "Ukraine calls for Russian documentary on Crimea to be sent to Hague Tribunal" .

Ukraine Today . 11 March 2015 . Retrieved 16 March 2015 .

^ «Матч» проти України . Високий замок. 17.05.2012 ^ /Фільм «Матч». Ну і нехай собі пливе — рецензія (відео) Archived 2015-04-28 at the Wayback Machine . Точка.net. 27.04.2012 ^ "Образ ворога: Як російський кінематограф розпалює ненависть до українців" .

Інформаційно-аналітичний центр Євро Харків (in Ukrainian). 28 July 2022 . Retrieved 18 November 2022 .

^ Вера Куприна (7 April 2024).

"Переделать пацифиста. В пропагандистских «20/22» «Позывном "Пассажире"» можно заметить сюжет, кажется, общий вообще для всех «патриотических» фильмов об «СВО»" .

Новая газета Европа .

^ Glas, Othmara (19 August 2022).

"Für den Kreml? Streit um Oliver Stones Ukraine-Film in Leipzig" [For the Kremlin ? Dispute over Oliver Stone's Ukraine film in Leipzig].

Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung . Retrieved 6 October 2022 .

Damit bedient er ein klassisches Propaganda-Narrativ des Kremls [In doing so, he is using a classic Kremlin propaganda narrative] ^ Dorota Niemitz (2 November 2016).

"Volhynia (Hatred) by Wojciech Smarzowski — a gripping account of the 1943 massacre" . International Committee of the Fourth International (ICFI).

^ "Emily in Paris: Ukraine complains over Kyiv character stereotype" .

BBC News . 2 January 2022.

Archived from the original on 14 April 2022 . Retrieved 14 April 2022 .

^ Krebs, Katharina; Noor Haq, Sana (3 January 2022).

"Ukraine's culture minister slams 'Emily in Paris' for 'offensive' Ukrainian character" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on 14 April 2022 . Retrieved 14 April 2022 .

^ "Проститутки, мафия и… вампиры: карикатурные образы украинцев в мировом кино" .

vikna.tv . 6 January 2022.  [“…There is no Santa Claus, or honest Ukrainian,” says one fortune teller in the series Lost Girl.] ^ a b "Проститутки, мафия и… вампиры: карикатурные образы украинцев в мировом кино" .

vikna.tv . 6 January 2022.  [One of the regular characters, Oleh, is an immigrant from Ukraine who now earns his living working in a diner. He is not very fond of cleanliness, which cannot be said about his excessive interest in perversion.] ^ Moscow Times ^ a b Yuzefyk, Kateryna (19 October 2022).

"Михайло Булгаков: києволюб чи імперець-українофоб? • Ukraїner" .

Ukraїner . Retrieved 13 October 2024 .

^ Yefymenko, Hennadiy; Semkiv, Rostyslav (22 September 2022).

"Українофоб чи геній? Які погляди мав Булгаков, що не так із його культом і як вчинити з музеєм у Києві" [Ukrainophobe or a genius? What views did Bulgakov have, what was wrong with his cult and what should be done with the museum in Kiev] (in Ukrainian).  [But the same "White Guard" was reworked into the play "Days of the Turbines", and in it the "anti-Petlyura" and, in fact, anti-Ukrainian motives were strengthened.] ^ "Новости интернета, сми, медиа. Последние события" . 26 November 2020.

^ "401 Authorization Required" .

^ «Година „ЧЕ“ з Єгором Чечериндою», 26 травня, частина 2 on YouTube ^ a b c Загін Кіноманів (13 May 2022).

УКРАЇНА В РОСІЙСЬКИХ ФІЛЬМАХ! Після 2014 року . Retrieved 22 October 2024 – via YouTube.

^ "Opinion | You might be binge-watching Russian propaganda on Netflix" .

Washington Post . 20 February 2019.

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 13 October 2024 .

^ "«Україна не для українців»? Як Троцький з «партизанськими бандами» боровся" .

www.nas.gov.ua (in Ukrainian) . Retrieved 13 October 2024 .

^ "Russian TV series claims Jewish Trotsky masterminded bloody 1917 revolution" .

The Times of Israel .

^ "Russian television's Trotsky serial: A degraded spectacle of historical falsification and anti-Semitism" .

World Socialist Web Site . 25 November 2017 . Retrieved 13 October 2024 .

^ "В Україні заборонено більше 70 фільмів і серіалів з Охлобистіним" . Archived from the original on 3 May 2017.

^ Держкіно заборонило 71 фільм з участю російського актора Охлобистіна (список) Archived 2016-03-04 at the Wayback Machine .

Radio Freedom . 12/09/2014 ^ Держкіно забороняє фільми Охлобистіна Archived 2014-12-10 at the Wayback Machine .12/09/2014 ^ В Україні заборонили 71 фільм за участі Охлобистіна Archived 2015-12-22 at the Wayback Machine . Ракурс. 09.12.2014 ^ "Киевские националисты просят Пинчука запретить показ фильма Мы из будущего-2" .

Archived from the original on 26 February 2011 . Retrieved 29 November 2010 .

^ Віталій Жежера.

Сім'я вечеря в Інтернеті… . Голос України, 27 вересня 2003 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Anti-Ukrainian sentiment .

Article that lists the communist regime crimes against Ukrainians S. Velychenko, "The Strange Case of Foreign Pro Russian Radical Leftists" v t e Anti-Slavic sentiment Anti-Croat sentiment Anti-Montenegrin sentiment Anti-Polish sentiment Anti-Russian sentiment Anti-Serb sentiment Anti-Ukrainian sentiment v t e Anti-national sentiment Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people State American Australian British Canadian Chilean Empire of Japan Inter-Korean North South Israeli Zionist People's Republic of China Qing Other Western Related topics Ethnic hatred v t e Racism Types of racism Aversive Colorism Covert Cultural Cyber Environmental Formal Gendered Institutional Internalized Patent Laissez-faire Linguistic Neocolonial Romantic Scientific Societal Substantive Symbolic Manifestations of racism Anti-miscegenation laws Apartheid Biological determinism Discrimination based on nationality Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic jokes Ethnic slurs Ethnic stereotype Hate crime Hate speech Hate group Hypodescent / Hyperdescent Racial capitalism Racialization Racial hierarchy Racial nationalism Racial profiling Racial segregation Racism by region Global apartheid Africa South Africa Zimbabwe Asia China Japan North Korea South Korea Thailand Vietnam Arab world Libya Saudi Arabia Sudan Australia Europe Denmark France Germany Italy Poland Portugal Russia Soviet Union Spain Ukraine United Kingdom Middle East Iran Israel Palestine Turkey North America Canada United States Mexico South America Argentina Brazil Chile Racism by target Arab Asians Chinese Chinese Americans Zainichi Chinese Japanese Japanese Americans Japanese Koreans Korean Zainichi Koreans Vietnamese Black African Americans Arab Women Mexican Native Americans Jewish Anti-racism Jewish Americans In Jewish communities LGBT Middle Eastern Muslim Romani Slavic Wine industry Racial supremacy Black supremacy White supremacy White Related topics Ableism Alt-right Anti-racism Casteism Ethnic plastic surgery Go back to where you came from Herrenvolk democracy Interminority racism in the United States Hispanics/Latinos Lynching Passing Perpetual foreigner Psychometrics of racism Race and sexuality Race card Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racial misrepresentation Racial figleaf Racial integration Racial quota Racism in sport in Australia Reverse racism Sociology of race and ethnic relations Xenophobia Category Commons Index v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons v t e Russian invasion of Ukraine Part of the Russo-Ukrainian War Overview General Outline Timeline Prelude Feb–Apr 2022 Apr–Aug 2022 Aug–Nov 2022 Nov 2022 – Jun 2023 Jun–Aug 2023 Sep–Nov 2023 Dec 2023 – Mar 2024 Apr–Jul 2024 Aug–Dec 2024 Jan–May 2025 Jun 2025 – present Aerial warfare Defense lines Foreign fighters Information war Naval warfare Legality Map Order of battle Peace negotiations Ukraine's Peace Formula China peace proposal June 2024 peace summit Proposed no-fly zone Red lines Reparations Territorial control Prelude Reactions Disinformation Ukraine bioweapons conspiracy theory Ukraine and weapons of mass destruction 2021 Russia–United States summit 2021 Black Sea incident Belarus–European Union border crisis " On the Historical Unity of Russians and Ukrainians " Crimea Platform Zapad 2021 December 2021 ultimatum 2022 Ukraine cyberattacks Zametil 2022 Union Resolve 2022 Stanytsia Luhanska kindergarten bombing British–Polish–Ukrainian trilateral pact Evacuation of the Donetsk PR and Luhansk PR Mobilization in Donetsk PR and Luhansk PR " Address concerning the events in Ukraine " " On conducting a special military operation " Background Dissolution of the Soviet Union 2014 pro-Russian unrest in Ukraine Annexation of Crimea reactions War in Donbas 2022 timeline Minsk agreements humanitarian situation international recognition of the Donetsk PR and Luhansk PR Putinism Foundations of Geopolitics Novorossiya Ruscism Russian irredentism Russian imperialism Foreign relations Russia–Ukraine Belarus–Ukraine Belarus–Russia Russia–United States Ukraine–United States Russia–NATO Ukraine–NATO enlargement of NATO eastward expansion controversy open door policy Military engagements Southern Ukraine Snake Island campaign Siege of Mariupol Battle of Kherson Capture of Melitopol Battle of Mykolaiv Battle of Enerhodar Battle of Voznesensk Kherson counteroffensive Liberation of Kherson Dnieper campaign Destruction of the Kakhovka Dam Eastern Ukraine Battle of Volnovakha Battle of Kharkiv Battle of Izium Battle of Rubizhne Battle of Popasna Battle of Marinka Battle of Donbas Battle of the Siverskyi Donets Battle of Sievierodonetsk Battle of Lysychansk Battle of Pisky Battle of Bakhmut Battle of Soledar Battle of Vuhledar Kharkiv counteroffensive Battle of Lyman (September–October 2022) Luhansk Oblast campaign Kupiansk Northeast Donetsk Battle of Avdiivka Battle of Chasiv Yar Battle of Krasnohorivka Battle of Ocheretyne Battle of Toretsk Pokrovsk offensive Battle of Kurakhove Dobropillia offensive Northern Ukraine Capture of Chernobyl Russian Kyiv convoy Battle of Kyiv Battle of Antonov Airport Battle of Hostomel Battle of Bucha Battle of Irpin Battle of Makariv Battle of Moshchun Destruction of the Kozarovychi Dam Battle of Brovary Battle of Slavutych Battle of Sumy Siege of Chernihiv Northeastern border skirmishes 2025 Sumy offensive Russia Bryansk Oblast raid Kremlin drone attack Moscow drone strikes 2023 Belgorod Oblast incursions 30 December 2023 Belgorod shelling February 2024 Belgorod missile strike May 2024 Belgorod missile strike March 2024 western Russia incursion Kursk campaign occupation Battles for Olgovskiy Forest Toropets depot explosions Airstrikes by city Chernihiv strikes Dnipro strikes Huliaipole strikes Ivano-Frankivsk strikes Kharkiv strikes Kherson strikes Khmelnytskyi strikes Kryvyi Rih strikes Kyiv strikes Lviv strikes Mykolaiv strikes Odesa strikes Rivne strikes Vinnytsia strikes Zaporizhzhia strikes Zhytomyr strikes Airstrikes on military targets Chuhuiv air base attack Millerovo air base attack Chornobaivka attacks 7 March 2022 Mykolaiv military barracks attack Yavoriv military base attack 18 March 2022 Mykolaiv military quarters attack Berdiansk port attack Sinking of the Moskva Desna barracks airstrike Attack on Nova Kakhovka Crimea attacks Saky air base attack Drone attack on the Sevastopol Naval Base Missile strike on the Black Sea Fleet headquarters Dyagilevo and Engels air bases attacks Makiivka military quarters shelling Machulishchy air base attack Zarichne barracks airstrike Operation Spiderweb Resistance Russian-occupied Ukraine Popular Resistance of Ukraine Berdiansk Partisan Army Yellow Ribbon Atesh Belarusian and Russian partisans Assassination of Vladlen Tatarsky Civic Council Irpin Declaration Killing of Darya Dugina National Republican Army Military commissariats arsons Ust-Ilimsk military commissariat shooting Black Bridge Rail war in Russia Stop the Wagons Combat Organization of Anarcho-Communists Rail war in Belarus Busly liaciać BYPOL Community of Railway Workers Cyber Partisans Russian occupations Flags used in Russian-occupied Ukraine Ongoing Annexation referendums Annexation of Donetsk, Kherson, Luhansk and Zaporizhzhia oblasts Elections in Russian-occupied Ukraine Russian-occupied territories of Ukraine Autonomous Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol Donetsk Oblast Kharkiv Oblast Kherson Oblast Luhansk Oblast Mykolaiv Oblast Zaporizhzhia Oblast Sumy Oblast (2025, reentry) Previous Chernihiv Oblast Kyiv Oblast Odesa Oblast Sumy Oblast (2022) Zhytomyr Oblast Potentially related Black Sea drone incident Bridge collapses in Russia Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant drone strike Mystery fires in Russia Transnistria attacks Zagreb Tu-141 crash Other 2022 Crimean Bridge explosion 2023 Crimean Bridge explosion 2025 Crimean Bridge explosion Assassination attempts on Volodymyr Zelenskyy Coup d'état attempt in Ukraine Bridges in the Russo-Ukrainian War Dragon drone Violations of non-combatant airspaces Missile explosion in Poland Operation Synytsia Ukraine and electronic warfare Use of long-range weapons by Ukraine in Russia 2023 Ukrainian counteroffensive 2024 Ukrainian cyberattacks against Russia Wagner Group rebellion War crimes General Accusations of genocide in Donbas Allegations of genocide of Ukrainians child abductions Attacks on hospitals Cluster munitions Incendiary weapons Landmines Russian filtration camps Russian mobile crematoriums Russian theft of Ukrainian grain Russian torture chambers Looting Sexual violence Mistreatment of prisoners of war Attacks on civilians February 2022 Kharkiv cluster bombing Kharkiv government building airstrike 3 March Chernihiv bombing Irpin refugee column shelling Mariupol hospital airstrike Stara Krasnianka care house attack Mykolaiv cluster bombing March 2022 Donetsk attack 2022 Borodianka airstrikes Chernihiv breadline attack Mariupol theatre airstrike Kyiv shopping centre bombing Sumykhimprom ammonia leak March 2022 Kharkiv cluster bombing Mykolaiv government building missile strike Bucha massacre Kramatorsk railway station attack April 2022 Kharkiv cluster bombing Bilohorivka school bombing Shooting of Andrii Bohomaz Maisky Market attack Kremenchuk shopping mall attack Serhiivka missile strike Chasiv Yar missile strike Olenivka prison massacre Kharkiv dormitories missile strike Chaplyne railway station attack Izium mass graves September 2022 Donetsk attack Zaporizhzhia civilian convoy attack Kupiansk civilian convoy shelling Zaporizhzhia residential building airstrike Russian strikes against Ukrainian infrastructure 2023 Dnipro residential building airstrike Sloviansk airstrike Uman missile strike Kramatorsk restaurant missile strike Lyman cluster bombing 2023 Pokrovsk missile strike Chernihiv missile strike Kostiantynivka missile strike Hroza missile attack Volnovakha massacre December 2023 strikes 2024 Pokrovsk missile strike 2024 Donetsk attack Lysychansk missile strike 6 March 2024 Odesa strike March 2024 strikes Human safari (terror campaign) May 2024 Kharkiv strikes 8 July 2024 strikes 2024 Kostiantynivka supermarket missile attack 26 August 2024 strikes September 2024 Poltava strike November 2024 strikes February 2025 Poltava strike 2025 Sumy airstrike Crimes against soldiers Torture of Russian soldiers in Mala Rohan Torture and castration of a Ukrainian POW in Pryvillia Rape of Donetsk People's Republic soldiers by Kadyrovites Murder of Yevgeny Nuzhin Makiivka surrender incident Execution of Oleksandr Matsievskyi 2022 Ukrainian prisoner of war beheading Legal cases ICC investigation Arrest warrants ICJ court case Task Force on Accountability Universal jurisdiction Crime of aggression tribunal Criminal proceedings Vadim Shishimarin Alexander Bobikin and Alexander Ivanov Anton Cherednik Reactions States and official entities General Sanctions people and organizations restrictions on transit to Kaliningrad Oblast Military aid European Union Military Assistance Mission in support of Ukraine People's Bayraktar Signmyrocket.com Humanitarian aid Sanctioned yachts Relations with Russia Ukraine Application to NATO Be Brave Like Ukraine Brave1 Bring Kids Back UA Ban on Russia-associated religious groups Coordination Headquarters for the Treatment of Prisoners of War Decolonization and derussification law Delta Destroyed Russian military equipment exhibition For Courage and Bravery (Ukraine) Grain From Ukraine Headquarters of the Supreme Commander-in-Chief Hero City I Want to Live International Legion and other foreign units Belarusian Volunteer Corps Terror Battalion Black Maple Company Canadian-Ukrainian Brigade Freedom of Russia Legion German Volunteer Corps Karelian National Battalion Kastuś Kalinoŭski Regiment Norman Brigade Pahonia Regiment Polish Volunteer Corps Romanian Battlegroup Getica Russian Volunteer Corps Separate Special Purpose Battalion Sibir Battalion Turan Battalion International Sponsors of War Forced confiscation law of Russian property [ ru ; uk ] Look for Your Own Lukoil sanctions Martial law Mobilization Media Center Ukraine National Council for the Recovery of Ukraine from the War [ uk ] National Multi-Subject Test [ uk ] North Korea–Ukraine relations Points of Invincibility Recognition of Ichkeria Rescuer City Save Ukrainian Culture [ uk ] Syria–Ukraine relations Ukrainian Freedom Orchestra United24 United News Russia highways in the annexed territories A290 A291 "Tavrida" R260 R280 "Novorossiya" 2022 Moscow rally 2023 Moscow rally 2022 Moscow Victory Day Parade 2023 Moscow Victory Day Parade 2024 Moscow Victory Day Parade 2023 Presidential Address to the Federal Assembly Blockade of Ukraine [ ru ] Bohdan Khmelnytsky Battalion Censorship in Russia [ ru ] Chechnya Pro-Ukrainian Chechen fighters Conmemorative Medal "Participant of a Special Military Operation" [ ru ] Conversations about Important Things Krasovsky case Legalization of parallel imports [ ru ] Manifesto of the South Russian People's Council Martial law Masha Moskalyova case Metropolis of Crimea Mikhail Simonov case Mobilization Recruitment of irregular forces [ ru ] Operation Doppelgänger Opinion polling [ ru ] Orthodox Christmas truce proposal Wagner Group–Ministry of Defense conflict Russian Orthodox clergymen appeal against war Salvation Committee for Peace and Order Special Coordinating Council Ukraine bioweapons conspiracy theory Unfriendly countries list War censorship laws We Are Together. Sports " What Russia Should Do with Ukraine " United States 2022 Joe Biden speech in Warsaw 2022 State of the Union Address Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2022 Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2023 Disinformation Governance Board Executive Order 14071 Pentagon document leaks Task Force KleptoCapture Ukraine Defense Contact Group Ukraine Democracy Defense Lend-Lease Act Ukraine Security Assistance Initiative Other countries Belarus Canada Canada–Ukraine authorization for emergency travel China Closer ties with Russia Chinese peace plan Hong Kong Croatia Denmark Danish European Union defence opt-out referendum France Mission Aigle Georgia Germany German Taurus controversy Taurus leak Zeitenwende speech Hungary India Operation Ganga Iran Closer ties with Russia Israel Operation Israel Guarantees Lithuania Moldova New Zealand Russia Sanctions Act North Korea Poland border crisis with Ukraine Syria [ ru ] Taiwan United Kingdom Economic Crime Act Homes for Ukraine Operation Interflex 2025 London Summit on Ukraine Coalition of the willing United Nations Emergency special session Resolution ES-11/1 Resolution ES-11/2 Resolution ES-11/3 Resolution ES-11/4 Resolution ES-11/5 Resolution ES-11/6 Resolution ES-11/7 Security Council Resolution 2623 Resolution A/RES/77/229 Easter truce International organizations Accession of Moldova to the EU Accession of Ukraine to the EU Brussels summit European Political Community 1st summit 2nd summit 3rd summit Madrid summit NATO virtual summit Operation Oscar Ramstein Air Base meeting EU–Ukraine Summit REPowerEU Steadfast Defender 2024 SWIFT ban against Russian banks Ukraine Recovery Conference Versailles declaration 2023 Vilnius summit 15th BRICS summit 2024 Washington summit Weimar+ Other Consecration of Russia F-16 training coalition Finland–NATO relations Finland–Russia border barrier Iron diplomacy Proposed Russian annexation of South Ossetia Removal of monuments and memorials Streets renamed Ukraine Square, Oslo Serving heads of state and government that have visited Ukraine during the invasion Sweden–NATO relations Swedish anti-terrorism bill Public Protests In Ukraine in Russian-occupied Ukraine demolition of monuments to Alexander Pushkin ArmWomenNow Ukrainian Artistic Front In Russia Angry patriots Club of Angry Patriots Anti-War Committee Suspicious deaths of Russian businesspeople Congress of People's Deputies Council of Mothers and Wives Feminist Anti-War Resistance Flower protests Marina Ovsyannikova Russian Action Committee North Caucasian protests 2022 Russian Far East protests State Duma initiative for charging Vladimir Putin of high treason White-blue-white flag In Belarus In China Great Translation Movement In Czech Republic Czech Republic First!

Companies Address of the Russian Union of Rectors Boycott of Russia and Belarus " Do not buy Russian goods!

" E.N.O.T. Corp.

Igor Mangushev McDonald's in Russia Vkusno i tochka NashStore [ ru ] People's Satellite Starlink satellites Stop Bloody Energy Wagner Group Andrey Aleksandrovich Medvedev Death of Nemes Tarimo Yale CELI List of Companies Technology Anonymous and the invasion alerts.in.ua DDoS attacks on Romania DeepStateMap.Live Denys Davydov IT Army of Ukraine Killnet Liveuamap Open-source intelligence peacenotwar Russian Asset Tracker Squad303 [ pl ] Ukraine Siren Alerts Wikipedia threat to block in Russia detention of Mark Bernstein Spies Diplomatic expulsions during the Russo-Ukrainian War Russian spies in the Russo-Ukrainian War Other Association of Azovstal Defenders' Families Black Sea Grain Initiative Collaboration with Russia We Are Together with Russia Concert for Ukraine Free Buryatia Foundation Free Nations of Post-Russia Forum Game4Ukraine Get Lost Global Tour for Peace Go by the Forest Guide to the Free World Mozart Group Olena Zelenska Foundation Open letter from Nobel laureates Pavel Sudoplatov Battalion Rubikus.HelpUA Ruslan Shostak Charitable Foundation Russia's War Crimes House Save Ukraine Saving Ukrainian Cultural Heritage Online Serhiy Prytula Charity Foundation Spain letter bomb attacks Yermak-McFaul Expert Group on Russian Sanctions Pavel Filatyev True Russia Volos Declaration Vyvozhuk Wimbledon ban Impact Effects Aircraft losses Casualties journalists killed Russian generals killed Economic impact Inflation surge 2022 Moldovan energy crisis 2022–2023 protests 2025 Moldovan energy crisis Russia–EU gas dispute 2022 Nord Stream pipelines sabotage Russian debt default 2022 Russian oil price cap 2022-2024 German economic crisis 2023 Russian oil products sanctions and price cap EU natural gas price cap Education End of the Whisky War Environmental impact European re-armament Eurovision Song Contest 2022 Russia Ukraine Eurovision Song Contest 2023 Food crises Impact on theatre [ uk ] List of notable deaths Lukoil oil transit dispute Nuclear power plants Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant crisis Nuclear risk Religion Russian emigration The Ark Ship losses Ukrainian cultural heritage art theft and looting damaged cultural sites Trauma Urengoy–Pomary–Uzhhorod pipeline explosion Ukrainian energy crisis Violations of non-combatant airspaces Women Human rights Humanitarian impact Ukrainian refugee crisis 2025 Amsterdam stabbing attack Sobieskiego 100 UN Commission of Inquiry UN Human Rights Monitoring Mission Terms, phrases " And now I will show you where the attack on Belarus was prepared from " " Anglo-Saxons " " Bavovna " " Grandpa in his bunker " " Good evening, we are from Ukraine " " Orc " " Putin khuylo!

" " Khuy Voyne!

" " Russia is here forever [ uk ] " " Russian warship, go fuck yourself " " Slava Ukraini!

" " Special military operation " " To bomb Voronezh " " Strength is in truth " " Westsplaining " " Where have you been for eight years?

" " Without you " Popular culture Songs " 12 " " Bakhmut Fortress " " Bayraktar " " Bilia topoli " " City of Mary " " Flowers of Minefields " " Generation Cancellation " " Generation Z " " I'm Russian " " Oyda " " Hey, Hey, Rise Up!

" " Mama ŠČ!

" " Oi u luzi chervona kalyna " " Slava Ukraini!

" " Stefania " " Ukraine " " Crushed " Films 20 Days in Mariupol A Rising Fury Follow Me Intercepted Russians at War Turn in the Wound Ukraine on Fire 2 [ uk ] Other Babylon'13 Back to the Cold War Borodianka cat [ uk ] Ghost of Kyiv Kherson watermelon Královec Region Madonna of Kyiv North Atlantic Fella Organization Newspeak in Russia Patron " Putler " " Putinversteher " Raccoon of Kherson Saint Javelin Saint Mariuburg [ ru ; uk ] Vasylkiv maiolica rooster Vladimir Putin's meeting table Walk of the Brave "Z" military symbol Key people Ukrainians Volodymyr Zelenskyy speeches during the invasion visit to the United States visit to the United Kingdom visits to Europe Anatolii Kryvonozhko Anatoliy Barhylevych Andrii Hnatov Andriy Biletsky Andriy Yermak Denys Shmyhal Denys Kireyev X Denys Monastyrsky † Denys Prokopenko Ihor Klymenko Iryna Venediktova Kyrylo Budanov Mykhailo Drapatyi Mykola Oleschuk Oleksandr Pavlyuk Oleksandr Syrskyi Oleksii Reznikov Oleksiy Danilov Oleksiy Neizhpapa Ruslan Khomchak Rustem Umerov Sergiy Kyslytsya Serhiy Shaptala Serhii Sternenko Valerii Zaluzhnyi Vasyl Malyuk Vitali Klitschko Yevhen Moisiuk Yulia Svyrydenko Russians Vladimir Putin Aleksandr Dvornikov Aleksandr Lapin Aleksey Dyumin Aleksey Nagin † Alexander Bortnikov Andrei Kolesnikov Andrei Sychevoi Andrey Belousov Andrey Vorobyov Dmitry Medvedev Gennady Zhidko # Igor Kastyukevich Ivan Popov Mikhail Mishustin Maria Lvova-Belova Nikolai Patrushev Oleg Salyukov Oleg Tsokov † Ramzan Kadyrov Roman Berdnikov Rustam Muradov Sergey Kobylash Sergey Lavrov Sergey Naryshkin Sergei Shoigu Sergey Surovikin Timur Ivanov Valery Gerasimov Viktor Sokolov Viktor Zolotov Vitaly Gerasimov Vyacheslav Gladkov Vyacheslav Volodin Yevgeny Prigozhin X Other Alexander Lukashenko Denis Pushilin Leonid Pasechnik Sergey Aksyonov Vitaly Ganchev Vladimir Saldo Yevgeny Balitsky Yuriy Barbashov Related 2023 North Korea–Russia summit 2023 visit by Joe Biden to Ukraine 2023 visit by Fumio Kishida to Ukraine 2023 visit by Xi Jinping to Russia 2023 visit by Yoon Suk Yeol to Ukraine 2025 Putin–Trump call Anti-drone mesh Anti-Russian sentiment Anti-Ukrainian sentiment Antonov An-225 Mriya Axis of Upheaval Azerbaijan Airlines Flight 8243 Azovstal Iron and Steel Works Brovary helicopter crash Bryansk Oblast military aircraft crashes Claims of Vladimir Putin's incapacity and death Decolonization in Ukraine Decommunization in Ukraine Derussification in Ukraine Demolition of monuments to Alexander Pushkin in Ukraine Foreign leaders that have visited during the invasion Institute for the Study of War Irkutsk Su-30 crash Ivanovo Ilyushin Il-76 crash Korochansky Ilyushin Il-76 crash Kyivstar cyberattack Lady R incident Moldovan coup d'état attempt allegations Nord Stream 2 Proposed Russian annexation of Transnistria Punisher Russian nuclear weapons Sarmat Rico Krieger Russian military presence in Transnistria Ryazan Il-76 crash Siberian wildfires Sinhury mid-air collision [ uk ; zh ] Soloti military training ground shooting Soviet imagery Territorial Center of Recruitment and Social Support Turtle tank U-24 association Ukrainian-African Renaissance Ukrainian conscription crisis Western long-range weapons in Russia Ural Airlines Flight 1383 " The Vladimir Putin Interview " Voronezh An-26 crash Wagner Group plane crash Yeysk Su-34 crash Yaroslav Hunka scandal Time of Heroes Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anti-Ukrainian_sentiment&oldid=1306040338 " Categories : Anti-Ukrainian sentiment Anti-national sentiment Human rights in Ukraine Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Ukrainian-language sources (uk) CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with Ukrainian-language sources (uk) CS1 uses Russian-language script (ru) CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) CS1 uses Ukrainian-language script (uk) CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with excerpts Use dmy dates from August 2021 Articles containing Ukrainian-language text All Wikipedia articles needing context Wikipedia articles needing context from May 2024 Citation overkill Articles tagged with the inline citation overkill template from August 2025 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from July 2015 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2023 Commons category link is on Wikidata Interlanguage link template existing link This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 15:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anti-Ukrainian sentiment 19 languages Add topic

