Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Practice 3 Alternate uses 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Thematic interpretation 2 languages العربية Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Research framework Thematic interpretation is an approach to heritage interpretation originally advocated by Professor William J. Lewis (University of Vermont) [ 1 ] and subsequently developed by Professor Sam H. Ham (University of Idaho). In the thematic approach, an interpreter relies on a central theme (i.e., a major point or message) to guide development of a communication activity or device.  In presenting the activity or device, the thematic interpreter develops the theme in such a way that it will be highly relevant to an audience.  According to studies [ citation needed ] , presenting a strongly relevant theme greatly increases the likelihood an interpreter will succeed in provoking an audience to think about theme-related issues.

Beginning in the early 2000s, the thematic approach has been adopted widely in persuasive communication campaigns aimed at impacting environmental behaviors , especially those related to energy and water consumption, and in occupational safety and risk communication programs. In the broader fields of sustainable development and risk communication, the term thematic communication (rather than thematic "interpretation") is often used. The two approaches, however, are identical, and both are linked largely to Ham's (1992) book, Environmental Interpretation .

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] The thematic approach to interpretation was popularized in the book Environmental Interpretation (1992) by Dr. Sam H. Ham (University of Idaho) which has become standard reading for many students of interpretation and interpretive tour guiding. Prior to Dr. Ham's book, two additional contributors to the field of Interpretation are its founder, Freeman Tilden and his book, Interpreting Our Heritage (1957) [ 3 ] and Dr. Grant W. Sharpe (University of Washington) and his work, Interpreting the Environment .

Ham formally presented the thematic approach for the first time in his 1992 book, wherein he outlined the "EROT" (Enjoyable, Relevant, Organized, Thematic) framework.  Drawing heavily on persuasive communication research, Ham refined the EROT framework in the early 2000s and renamed it the TORE model of thematic interpretation. The most detailed presentation of the TORE model is in Interpretation-- Making a difference on purpose which Ham published in 2013.

There are obvious parallels between Ham's view of thematic interpretation and those of Freeman Tilden who is widely considered the founder of the field of interpretation. The most important parallel is that both see interpretation  as a process aimed at provoking audiences to do their own thinking and thereby develop their own subjective understanding of the world.  This is in contrast to the view that interpretation instructs audiences to know or accept the interpreter's understanding of things.

Both Tilden and Ham appear to be strongly influenced by the views of constructivist learning theorists--with Tilden influenced by John Dewey , and Ham influenced by cognitive constructivist Jean Piaget and social constructivist Lev Vygotsky . In the spirit of constructivist learning theory , Dewey, Piaget, and Vygotsky saw learning as the result of knowledge that is created inside a learner's own head, rather than being "put" there by an educator.  Both Tilden, and later, Ham, advocated a very similar view in the field of interpretation.  According to both of them, when interpretation is strongly relevant to its audience, it is likely to provoke thinking and elaboration.

Practice [ edit ] In everyday reality, the practice of thematic interpretation involves theme-based communication by interpretive naturalists, zoo and museum educators, guides, docents, park rangers, and other communicators in natural and cultural settings.  Typically interpreters are required to present complex and potentially dry subject matter to non-technical voluntary audiences (often consisting of tourists) in an interesting and engaging way. The thematic approach can involve any method that increases the relevance of an interpreter's theme to an audience, for example, comparisons, analogies and stories that link unfamiliar things to the things an audience already cares about.

Alternate uses [ edit ] Thematic interpretation also refers to an event in some high school competitive speech leagues such as the California High School Speech Association and the National Christian Forensics and Communications Association .  "TIers" present multiple "cuttings" from published works on a common theme; they can be of humorous and/or dramatic intent.  The entire speech including an introduction and transitions should not exceed ten minutes.  Contestants are judged based on the appropriateness of their selections and their portrayal of the characters.  Another defining characteristic of Thematic Interpretation is the use of a single binder, containing the literature, as a prop.

See also [ edit ] Environmental education Heritage interpretation References [ edit ] ^ Lewis, William (1980).

Interpreting for park visitors . Fort Washington, PA: Eastern National.

ISBN 0-89062-079-2 .

^ Ham, Sam (1992).

Environmental interpretation--A practical guide for people with big ideas and small budgets . Golden, CO: Fulcrum Publishing.

ISBN 1-55591-902-2 .

^ Tilden, Freeman (1957).

Interpreting our heritage . Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.

ISBN 0-8078-4016-5 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) External links [ edit ] Interpreting for Park Visitors v t e Environmental humanities Art Crop art Environmental art Environmental sculpture Land art Landscape painting Photography conservation landscape nature wildlife Sculpture trail Site-specific art Sustainable art Culture Cultural ecology Cultural landscape Ecolinguistics Ecological anthropology Ecosemiotics Environmental anthropology Ethnoecology Traditional ecological knowledge Literature Ecocomposition Ecocriticism Ecopoetry Geocriticism Nature writing Outdoor literature Philosophy Aesthetics of nature Critical realism Deep ecology Ecofeminism Ecophenomenology Ecosophy Environmental ethics Environmental justice Environmental philosophy Predation problem Social ecology Religion Ecotheology Environmental theology Religion and environmentalism Spiritual ecology Stewardship Other Anthrozoology Ecomusicology Environmental communication Environmental education adult arts-based Environmental history Environmental interpretation Environmental journalism Environmental law Outdoor education Political representation of nature Psychogeography Thematic interpretation Related Animal studies Bioethics Biophilia hypothesis Do it yourself ( ethic ) Natural history ( museums ) Popular science Property theory ( common property ) Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Simple living Slow food Spirit of place Sustainability studies Applied Arts and Crafts movement Acoustic ecology Biomimicry Ecological design Ecomuseum Educational trail Environmental design Landscape architecture assessment planning Nature center New Urbanism Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable fashion Themed walk Environment portal Category Commons Journals Degrees Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thematic_interpretation&oldid=1248938490 " Categories : Communication Environmental interpretation Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2015 This page was last edited on 2 October 2024, at 08:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Thematic interpretation 2 languages Add topic

