Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Theoretical predictions 2 Recreating superpartners 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Superpartner 24 languages Afrikaans العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano עברית Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hypothetical elementary particle In particle physics , a superpartner (also sparticle ) is a class of hypothetical elementary particles predicted by supersymmetry , which, among other applications, is one of the well-studied ways to extend the Standard Model of high-energy physics .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] When considering extensions of the Standard Model , the s- prefix from sparticle is used to form names of superpartners of the Standard Model fermions ( sfermions ), [ 3 ] e.g. the stop squark . The superpartners of Standard Model bosons have an -ino ( bosinos ) [ 3 ] appended to their name, e.g.

gluino , the set of all gauge superpartners are called the gauginos .

Theoretical predictions [ edit ] According to the supersymmetry theory, each fermion should have a partner boson , the fermion's superpartner, and each boson should have a partner fermion. Exact unbroken supersymmetry would predict that a particle and its superpartners would have the same mass. No superpartners of the Standard Model particles have yet been found. This may indicate that supersymmetry is incorrect, or it may also be the result of the fact that supersymmetry is not an exact, unbroken symmetry of nature. If superpartners are found, their masses would indicate the scale at which supersymmetry is broken.

[ 1 ] [ 4 ] For particles that are real scalars (such as an axion ), there is a fermion superpartner as well as a second, real scalar field.  For axions, these particles are often referred to as axinos and saxions.

In extended supersymmetry there may be more than one superparticle for a given particle. For instance, with two copies of supersymmetry in four dimensions, a photon would have two fermion superpartners and a scalar superpartner.

[ citation needed ] In zero dimensions it is possible to have supersymmetry, but no superpartners. However, this is the only situation where supersymmetry does not imply the existence of superpartners.

[ citation needed ] Recreating superpartners [ edit ] If the supersymmetry theory is correct, it should be possible to recreate these particles in high-energy particle accelerators . Doing so will not be an easy task; these particles may have masses up to a thousand times greater than their corresponding "real" particles.

[ 1 ] Some researchers have hoped the Large Hadron Collider at CERN might produce evidence for the existence of superpartner particles.

[ 1 ] However, as of 2018, no such evidence has been found.

See also [ edit ] Chargino Gluino – as a superpartner of the Gluon Gravitino – as a superpartner of the hypothetical graviton Higgsino – as a superpartner of the Higgs Field Neutralino References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Langacker, Paul (November 22, 2010). Sprouse, Gene D. (ed.).

"Meet a superpartner at the LHC" .

Physics .

3 (98).

New York : American Physical Society : 98.

Bibcode : 2010PhyOJ...3...98L .

doi : 10.1103/Physics.3.98 .

ISSN 1943-2879 .

OCLC 233971234 .

^ Overbye, Dennis (May 15, 2007).

"A Giant Takes On Physics' Biggest Questions" .

The New York Times . p. F1.

ISSN 0362-4331 .

OCLC 1645522 . Retrieved 21 February 2011 .

^ a b Alexander I. Studenikin (ed.), Particle Physics in Laboratory, Space and Universe , World Scientific, 2005, p. 327.

^ Quigg, Chris (January 17, 2008).

"Sidebar: Solving the Higgs Puzzle" .

Scientific American .

Nature Publishing Group .

ISSN 0036-8733 .

OCLC 1775222 . Archived from the original on 2011-03-19 . Retrieved 21 February 2011 .

v t e Particles in physics Elementary Fermions Quarks Up (quark antiquark) Down (quark antiquark) Charm (quark antiquark) Strange (quark antiquark) Top (quark antiquark) Bottom (quark antiquark) Leptons Electron Positron Muon Antimuon Tau Antitau Neutrino Electron neutrino Electron antineutrino Muon neutrino Muon antineutrino Tau neutrino Tau antineutrino Bosons Gauge Photon Gluon W and Z bosons Scalar Higgs boson Ghost fields Faddeev–Popov ghosts Hypothetical Superpartners Gauginos Gluino Gravitino Photino Others Axino Chargino Higgsino Neutralino Sfermion ( Stop squark ) Others Axion Curvaton Dilaton Dual graviton Graviphoton Graviton Inflaton Leptoquark Magnetic monopole Majoron Majorana fermion Dark photon Preon Sterile neutrino Tachyon W′ and Z′ bosons X and Y bosons Composite Hadrons Baryons Nucleon Proton Antiproton Neutron Antineutron Delta baryon Lambda baryon Sigma baryon Xi baryon Omega baryon Mesons Pion Rho meson Eta and eta prime mesons Bottom eta meson Phi meson J/psi meson Omega meson Upsilon meson Kaon B meson D meson Quarkonium Exotic hadrons Tetraquark ( Double-charm tetraquark ) Pentaquark Others Atomic nuclei Atoms Exotic atoms Positronium Muonium Tauonium Onia Pionium Protonium Antihydrogen Superatoms Molecules Hypothetical Baryons Hexaquark Heptaquark Skyrmion Mesons Glueball Theta meson T meson Others Mesonic molecule Pomeron Diquark R-hadron Quasiparticles Anyon Davydov soliton Dropleton Exciton Fracton Hole Magnon Phonon Plasmaron Plasmon Polariton Polaron Roton Trion Lists Baryons Mesons Particles Quasiparticles Timeline of particle discoveries Related History of subatomic physics timeline Standard Model mathematical formulation Subatomic particles Particles Antiparticles Nuclear physics Eightfold way Quark model Exotic matter Massless particle Relativistic particle Virtual particle Wave–particle duality Particle chauvinism Physics portal Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Superpartner&oldid=1284091680 " Categories : Supersymmetric quantum field theory Particle physics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2018 This page was last edited on 5 April 2025, at 14:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Superpartner 24 languages Add topic

