Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography 2 Geology 3 Administration 4 Architectural control 5 Mythology 6 History Toggle History subsection 6.1 4000–2500 BC 6.2 1600–1250 BC 6.3 1240–850 BC 6.4 600–300 BC 6.5 300 BC–AD 250 6.6 AD 250–1000 6.7 1000–1600 6.8 1600–present 7 UNESCO World Heritage Sites 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Aeolian Islands 63 languages العربية ܐܪܡܝܐ Asturianu Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Ирон Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malti Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 38°32′N 14°54′E ﻿ / ﻿ 38.533°N 14.900°E ﻿ / 38.533; 14.900 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Volcanically active archipelago off the northern coast of Sicily, Italy Aeolian Islands Native name: Isole Eolie, Ìsuli Eoli Aerial view of the Aeolian Islands Map of the Aeolian Islands Geography Location Tyrrhenian Sea Coordinates 38°32′N 14°54′E ﻿ / ﻿ 38.533°N 14.900°E ﻿ / 38.533; 14.900 Area 114.7 km 2 (44.3 sq mi) Administration Italy Region Sicily Metropolitan City Messina Demographics Population 15,419 (1 January 2019) Pop. density 134.4/km 2 (348.1/sq mi) UNESCO World Heritage Site Official name Isole Eolie (Aeolian Islands) Criteria Natural: viii Reference 908 Inscription 2000 (24th Session ) Area 1,216 ha The Aeolian Islands ( / iː ˈ oʊ l i ən / ee- OH -lee-ən ; Italian : Isole Eolie [ˈiːsole eˈɔːlje] ; Sicilian : Ìsuli Eoli ), sometimes referred to as the Lipari Islands or Lipari group ( / ˈ l ɪ p ə r i / LIP -ə-ree , Italian: [ˈliːpari] ) after their largest island , are a volcanic archipelago in the Tyrrhenian Sea north of Sicily , said to be named after Aeolus , the mythical ruler of the winds.

[ 1 ] The islands' inhabitants are known as Aeolians (Italian: Eoliani ). The islands had a permanent population of 14,224 at the 2011 census; the latest official estimate is 15,419 as of 1 January 2019. The Aeolian Islands are a popular tourist destination in the summer and attract up to 600,000 visitors annually.

There are seven significant islands: Lipari , Vulcano , Salina , Stromboli , Filicudi , Alicudi and Panarea , and a set of minor islands and rocks.

Geography [ edit ] The Aeolian Islands are 30 to 80 kilometres (19 to 50 mi) off the north coast of Sicily in the Tyrrhenian Sea. Vulcano is located closest to the Sicilian coast. Lipari and Salina follow to the north, Filicudi and Alicudi to the west, and Panarea and Stromboli to the northeast. In addition to these seven inhabited islands, there are a number of smaller, uninhabited islands and rocky cliffs, such as Basiluzzo , Strombolicchio , Dattilo [ it ] and Lisca Bianca [ it ] .

The largest island is Lipari (37.5 km 2 [14.5 sq mi]), followed by Salina (26.8 km 2 [10.3 sq mi]), Vulcano (21.2 km 2 [8.2 sq mi]), Stromboli (12.6 km 2 [4.9 sq mi]), Filicudi (9.5 km 2 [3.7 sq mi]) and Alicudi (5.2 km 2 [2.0 sq mi]). The smallest island, at 3.4 km 2 (1.3 sq mi), is Panarea. The highest elevation of the Lipari Islands is Monte Fossa delle Felci [ it ] on Salina, which reaches a height of 962 m (3,156 ft).

[ 2 ] Geology [ edit ] The Aeolian Islands (part of Salina, Lipari, and Vulcano) seen from space.

The seven Aeolian Islands, covering an area of 1,600 km 2 (620 sq mi), originated in the Tyrrhenian Basin , a great plain at the bottom of the Tyrrhenian Sea . Emissions of lava from depths of up to 3,600 m (11,800 ft) resulted in the formation of the Aeolian Islands, together with Ustica and a series of submarine volcanoes named Magnani, Vavilov, Marsili and Palinuro , as well as two that are unnamed.

The present shape of the Aeolian Islands is the result of volcanic activity over a period of 260,000 years. There are two active volcanoes – Stromboli and Vulcano .

[ 3 ] Steaming fumaroles and thermal waters are on most of the islands. The volcanic activity has also left the islands with a very fertile soil that is beneficial in the growth of natural flora .

[ 4 ] Geologically the archipelago is defined as a volcanic arc .

[ 5 ] The origin of the Aeolian Islands is due to movement of the Earth's crust as a result of plate tectonics . The African continental shelf is in constant movement towards Europe . Its subduction underneath the Eurasian plate generates magma , which rises to the surface to form the volcanoes . The "Aeolian Arc" extends for more than 140 km (87 mi). It is a section of a larger area of geological instability across the Mediterranean region, caused by the collision of Africa and Europe , which includes Sicily , Calabria , and Campania together with Greece and the Aegean islands .

Lipari Panarea Filicudi Alicudi Salina Vulcano Stromboli Administration [ edit ] The islands form part of the Sicilian Metropolitan City of Messina . All the islands except Salina comprise the comune of Lipari within that province; Salina forms three separate comunes : Malfa , Leni and Santa Marina Salina .

Commune Population Leni 708 Lipari 11,549 Malfa 1,001 Santa Marina Salina 894 Architectural control [ edit ] View from Vulcano, Lipari in the middle, Salina at the left, Panarea at the right Curbing urban development has been a key in preserving the Aeolian islands in a natural state. New buildings are severely restricted. Existing residences can be bought and restored but they must be constructed to resemble its whitewashed houses. Traditional houses consist of modular cubes [ 6 ] constructed from indigenous building materials like stone, lava, pumice, and tufo. Almost all houses have a huge outdoor terrace, usually shaded by grape and flowering vines.

Mythology [ edit ] In Homer 's epic poem, the Odyssey , Aeolus , son of Hippotes , was the divine keeper of the winds and king of the mythical, floating island of Aeolia. He kept the violent winds locked safely away inside the interior of his isle, releasing them only at the command of greatest gods to wreak devastation upon the world.

[ 7 ] The hero of the epic poem, Odysseus , on his travels to return home from Troy , visited Aiolos' isle and was entrusted with a bag containing all of the winds to ensure a safe voyage home. However, during the trip, the hero's companions opened the bag and the escaping winds carried their ship all the way back to Aiolos' shore.

[ 8 ] History [ edit ] Sunset at the Aeolian Islands seen from mount Dinnammare , in the Peloritani range.

4000–2500 BC [ edit ] The first evidence of Sicilian migration was in Lipari ( Castellaro Vecchio culture [ it ] ).

[ 9 ] The manufacture and commerce of obsidian objects was highly developed until the introduction of metals .

[ 10 ] 1600–1250 BC [ edit ] During the Bronze Age , the Aeolians prospered by means of maritime commerce in an area which extended from Mycenae to the British Isles , from where tin was imported. Villages on the Aeolian islands flourished on Capo Graziano (Filicudi), Castello (Lipari), Serro dei Cianfi (Salina), Capo Milazzese (Panarea), and Portella (Salina). All these settlements were destroyed by new Italic invasions in 1250 BC.

[ 11 ] 1240–850 BC [ edit ] According to Diodorus Siculus , the Aeolian Islands were occupied by the Ausones led by Liparus .

[ 12 ] Liparus was succeeded by Aeolus whose house, according to the Odyssey by Homer , gave hospitality to Odysseus .

600–300 BC [ edit ] In 580 BC, Greeks exiled from Rhodes and Knidos landed at Lipari and began a period of Greek domination , which was known for acts of piracy against Etruscan and Phoenician shipping. There was production of vases and other ceramics .

[ 13 ] 300 BC–AD 250 [ edit ] Ancient temple in Salina, 1810 The islanders were allies of the Carthaginians against Rome during the Punic Wars . Although the Battle of the Lipari Islands in 260 BC led to a Carthaginian victory, the Romans later sacked Lipari and their domination led to a period of poverty.

[ 14 ] AD 250–1000 [ edit ] At the fall of the Western Roman Empire , the Aeolian Islands came under the sway of the Visigoths , the Vandals and the Ostrogoths , followed by the domination of the Byzantine Empire . According to a Christian legend, in 264 a coffin which contained the body of Bartholomew washed up on the beach of Lipari, with the result that Bartholomew was immediately elected the patron saint of the Aeolian Islands. In 836 the Aghlabids of Ziyadat Allah I of Ifriqiya sacked Lipari, massacred most of the population, enslaved the survivors and annexed the Liparian Islands into the Emirate of Sicily .

1000–1600 [ edit ] The Norman conquest of Sicily from the Emirate of Sicily in 1061 resulted in the annexation of the islands.

Roger II of Sicily sent the Benedictine monks to Lipari , which gave rise to considerable development on the islands. A cathedral dedicated to Saint Bartholomew was built, as well as the Benedictine monastery in the castle. In 1208 Frederick II of Swabia acceded to the throne of the Kingdom of Sicily . The period of prosperity which followed, ended with the domination of the Angevins and the rebellion of the Sicilians which culminated in the revolt of the Sicilian Vespers . The Aeolians however, remained loyal to Charles of Anjou , and commercial links were established with Naples , the capital of the Angevin kingdom. In 1337 Lipari opened its gates to the French fleet without resistance, and in return obtained various commercial and fiscal benefits.

[ 15 ] In the mid-15th century, Naples and Palermo united into the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies under the crown of Alfonso V of Aragon .

Stromboli in 1810, painted by Luigi Mayer On June 30, 1544, a fleet of 180 Ottoman vessels under the command of the corsair Hayreddin Barbarossa occupied Lipari and laid siege to the castle. The defenders surrendered.  Historically, it is said around 9,000 of the 10,000 citizens of Lipari were captured and enslaved although a couple of more recent scholars have questioned this number arguing for a lower population at the time of Barbarossa.

[ 16 ] A number of citizens were ransomed in Messina and returned to the islands but most of those captured never returned. Only after the tragedy did the Spanish authorities turn their attention to Lipari and repopulate the city with Sicilian, Calabrian and Spanish families. The city walls and houses were rebuilt and an Aeolian fleet was constructed which was able to successfully defend the Tyrrhenian Sea from the Ottomans.

1600–present [ edit ] In 1693, an earthquake destroyed all the towns in eastern Sicily, causing around 60,000 deaths.

[ 17 ] After the population invoked the protection of Saint Bartholomew during prayers in the cathedral , there was not a single victim on the Aeolian Islands. The economic conditions of the islands improved greatly during the 17th century with agricultural progress ( malvasia grapes), capers , and a variety of fruit, vegetables and fishing). With the Bourbons came the introduction of criminal and political prisoners to the islands. In 1916, the penal colony was closed, but the Fascist regime unsuccessfully tried to reopen it in 1926. The island population reacted by pulling down the remains of the ex-penitentiary in the castle. However, not long after, the castle was converted to accommodate anti-Fascist political prisoners in enforced exile. Liparians fraternised with these exiles until the Allies ' liberation. After the war, the same room that had housed the opponents of Fascism became the Aeolian Archaeological Museum [ it ] .

Towards the end of the 19th century, the Aeolian Islands were visited by Archduke Ludwig Salvator of Austria —a friend of the islands and also a man with a profound knowledge of the archipelago. Between the years 1893–96 he published a work of eight volumes on the Aeolian Islands.

[ 18 ] In August 1888, the crater named Fossa on Vulcano erupted and caused many deaths in the sulphur mines . The eruptions continued for 19 months.

On New Year's Day in 1909, a rumour appeared in international newspapers that the Aeolian Islands had been "swallowed up by the sea" during a time of volcanic activity.

[ 19 ] While communication with the islands was interrupted for a time, [ 20 ] they were not otherwise inconvenienced.

During World War II , all of the Aeolian Islands were captured by the Allies in August 1943, during the invasion of Sicily .

[ 21 ] The islands were then extensively searched by archeologists Madeleine Cavalier and Luigi Bernabò Brea after World War II .

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] UNESCO World Heritage Sites [ edit ] The Aeolian Islands were listed by UNESCO in 2000 as a World Heritage Site for providing "an outstanding record of volcanic island-building and destruction, and ongoing volcanic phenomena".

[ 25 ] Status as a World Heritage Site was threatened by Italy's failure to close the pumice quarry as well as its failure to prevent the building of 4 new harbours.

[ 26 ] However, as of 2020 [update] , it is still listed by UNESCO as a World Heritage site.

[ 27 ] See also [ edit ] List of islands of Italy References [ edit ] ^ Mike Dixon-Kennedy (1998).

Encyclopedia of Greco-Roman mythology . Bloomsbury Academic. p.

15 .

ISBN 1-57607-094-8 .

^ Eolian Islands, in: Earth's Landscape: An Encyclopedia of the World's Geographic Features, 2015, ASIN B00SC8OO9U ^ "The Aeolians: The Volcanic Islands" . Archived from the original on 2017-07-31 . Retrieved 2013-08-03 .

^ Gasson, John (19 October 2016).

"Falling in Love With Italy's Blissful, Rustic Aeolian Islands" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 4 January 2017 .

^ "The Aeolian archipelago" .

^ Belford, R.; Dunford, M.; Woolfrey, C. (2003).

Italy . Italy (Rough Guides). Rough Guides. p. 1162.

ISBN 978-1-84353-060-2 .

^ Sources about Aiolos Retrieved 25 March 2022.

^ Homer, Odyssey 10.1–12 This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Luigi Bernabò Brea , Madeleine Cavalier (Eds.). (1980). Meligunìs Lipára IV. L’acropoli di Lipari nella preistoria. Palermo: Flaccovio.

^ Martinelli, Maria & Vianello, Andrea. (2019). Lipari (Aeolian Islands) Obsidian in the Late Neolithic. Artifacts, Supply and Function. Open Archaeology. 5. 46-64. 10.1515/opar-2019-0005.

^ Sicily Before the Greeks. The Interaction with Aegean and the Levant in the Pre-colonial Era Retrieved 25 March 2022.

^ Bibliotheca historica , book V.

^ Brief history of the Aeolian Islands Retrieved 25 March 2022.

^ Goldsworthy, Adrian (2006).

The Fall of Carthage: The Punic Wars 265–146 BC . London: Phoenix.

ISBN 978-0-304-36642-2 .

^ Brown, Gordon S. (2003).

The Norman Conquest of Southern Italy and Sicily . McFarland & Company Inc.

ISBN 978-0-7864-1472-7 .

^ Joe Russo (October 1, 2015).

"Estimating the population of Lipari in 1544" .

Aeolian Genealogy . Retrieved 18 November 2017 .

^ Rodríguez de la Torre, Fernando (1995).

"Spanish sources concerning the 1693 earthquake in Sicily" (PDF) .

Annali di Geofisica .

38 ( 5– 6): 526.

, Juan Francisco Pacheco y Téllez-Girón, 4th Consort Duke of Uceda the Spanish Viceroy of Sicily at the time reported "...and about sixty thousand people died under the ruins of the earthquake" (August 4, 1695) ^ Rando, Gaetano.

"Filicudi in the Late 19th Century a Scientific Description" .

Excerpts from die Liparischen Inseln .

^ "Aeolian Islands Not Sunk" Atchison Daily Champion (1 January 1909): 1. via Newspapers.com ^ "Aeolian Islands Isolated" Dakota Huronite (14 January 1909): 7. via Newspapers.com ^ "Foggia Blasted; Aeolian Isles Seized" Kingsport News (21 August 1943): 1. via Newspapers.com ^ "Médaille d'argent du CNRS à Madeleine Cavalier - Centre Jean Bérard" .

centrejeanberard.cnrs.fr . Retrieved 2024-03-03 .

^ Pracanica, Alessio (2020-06-22).

"Il museo Bernabò Brea di Lipari, uno dei più ricchi e meno conosciuti musei del Mediterraneo. Foto" .

Dazebaonews (in Italian) . Retrieved 2024-03-03 .

^ Martinelli, Maria Clara; Spigo, Umberto (2014).

"Le isole Eolie dalla fondazione del Museo Archeologico Luigi Bernabò Brea alla istituzione del Parco Archeologico delle Isole Eolie: problemi di tutela e valorizzazione" .

150 anni di preistoria e protostoria in Italia. - ( Studi di preistoria e protostoria; 1) (in Italian): 561– 565.

^ "World Heritage Committee Inscribes 61 New Sites on World Heritage List" .

UNESCO World Heritage Centre . Retrieved 7 January 2017 .

^ Eddyburg.it – Le Eolie fuori dai siti Unesco Archived September 27, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ " Isole Eolie (Aeolian Islands): Indicators . UNESCO" .

Further reading [ edit ] Ward, Phillip (1974).

The Aeolian Islands . The Oleander Press.

ISBN 0902675435 Berlinghieri, Castagnino E.F. (with introduction by A. J. Parker) (2003) The Aeolian Islands: crossroads of Mediterranean maritime routes . A survey on their maritime archaeology and topography from the Prehistoric to the Roman periods, British Archaeological Reports, International Series 1181, Oxford.

External links [ edit ] Aeolian Islands at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel information from Wikivoyage Aeolian Islands travel guide from Wikivoyage UNESCO World Heritage Sites, Aeolian Islands v t e Messina History of Messina Timeline 1908 Messina earthquake Battle of the Strait of Messina Fortifications of Messina Messina Conference Senate of Messina Mategriffon Real Cittadella Vara di Messina Siege of Messina (1848) Monuments and places Church of Catalani Chiesa del Carmine Forte del Santissimo Salvatore Forte Gonzaga Messina astronomical clock Duomo di Messina Monument to John of Austria Palace of Culture Palazzo del Monte di Pietà Palazzo Trabia Port of Messina Pylons of Messina Orto Botanico Strait of Messina LaFenice Personalities Actors Adolfo Celi Tano Cimarosa Maria Grazia Cucinotta Nino Frassica Massimo Mollica Artists and designers Girolamo Alibrandi Anna Maria Arduino Antonio Barbalonga Francesco Comande Antonello da Messina Giuseppe Migneco Giovanni Quagliata Filippo Juvarra Mariano Riccio Alonzo Rodriguez Giovanni Tuccari Politicians, civil service, military Giuseppe La Farina Gaetano Martino Giuseppe Natoli Luigi Rizzo Musicians, composers Lucia Aliberti Mario Aspa Filippo Bonaffino Gens Religion Eustochia Smeralda Calafato Annibale Maria Di Francia Sports Silvia Bosurgi Tony Cairoli Vincenzo Nibali Valerio Vermiglio Researchers, academics Aristocles of Messene Dicaearchus Caio Domenico Gallo Francesco Maurolico Agostino Scilla Giuseppe Seguenza Giuseppe Sergi Parks & nature reserves Argimusco Alcantara River Park Isola Bella nature reserve Laghetti di Marinello nature reserve Nebrodi Park Natural Reserve The Mountains of Ferns and Leeks Sport events 10 Hours of Messina Baseball World Cup 1998 Baseball World Cup 2009 EuroBasket Women 1968 International Rally of Messina International Tennis Tournament of Messina Messina Grand Prix Transportation & infrastructure Messina Centrale railway station Messina Marittima railway station Category Commons v t e Islands of Italy in the Mediterranean Aegadian Islands Aeolian Islands Asinara Barbana Bergeggi Cheradi Islands Ferdinandea Gallinara Gaiola Grado Maddalena archipelago Mal di Ventre Molara Pantelleria Palmaria Pelagie Islands Phlegraean Islands Pontine Islands Porto Buso Sant'Andrea Sant'Antioco San Pietro San Pietro d'Orio Sardinia Scola Sicily Tavolara Tinetto Tino Tremiti Islands Tuscan Archipelago Ustica Venetian Lagoon Islands portal v t e Aeolian Islands Main islands Alicudi Filicudi Lipari Panarea Salina Stromboli Vulcano Islets and skerries Faraglioni di Lipari [ it ] Isola Basiluzzo [ it ] Isola Bella Isola Bottaro [ it ] Isola Dattilo [ it ] Isole Panarelli [ it ] La Canna [ it ] Lisca Bianca [ it ] Lisca Nera [ it ] Pietra del Bagno [ it ] Pietra Quaglietto [ it ] Scoglio Bastimento Scoglio Faraglione [ it ] Scoglio Giafante [ it ] Scoglio Loca Scoglio Montenassari [ it ] Scoglio Nave [ it ] Scoglio Sirene [ it ] Scoglio Sorcio Scoglio Spinazzola [ it ] Strombolicchio v t e Sicily Provinces, metropolitan cities and places Agrigento Caltanissetta Catania Enna Messina Palermo Ragusa Syracuse Trapani Islands Cities, towns and villages List of communes History Magna Graecia Sicilia province Bellum Siculum Theme of Sicily Muslim Sicily County of Sicily Kingdom of Sicily War of the Sicilian Vespers Lombards of Sicily Monarchs Viceroys Sicilian Parliament Bourbon Sicily Two Sicilies Risorgimento 1848 Sicilian revolution Dictatorship of Garibaldi Allied invasion of Sicily Sicilian nationalism Politics and government Politics of Sicily Statute of Sicily Elections in Sicily List of presidents of Sicily Sicilian Regional Assembly Culture and heritage People List of people from Sicily Cuisine List of Sicilian dishes Derby di Sicilia (football) Language Music Norman-Sicilian culture Sicilian Baroque Sicilian School Sicilian cart Coppola cap Flags Triskeles Mount Etna Economy Railway network Sulfur mining Category v t e World Heritage Sites in Italy Northwest Crespi d'Adda Genoa Historic center Ivrea Mantua and Sabbioneta Monte San Giorgio 1 Porto Venere , Palmaria , Tino and Tinetto , Cinque Terre Residences of the Royal House of Savoy Rhaetian Railway in the Albula / Bernina Landscapes 1 Rock Drawings in Valcamonica Sacri Monti of Piedmont and Lombardy Santa Maria delle Grazie, Milan Vineyard Landscape of Piedmont : Langhe - Roero and Monferrato Northeast Aquileia The Dolomites Ferrara Le Colline del Prosecco di Conegliano e Valdobbiadene Modena Cathedral , Torre della Ghirlandina and Piazza Grande, Modena Orto botanico di Padova Padua's fourteenth-century fresco cycles Porticoes of Bologna Ravenna Venice Verona City of Vicenza and the Palladian Villas of the Veneto Central Assisi and Basilica of Saint Francis of Assisi Etruscan Necropolises of Cerveteri and Tarquinia Great Spa Towns of Europe - Montecatini Terme Florence Hadrian's Villa Medici villas Piazza del Duomo, Pisa Pienza Rome 2 San Gimignano Siena Urbino Val d'Orcia Villa d'Este South Alberobello Amalfi Coast Appian Way (with Via Traiana ) Castel del Monte, Apulia Cilento and Vallo di Diano National Park , Paestum and Velia , Certosa di Padula Herculaneum Oplontis and Villa Poppaea Naples Historic Centre Royal Palace of Caserta , Aqueduct of Vanvitelli and San Leucio Complex Pompeii Sassi di Matera Islands Aeolian Islands Arab-Norman Palermo and the Cathedral Churches of Cefalù and Monreale Archaeological Area of Agrigento Barumini nuraghes Domus de Janas Mount Etna Syracuse and Necropolis of Pantalica Val di Noto Villa Romana del Casale Countrywide Longobards in Italy, Places of Power (568–774 A.D.) Brescia Cividale del Friuli Castelseprio Spoleto Temple of Clitumnus located at Campello sul Clitunno Santa Sofia located at Benevento Sanctuary of Monte Sant'Angelo located at Monte Sant'Angelo Prehistoric pile dwellings around the Alps 3 Ancient and Primeval Beech Forests of the Carpathians and Other Regions of Europe 4 Venetian Works of Defence between 15th and 17th centuries 5 Bergamo Palmanova Peschiera del Garda 1 with Switzerland 2 with the Holy See 3 with Austria , France , Germany , Slovenia , and Switzerland 4 with 17 other countries 5 with Croatia and Montenegro v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Authority control databases International VIAF 2 FAST National Germany United States Czech Republic Spain Latvia Israel Geographic Pleiades Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aeolian_Islands&oldid=1300676834 " Categories : Aeolian Islands Archipelagoes of Italy Islands of Sicily Messina Volcanic arc islands Volcanoes of the Tyrrhenian Dorian colonies in Magna Graecia World Heritage Sites in Italy Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Source attribution CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing Italian-language text Pages with Italian IPA Articles containing Sicilian-language text Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2020 All articles containing potentially dated statements Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Pages using Sister project links with default search This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 19:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aeolian Islands 63 languages Add topic

