Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Development of public international law 1.2 Development of national regulations 1.2.1 United Kingdom 1.2.2 Communist bloc 1.2.3 United States 1.2.4 Japan 2 Notable aviation lawyers 3 Notes 4 References Toggle the table of contents Aviation law 26 languages العربية Беларуская Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Malagasy Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Suomi Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська 中文 ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Field of law This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Aviation law" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( December 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Aviation law is the branch of law that concerns flight, air travel , and associated legal and business concerns. Some of its area of concern overlaps that of admiralty law and, in many cases, aviation law is considered a matter of international law due to the nature of air travel. However, the business aspects of airlines and their regulation also fall under aviation law. In the international realm, the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) provides general rules and mediates international concerns to an extent regarding aviation law. The ICAO is a specialized agency of the United Nations .

In the United States and in most European nations, aviation law is considered a federal or state-level concern and is regulated at that level. In the U.S., states cannot govern aviation matters in most cases directly but look to federal laws and case law for this function instead. For example, in 2008, The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit struck down New York's Passenger Bill of Rights law because regulation of aviation is traditionally a federal concern.

[ 1 ] Aviation law, however, is not in the United States held under the same federal mandate of jurisdiction as admiralty law ; that is, while the United States Constitution provides for the administration of admiralty, [ citation needed ] it does not provide such for aviation law. States and municipalities do have some indirect regulation over aviation. For example, zoning laws can require an airport to be located away from residential areas, and airport usage can be restricted to certain times of day. State product-liabilities law are not pre-empted by federal law and in most cases, aviation manufacturers may be held strictly liable for defects in aviation products.

[ citation needed ] Space law , which governs matters in outer space beyond the Earth's atmosphere, is a relatively new area with the Outer Space Treaty in 1967.

History [ edit ] Roman law and other ancient land systems generally granted all rights in airspace to the owner of the underlying land. The first law specifically applicable to aircraft was a local ordinance enacted in Paris in 1784, one year after the first hot air balloon flight by the Montgolfier brothers . Several court cases involving balloonists were tried in common law jurisdictions during the 19th century.

[ 2 ] Development of public international law [ edit ] Balloons were used in the Franco-German War of 1870–71, and the First Hague Conference of 1899 set a five-year moratorium on the use of balloons in combat operations, which was not renewed by the Second Hague Conference (1907). Prior to World War I , several nations signed bilateral agreements regarding the legal status of international flights, and during the war, several nations took the step of prohibiting flights over their territory. Several competing multilateral treaty regimes were established in the wake of the war, including the Paris Convention of 1919 , Ibero-American Convention (1926) [ 3 ] and the Havana Convention (1928).

[ 4 ] The International Air Transport Association (IATA) was founded in 1919 in a conference at The Hague , to foster cooperation between airlines in various commercial and legal areas.

[ 2 ] The lack of uniformity in international air law, particularly with regard to the liability of international airlines, led to the Warsaw Convention of 1929.

The Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation was signed in 1944, during World War II . It provided for the establishment of the International Civil Aviation Organization as a unit of the United Nations devoted to overseeing civil aviation. The convention also provided various general principles governing international air service.

The Tokyo Convention of 1963 enacted new international standards for the treatment of criminal offenses on or involving aircraft. The Montreal Convention of 1999 updated the carrier liability provisions of the Warsaw Convention, while the Cape Town Treaty of 2001 created an international regime for the registration of security interests in aircraft and certain other large movable assets.

Development of national regulations [ edit ] United Kingdom [ edit ] The United Kingdom enacted the Air Navigation Act 1920 , which formed the basis of aviation regulation in the United Kingdom and its colonies.

Communist bloc [ edit ] The Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic declared sovereignty over its airspace and enacted basic aviation regulations in 1921, forming a state-owned Civil Air Fleet in 1923 which became known as Aeroflot in 1932. Other communist states followed a similar pattern in establishing state-controlled entities for civil aviation, such as the Civil Aviation Administration of China in the People's Republic of China and Interflug in East Germany.

United States [ edit ] Main article: United States government role in civil aviation In the United States, the Air Mail Act of 1925 and the Civil Aeronautics Act of 1938 formed the early basis for regulation of domestic air transportation. The United States established a Federal Aviation Agency in 1958, which became the Federal Aviation Administration , a unit of the newly formed United States Department of Transportation , in 1967. The Airline Deregulation Act of 1978 was a watershed in the U.S. air transportation industry, and it greatly increased the regulatory workload of the FAA as new operators were allowed to apply for operating certificates.

[ 5 ] Japan [ edit ] Japan enacted a legal regime governing civil aviation in 1952, after a brief moratorium during the occupation that followed World War II. While the early domestic air travel market was lightly regulated and highly competitive, the government implemented a regulation system in 1970 which limited service to three carriers ( Japan Airlines , All Nippon Airways and Japan Air System ), with largely separate markets and strictly regulated fare levels that minimized competition. Pressure from the United States, which sought to introduce new U.S. carriers to the transpacific market in the 1980s, led Japan to gradually deregulate its market in the form of cheap packaged-tour fares and an increased international role for ANA in the 1980s and 1990s, followed by the advent of new domestic carriers such as Skymark Airlines and Air Do .

[ 6 ] Notable aviation lawyers [ edit ] Kenneth Beaumont Stephen Latchford Mary Schiavo Notes [ edit ] References [ edit ] ^ "Air Transport v. Cuomo, 520 F.3d 218 | Casetext Search + Citator" .

casetext.com . Retrieved 10 August 2023 .

^ a b Sand, Peter H.

"An Historical Survey of International Air Law Before the Second World War" (PDF) .

McGill Law Journal .

7 (1): 24– 42. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 March 2016 . Retrieved 17 March 2015 .

^ " The Ibero-American Convention , ICAO History" . Archived from the original on 22 February 2017 . Retrieved 27 August 2016 .

^ " The Havana Convention , ICAO History" . Archived from the original on 10 January 2017 . Retrieved 27 August 2016 .

^ "History" . Federal Aviation Administration . Retrieved 17 March 2015 .

^ Alexander, Arthur J. (26 May 2000).

"JAPAN'S AVIATION INDUSTRY: DEREGULATION ADVANCES ON BROAD FRONT" .

Japan Economic Institute Report (21) . Retrieved 17 March 2015 .

v t e Commercial aviation Airlines Airline codes Airline holding companies Cargo airline Charter airlines Flag carriers Low-cost airlines Non-scheduled airline Passenger airlines Regional airlines Alliances Oneworld SkyTeam Star Alliance Value Alliance Vanilla Alliance U-FLY Alliance Trade groups International ACO ATAG IATA IATAN IFALPA ISTAT United States A4A RAA Europe A4E ASD ECA EBAA ERA ETWF Other regions AACO AAPA AFRAA RAAA Aircrew Pilot in command (Captain) First officer Second officer Third officer Relief crew Flight attendant Flight engineer Loadmaster Aircraft pilot Purser Dead mileage Airliner Travel class First class Business class Premium economy class Economy class Basic economy class Aircraft cabin Aircraft lavatory Aircraft seat map Airline meal Airline seat Buy on board Crew rest compartment In-flight entertainment Inflight smoking Galley Sickness bag Airport Aerodrome Airline hub Airport check-in Airport lounge Airport rail link Airport terminal Airside pass Airstair Boarding Domestic airport Gate International airport Jet bridge Low-cost carrier terminal Runway Transit hotel Customs / Immigration Arrival card Border control ( internal ) Departure card Passport Timatic Travel document Travel visa (Electronic) Environmental effects Hypermobility Environmental effects of aviation Law Air transport agreement Air route authority between the United States and China Bermuda Agreement (UK–US, 1946–1978) Bermuda II Agreement (UK–US, 1978–2008) Cross-strait charter Beijing Convention Cape Town Treaty Chicago Convention Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives European Common Aviation Area Flight permit Freedoms of the air EU–US Open Skies Agreement Hague Hijacking Convention Hague Protocol Montreal Convention Paris Convention of 1919 Rome Convention Sabotage Convention Tokyo Convention Warsaw Convention Intergovernmental organizations ICAO ECAC Eurocontrol EASA ENCASIA Baggage Bag tag Baggage allowance Baggage carousel Baggage cart Baggage reclaim Baggage handler Baggage handling system Baggage sizer Checked baggage Hand luggage Lost luggage ( WorldTracer ) Luggage lock Aviation safety Air rage Air traffic control Air traffic service Aircraft safety card Airport authority Airport crash tender Airport police Airport security Airspace class Area control center Brace position Civil aviation authority Control area Control zone Controlled airspace Evacuation slide Flight information region Flight information service Flight recorder Instrument flight rules Overwing exits Pre-flight safety demonstration Sky marshal Special use airspace Special visual flight rules Terminal control area Terminal control center Uncontrolled airspace Upper information region Visual flight rules Airline tickets Airline booking ploys Airline reservations system Airline ticket Airline timetable Bereavement flight Boarding pass Codeshare agreement Continent pass Electronic ticket Fare basis code Flight cancellation and delay Frequent-flyer program Government contract flight One-way travel Open-jaw ticket Overbooking ( Overselling ) Passenger name record Red-eye flight Round-the-world ticket Standby Tracking Travel agency Ground crew Aircraft maintenance technician Aircraft ground handling Baggage handler Flight dispatcher Miscellaneous Air cargo Air travel Aviation taxation and subsidies Mile high club v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐62dw2
Cached time: 20250812021112
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.358 seconds
Real time usage: 0.508 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1681/1000000
Revision size: 8807/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 104950/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10060/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 45440/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.204/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5829624/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  397.682      1 -total
 38.87%  154.588      2 Template:Reflist
 33.20%  132.035      4 Template:Cite_web
 20.09%   79.893      2 Template:Navbox
 15.66%   62.267      1 Template:Commercial_air_travel
 14.31%   56.889      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 14.17%   56.356      1 Template:Short_description
  9.77%   38.848      2 Template:Ambox
  9.76%   38.809      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  7.68%   30.549      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2749204:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812021112 and revision id 1216259110. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aviation_law&oldid=1216259110 " Category : Aviation law Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2016 Articles needing additional references from April 2015 All articles needing additional references Articles with limited geographic scope from December 2010 Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 This page was last edited on 30 March 2024, at 00:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aviation law 26 languages Add topic

