Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 General requirements Toggle General requirements subsection 1.1 Fitness of recreational divers 1.1.1 Standard forms for recreational diving 1.2 Fitness of professional divers 2 Fitness testing procedures Toggle Fitness testing procedures subsection 2.1 Lung function tests 2.2 Cardiac stress test 3 Medical examiner of divers 4 Disqualifying conditions Toggle Disqualifying conditions subsection 4.1 Permanently disqualifying conditions 4.2 Temporarily disqualifying conditions 5 Conditions which may disqualify or require restrictions depending on severity and management Toggle Conditions which may disqualify or require restrictions depending on severity and management subsection 5.1 Asthma 5.2 Cancers 5.3 Diabetes 5.4 Epilepsy 5.5 Pregnancy 5.6 Diving after childbirth 5.7 Physical disabilities 5.8 Patent foramen ovale 6 Factors which temporarily affect fitness to dive 7 COVID-19 Toggle COVID-19 subsection 7.1 Return to diving after COVID-19 8 Psychological fitness to dive Toggle Psychological fitness to dive subsection 8.1 Recreational diving 8.1.1 Technical diving 8.2 Military diving 8.3 Commercial diving 9 Effects of drugs Toggle Effects of drugs subsection 9.1 Prescription and non-prescription medication 9.2 Recreational drugs and substance abuse 10 See also 11 References 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Fitness to dive 1 language Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Medical fitness to function underwater PC-based spirometer output Hand held spirometer with display and transducer Fitness to dive (more specifically medical fitness to dive ) refers to the medical and physical suitability of a diver to function safely in an underwater environment using diving equipment and related procedures. Depending on the circumstances, it may be established with a signed statement by the diver that they do not have any of the listed disqualifying conditions. The diver must be able to fulfill the ordinary physical requirements of diving as per the detailed medical examination by a physician registered as a medical examiner of divers following a procedural checklist. A legal document of fitness to dive issued by the medical examiner is also necessary.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] The most important medical is the one before starting diving, as the diver can be screened to prevent exposure in the event of an imminent danger. The other important medicals are after some significant illness, where medical intervention is needed and has to be done by a doctor proficient in diving medicine, and can not be done by prescriptive rules.

[ 4 ] Psychological factors can affect fitness to dive, particularly where they affect response to emergencies, or risk-taking behavior. The use of medical and recreational drugs can also influence fitness to dive, both for physiological and behavioral reasons. In some cases, prescription drug use might have a net positive effect when viably treating an underlying condition. However, the side effects of viable medication frequently have undesirable influences on the fitness of a diver. Most cases of recreational drug use result in an impaired fitness to dive, and a significantly increased risk of sub-optimal response to emergencies.

General requirements [ edit ] The medical, mental and physical fitness of professional divers is important for safety at work for the diver and the other members of the diving team.

[ 2 ] As a general principle, fitness to dive is dependent on the absence of conditions which would constitute an unacceptable risk for the diver, and for professional divers, to any member of the diving team. General physical fitness requirements are also often specified by a certifying agency, and are usually related to ability to swim and perform the activities that are associated with the relevant type of diving.

The general hazards of diving are much the same for recreational divers and professional divers, but the risks vary with the diving procedures used. These risks are reduced by appropriate skills and equipment.

Medical fitness to dive generally implies that the diver has no known medical conditions that limit the ability to do the job, jeopardize the safety of the diver or the team, that might get worse as an effect of diving, or predispose the diver to diving or occupational illness.

[ 2 ] There are three types of diver medical assessment: initial assessments, routine re-assessments and special re-assessments after injury or decompression illness.

[ 2 ] Fitness of recreational divers [ edit ] Standards for fitness to dive are specified by the diver certification agency that issues the certification following training. Some agencies place the responsibility for assessing fitness largely on the individual diver, while others require an examination by a registered medical practitioner based on specified criteria. These criteria are generally consistent across certification agencies and are adapted from standards for professional divers, though they may be somewhat relaxed for recreational diving.

The purpose of establishing fitness to dive is to reduce risk of a range of diving related medical conditions associated with known or suspected pre-existing conditions, and is not generally an indication of the person's psychological suitability for diving and has no reference to their diving skills.

A certification of fitness to dive is generally for a specified period, (usually a year or less), and may specify limitations or restrictions.

In most cases, a statement or certificate of fitness to dive for recreational divers is only required during training courses. Ordinary recreational diving is at the diver's own risk. The medical literature, anecdotal evidence and small-scale surveys suggest that a significant part of the recreational scuba diving population may have chronic medical conditions that affect their fitness to dive according to the Recreational Scuba Training Council's guidelines, are aware of these, and continue to dive. It has not been established whether the risk associated with these conditions is clinically significant or whether repeated screening is necessary or desirable, or whether the risks traditionally associated with some contraindicated conditions are realistic. It is also not clear whether these conditions were generally present at initial screening but not known or disclosed, or whether they developed afterwards, and if so, whether in some cases they are consequences of diving injury.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] In rare cases, state or national legislation may require recreational divers to be examined by registered medical examiners of divers.

[ 7 ] In France, Norway, Portugal and Israel. recreational divers are required by regulation to be examined for medical fitness to dive.

[ 8 ] Standard forms for recreational diving [ edit ] Recreational diver certification agencies may provide a standard document [ 1 ] which the diver is required to complete, specifying whether any of a range of conditions apply to the diver. If no disqualifying conditions are admitted, the diver is considered to be fit to dive.

The RSTC medical statement is used by all RSTC member affiliates: RSTC Canada, RSTC, RSTC-Europe and IAC (former Barakuda), FIAS, ANIS, SSI Europe, PADI Norway, PADI Sweden, PADI Asia Pacific, PADI Japan, PADI Canada, PADI Americas, PADI Worldwide, IDD Europe, YMCA, IDEA, PDIC, SSI International, BSAC Japan and NASDS Japan.

[ 9 ] Other certification agencies may rely on the competence of a general practitioner to assess fitness to dive, either with or without an agency specified checklist.

[ citation needed ] [ 10 ] In some cases the certification agency may require a medical examination by a registered medical examiner of divers.

[ 11 ] In 2020-21, a revised World Recreational Scuba Training Council diver participation questionnaire [ 12 ] and Diving Medical Guidance to the Physician form [ 13 ] were published, following a three-year review by the Diving Medical Screen Committee.

[ 14 ] Fitness of professional divers [ edit ] The requirements for medical examination and certification of fitness of professional divers is typically regulated by national or state legislation for occupational health and safety [ 15 ] [ 2 ] Fitness testing procedures [ edit ] Typical output from a spirometer of a normal person taking 4 tidal breaths, followed by maximal inspiration and expiration. Corresponding volumes and capacities are noted in the right-hand boxes.

Cardiac stress test Lung function tests [ edit ] A frequently used test for lung function for divers is spirometry , which measures the amount (volume) and/or speed (flow) of air that can be inhaled and exhaled. Spirometry is an important tool used for generating pneumotachographs, which are helpful in assessing conditions such as asthma, pulmonary fibrosis, cystic fibrosis, and COPD, all of which are contraindications for diving. Sometimes only peak expiratory flow (PEF) is measured, which uses a much simpler apparatus, but is still useful to give an indication of lung overpressure risk.

Cardiac stress test [ edit ] The cardiac stress test is done with heart stimulation, either by exercise on a treadmill, or pedaling a stationary exercise bicycle ergometer , with the patient connected to an electrocardiogram (or ECG).

The Harvard Step Test is a type of cardiac stress test for detecting and/or diagnosing cardiovascular disease . It also is a good measurement of fitness, and the ability to recover after a strenuous exercise, and is sometimes used as an alternative for the cardiac stress test.

Medical examiner of divers [ edit ] Further information: Diving medicine § Education and registration of practitioners The most important medical examination is the one before starting diving, as the diver can be screened to prevent exposure when a dangerous condition exists. The other important medicals are after some significant illness, where medical intervention is needed there and has to be done by a doctor who is competent in diving medicine, and can not be done by prescriptive rules.

[ 4 ] For medical examinations prescribed in terms of occupational health legislation, the examiner may be required to be registered as a specialist in diving medicine, or be registered as competent to make medical examinations on divers, which implies an awareness of the physiological effects of diving and the mechanisms of diving diseases. Standards and levels of specialization and registration vary considerably between countries, and international recognition is limited.

[ 3 ] In most cases, medical examination for recreational divers is not compulsory, therefore international recognition of medical examiners is not relevant.

Disqualifying conditions [ edit ] The general principles for disqualification are that diving causes a deterioration in the medical condition and the medical condition presents an excessive risk for a diving injury to both the individual and the diving partner.

[ 1 ] There are some conditions that are considered absolute contraindications for diving. Details vary between recreational and professional diving and in different parts of the world. Those listed below are widely recognized.

Permanently disqualifying conditions [ edit ] Stroke and transient ischemic attacks.

[ 16 ] Intercranial aneurysm, arterial-venous malformation or tumor.

[ 16 ] Exertional angina, postmyocardial infarction with left ventricular dysfunction, congestive heart failure, or dependence on medication to control dysrhythmias.

[ 16 ] Postcoronary bypass surgery with violation of pleural spaces.

[ 16 ] A history of spontaneous pneumothorax.

[ 16 ] Temporarily disqualifying conditions [ edit ] Any illness requiring drug treatment may constitute a temporary disqualification if either the illness or the drug may compromise diving safety. Sedatives, tranquilizers, antidepressants, antihistamines, anti-diabetic drugs, steroids, anti-hypertensives, anti-epilepsy drugs, alcohol and hallucinatory
drugs such as marijuana and LSD may increase risk to the diver. Some drugs which affect brain function have unpredictable effects on a diver exposed to high pressure in deep diving.

[ 17 ] Conditions which may disqualify or require restrictions depending on severity and management [ edit ] Some medical conditions may temporarily or permanently disqualify a person from diving depending on severity and the specific requirements of the registration body. These conditions may also require the diver to restrict the scope of activities or take specific additional precautions. They are also referred to as relative contraindications , and may be acute or chronic.

Asthma [ edit ] In the past, asthma was generally considered a contraindication for diving due to theoretical concern about an increased risk for pulmonary barotrauma and decompression sickness. The conservative approach was to arbitrarily disqualify asthmatics from diving. This has not stopped asthmatics from diving, and experience in the field and data in the current literature do not support this dogmatic approach. Asthma has a similar prevalence in divers as in the general population.

[ 18 ] The theoretical concern for asthmatic divers is that pulmonary obstruction, air trapping and hyperinflation may increase risk for pulmonary barotrauma, and the diver may be exposed to environmental factors that increase the risk of bronchospasm and the development of an acute asthmatic attack which could lead to panic and drowning. As of 2016, there is no epidemiological evidence for an increased relative risk of pulmonary barotrauma, decompression sickness or death among divers with asthma. This evidence only accounts for asthmatics with mild disease and the actual risk for severe or uncontrolled asthmatics, may be higher.

[ 18 ] Cancers [ edit ] Cancers are generally considered a class of abnormal, fast growing and disordered cells which have the potential to spread to other parts of the body. They may occur in virtually any organ or tissue. The effect of a cancer on fitness to dive can vary considerably, and will depend on several factors. If the cancer or the treatment compromise the diver's ability to perform the normal activities associated with diving, including the necessary physical fitness, and particularly cancers or treatments which compromise fitness to withstand the pressure changes, then the diver should abstain from diving until passed as fit by a diving medical practitioner who is aware of the condition. Specific considerations include whether the tumor or treatment affects organs which are directly affected by pressure changes, whether the person's capacity to manage themselves in an emergency is compromised, including mental awareness and judgement, and that diving should not aggravate the disease. Some cancers, such as lung cancer would be an absolute contraindication.

[ 19 ] Diabetes [ edit ] See also: Diabetes Like asthma, the traditional medical response to diabetes was to declare the person unfit to dive, but in a similar way, a significant number of divers with well-managed diabetes have logged sufficient dives to provide statistical evidence that it can be done at acceptable risk, and the recommendations of diving medical researchers and insurers has changed accordingly.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Current (2016) medical opinion of Divers Alert Network (DAN) and the Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) is that diabetics should not dive if they have any of the following complications: Significant retinopathy increases risk of retinal hemorrhage due to minor mask squeeze or equalizing procedures.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Peripheral vascular disease and/or neuropathy increase risk of sudden death due to coronary artery disease, [ 21 ] Significant autonomic or peripheral neuropathy increases the risk of exaggerated hypotension when leaving the water.

[ 21 ] Nephropathy causing proteinuria [ 20 ] [ 21 ] Coronary artery disease [ 20 ] [ 21 ] Significant peripheral vascular disease may reduce inert gas washout and predispose the diver to limb decompression sickness.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] DAN makes the following recommendations for additional precautions by diabetic divers: Diabetic divers are advised not to dive deeper than 30 msw (100 fsw), to avoid situations where nitrogen narcosis could be confused with hypoglycemia, not to dive for longer than one hour, to limit the time blood glucose levels would remain unmonitored, or to incur compulsory decompression stops, or dive in overhead environments , both of which make direct and immediate access to the surface unavailable.

[ 21 ] Diabetic diver's buddy or dive leader who is informed of their condition and knows the appropriate response in the event of a hypoglycemic episode. It is also recommended the buddy does not have diabetes.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Diabetic divers should avoid circumstances that increase risk of hypoglycemic episodes such as prolonged cold and strenuous dives.

[ 21 ] Epilepsy [ edit ] See also: Epilepsy Epilepsy is a central nervous system disorder in which the person has had at least two seizures, often for no discernible cause. Even if no one with a history of epilepsy dived, a few people would experience their first seizure while diving. As a seizure may involve loss of consciousness, this puts the convulsing diver at significant risk, particularly on scuba with half mask and demand valve, which may become dislodged.

[ 22 ] If epilepsy is required to be controlled by medication, diving is contraindicated. A possible acceptable risk would be a history of febrile seizures in infancy, apneic spells or seizures attendant to acute illness such as encephalitis and meningitis, all without recurrence without medication.

[ 16 ] By 2004 the UK Sport Diving Medical Committee ruled that a person with epilepsy must go 5 years without fits and off medication before being passed to dive.

[ 23 ] Very little reliable epidemiological evidence exists to suggest that a past history of seizures may correlate with increased risk to recreational scuba divers.

[ 23 ] Published literature does not support an association between decompression illness and epilepsy, however, if a seizure occurs underwater it may plausibly lead to an uncontrolled ascent, which is associated with a high risk of decompression illness.

[ 23 ] A seizure underwater is similarly likely to cause dislodging of the demand valve with consequent high risk of drowning.

[ 24 ] There is also no reliable evidence that epileptics are differently sensitive to raised partial pressures of oxygen.

[ 23 ] It is now known that the mechanism of the epileptic seizure is different to the oxygen toxicity seizure, and epileptics are not more susceptible to convulse under pressure.

[ 24 ] No evidence suggests that a person with a history of seizures is likely to be more sensitive to nitrogen narcosis.

[ 23 ] No plausible reasons to suggest that antiepileptic drugs would increase the risk of oxygen toxicity have been published. In theory it is possible that they may provide some level of protection.

[ 23 ] Most objections to allowing people who have a long history of no seizures to dive are largely theoretical, and in many cases entirely unsupported by reliable evidence.

[ 23 ] The British Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) recommendation as of 2019 is that if a person previously had epilepsy but has been off medication without seizure for at least five years they may be fit to dive. If the seizures were exclusively nocturnal, this is reduced to three years. Medical advice from a diving doctor is recommended.

[ 25 ] The European Diving Technology Committee guidelines for fitness to dive states that epilepsy is a contraindication to occupational diving, but that
where a diver has been free of seizures for ten years without treatment they may be assessed by an expert for fitness to dive.

[ 2 ] Pregnancy [ edit ] A study investigating potential links between diving while pregnant and fetal abnormalities by evaluating field data showed that most women are complying with the diving industry recommendation and refraining from diving while pregnant. There were insufficient data to establish significant correlation between diving and fetal abnormalities, and differences in placental circulation between humans and other animals limit the applicability of animal research for pregnancy and diving studies.

[ 26 ] The literature indicates that diving during pregnancy does increase the risk to the fetus, but to an uncertain extent. As diving is an avoidable risk for most women, the prudent choice is to avoid diving while pregnant. However, if diving is done before pregnancy is recognized, there is generally no indication for concern.

[ 27 ] In addition to possible risk to the fetus, changes in a woman's body during pregnancy might make diving more problematic. There may be problems fitting equipment and the associated hazards of ill fitting equipment. Swelling of the mucous membranes in the sinuses could make ear clearing difficult, and nausea may increase discomfort.

[ 27 ] Diving after childbirth [ edit ] Divers who want to return to diving after having a child should generally follow the guidelines suggested for other sports and activities, as diving requires a similar level of conditioning and fitness.

After a vaginal delivery, without complications, three weeks is usually sufficient to allow the cervix to close, which reduces the risk of uterine infection.

Divers Alert Network recommends as a rule of thumb, to wait four weeks after normal delivery before resuming diving, and at least eight weeks after cesarean delivery. Any complications may indicate a longer wait, and medical clearance is advised.

[ 28 ] Physical disabilities [ edit ] Adaptive Diving, diving with physical disabilities: Adaptive diving is a branch of scuba diving that caters to individuals with physical disabilities. It encompasses a range of strategies and modifications to ensure that people with diverse physical challenges can enjoy the freedom of diving. Here are some key aspects of adaptive diving: Equipment Modifications:
Divers with physical disabilities may require specialized equipment adaptations. For amputees, prosthetic limbs can be fitted with diving attachments. Custom harnesses, buoyancy compensators, and fins are designed to accommodate various physical limitations.
For sight correction, prescription masks or seedeep reading glasses with strong lenses can be used, allowing correction of such limitation, and enabling the needed sight to read your dive gauge and dive watch.

[ 29 ] Training and Certification:
Several scuba diving organizations offer adaptive diving courses and certifications. These courses teach divers and instructors how to adapt techniques and equipment to different disabilities, ensuring safe and enjoyable dives.

[ 30 ] Buddy System:
The buddy system is crucial in scuba diving, and it's especially important for divers with physical disabilities. Divers work together with their dive buddies to assist each other as needed, ensuring a safe and enjoyable dive experience.

Dive Destinations and Facilities:
Many dive resorts and destinations around the world are equipped to accommodate divers with physical disabilities. They provide accessible entry points, adaptive equipment, and trained staff to assist disabled divers.

Supportive Organizations:
Numerous organizations and foundations are dedicated to promoting adaptive diving and providing resources for individuals with physical disabilities. These organizations often organize dive trips, training programs, and support networks for disabled divers.

Patent foramen ovale [ edit ] A patent foramen ovale (PFO), or atrial shunt can potentially cause a paradoxical gas embolism by allowing venous blood containing what would normally be asymptomatic inert gas decompression bubbles to shunt from the right atrium to the left atrium during exertion, and can be then circulated to the vital organs where an embolism may form and grow due to local tissue supersaturation during decompression. This congenital condition is found in roughly 25% of adults, and is not listed as a disqualifier from diving nor as a required medical test for professional or recreational divers. Some training organisations recommend that divers contemplating technical diver training should have themselves tested as a precaution, and to allow informed consent to assume the associated risks.

[ 31 ] Factors which temporarily affect fitness to dive [ edit ] See also: Decompression sickness§Predisposing factors: Individual Several factors may temporarily affect fitness to dive by altering the risk of encountering problems during a dive. Some of these depend on conditions that vary according to time or place, and are not addressed in a medical examination. Others are more within the control of the diver. These include: Fatigue : Dehydration : Excessive hydration, particularly in combination with hypertension , is a known risk factor for immersion pulmonary oedema .

Motion sickness : Menstrual cycle : There is evidence from surveys that there may be a correlation between the stage of the menstrual cycle and the occurrence of decompression illness. The same study indicates the possibility of correlation between the stage of the menstrual cycle with other problems during the dive.

[ 32 ] Medications Recreational drug use and substance abuse This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( December 2019 ) COVID-19 [ edit ] See also: COVID-19 § Prognosis The long term effects of Coronavirus disease 2019 are highly variable in severity, and the effects on fitness to dive will vary from case to case. Many of these effects influence the lungs and cardiovascular system, and therefore may significantly affect risk of diving injury, or the diver's ability to manage an emergency effectively.

[ 33 ] A review indicated that people who have recovered from COVID-19 had reduced levels of physical function and fitness compared to healthy controls. Recovery of physical functions tends to be incomplete, with some residual impairments present up to 2 years after infection. There is some evidence that combined aerobic and resistance training can improve physical function and fitness after medical recovery, but further research is required to determine the effectiveness of exercise in restoring fitness.

[ 34 ] Diving medicine specialists at Divers Alert Network have advised that divers wishing to return to recreational diving after recovering from COVID-19 should wait until they have regained their previous physical fitness, then consult a qualified diving medical practitioner . This process is similar to the compulsory procedure for professional divers for return to diving after illness. The process takes into account the significant number of people who may have had asymptomatic infections, and treats them as if they did not have COVID.

[ 33 ] [ 35 ] [ 36 ] Return to diving after COVID-19 [ edit ] The principles behind the DAN protocol for returning to diving activity after COVID-19 are based on risk. The returning diver should not pose a risk of infecting others, and should not be at elevated risk of barotrauma or decompression illness due to damage to the lungs, or be at reduced capacity to manage problems due to cognitive dysfunction or insufficient physical fitness. Aerobic fitness recommendation for commercial divers is 10 Mets , and for recreational divers 6 Mets.

[ 33 ] [ 36 ] A grading system based on severity of illness is suggested as a guideline (July 2021), with the understanding that individual circumstances may differ, and that this model is subject to revision as and when further data becomes available.

[ 33 ] Grade 0 is people who may or may not have had COVID-19, but if they were infected, did not notice significant symptoms, including those who are identified by screening or diagnostic tests as being infected, but remain asymptomatic. This is about 25% of the people infected. They do not need to undergo any special examination or testing, and can return to diving without restrictions as appropriate to their general health and fitness, provided they are not still infectious. If in doubt, they should remain in precautionary isolation for 14 days.

[ 33 ] Grade 1 (mild), is people who had mild symptoms that did not require medical intervention, and recovered after self-isolation or quarantine. These people may return to diving 2 weeks after full recovery, conditional on passing a diving medical examination, a stress ECG, normal lung function tests and a normal lung X-ray.

[ 33 ] Grade 2 (moderate), is people who has moderate symptoms which required admission to hospital or supplementary oxygen, but not ventilatory support. X-rays do not indicate more than mild abnormality, and no clotting disorders have manifested. These people may return to diving 3 months after recovery subject to passing a diving medical examination, a stress ECG, normal lung function tests and a normal lung X-ray.

[ 33 ] Grade 3 (severe), is people who required admission to intensive care or ventilatory support, or displayed cardiac, neurological or clotting abnormalities, or other complications. These people may return to diving 6 months after recovery subject to passing a diving medical examination, a stress ECG, normal lung function tests, a normal lung X-ray, additional heart tests and a lung CT if indicated. If there are abnormalities, retesting at 12 months is suggested.

[ 33 ] The DAN recommendation for diving after vaccination, is not to dive while one is not feeling well in the days after vaccination, to the same extent that one would not dive if not feeling well at any other time.

[ 33 ] DAN is conducting research on the long term (5 year) effects of COVID-19 on fitness to dive for recreational scuba and freediving.

[ 37 ] The Diving Medical Advisory Council and IMCA have also issued advisory documents on this topic for commercial divers.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( July 2020 ) This section needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( January 2024 ) Psychological fitness to dive [ edit ] Psychological fitness has been defined in a military context as "the integration and optimization of mental, emotional, and behavioral abilities and capacities to optimize performance and strengthen resilience".

[ 40 ] There are other definitions in a self-help/personal growth context, also referred to as emotional or mental fitness, [ 41 ] [ 42 ] but the military definition is appropriate in the context of the ability to survive and perform in a hostile environment. Psychological fitness to dive is to some extent a characteristic of the person who trains to become a diver, and in recreational diving there is little or no further training, but training for diving in harsher environments and for more demanding tasks often includes elements of training to improve psychological fitness, which allows the diver to better cope with the stresses of emergencies, and in some types of professional diving, the stresses of the job in hand.

Competence, physical health, and fitness are important factors in safe performance, but psychological factors also contribute to human failure or success and should be addressed in the interests of due diligence.

[ 43 ] There is little screening for psychological fitness for recreational diving, and not much more for commercial and scientific diving. Technical diving exposes the diver to more unforgiving hazards and higher risks, but it is a recreational activity and to a large extent participation is at the option of the participant.

Psychological profiles indicating intelligence and below average neuroticism tend to correlate with successful diving activity over the long term. These divers tend to be self-sufficient and emotionally stable, and less likely to be involved in accidents unrelated to health problems. Nevertheless, many people with mild neuroses can and do dive with an acceptable safety record.

[ 44 ] Besides any risks caused by the condition itself, there may be hazards due to the effects of medications taken to manage the condition, either singly or in combination. There are no scientific studies into the safety of diving with most medications, and in most cases the effects of the medication are secondary to the effects of the underlying condition. Drugs with strong effects on moods should be used with care when diving.

[ 44 ] A mild state of anxiety can improve performance by making the person more alert and quicker to react, but more severe levels can degrade performance, by narrowing focus and distracting attention, culminating in extreme and debilitating anxiety or panic, where rational response to a developing emergency is lost.

[ 45 ] A tendency to be generally anxious is known as trait anxiety , as opposed to anxiety brought on by a situation, which is termed state anxiety. Divers who are prone to trait anxiety are more likely to mismanage a developing emergency by panicking and missing the opportunity to recover from the initial incident.

[ 46 ] Training can help a diver to recognize rising stress levels, and allow them to take corrective action before the situation deteriorates into an injury or fatality. Over-learning appropriate responses to predictable and reasonably foreseeable contingencies allows the diver to react confidently and effectively, which reduces stress as the positive consequences of the appropriate actions are apparent, usually allowing the diver to terminate the dive in a controlled and safe manner.

[ 47 ] Statistics from incidents where the circumstances are known implicate panic and inappropriate response in a large proportion of fatalities and near misses.

[ 48 ] In 1998 the Recreational Scuba Training Council listed "a history of panic disorder" as an absolute contraindication to scuba diving, but the 2001 guideline specifies "a history of untreated panic disorder" as a severe risk condition, which suggests that some people who are being treated for the condition might dive at an acceptable level of risk.

[ 48 ] Two personality traits are consistently mentioned across contexts, These are a propensity for adventure or sensation-seeking, and lower trait anxiety than the general population. Both of these characteristics are associated with tolerance to physiological stress and safety implications. Trait anxiety is associated with a tendency to panic, which is implicated in a high proportion of diving incidents, and sensation seeking is associated with risk taking behavior. The current trend in research has moved from describing personality profiles to investigating associations between personality and diving performance.

[ 49 ] Some psychological conditions that may affect a person's competence to dive include: Affective disorders : Depression and manic depression ( bipolar disorder ). A condition that reduces a person's ability to make appropriate decisions while diving, particularly when things go wrong, can be a danger to themselves and anyone diving with them who may get involved in the consequences of a poor decision. Conditions that require medication also bring the effects of that medication into the situation, and this applies particularly when the medications alter the mood and affect competence to manage an emergency. A decision whether a person with these conditions can be considered fit to dive must take into account the specifics of the case, including the medications used, the response to the medication over time, and the frequency and severity of incidents.

[ 50 ] Anxiety and phobias, panic disorder . Episodes of panic or near-panic have been implicated in many diving accidents, particularly in recreational diving, and have probably been the cause of diving fatalities. There is evidence that people who have a high level of underlying anxiety are likely to have greater responses to stresses, and these divers will therefore be exposed to greater risk. More than half of divers in a survey reported experiencing at least one panic or near-panic episode while diving. Panic attacks are commonly triggered by an event that a non-diver would consider serious, such as entanglement, an equipment malfunction or being confronted by an unexpected sea creature they may consider dangerous. Such panic attacks can lead to irrational behavior, which can be life-threatening.

Panic attacks can be experienced by both inexperienced and experienced  divers, for no apparent reason. In experienced divers, it is believed that panic occurs because the diver becomes disoriented and experiences sensory deprivation. Inexperienced divers are more likely to panic for a specific reason, such as a loss of breathing gas or an encounter with a shark perceived to be dangerous.

Panic can occur when the person reacts quickly but irrationally, their attention narrows, and they lose the ability to recognise and select the appropriate available response options. Appropriate training, adequate practice of skills, and attention to the environment can prevent or minimise the occurrence of situations that may trigger panic, and reinforce the ability to respond appropriately to those triggering events which cannot be avoided.

[ 50 ] Narcolepsy : Fitness to dive would depend to some extent on the medication used, response to the medication and possible side-effects. The condition may also affect the safety of other  divers who may be affected by a diving accident. A full-face mask may be used to reduce risk of drowning in case of loss of consciousness during a dive.

[ 50 ] Schizophrenia would be considered case by case. Type of medication and response, and how long the person has been free of the disorder would be taken into account, as some people have responded well to medication over the long term. The person's decision making ability, social responsibility and medication side-effects may affect the person's ability to dive safely.

[ 50 ] Substance abuse [ 50 ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( May 2024 ) Recreational diving [ edit ] Recreational diving can have a more beneficial effect on the state of mind of participants than many other physical leisure activities by way of stress reduction and improvement of well-being.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] Recreational scuba diving may be considered an extreme sport since personal risk is involved, [ 53 ] but it is also a leisure activity conducted for entertainment and relaxation. The diver is free to not dive or to terminate a dive at any time, and to make this physiologically practicable at acceptable risk, there are limitations on the depth, decompression status, and environment in which mainstream recreational diving can take place.

Limited research into the personality characteristics of people choosing to start recreational diving indicate tendencies of self-sufficiency, boldness and impulsiveness (and low scores on conformity, warmth and sensitivity), and are not typical of the personality profiles expected from extreme athletes.

[ clarification needed ] Four prevalent personality types were identified, and the results suggested that the risk behavior of the diver would probably depend on the personality type.

[ 53 ] Personality types identified were: [ 53 ] The adventurer , a focused and enthusiastic person who appears easy to get along with, but has a tendency to be competitive and seek attention, and may take risks that endanger themselves and their diving partners.

The rationalist , an intelligent person with strong control of their emotional life and general behavior, who will conform when the situation requires it, and will generally persist until they have mastered the necessary skills, will comply with rational rules and procedures, and follow the instructions of people who appear to be competent. They are unlikely to take unnecessary risks.

The dreamer , a person who appears to be unconcerned with everyday matters, or absent minded, and take part in scuba diving as an escape from a bland existence to a more exotic world. Once they recognize the challenges of the activity they may become excessively dependent on the instructor or diving partner and may feel insecure and overwhelmed and frequently seek confirmation of their abilities, which may be annoying.

The passive-aggressive macho diver , a person who initially presents themselves as friendly and pleasant, but as they integrate with the group, start to display consistently critical attitudes towards anyone who may be conceived of as less expert than themselves, whether or not this is objectively realistic. This has been explained  as a defense mechanism to disguise their underlying insecurity and an attempt to boost their low self-esteem.

Motivation to continue diving and to travel to dive: Kler and Tribe (2012) hypothesize and present evidence that a major motivation to pursue diving tourism at considerable expense is the participants gain meaning, fulfillment and long-term satisfaction ( eudaimonia ) through learning and personal growth from their participation.

[ 54 ] For most recreational divers the activity is enjoyable and relaxing. The need to focus on the activities and skills and the tendency to become enthralled by the underwater environment enables divers to leave their worries above the surface.

[ 55 ] Technical diving [ edit ] Technical diving is the extension of recreational diving to higher risk activities. Technical divers operate in the range of activities that are generally beyond the expected competence of recreational diving, and often beyond the legally acceptable range of risk for professional diving. Military and public safety divers may occasionally be exposed to similar levels of risk in the course of their duties, but this will be for compelling operational reasons, whereas the technical diver chooses to accept these risks in the pursuit of a recreational activity. The risks are managed by the use of specialized equipment, avoidance of single points of failure by teamwork and equipment redundancy, the use of procedures known to be effective, maintenance of a high level of skill, sufficient physical fitness to perform effectively in the expected conditions and any reasonably foreseeable contingency, and appropriate reaction to contingencies. The diver makes an informed assessment of the residual risk and accepts the possible consequences. The way in which a diver reacts to the environment is influenced by attitude, awareness, physical fitness, self-discipline, and the ability to distinguish reality from perception.

[ 56 ] In a situation where there is no simple and direct escape to safety, reaction to stress can determine the difference between an enjoyable dive and an accident that may lead to death or disability. If uncontrolled, stress may lead to panic. Overhead environments present challenges and choices where an error may be fatal. Time-pressure stress related to matching gas supply to dive duration can increase when the dive plan is compromised and gas supply runs low, or decompression obligation accumulates beyond the planned limit. When this kind of stress causes the diver to increase gas consumption due to overreacting, the problem gets worse and can spiral into an unrecoverable incident. The ability to react calmly, promptly, and correctly to life-threatening situations, and to persistently and rationally strive to deal effectively with the situation can make the difference between life and death.

[ 56 ] This section needs expansion with: Personality traits associated with unsafe diving behaviors,. You can help by adding to it .

( November 2017 ) Military diving [ edit ] Studies of the personality traits of navy divers have indicated that although they operate in a military environment, navy divers tend to be non-conformists.

[ 53 ] In a comparison between navy and civilian divers, navy divers scored higher than navy non-divers and civilian divers on calmness and self-control in difficult circumstances and were more emotionally controlled and adventurous, less assertive, more practical, more self-controlled and more likely to follow rules and procedures precisely and work together as a team.

[ 53 ] [ 57 ] The navy divers were found to be willing to accept higher risk, and to have a strong sense of control and acceptance of taking personal responsibility for events.

[ 58 ] Commercial diving [ edit ] Serious injuries in commercial diving can be extremely costly to the employer, and the working environment can be inherently very hazardous. This is combined with a legislative environment which has a low risk tolerance, so commercial divers need to be selected for the ability to follow best practice procedures reliably and work well as members of a team, as well as the requisite work skills needed to work efficiently and profitably.

[ 51 ] This section needs expansion with: Personality traits associated with unsafe diving behavior. personality traits of commercial divers, scientific divers? public safety divers?. You can help by adding to it .

( November 2017 ) Effects of drugs [ edit ] The use of medical and recreational drugs, can also influence fitness to dive, both for physiological and behavioral reasons. In some cases prescription drug use may have a net positive effect, when effectively treating an underlying condition, but frequently the side effects of effective medication may have undesirable influences on the fitness of diver, and most cases of recreational drug use result in an impaired fitness to dive, and a significantly increased risk of sub-optimal response to emergencies.

Prescription and non-prescription medication [ edit ] There are no specific studies that give objective values for the effects and risks of most medications if used while diving, and their interactions with the physiological effects of diving. Any advice given by a medical practitioner is based on educated (to a greater or lesser extent), but unproven assumption, and each case is best evaluated by an expert.

[ 59 ] Personality differences between divers will cause each to respond differently to the effects of various breathing gases under pressure and abnormal physiological states. Some of the diving disorders can present symptoms similar to those of psychoneurotic reactions or an organic cerebral syndrome. 
When considering allowing or barring someone with psychological problems to dive, the certifying physician must be aware of all the possibilities and variations in the specific case.

[ 59 ] In many cases an acute illness is best treated in the absence of potential complications caused by diving, but chronic conditions may require medication if the person is to dive at all. Some of the medication types which are commonly or occasionally known to be used by active divers are listed here, along with possible side effects and complications: [ 59 ] Over the counter drugs are generally considered safe for consumer use when the directions for use are followed. They are generally not tested in hyperbaric conditions and may have undesirable side effects, particularly in combination with other drugs.

[ 60 ] Motion sickness is a widespread and potentially debilitating reaction of the central nervous system to conflicting input from the vestibular balance organs of the inner ear and the eyes and other parts of the body. The main symptoms are nausea and confusion.

[ 61 ] Antihistamines, which include cyclizine , dimenhydrinate , diphenhydramine , and meclizine are the most commonly used medications. They are generally available without a prescription, and have similar side effects, the most common of which is drowsiness, which can adversely affect a diver's situational awareness and reaction speed. There are also other side effects.

[ 61 ] Promethazine is chemically related to the tranquilizers, and it also has antihistamine properties. It is generally a prescription drug and drowsiness is a significant side effect, and it may significantly impair ability to perform essential tasks under stressful conditions.

[ 61 ] Trans-dermal scopolamine patch has been reported as effective by many divers, but there are undesirable side effects. Dry mouth effects have been reported, which may be more prevalent in divers breathing dry gas from scuba cylinders. Blurred vision is common, and contact contamination of the eye with the medication will cause pupil dilation. The medication is known to occasionally cause hallucinations, confusion, agitation and disorientation, which are not compatible with safe diving.

[ 61 ] Phenytoin is an antiepileptic drug which has been shown to be effective against motion sickness, but it has not been approved for the purpose. It is not free of side effects.

[ 61 ] Tablet form of scopolamine, by prescription [ 62 ] Malaria is a disease caused by a microorganism carried by mosquitoes. There are several strains and it is widespread in tropical regions. The disease is dangerous and prophylaxis is recommended.

[ 63 ] No interactions between antimalarial drugs and diving have been established, and complications are not generally expected, but the use of Mefloquine is not accepted by all diving medicine specialists.

[ 63 ] Antimalarial drug prophylaxis recommendations depend on specific regions and may change over time. Current recommendations should be checked.

[ 63 ] All of these drugs may have side-effects, and there are known interactions with other drugs. Overdose can be fatal.

[ 63 ] Mefloquine is seldom reported to have side-effects, but some people are allergic to it. Side effects include nausea, dizziness and disturbed sleep. Occasional serious side effects include seizures, hallucinations and severe anxiety.

[ 63 ] Doxycycline has side effects of skin sensitization to sunburn, and sometimes upset stomach or yeast infections. It is unsuitable for young children and pregnant women as it can cause staining of developing teeth.

[ 63 ] Malarone (a combination of atovaquone and proguanil) seldom has side effects, but headache, nausea, vomiting and abdominal pain have been reported.

[ 63 ] There are contraindications for renal impairment, and it is not recommended in pregnancy or for small children.

[ 63 ] Chloroquine Hydroxychloroquine sulfate Pyrimethamine Fansidar (sulfadoxine and pyrimethamine) Decongestants : Pseudoephedrine has been named in anecdotal reports of possible connections with increased sensitivity to CNS oxygen toxicity. There is a plausible biological mechanism but very little reliable data.

[ 64 ] The steroid fluticasone propionate and similar medications have been satisfactorily used to treat nasal congestion, but should be used for at least a week before diving to be maximally effective.

[ 65 ] Contraceptives [ 66 ] Anxiety , phobias & panic disorders [ 46 ] Diabetes [ 67 ] [ 68 ] [ 69 ] [ 70 ] Asthma Indigestion Headaches Cardiovascular and hypertension medication; [ 71 ] Beta blockers ACE inhibitors (Angiotension-converting enzyme inhibitors) Calcium channel blockers Diuretics Antiarrhythmic agents Anticoagulants Schizophrenia [ 59 ] Clozapine Quetiapine Risperidone Olanzapine Depression : Little research is available on diving or hyperbaric exposure with depression or while taking antidepressants. Reported side effects include anxiety and panic, thought to be caused by interaction with high partial pressure of nitrogen and side effects of the drugs.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] Restrictions on instructors or divemasters with duty of care to their clients may be more stringent than for recreational divers, though consideration should be given for the possible degradation of the buddy system. Some antidepressants are known to increase risk of seizure but no data is available on whether they increase sensitivity to CNS oxygen toxicity.

[ 73 ] Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors : SSRIs tend to be more expensive than other antidepressant medications, but are relatively safer for divers. However they do have typical side effects, such as drowsiness, which can affect dive safety. Other side effects may include increased susceptibility to bruising and bleeding, which can increase the apparent severity of injuries. Combined effects with other medications like anti-platelet drugs and non-steroidal anti-inflammatories, (such as aspirin or ibuprofen), can further exacerbate bleeding. In higher doses SSRIs may cause seizures, with the associated high risk of drowning if they occur underwater.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] Monoamine oxidase inhibitors : MOAIs can cause dizziness from orthostatic hypotension and drowsiness. Side effects at increased partial pressure of nitrogen are unclear. In combination with some other medications they can cause increased blood pressure, and they should not be take with some types of aged or fermented foods which contain the amino acid tyramine which can cause a hypertensive crisis.

[ 72 ] Tricyclics , tetracyclics , heterocyclics : TCAs and HCAs can have side effects of dizziness, drowsiness, and blurred vision, which are not compatible with safe diving if they impair concentration, alertness or decision-making.

[ 72 ] bupropion , trazodone and venlafaxine may lower the seizure threshold. Venlafaxine may occasionally cause fainting, excitability and difficulty breathing. Bupropion may cause agitation, CNS stimulation, seizures, psychosis, dry mouth, headache, migraine, nausea, vomiting, rash, tinnitus, muscle pain and dizziness.

[ 72 ] Anti-inflammatories and analgesics may be acceptable, subject to some known side effects, sensitivities, interactions and contraindications.

[ 60 ] These drugs are commonly taken for temporary relief of minor aches and pains, and the underlying condition may still be present. They may mask symptoms of mild decompression sickness, which may delay treatment. Naproxen sodium and ibuprofen may produce side effects such as heartburn, nausea, abdominal pain, headache, dizziness and drowsiness, and they are usually discouraged for people with disorders involving heartburn, gastric ulcers, bleeding problems or asthma. There may be adverse drug interactions with anticoagulants, insulin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories.

[ 60 ] Aspirin Diclofenac (Voltaren) Ibuprofen Ketoprofen Naproxen Paracetamol (Acetaminophen) Recreational drugs and substance abuse [ edit ] Smoking (tobacco) Alcohol: Although alcohol consumption increases dehydration and therefore may increase susceptibility to DCS, [ 74 ] a 2005 study found no evidence that alcohol consumption increases the incidence of DCS.

[ 75 ] Alcohol may also increase risk by affecting reaction time , visual tracking, attention, ability to multitask , perception and judgement and performance of psychomotor tasks .

[ 50 ] Cannabis may cause side effects that could increase risk when diving, including: Dizziness is a fairly common side effect, which may reduce with continued use.

[ 50 ] Headache, constipation, nervousness, fatigue, insomnia, limb or abdominal pain, and weight loss are less common side effects.

[ 50 ] These impairments may not be apparent to the user, which makes the risk greater.

[ 50 ] This section needs expansion with: Recreational drugs - known effects. You can help by adding to it .

( November 2017 ) See also [ edit ] Rubicon Foundation – Non-profit organization for promoting research and information access for underwater diving Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society – US based organisation for research and education in hyperbaric physiology and medicine.

Diving Medical Advisory Council – Independent organisation of diving medical specialists from Northern Europe References [ edit ] ^ a b c "Dive Standards & Medical Statement" . World Recreational Scuba Training Council. Archived from the original on 25 June 2012 . Retrieved 26 January 2013 .

^ a b c d e f Joint Medical Subcommittee of ECHM and EDTC (24 June 2003). Wendling, Jürg; Elliott, David; Nome, Tor (eds.).

Fitness to Dive Standards - Guidelines for Medical Assessment of Working Divers (PDF) (Report). European Diving Technology Committee. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 August 2016 . Retrieved 18 May 2017 .

^ a b Educational and Training Standards for Physicians in Diving and Hyperbaric Medicine (PDF) , Joint Educational Subcommittee of the European Committee for Hyperbaric Medicine (ECHM) and the European Diving Technical Committee (EDTC), 2011, archived (PDF) from the original on 28 September 2016 , retrieved 30 March 2013 ^ a b Williams, G.; Elliott, D.H.; Walker, R.; Gorman, DF.; Haller, V. (2001). "Fitness to dive: Panel discussion with audience participation".

Journal of the South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society .

31 (3).

^ Hanson, E.; Fleisher, J.; Jackman, R.; Dovenbarger, J.; Uguccioni, D.; Thalmann, E.; Cudahy, E.

"Demographics And Illness Prevalence in Recreational Scuba Divers" .

www.diversalertnetwork.org . Groton, CT: Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory.

Archived from the original on 29 December 2019 . Retrieved 9 January 2020 .

^ Taylor, David McD.; O'Toole, Kevin S.; Ryan, Christopher M. (September 2002).

"Experienced, Recreational Scuba Divers in Australia Continue to Dive Despite Medical Contraindications" .

Wilderness & Environmental Medicine .

13 (3): 187– 193.

doi : 10.1580/1080-6032(2002)013[0187:ERSDIA]2.0.CO;2 .

PMID 12353595 .

Archived from the original on 2024-01-21 . Retrieved 2020-01-09 .

^ Richardson, Drew (December 2000). "The RSTC Medical statement and candidate screening model; discussion".

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Journal .

30 (4). South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society: 210– 213.

^ Elliott, D. (2000), "Why fitness? Who benefits from diver medical examinations?", Journal of the South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society.

, 30 (4) ^ Richardson, Drew (December 2000). "The RSTC Medical statement and candidate screening model".

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Journal .

30 (4). South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society: 210– 213.

^ "IMCA-Guidance on Health, Fitness and Medical Issues in Diving Operations" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2024-04-23 . Retrieved 2024-04-23 .

^ admin.

"Importance of Diving Medicals – Medoccs International" .

Archived from the original on 2024-04-23 . Retrieved 2024-04-23 .

^ "Diver Medical: Participant Questionnaire" . Divers Alert Network, World Recreational Scuba Training Council. 2020 . Retrieved 7 May 2025 .

^ "Diving Medical Guidance to the Physician" (PDF) . Diving Medical Screen Committee, Divers Alert Network. 16 September 2021 . Retrieved 7 May 2025 .

^ Lunn, Rosemary E (23 June 2020).

"The 'Medical Statement' form has been updated" . X-Ray Magazine.

Archived from the original on 21 January 2024 . Retrieved 26 August 2020 .

^ "Diving Regulations 2009 of the South African Occupational Health and Safety Act, 1993", Government Notice R41, Government Gazette (#32907), 29 January 2010 ^ a b c d e f Vorosmarti, J; Linaweaver, PG., eds. (1987). Fitness to Dive. 34th Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society Workshop.

UHMS Publication Number 70(WS-WD)5-1-87.

(Report). Bethesda: Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society. p. 116.

^ Edmonds; Thomas; McKenzie; Pennefather (2010).

Diving Medicine for Scuba Divers (3rd ed.). Carl Edmonds. Archived from the original on 2010-11-27 . Retrieved 2013-04-07 .

^ a b Adir, Yochai; Bove, Alfred A. (2016).

"Can asthmatic subjects dive?" (PDF) .

European Respiratory Review .

25 (140): 214– 220.

doi : 10.1183/16000617.0006-2016 .

PMC 9487249 .

PMID 27246598 .

S2CID 35971130 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 June 2016 . Retrieved 10 June 2016 .

^ DAN medical team (10 April 2017).

"Diving with cancer" . DAN Southern Africa.

Archived from the original on 6 July 2018 . Retrieved 2 September 2017 .

^ a b c d e f Staff (2016).

"Diving and diabetes" .

Diver Health . Plymouth, UK.: Diving Diseases Research Centre - DDRC Healthcare. Archived from the original on February 13, 2015 . Retrieved 11 June 2016 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Pollock NW; Uguccioni DM; Dear GdeL, eds. (2005).

"Guidelines to Diabetes & Recreational Diving" (PDF) .

Diabetes and recreational diving: guidelines for the future. Proceedings of the Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society/Divers Alert Network 2005 June 19 Workshop . Durham, NC: Divers Alert Network . Retrieved 11 June 2016 .

^ Sawatsky, David (17 January 2012).

"Epilepsy/Seizures and Diving" .

divermag.com .

Archived from the original on 30 December 2019 . Retrieved 30 December 2019 .

^ a b c d e f g Almeida, Maria do Rosario G.; Bell, Gail S.; Sander, Josemir W. (14 May 2007).

"Epilepsy and Recreational Scuba Diving: An Absolute Contraindication or Can There Be Exceptions? A Call for Discussion" .

Epilepsia .

48 (5): 851– 858.

doi : 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2007.01045.x .

PMID 17508997 .

^ a b "Epilepsy" .

www.ukdmc.org . UK diving medical committee.

Archived from the original on 31 December 2019 . Retrieved 31 December 2019 .

^ "Can I dive with Epilepsy?" . DDRC healthcare . Retrieved 30 December 2019 .

^ St Leger Dowse, M.; Gunby, A.; Moncad, R.; Fife, C.; Bryson, P. (2006). "Scuba diving and pregnancy: Can we determine safe limits?".

Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology .

26 (6): 509– 513.

doi : 10.1080/01443610600797368 .

PMID 17000494 .

S2CID 883392 .

^ a b Held, Heather E; Pollock, Neal W. (2007).

"The Risks of Pregnancy and Diving" .

DAN Medical articles . Durham, NC.: Divers Alert Network.

Archived from the original on 7 June 2016 . Retrieved 11 June 2016 .

^ DAN medical team (June 2016).

"Return to Diving After Giving Birth" .

DANSA website . Divers Alert Network.

Archived from the original on 20 August 2016 . Retrieved 11 August 2016 .

^ [1] Archived 2024-01-02 at the Wayback Machine . DivingGuru.

https://www.see-deep.com/ Archived 2024-01-02 at the Wayback Machine 02-jan-2024 ^ [2] Archived 2024-01-02 at the Wayback Machine . DivingGuru.

https://www.padi.com/courses/adaptive-techniques Archived 2024-01-02 at the Wayback Machine 02-jan-2024 ^ Caruso, James L (2006). "The Pathologist's Approach to SCUBA Diving Deaths".

American Society for Clinical Pathology Teleconference .

^ St Leger Dowse, M.; Gunby, A.; Phil, D.; Moncad, R.; Fife, C.; Morsman, J.; Bryson, P. (2006).

"Problems associated with scuba diving are not evenly distributed across a menstrual cycle" .

Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology .

26 (3): 216– 221.

doi : 10.1080/01443610600555261 .

PMID 16698628 .

S2CID 15533385 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Cronje, Frans (7 July 2021).

"Return To Diving After COVID" .

www.youtube.com . Divers Alert Network South Africa.

Archived from the original on 10 July 2021 . Retrieved 10 July 2021 .

^ Rooney, Scott; Webster, Amy; Paul, Lorna (31 July 2020).

"Systematic Review of Changes and Recovery in Physical Function and Fitness After Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome–Related Coronavirus Infection: Implications for COVID-19 Rehabilitation" .

Phys Ther .

100 (10): 1717– 1729.

doi : 10.1093/ptj/pzaa129 .

PMC 7454932 .

PMID 32737507 .

^ "Diving after COVID-19: What divers need to know" .

www.youtube.com . Divers Alert Network. 29 May 2020.

Archived from the original on 1 September 2020 . Retrieved 3 July 2020 .

^ a b Sadler, Charlotte; Alvarez Villela, Miguel; Van Hoesen, Karen; Grover, Ian; Lang, Michael; Neuman, Tom; Lindholm, Peter (30 September 2020).

"Diving after SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) infection: Fitness to dive assessment and medical guidance" .

Diving Hyperb Med .

50 (3): 278– 287.

doi : 10.28920/dhm50.3.278-287 .

PMC 7755459 .

PMID 32957131 .

^ "DAN COVID-19 Study - Initial Survey" .

www.research.net . Divers Alert Network.

Archived from the original on 22 December 2020 . Retrieved 21 December 2020 .

^ "Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) – Guidance for Diving Contractors. Information Note 1563" . International Marine Contractors Association. 31 May 2021.

Archived from the original on 10 July 2021 . Retrieved 10 July 2021 .

^ "Return to Diving after Covid-19 DMAC 33 Rev.1" (PDF) . London, UK: The Diving Medical Advisory Committee. December 2020.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2021-07-10 . Retrieved 2021-07-10 .

^ Bates, Mark; Bowles, Stephen; Hammermeister, Jon; Stokes, Charlene; Pinder, Evette; Moore, Monique; Fritts, Matthew; Vythilingam, Meena; Yosick, Todd; Rhodes, Jeffrey; Myatt, Craig; Westphal, Richard; Fautua, David; Hammer, Paul; Burbelo, Gregory (2010).

"Psychological Fitness" .

Military Medicine .

175 (8S): 21– 38.

doi : 10.7205/MILMED-D-10-00073 .

^ Lazarus, Clifford N. (21 May 2011).

"Three Keys to Optimum Mental Fitness" .

Psychology today .

Archived from the original on 21 January 2024 . Retrieved 31 December 2019 .

^ Furber, Gareth (24 April 2019).

"Mental Fitness – Lesson 8 – components of mental fitness" .

blogs.flinders.edu.au .

Archived from the original on 31 December 2019 . Retrieved 31 December 2019 .

^ de Beer, Leon; Rothmann, Ina; van Jaarsveldt, Wessel; Botha, Leon; Botha, Rudolph (5 April 2016).

Psychological Fitness IndexCase study: The Impact of Psychological Fitness Promotion on Safety Outcomes in a Corporate Environment (PDF) (Report).

Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 November 2018 . Retrieved 31 December 2019 .

^ a b Campbell, Ernest (2000).

"Medical info: Psychological Issues in Diving" .

www.diversalertnetwork.org .

Archived from the original on 11 November 2017 . Retrieved 11 November 2017 .

From the September/October 2000 issue of Alert Diver.

^ Yarbrough, John R.

"Anxiety: Is It A Contraindication to Diving?" .

www.diversalertnetwork.org . Divers Alert Network.

Archived from the original on 13 November 2017 . Retrieved 12 November 2017 .

^ a b Campbell, Ernest.

"Medical info: Psychological Issues in Diving II - Anxiety, Phobias in Diving" .

www.diversalertnetwork.org . Retrieved 11 November 2017 .

^ Lock, Gareth (8 May 2011).

Human factors within sport diving incidents and accidents: An Application of the Human Factors Analysis and Classification System (HFACS) (PDF) . Cognitas Incident Management Limited.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 November 2016 . Retrieved 5 November 2016 .

^ a b Colvard, David F.; Colvard, Lynn Y. (2003). "A Study of Panic in Recreational Scuba Divers".

The Undersea Journal .

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.506.6586 .

^ Van Wijk, Charles H (December 2017).

"Personality and behavioural outcomes in diving: current status and recommendations for future research" .

Diving and Hyperbaric Medicine .

47 (4): 248– 252.

doi : 10.28920/dhm47.4.248-252 .

PMC 6706337 .

PMID 29241235 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Campbell, Ernest.

"Psychological Issues and Diving" .

dan.org .

Archived from the original on 4 December 2023 . Retrieved 27 May 2024 .

^ a b Niewiedział, Dorota; Kolańska, Magdalena; Dabrowiecki, Zbigniew; Jerzemowski, Mateusz; Siermontowski, Piotr; Kobos, Zdzislaw; Olszański, Romuald (2018).

"Psychological Aspects of Diving in Selected Theoretical and Research Perspectives" .

Polish Hyperbaric Research .

62 : 43– 54.

doi : 10.2478/phr-2018-0003 .

^ Beneton, Frédéric; Michoud, Guillaume; Coulange, Mathieu; Laine, Nicolas; Ramdani, Céline; Borgnetta, Marc; Breton, Patricia; Guieu, Regis; Rostain, J. C.; Trousselard, Marion (18 December 2017).

"Recreational Diving Practice for Stress Management: An Exploratory Trial" .

Frontiers in Psychology .

8 : 2193.

doi : 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.02193 .

PMC 5741699 .

PMID 29326628 .

^ a b c d e Coetzee, Nicoleen (December 2010). "Personality profiles of recreational scuba divers".

African Journal for Physical Health Education, Recreation and Dance .

16 (4): 568– 579.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.966.9936 .

^ Kler, Balvinder Kaur; Tribe, John (2012).

"Flourishing Through Scuba: Understanding the Pursuit of Dive Experiences" .

Tourism in Marine Environments .

8 (1/2): 19– 32.

doi : 10.3727/154427312X13262430524027 .

Archived from the original on 2021-09-21 . Retrieved 2020-01-01 .

^ Walton, Laura (2019).

"Fixing problems under the surface" .

The Psychologist .

12 . The British Psychological Society: 28– 33.

Archived from the original on 2021-06-24 . Retrieved 2021-06-16 .

^ a b Mount, Tom (August 2008). "18: Psychological & Physical Fitness For Technical Diving". In Mount, Tom; Dituri, Joseph (eds.).

Exploration and Mixed Gas Diving Encyclopedia (1st ed.). Miami Shores, Florida: International Association of Nitrox Divers. pp.

209– 224.

ISBN 978-0-915539-10-9 .

^ van Wijk, C. (2002). "Comparing personality traits of navy divers, navy non-divers and civilian sport divers".

Journal of the South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society .

^ Krooss, Barbara.

"Going Deeper - Medical and Psychological Aspects of Diving With Disabilities" .

Archived from the original on 13 November 2017 . Retrieved 13 November 2017 .

^ a b c d Campbell, Ernest.

"Medical info: Psychological Issues in Diving III - Schizophrenia, Substance Abuse" .

www.diversalertnetwork.org . Retrieved 11 November 2017 .

^ a b c Nord, Daniel A (May–June 1996).

"DAN Takes a Look at Over-the-Counter Medications" .

www.diversalertnetwork.org .

Archived from the original on 30 December 2019 . Retrieved 30 December 2019 .

^ a b c d e Mebane, G.Yancey (April 1995).

"Motion Sickness" .

Alert Diver . Divers Alert Network.

Archived from the original on 16 November 2017 . Retrieved 15 November 2017 .

^ Kincade, Dan (October 2003).

"Motion Sickness - Updated 2003" .

Alert diver . Divers Alert Network.

Archived from the original on 16 November 2017 . Retrieved 15 November 2017 .

^ a b c d e f g h Leigh, Dan (September 2002).

"DAN Discusses Malaria and Antimalarial Drugs" .

Alert Diver . Divers Alert Network.

Archived from the original on 15 November 2017 . Retrieved 15 November 2017 .

^ Thalmann, E.D. (December 1999).

"Pseudoephedrine & Enriched-Air Diving?" .

Alert diver . Divers Alert Network.

Archived from the original on 23 May 2017 . Retrieved 15 November 2016 .

^ McCafferty, Marty (7 September 2017).

"Nasal Decongestants FAQ" .

www.dansa.org . DAN Southern Africa . Retrieved 18 February 2025 .

^ Uguccioni, Donna M.; Moon, Richard; Taylor, Maida Beth.

"Women's Health and Diving" .

dan.org . DAN . Retrieved 18 February 2025 .

^ "Can I dive with Diabeted?" .

www.ddrc.org . DDRC Healthcare . Retrieved 18 February 2025 .

^ "Guidelines for Diabetes and Recreational Diving" .

dan.org . Divers Alert Network . Retrieved 18 February 2025 .

^ "Scuba Diving and Diabetes" .

dan.org . Divers Alert Network. 4 August 2020 . Retrieved 8 February 2025 .

^ Jendle, J.H.; Adolfsson, P.; Pollock, N.W. (30 June 2020).

"Recreational diving in persons with type 1 and type 2 diabetes: Advancing capabilities and recommendations" .

Diving Hyperb Med .

50 (2): 135– 143.

doi : 10.28920/dhm50.2.135-143 .

PMC 7481121 .

PMID 32557415 .

^ Gowen, Laurie (2005).

"Cardiovascular Medications and Diving" . Divers Alert Network.

Archived from the original on 15 November 2017 . Retrieved 15 November 2017 .

First published in Alert Diver November/December 2005 ^ a b c d e Gowen, Laurie.

"Medications for Depression and Fitness to Dive" .

Alert Diver (May/June 2005). Divers Alert Network.

Archived from the original on 29 December 2019 . Retrieved 29 December 2019 – via www.diversalertnetwork.org.

^ a b c Querido, Abraham L (31 December 2017).

"Diving and antidepressants" .

Diving and Hyperbaric Medicine .

47 (4): 253– 256.

doi : 10.28920/dhm47.4.253-256 .

PMC 6708605 .

PMID 29241236 .

^ Fryer, DI (1969).

Subatmospheric decompression sickness in man . England: Technivision Services. p. 343.

ISBN 978-0-85102-023-5 .

^ Leigh, B.C.; Dunford, Richard G. (2005).

"Alcohol use in scuba divers treated for diving injuries: A comparison of decompression sickness and arterial gas embolism" (PDF) .

Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research .

29 (Supplement s1): 157A.

doi : 10.1111/j.1530-0277.2005.tb03524.x . Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 December 2013.

Presented at the Annual Meeting of the Research Society on Alcoholism, Santa Barbara, California, June 2005.

External links [ edit ] Health & Medicine - Divers Alert Network European diving technology committee Recreational Diving Medical Screening System (2020) Scuba diving restrictions v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.eqiad.main‐db6c4d8dd‐5w9dw
Cached time: 20250814224903
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.511 seconds
Real time usage: 1.773 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8612/1000000
Revision size: 91801/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 672318/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5638/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 323555/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.832/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 14976239/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1283.264      1 -total
 50.69%  650.459      1 Template:Reflist
 24.41%  313.227     39 Template:Cite_web
 14.32%  183.823     24 Template:Cite_journal
 12.27%  157.426      1 Template:Underwater_diving
 11.95%  153.385      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 11.40%  146.341      3 Template:Annotated_link
  7.30%   93.618     35 Template:Navbox
  6.42%   82.345      1 Template:Short_description
  4.21%   54.064      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:39038417:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814224903 and revision id 1293544527. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fitness_to_dive&oldid=1293544527 " Category : Underwater diving safety Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2018 Articles to be expanded from December 2019 All articles to be expanded Articles to be expanded from July 2020 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from January 2024 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles to be expanded from May 2024 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2017 Articles to be expanded from November 2017 This page was last edited on 2 June 2025, at 08:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fitness to dive 1 language Add topic

