Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Construction 2 History 3 Design 4 Gallery 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Slurry wall 17 languages العربية Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Galego Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands Polski Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Civil engineering technique This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Slurry wall" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Exposed slurry wall of the World Trade Center at Ground Zero A slurry wall is a civil engineering technique used to build reinforced concrete walls in areas of soft earth close to open water, or with a high groundwater table.

[ 1 ] This technique is typically used to build diaphragm (water-blocking) walls surrounding tunnels and open cuts, and to lay foundations . Slurry walls are used at Superfund sites to contain the waste or contamination and reduce potential future migration of waste constituents, often with other waste treatment methods. Slurry walls are a "well-established" technology but the decision to use slurry walls for a certain project requires geophysical and other engineering studies to develop a plan appropriate for the needs of that specific location. Slurry walls may need to be used in conjunction with other methods to meet project objectives.

[ 2 ] Construction [ edit ] Sequence of constructing a slurry wall While a trench is being excavated to create a form for a wall, it is simultaneously filled with slurry (usually a mixture of bentonite and water).  The dense but liquid slurry prevents the trench from collapsing by providing outward pressure, which balances the inward hydraulic forces and also retards water flow into the trench. The density of the slurry mix must be carefully monitored and adjusted to produce the correct outward pressure to prevent the trench walls from collapsing.

Slurry walls are typically constructed by starting with a set of concrete guide walls, typically 1 metre (3 ft 3 in) deep and 0.5 metres (1 ft 8 in) thick. The guide walls are constructed near the ground surface to outline the desired slurry trench, and to guide the excavation machinery. Excavation is done using a special clamshell-shaped digger or a hydromill trench cutter , suspended from a crane. The excavator digs down to design depth (or bedrock) for the first wall segment.  The excavator is then lifted and moved along the trench guide walls to continue the trench with successive cuts as needed.  The trench is at all times kept filled with slurry to prevent its collapse, but the fluid filling allows the excavation machinery and excavation spoil to be moved without hindrance.

Once a particular depth of trench is reached, a reinforcing cage is lowered into the slurry-filled pit and the pit is filled with concrete from the bottom up using tremie pipes. The heavier concrete displaces the bentonite slurry, which is pumped out, filtered, and stored in tanks for use in the next wall segment, or it is recycled.

Slurry walls are successively extended to enclose an area, blocking water and softened earth from flowing into it.  Once the concrete has hardened, excavation within the now concrete-wall-enclosed area can proceed. To prevent the concrete wall from collapsing into the newly excavated area, temporary supports such as tiebacks or internal crossbeams are installed. When completed, the structure built within the walled-off area usually supports the wall, so that tiebacks or other temporary bracing may be optionally removed.

History [ edit ] The slurry wall technique was first introduced in the 1950s during the excavations of the Red Line of the Milan Metro in Italy by the company ICOS (Impresa Costruzioni Opere Specializzate). This new technology became an important component of the top-down tunnelling method also known as Metodo Milano ("Milan method").

[ 3 ] Slurry wall construction was used in 1967–1968 to construct the "bathtub" that surrounded the foundations of most of the World Trade Center site in New York City.

[ 4 ] In the 1980s, the Red Line Northwest Extension project in Boston was one of the first projects in the US to use the modern form of the technology, with hydromill trench cutters and the "Milan method". Slurry walls were also used extensively in Boston's 1990s Big Dig tunnel project.

Design [ edit ] The design of a slurry wall (diaphragm wall) includes the design of wall thickness and reinforcements. Thickness of a slurry wall in preliminary design is generally set to about 4-8% of the excavation depth. Slurry wall design is undertaken based on bending moment and shear envelope obtained from the stress analysis . In the design of such underground walls, width of the unit is considered as one meter, and the wall is analyzed under plane strain condition. Since the length-to-width ratio of excavations is generally large, plane strain conditions can be assumed.

[ 5 ] In a single-phase diaphragm wall, also known as a "cut-off wall", a binder (usually cement) is added to the supporting fluid so that the supporting fluid hardens without exchange.

[ 6 ] One application for this type of construction is a landfill seal that is to be retrofitted later.

Gallery [ edit ] Hydromill trench cutter Clamshell-type slurry wall excavator A set of slurry wall guide walls before excavation See also [ edit ] Retaining wall Building of the World Trade Center Grout curtain References [ edit ] ^ Gutberle (1994).

"Slurry Walls" .

Virginia Tech . Archived from the original on 2007-08-24 . Retrieved 2012-01-05 .

^ "Engineering Bulletin: Slurry Walls" .

United States EPA .

^ "Primo by Ex Libris -" . Retrieved 2015-08-25 .

^ David W. Dunlap (September 11, 2013).

"Looking to a Wall That Limited the World Trade Center's Devastation" .

New York Times . Retrieved September 11, 2013 .

A portion of the slurry wall was deliberately left exposed in the Foundation Hall of the National September 11 Memorial Museum, set to open next year.

^ Bahrami, M.; Khodakarami, M.I.; Haddad, A. (April 2019). "Seismic behavior and design of strutted diaphragm walls in sand".

Computers and Geotechnics .

108 : 75– 87.

doi : 10.1016/j.compgeo.2018.12.019 .

^ "(Ab)Dicht(ungs)(schlitz)wand f" , Wörterbuch GeoTechnik/Dictionary Geotechnical Engineering , Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp.

7– 7, 2013 , retrieved 2022-03-28 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Slurry wall .

Video Overview of Slurry Wall Construction v t e Geotechnical engineering Offshore geotechnical engineering Investigation and instrumentation Field ( in situ ) Core drill Cone penetration test Geo-electrical sounding Permeability test Load test Static Dynamic Statnamic Pore pressure measurement Piezometer Well Ram sounding Rock control drilling Rotary-pressure sounding Rotary weight sounding Sample series Screw plate test Deformation monitoring Inclinometer Settlement recordings Shear vane test Simple sounding Standard penetration test Total sounding Trial pit Visible bedrock Nuclear densometer test Exploration geophysics Crosshole sonic logging Pile integrity test Wave equation analysis Laboratory testing Soil classification Atterberg limits California bearing ratio Direct shear test Hydrometer Proctor compaction test R-value Sieve analysis Triaxial shear test Oedometer test Hydraulic conductivity tests Water content tests Soil Types Clay Silt Sand Gravel Peat Loam Loess Properties Hydraulic conductivity Water content Void ratio Bulk density Thixotropy Reynolds' dilatancy Angle of repose Friction angle Cohesion Porosity Permeability Specific storage Shear strength Sensitivity Structures ( Interaction ) Natural features Topography Vegetation Terrain Topsoil Water table Bedrock Subgrade Subsoil Earthworks Shoring structures Retaining walls Gabion Ground freezing Mechanically stabilized earth Pressure grouting Slurry wall Soil nailing Tieback Land development Landfill Excavation Trench Embankment Cut Causeway Terracing Cut-and-cover Cut and fill Fill dirt Grading Land reclamation Track bed Erosion control Earth structure Expanded clay aggregate Crushed stone Geosynthetics Geotextile Geomembrane Geosynthetic clay liner Cellular confinement Infiltration Foundations Shallow Deep Mechanics Forces Effective stress Pore water pressure Lateral earth pressure Overburden pressure Preconsolidation pressure Phenomena/ problems Permafrost Frost heaving Consolidation Compaction Earthquake Response spectrum Seismic hazard Shear wave Landslide analysis Stability analysis Mitigation Classification Sliding criterion Slab stabilisation Bearing capacity * Stress distribution in soil Numerical analysis software SEEP2D STABL SVFlux SVSlope UTEXAS Plaxis Related fields Geology Geochemistry Petrology Earthquake engineering Geomorphology Soil science Hydrology Hydrogeology Biogeography Earth materials Archaeology Agricultural science Agrology Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Slurry_wall&oldid=1177883900 " Categories : Geotechnical shoring structures Types of wall Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2009 All articles needing additional references Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 September 2023, at 06:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Slurry wall 17 languages Add topic

