Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Rise to power 2 Downfall 3 Personality and oratorical style 4 Surviving speeches Toggle Surviving speeches subsection 4.1 New discoveries 5 Lost speeches 6 Portraits 7 Assessment 8 See also 9 Notes 10 Bibliography 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Hypereides 27 languages Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara Français Galego Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Latina Magyar مصرى Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Athenian logographer (c. 390 – 322 BC) For the potter, see Hypereides (potter) .

You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Italian .

(October 2021) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the Italian article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Italian Wikipedia article at [[:it:Iperide]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|it|Iperide}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Roman copy of an anonymous Greek portrait type of the late 4th or early 3rd century BCE, often identified as Hypereides ( Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek ) Hypereides or Hyperides ( Ancient Greek : Ὑπερείδης , Hypereidēs ; c. 390 – 322 BC; English pronunciation with the stress variably on the penultimate or antepenultimate syllable [ 1 ] ) was an Athenian logographer (speech writer).  He was one of the ten Attic orators included in the "Alexandrian canon" compiled by Aristophanes of Byzantium and Aristarchus of Samothrace in the third century BC.

He was a leader of the Athenian resistance to King Philip II of Macedon and Alexander the Great . He was associated with Lycurgus and Demosthenes in exposing pro- Macedonian sympathizers. He is known for prosecuting Philippides of Paiania for his pro-Macedonian measures and his decree in honoring Alexander the Great.

[ 2 ] Rise to power [ edit ] Little is known about his early life except that he was the son of Glaucippus of the deme of Collytus and that he studied logography under Isocrates . In 360 BC, he prosecuted Autocles for treason.

[ 3 ] During the Social War (358–355 BC) he accused Aristophon , then one of the most influential men at Athens , of malpractices, [ 4 ] and impeached Philocrates (343 BC) for high treason. Although Hypereides supported Demosthenes in the struggle against Philip II of Macedon ; that support was withdrawn after the Harpalus affair. After Demosthenes' exile Hypereides became the head of the patriotic party (324 BC).

[ 5 ] Downfall [ edit ] After the death of Alexander the Great , Hypereides was one of the chief promoters of war against Macedonian rule.   His speeches are believed to have led to the outbreak of the Lamian War (323–322 BC) in which Athens, Aetolia , and Thessaly revolted against Macedonian rule.  After the decisive defeat at Crannon (322 BC) in which Athens and her allies lost their independence, Hypereides and the other orators were captured by Archias of Thurii and condemned to death by the Athenian supporters of Macedon .

[ 5 ] Hypereides fled to Aegina only to be captured at the temple of Poseidon .  After being put to death, his body (according to others) was taken to Cleonae and shown to the Macedonian general Antipater before being returned to Athens for burial.

[ 5 ] Personality and oratorical style [ edit ] Hypereides was an ardent pursuer of "the beautiful," which in his time generally meant pleasure and luxury.

[ 5 ] He was a flamboyant figure, unwavering in public in his hostility to Macedon. He was a well-known epicure given to fine food and women. He engaged in countless affairs with prostitutes, some of whom he defended in court.

[ 6 ] His temper was easy-going and humorous. Though in his development of the periodic sentence he followed Isocrates , the essential tendencies of his style are those of Lysias . His diction was plain, though he occasionally indulged in long compound words probably borrowed from Middle Comedy . His composition was simple. He was especially distinguished for subtlety of expression, grace and wit.

[ 5 ] [ 7 ] Hypereides is known to have owned at least two or three pieces of property: an estate in Eleusis , a house in Athens, and a house in Piraeus , where he kept one of his many women. In around 340 BC he is known to have performed only two public services, as trierarch and Chorus producer. It is said he had received money from the Persian King who was alarmed at Macedon's expansion.

[ 2 ] Surviving speeches [ edit ] The final two columns of P.Lit.Lond. 134, the 2nd-century BC papyrus that transmits the conclusion to Against Philippides Hypereides's speech in trial against Philippides lasted over thirty minutes. In the first speech against Philippides he attacked King Philip II of Macedon and Alexander the Great . In the second part of the papyrus , he attacks Philippides and his associates and states: Each one of them was a traitor, one in Thebes , another in Tangara , another in Eleutherae , doing everything in the service of the Macedonians . He pleaded Philip's cause and campaigned with him against our country which is his most serious offense. Hypereides detested Philippides pro-Macedonian sympathies. Hypereides exposed Philippides who was known as saying in the Assembly: We must honor Alexander for all those that died at his hand.

[ 8 ] Seventy-seven speeches have been attributed to Hypereides, of which twenty-five were regarded as spurious by his contemporaries. It is said that a manuscript of most of the speeches survived as late as the 15th century in the Bibliotheca Corviniana , library of Matthias Corvinus , king of Hungary , but was later destroyed after the capture of Buda by the Turks in the 16th century. Only a few fragments were known until relatively recent times. In 1847, large fragments of his speeches, Against Demosthenes and For Lycophron (incidentally interesting for clarifying the order of marriage processions and other details of Athenian life, and the Athenian government of Lemnos ) and the whole of For Euxenippus (c. 330 BC, a locus classicus on εἰσαγγελίαι eisangeliai or state prosecutions), were found in a tomb at Thebes in Egypt .  In 1856 a considerable portion of a logos epitaphios , a Funeral Oration over Leosthenes and his comrades who had fallen in the Lamian war was discovered.

[ 5 ] Towards the end of the nineteenth century further discoveries were made including the conclusion of the speech Against Philippides (dealing with an indictment for the proposal of unconstitutional measure, arising out of the disputes of the Macedonian and anti-Macedonian parties at Athens), and of the whole  of Against Athenogenes (a perfumer accused of fraud in the sale of his business).

[ 5 ] New discoveries [ edit ] In 2002 Natalie Tchernetska of Trinity College, Cambridge discovered fragments of two speeches of Hypereides, which had been considered lost, in the Archimedes Palimpsest .

These were from two new speeches, the Against Timander and Against Diondas , increasing the quantity of material known by this author by 20 percent.

[ 9 ] Tchernetska's discovery led to a publication on the subject in the Zeitschrift für Papyrologie und Epigraphik .

[ 10 ] This prompted the establishment of a working group under the auspices of the British Academy , which includes scholars from the UK, Hungary and the US.

[ 11 ] In 2006, the Archimedes Palimpsest project together with imagers at Stanford University used powerful X-ray fluorescence imaging to read the final pages of the Palimpsest, which contained the material by Hypereides.  These were interpreted, transcribed and translated by the working group.

In 2018 a passage of another speech of Hypereides ( Against the envoys of Antipater ) was discovered in a papyrus from Herculaneum .

[ 12 ] Lost speeches [ edit ] Jean-Léon Gérôme , Phryne before the Areopagus , 1861 Among the speeches not yet recovered is the Deliacus [ 13 ] in which the presidency of the Temple of the Delians claimed by both Athens and Cos, which was adjudged by the Amphictyonic League to Athens.

[ 5 ] Also missing is the speech in  which he defended the illustrious courtesan Phryne (said to have been his mistress) on a capital charge: according to Plutarch and Athenaeus the speech climaxed with Hypereides stripping off her clothing to reveal her naked breasts; in the face of which the judges found it impossible to condemn her.

[ 14 ] Portraits [ edit ] Portraits of Hypereides are known to have existed in antiquity: a papyrus fragment from Egypt records that the Athenians honored him with statues after their liberation from Demetrius of Phalerum in 307 BCE, and an inscribed base, once in the Villa Mattei in Rome but now lost, bore a statue of Hyperides signed by the artist Zeuxiades.

[ 15 ] No inscribed portrait of Hypereides survives, however, and no existing ancient portrait type can be securely identified with him.

[ 15 ] In 1913, Frederik Poulsen suggested that a double herm of the Roman period in the Musée Vivenel in Compiègne , which bears a portrait of a bearded man on one side and a portrait of a woman on the other, represented Hypereides and Phryne; [ 16 ] as a result, the male portrait type, which exists in at least half a dozen Roman versions, is now commonly referred to as Hypereides.

[ 15 ] The style of the portrait that lies behind these copies seems to fit the late 4th or early 3rd century BCE.

[ 17 ] Poulsen's argument has not been universally accepted, however, and critics have described it as "dubious" [ 18 ] and "speculative".

[ 19 ] Assessment [ edit ] William Noel, the curator of manuscripts and rare books at the Walters Art Museum in Baltimore, Maryland and the director of the Archimedes Palimpsest project, called Hypereides "one of the great foundational figures of Greek democracy and the golden age of Athenian democracy, the foundational democracy of all democracy." [ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Churchill Babington Phryne Notes [ edit ] ^ Mackey and Mackey, The Pronunciation of 10,000 Proper Names , New York, 1922, p.

138 (penult.); John Walker , Critical Pronouncing Dictionary , New York, 1828, p.

61 (antepenult.); John Hogg in The Gentleman's Magazine , 1857, p.

423 (considering both possibilities) ^ a b Worthington, Ian (2001).

Dinarchus, Hyperides & Lycurgus . Austin, Texas: University of Texas.

ISBN 0-292-79142-9 .

^ (frags. 55–65, Blass ) ^ (frags. 40–44, Blass) ^ a b c d e f g h Chisholm 1911 .

^ Worthington, Ian (2001).

Dinarchus, Hyperides, and Lycurgus . Texas: University of Texas Press, Austin. pp.

65– 66.

ISBN 0-292-79142-9 .

^ ( De sublimitate , 34 ) in the phrase-" Hypereides was the Sheridan of Athens " ^ Harris, Edward M. (2001).

Dinarchus, Hyperides, and Lycurgus . Austin, Texas: University of Texas Press.

ISBN 0-292-79142-9 .

^ a b Lee, Felicia R. (November 27, 2006).

"A Layered Look Reveals Ancient Greek Texts" .

New York Times .

^ Tchernetska, Natalie (2005). "New Fragments of Hypereides from the Archimedes Palimpsest".

ZPE .

154 : 1– 6.

JSTOR 20190979 .

^ Carey, C.; et al. (2008). "Fragments of Hyperides' Against Diondas from the Archimedes Palimpsest".

ZPE .

165 : 1– 19.

^ Fleischer, Kilian (2018). "Eine neue Hypereidesrede aus Herkulaneum: Gegen die Gesandten des Antipatros (PHerc. 1021, Kol. 11+12)".

ZPE .

207 : 21– 38.

^ (frags. 67–75, Blass) ^ (Athenaeus, Deipnosophistae , XIII.590 ) ^ a b c Richter, G. M. A.

(1965).

The Portraits of the Greeks . Vol. II. London: Phaidon. pp.

210– 211.

^ Poulsen, Frederik (1913). "Un portrait de l'orateur Hypéride".

Monuments et mémoires de la Fondation Eugène Piot .

21 (1): 47– 58.

doi : 10.3406/piot.1913.1780 .

^ Richter, G. M. A. (1984). Smith, R. R. R. (ed.).

The Portraits of the Greeks (abridged and revised ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

150– 151.

^ Lawrence, A. W. (1929).

Classical Sculpture . London: Jonathan Cape. p. 259.

^ Frischer, Bernard (2023).

The Sculpted Word: Epicureanism and Philosophical Recruitment in Ancient Greece . Berkeley: University of California Press. p. 269, note 225.

Bibliography [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Hypereides ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 14 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 200.

Editions Hyperidis orationes sex cum ceterarum fragmentis , Friedrich Blass (ed.), 2nd edition, Lipsiae, in aedibus B. G. Teubneri, 1881.

' Hyperidis orationes sex cum ceterarum fragmentis , Friedrich Blass (ed.), 3rd edition, Lipsiae, in aedibus B. G. Teubneri, 1894.

Whitehead, David (2000).

Hypereides: The Forensic Speeches . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-815218-3 .

Herrman, Judson (ed., trans. comm.).

Hyperides. Funeral oration . Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2009. xiv, 148 p. (American Philological Association.

American Classical Studies , 53).

Horváth, László (2015).

Der "Neue Hypereides". Textedition, Studien und Erläuterungen [The ‘New Hypereides’. Text edition, studies and explanations]. Texte und Kommentare, vol. 50. Berlin: De Gruyter, ISBN 9783110378627 .

Studies Engels, Johannes (1989).

Studien zur politischen Biographie des Hypereides. Athen in der Epoche der lykurgischen Reformen und des makedonischen Universalreiches [Studies on the political biography of Hypereides. Athens in the Era of the Lycurgical Reforms and the Macedonian Universal Empire]. Munich: tuduv, ISBN 3-88073-295-7 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Hypereides at Wikimedia Commons The Speeches of Hypereides - links to online translations Life of Hypereides - attributed to Plutarch v t e Attic orators Antiphon Andocides Lysias Isocrates Isaeus Aeschines Lycurgus Demosthenes Hypereides Dinarchus v t e Ancient Athenian politicians Aeschines Agyrrhius Alcibiades Andocides Archinus Aristides Aristogeiton Aristophon Autocles Callistratus Charmides Chremonides Cimon Cleisthenes Cleophon Cleon Critias Demades Demetrius of Phalerum Demochares Democles Demosthenes Draco Echedemos Ephialtes Eratosthenes Eubulus Hagnon Hyperbolus Hypereides Laches Lycurgus Lysicles Miltiades Moerocles Nicias Pericles Philinus Phocion Pisistratus Solon Themistocles Theramenes Thrasybulus Thucydides Timoleon Timotheus Xanthippus Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hypereides&oldid=1297695619 " Categories : 390s BC births 322 BC deaths Attic orators 4th-century BC Athenians People who died under the regency of Antipater Executed ancient Greek people Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Biography articles needing translation from Italian Wikipedia Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 27 June 2025, at 22:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hypereides 27 languages Add topic

