Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Nomenclature 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Origins (9th century CE) 2.2 Growth and flowering (900-1200 CE) 2.3 Decline (1200 CE - 20th century) 2.4 20th-century revival 3 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 3.1 Influences 3.2 Triads (trika) 3.3 One consciousness Being unfolds as the multiplicity of the world 3.4 Spanda 3.5 Pratyabhijna 3.6 Kali 3.7 Comparison with Advaita Vedanta 4 Practice Toggle Practice subsection 4.1 Prerequisites 4.2 Six laksyas 4.3 Yogas 4.3.1 The conquest of the tattvas 4.3.2 Yoga with six ancillaries ( ṣaḍaṅgayoga ) 4.3.3 Yogic suicide 4.4 Four upayas 5 Texts 6 Influence 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 Sources 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Kashmir Shaivism 18 languages বাংলা Bikol Central Deutsch Español Français हिन्दी Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ کٲشُر Lietuvių Magyar Polski Português Русский தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Nondualist Kashmiri Hindu tradition The trident ( triśūlābija maṇḍalam ) symbol and yantra of Parama Shiva, representing the triadic energies of the supreme goddess Parā , Parā-aparā and Aparā śakti.

Part of a series on Shaivism Deities Parameshvara (Supreme being) Shiva Sadasiva Bhairava Rudra Virabhadra Shakti Parvati Sati Durga Kali Ganesha Kartikeya Forms of Shiva Others Scriptures and texts Vedas Agama - Tantras Shivasutras Tirumurai Vachanas Svetasvatara Philosophy Three Components Pati Pashu Pasam Three bondages Anava Karma Maya other aspects 36 Tattvas Yoga Satkaryavada Abhasavada Svatantrya Aham Practices Vibhuti Rudraksha Panchakshara Bilva Maha Shivaratri Yamas - Niyamas Guru - Linga - Jangam Schools Ati marga Pashupata Kalamukha Kapalika Mantra marga Saiddhantika Siddhantism Non - Saiddhantika Kashmir Shaivism Pratyabhijna Vama Dakshina Kaula : Trika - Yamala - Kubjika - Netra Others Nath Inchegeri Veerashaivism / Lingayats Siddharism Sroutaism Aghori Indonesian Scholars Lakulisha Abhinavagupta Vasugupta Utpaladeva Nayanars Manikkavacakar Meykandar Nirartha Basava Sharana Srikantha Appayya Navnath Related Nandi Tantrism Bhakti Jyotirlinga Shiva Temples Hinduism portal v t e Part of a series on Shaktism History Deities Mahadevi (Supreme) Devi Shakti Parvati Durga Mahavidya Kali Lalita Matrikas Lakshmi Saraswati Scriptures and texts Vedas Tantras Yogini Shakta Upanishads Devi Sita Tripura Devi Bhagavatam Devi Mahatmyam Lalita Sahasranama Tripura Rahasya Kalika Purana other texts Saundarya Lahari Annada Mangal Ramprasadi Abirami Antati Schools Vidya margam Vamachara Dakshinachara Kula margam Srikulam Kalikulam Trika (Kashmir Shaivism) Kubjikamata Scholars Bharatchandra Ray Bhaskararaya Krishnananda Agamavagisha Ramprasad Sen Ramakrishna Abhirami Bhattar Practices Yoga Yoni Kundalini Panchamakara Tantra Yantra Festivals and temples Navaratri Durga Puja Lakshmi Puja Kali Puja Saraswati Puja Teej Shakta pithas Regional variations Caribbean Shaktism Hinduism portal v t e Part of a series on Advaita Schools Classical Advaita Vedanta Bhāmatī Vivarana Shaivism/Tantra/Nath Kashmir Shaivism ( Pratyabhijna ) Nath ( Inchegeri Sampradaya ) New movements Neo-Advaita Concepts Classical Advaita vedanta Atman Brahman Avidya Ajativada Mahāvākyas Satchitananda Om Tat Tvam Asi Three Bodies Aham Cause and effect Kosha Neti neti Kashmir Shaivism Pratyabhijna so'ham Practices Guru Meditation Svādhyāya Sravana, manana, nididhyasana Jnana yoga Rāja yoga "Unfoldment of the middle" Self-enquiry Moksha Moksha Anubhava Turiya Jivanmukta Sahaja Texts Advaita Vedanta Prasthanatrayi ( Principal Upanishads , Brahma Sutras , Bhagavad Gita ) Advaita Bodha Deepika Dŗg-Dŗśya-Viveka Vedantasara of Sadananda Panchadasi Ashtavakra Gita Gaudapada Mandukya Karika Adi Shankara Upadesasahasri Attributed to Shankara Vivekachudamani Atma bodha Aparokshanubhuti Advaita-Yoga Yoga Vasistha Yoga Yajnavalkya Nath Avadhuta Gita Kashmir Shaivism Shiva Sutras of Vasugupta Pratyabhijnahridayam Neo-Vedanta Works by Vivekananda Inchegeri Sampradaya Dasbodh Teachers Classical Advaita Vedanta Gaudapada Adi Shankara Mandana Misra Sureśvara Vāchaspati Misra Padmapadacharya Amalananda Vidyaranya Bharathi Tirtha Advaita teachers Contemporary Swami Vivekananda Swami Rama Tirtha Swami Sivananda Swami Chinmayananda Swami Dayananda Swami Sarvapriyananda Shaivism/Tantra/Nath Gorakshanath Matsyendranath Neo-Advaita Ramana Maharshi Nisargadatta Maharaj H. W. L. Poonja Vijnanabhiksu Influences Sramanic movement Hinduism Vedas Upanishads Mimamsa Nyaya Samkhya Yoga Vedanta Buddhism Precanonical Buddhism Madhyamika Yogacara Buddha-nature Monasteries and Orders Classical Advaita Vedanta Dashanami Sampradaya Gaudapadacharya Math Sringeri Sharada Peetham Govardhana Pīṭhaṃ Dvāraka Pīṭhaṃ Jyotirmaṭha Pīṭhaṃ Modern Advaita Vedanta Divine Life Society Chinmaya Mission Arsha Vidya Gurukulam Neo-Vedanta Ramakrishna Mission Scholarship Academic Paul Deussen Daniel H. H. Ingalls Richard De Smet Eliot Deutsch Sengaku Mayeda Max Müller Hajime Nakamura Patrick Olivelle Anantanand Rambachan Arvind Sharma Non-academic David Godman Categories Advaita Advaita Vedanta Vishishtadvaita Vedanta Advaita Shaivism Kashmir Shaivism Inchegeri Sampradaya Nondualism Neo-Advaita teachers Hindu philosophy v t e Kashmir Shaivism tradition is a 20th century umbrella-term for a body of Sanskrit exegetical literature [ a ] from several non-dualist Shaiva- Shakta tantric and monistic religious traditions, often used synonymously for the Trika -school or the "Philosophy of Recognition" ( Pratyabhijnad ).

[ 1 ] These traditions originated in Kashmir after 850 CE, as an adaptation to upper-class Hindu norms of 'wild' tantric Kaula traditions.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Trika Shaivism later spread beyond Kashmir, particularly flourishing in the states of Odisha and Maharashtra .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Defining features of the Trika tradition are its idealistic and monistic pratyabhijna ("direct knowledge of one's self," "recognition" [ 5 ] ) philosophical system, propounded by Utpaladeva (c. 925–975 CE) and Abhinavagupta (c. 975–1025 CE), and the use of several triades in its philosophy, including the three goddesses Parā , Parāparā, and Aparā.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] While Trika draws from numerous Shaiva texts, such as the Shaiva Agamas and the Shaiva and Shakta Tantras , its major scriptural authorities are the Mālinīvijayottara Tantra , the Siddhayogeśvarīmata and the Anāmaka-tantra.

[ 6 ] Its main exegetical works are those of Abhinavagupta , such as the Tantraloka , Mālinīślokavārttika , and Tantrasāra which are formally an exegesis of the Mālinīvijayottara Tantra , although they also drew heavily on the Kali -based Krama subcategory of the Kulamārga .

[ 7 ] Another important text of this tradition is the Vijñāna-bhairava-tantra , which focuses on outlining numerous yogic practices.

[ 8 ] Kashmir Shaivism shares many parallel points of agreement with the lesser-known monistic school of Shaiva Siddhanta as expressed in the Tirumantiram of Tirumular .

[ 9 ] It also shares this branch's disagreements with the dualistic Shaiva Siddhanta school of Meykandar , which scholars consider to be normative tantric Shaivism.

[ 10 ] The doctrines of Kashmir Shaivism were very influential on the Shri Vidya tradition of Shaktism.

[ 11 ] Nomenclature [ edit ] Kashmir Shaivism is an umbrella-term for several non-dualist Shaiva- Shakta tantric religious traditions that flourished in Kashmir after 850 CE.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Trika Shaivism is one of these traditions, named after the use of several triades in its philosophy. Other schools of Shaivism that existed in Kashmir are Kula, Krama, the Pratyabhijnad philosophy, and the "Doctrine of Vibration" ( spanda ).

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] c.

8th century CE Shaivite Temple complex at Wangath in the Himalayas of Kashmir Origins (9th century CE) [ edit ] Kashmir Shaivism originated in Kashmir after 850 CE, as a domestication of Kaula tantric movements, adapting its views and practices to normative upper-caste Hinduism.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] As Lawrence notes, " Radical practices were toned down, concealed under the guise of propriety, or interpreted as metaphors of internal contemplations." [ 2 ] One result of this domestication-process was the composition, by monistic Saivite Brahmins, of "increasingly systematic manuals of doctrines and practices on the model of Sanskrit scholastic texts ( shāstras ).

[ 2 ] This textual development began with the Shiva Sutras of Vasugupta (9th cent. CE) and the Spandakārikā (9th cent. CE), which are the central texts of the Spanda system , interpreting Shakti as spanda , "cosmic pulsation," the active and creative energy of Shiva.

[ 2 ] The Shiva Sutras appeared to Vasugupta in a dream, according to tradition. The Spandakārikā was either composed by Vasugupta (c. 800-850 CE) or his student Bhatta Kallata (9th cent. CE).

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] These were a Śākta Śaiva attempt to present a non-dualistic metaphysics and gnostic soteriology , in opposition to the dualistic exegesis of the Meykandar school of Shaiva Siddhanta , [ 14 ] while remaining in agreement with the monistic view expressed in the older and arguably more authoritative Tirumantiram of Tirumular .

[ 9 ] Shiva and Parvati (which is associated with Shakti ), Kashmir, 10 or 11th century.

Growth and flowering (900-1200 CE) [ edit ] The main theologians of Trika Shaivism are those of the Pratyabhijñā (Recognition) school of Shaiva non-dual philosophy.

Somānanda (875-925) wrote the Śivadr̥ṣṭi , [ 15 ] "the first work of full-fledged scholastic philosophy" of the Trika school.

[ 2 ] Utpaladeva (c. 900–950 CE) and Abhinavagupta (c. 950–1016, a student of one of Utpaladeva's disciples) developed the Pratyabhijñā-system into its mature form.

[ 15 ] Utpaladeva's Īśvarapratyabhijñā-kārikā (Verses on the Recognition of the Lord) is one of the main works of this tradition, but was overshadowed by the work of Abhinavagupta. Thus, according to Torella,  "Abhinavagupta's Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vimarśinī and the Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti-Vimarśinī (a commentary on Utpaladeva’s Vivr̥ti on his own Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Kārikā and Vr̥tti) are generally considered the standard works of the Pratyabhijñā." [ 15 ] Torella notes however, that "most of Abhinavagupta’s ideas are just the development of what Utpaladeva had already expounded." [ 16 ] Abhinavagupta's tantric synthesis was the most influential form of the tantric "Kashmir Shaivism". It brought together elements from the following sampradayas (lineages): the Trika, Pratyabhijñā, the Kaula Krama, and Shaiva Siddhantha.

[ 17 ] Abhinavagupta wrote numerous other works on Shaiva tantra. His Tantrāloka , Mālinīślokavārttika , and Tantrasāra are mainly based on the Mālinīvijayottara Tantra , although they also drew heavily on the Kali -based Krama tradition of the Kulamārga .

[ 7 ] Abhinavagupta's Tantrāloka is probably his most important work.

[ 2 ] According to Christopher Wallis, "the Tantrāloka is a monumental explication of Tantrik practice and philosophy in over 5,800 verses. It is encyclopedic in its scope though not organized like an encyclopedia, for instead of just enumerating theories and practices, it brings them all into a coherent framework in which everything has its place and everything makes sense in relation to the whole." [ 17 ] [ 18 ] One of Abhinavagupta's students, Kshemaraja , is also an important figure who authored the short Pratyabhijñāhṛdayam ( The Essence of Self-Recognition ).

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Jayaratha (1150–1200 CE) wrote a commentary on the Tantrāloka .

[ 7 ] Decline (1200 CE - 20th century) [ edit ] After 1200 CE, the institutional basis and support for the Shaiva and Buddhist Tantric tradition mostly disappeared with Islamic conquests of the region leading to the slow decline and contraction of the tradition, though especially the Kaula-influenced lineages continued to be passed down and practiced by wandering ascetics well into the 18th century, due to their non-institutionalized structure.

[ 21 ] The number of major writers and publications declined after approximately the 14th century, although writers such as Rājānaka Ānanda Kavi, Anantaśaktipāda, Śivopādhyāya, Bhāskarakaṇṭha, Rājānaka Lakṣmīrāma, and Harabhaṭṭa Śāstri continued to produce important commentaries on core Kashmiri Shaiva texts into the early 20th century.

[ 22 ] Painting of a priest and worshippers at a Shiva temple in Srinagar , Kashmir, circa 1850–1860 20th-century revival [ edit ] In the 20th century Swami Lakshman Joo , a Kashmiri Hindu , helped revive both the scholarly and yogic streams of Kashmir Shaivism.

[ 23 ] His contribution is enormous. He inspired a generation of scholars who made Kashmir Shaivism a legitimate field of inquiry within the academy.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Acharya Rameshwar Jha , a disciple of Lakshman Joo, is often credited with establishing the roots of Kashmir Shaivism in the learned community of Varanasi . Rameshwar Jha with his creativity, familiarity with the ancient texts and personal experiences provided access to concepts of non-dualistic Kashmir Shaivism. His writings of Sanskrit verses have been published as the books Purnta Pratyabhijna [ 26 ] and Samit Swatantram .

[ 26 ] Lilian Silburn (1908–1993) was a French Indologist specialising in Kashmir Shaivism, Tantra and Buddhism . Working together with Louis Renou , she translated from Sanskrit and published the core scriptures of Kashmir Shaivism, including Shiva Sutras of Vasugupta , Vijnana Bhairava Tantra , and others, many being first-ever translations of the recently discovered texts. Silburn, a student of Lakshman Joo , authored Kundalini: The Energy of the Depths, A Comprehensive Study Based on the Scriptures of Nondualistic Kasmir Saivism (Shaiva Traditions of Kashmir, State University of New York Press, 1988).

Swami Muktananda , although not belonging to the direct lineage of Kashmir Shaivism, felt an affinity for the teachings, validated by his own direct experience.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] He encouraged Motilal Banarsidass to publish Jaideva Singh 's translations of Shiva Sutras , Pratyabhijnahrdayam , Spanda Karikas and Vijnana Bhairava , all of which Singh studied in-depth with Lakshman Joo.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] He also introduced Kashmir Shaivism to a wide audience of western meditators through his writings and lectures on the subject.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] The Vijnana Bhairava Tantra , a chapter from the Rudrayamala Tantra , was introduced to the West by Paul Reps , a student of Lakshman Joo, by including an English translation in his book Zen Flesh, Zen Bones . Cast as a discourse between the god Shiva and his consort Devi or Shakti , it presents 112 meditation methods or centering techniques ( dharana s).

[ 33 ] The four key Trika mandalas from Abhinavagupta’s Tantrāloka, previously considered indecipherable, were translated, decoded and illustrated by Christian de Vietri in his 2024 book titled Trika Maṇḍala Prakāśa .

[ 34 ] Philosophy [ edit ] A painting of goddess Kali from Jammu and Kashmir , c. 1660-70, from a Tantric Devi series attributed to Kripal of Nurpur (active c. 1660 - c. 1690).

Philadelphia Museum of Art Influences [ edit ] Trika Shaivism is a nondual idealistic and monistic theism , [ 2 ] [ 1 ] influenced by the works of the Saiva monist Vasugupta (c. 800–850 CE), and numerous Śaiva scriptures such as the Agamas , the Śaiva - Śakta Tantras and Kaula scriptures. The Trika philosophical system of Pratyabhijñā is presented in the works of Somānanda (c. 900–950 CE), Utpaladeva (c. 925–975 CE), Abhinavagupta (c. 975–1025 CE) and his disciple Kṣemarāja (c. 1000–1050).

[ 2 ] According to Christopher Wallis, the philosophy of Trika Shaivism also adopted much of the ontological apparatus of Sāṅkhya school, such as its system of 25 tattvas, expanding and reinterpreting it for its own system of 36 tattvas.

[ 35 ] Another important source for Trika is the monistic theism of Tirumular 's Shaiva Siddhanta . The Saivas also were influenced by the work of Buddhist Vijñānavāda and Pramanavada philosophers, especially Dharmakirti , who was also taken as a primary non-Saiva opponent and whose doctrines were sometimes absorbed into the Pratyabhijñā system.

[ 36 ] Triads (trika) [ edit ] Sri Yantra diagram with the Ten Mahavidyas . The triangles represent Shiva and Shakti , the snake represents Spanda and Kundalini .

An important element of Trika Shaivism's theology is the use of several triads (symbolized by the trident) in its description of Absolute and phenomenal reality, hence the name trika . There are several triads described in Trika-works of thinkers like Abhinavagupta including, Three realities: Śiva, the Supreme Transcendent), Śakti, the creative force, immanent in creation, the link between the macrocosm and the microcosm, and Aṇu , the limited atom or individual, a complete image of the ultimate, the microcosm of the macrocosm.

[ 37 ] In Kashmiri Shaivism, the Goddess Shakti is incorporated in Shiva, the shaktiman ("possessor") of the creative force of Shakti. The human identity with Shiva is realized through Shakti, "by assuming his mythic agency in emanating and controlling the universe through Shakti." [ 2 ] Three powers: Icchā (will), Jñāna (knowledge), and Kriyā (action). Any action of any being, including God, is subject to these three fundamental energies. Iccha or Will is in the beginning of any action or process. Jnana by which the action is clearly expressed first in mind, before it is put into action. Then comes Kriyā, the energy of the action.

Three entities: pati ( Śiva ), pāśa (bondage), paśu ( soul ) Shakti Triad or Three Goddesses: Parā (transcendence), Parāparā (transcendence and immanence) and Aparā śakti (immanence) Three aspects of knowledge: Pramatri (the subject), Pramana (the modalities of knowledge) and Prameya - the known object Three states of consciousness: jāgrat (waking), svapna (dreaming) and suṣupti (dreamless sleep) Three-fold spiritual path: Śāmbhavopāya , Śāktopāya and Āṇavopāya The transcendental triad: prakāśa (luminosity), vimarśa (dynamics), sāmarasya (homogeneous bliss) The three impurities: āṇavamala, māyā, karma One consciousness Being unfolds as the multiplicity of the world [ edit ] The basic theology of Trika's Recognition school, as summarised by Utpaladeva in Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Kārikā (Verses on the Recognition of the Lord), is as follows: There is only one Great Divinity, and it is the very inner Self of all creatures. It embodies itself as all things, full of unbroken awareness of three kinds: “I”, “this”, and “I am this.” [ 38 ] The school's theology is expressed by Kshemaraja in his Pratyabhijñā-hṛdayam ( The Heart of Recognition ) as follows: Awareness, free and independent, is the cause of the performance of everything. She unfolds the universe through Her own will and on Her own canvas. It becomes diverse by its division into mutually adapting subjects and objects. The individual conscious being, as a condensation of universal Awareness, embodies the entire universe in a microcosmic form.

[ 38 ] Spanda [ edit ] Trika theology regards consciousness as active and dynamic, described as the spontaneous vibration or pulsation ( spanda ) of universal consciousness, which is an expression of its freedom ( svātāntrya ) and power ( Śakti ).

[ 39 ] Because of this, though this philosophy is idealist , it affirms the reality of the world and everyday life, as a real transformation ( parinama ), manifestation or appearance ( ābhāsa ) of the absolute consciousness.

[ 40 ] The Absolute is also explained through the metaphor of light ( prakasha ) and reflective awareness ( vimarsha ).

[ 41 ] Pratyabhijna [ edit ] Central to Trika Shaivism is Pratyabhijñā , "recognition." Etymologically, pratyabhijñā is formed from prati- ("re-") + abhi- ("closely") + * jñā ("to know"), so the meaning is "direct knowledge of one's self," "recognition." [ 5 ] The central thesis of this philosophy is that everything is a manifestation or unfolding of absolute consciousness, termed Śiva , and it is possible to "re-cognise" this fundamental reality and be freed from limitations, identified with Śiva and immersed in bliss.

[ 42 ] Thus, the slave ( paśu : the human condition) shakes off the fetters ( pāśa ) and becomes the master ( pati : the divine condition).

[ 43 ] Pratyabhijna, the 'philosophy of recognition', as outlined by thinkers like Utpaladeva, teaches that though the identity of all souls is one with God ( Isvara ) or Shiva (which is the single reality, Being and absolute consciousness), they have forgotten this due to Maya or ignorance. However, through knowledge one can recognize one's authentic divine nature and become a liberated being.

[ 44 ] The modern scholar-practitioner of Shaiva Tantra, Christopher Wallis outlines the metaphysics and theology of non-dual Shaiva Tantra thus: All that exists, throughout all time and beyond, is one infinite divine Consciousness, free and blissful, which projects within the field of its awareness a vast multiplicity of apparently differentiated subjects and objects: each object an actualization of a timeless potentiality inherent in the Light of Consciousness, and each subject the same plus a contracted locus of self-awareness. This creation, a divine play, is the result of the natural impulse within Consciousness to express the totality of its self-knowledge in action, an impulse arising from love. The unbounded Light of Consciousness contracts into finite embodied loci of awareness out of its own free will. When those finite subjects then identify with the limited and circumscribed cognitions and circumstances that make up this phase of their existence, instead of identifying with the transindividual overarching pulsation of pure Awareness that is their true nature, they experience what they call “suffering.” To rectify this, some feel an inner urge to take up the path of spiritual gnosis and yogic practice, the purpose of which is to undermine their misidentification and directly reveal within the immediacy of awareness the fact that the divine powers of Consciousness, Bliss, Willing, Knowing, and Acting comprise the totality of individual experience as well—thereby triggering a recognition that one’s real identity is that of the highest Divinity, the Whole in every part. This experiential gnosis is repeated and reinforced through various means until it becomes the nonconceptual ground of every moment of experience, and one’s contracted sense of self and separation from the Whole is finally annihilated in the incandescent radiance of the complete expansion into perfect wholeness. Then one’s perception fully encompasses the reality of a universe dancing ecstatically in the animation of its completely perfect divinity.

[ 45 ] This single supreme reality is also sometimes referred to as Aham (the heart). It is considered to be a non-dual interior space of Śiva, support for the entire manifestation, [ 46 ] supreme mantra [ 47 ] and identical to Śakti.

[ 48 ] Kali [ edit ] Kali , ca. 9th century, from Andhra Pradesh . The Trika synthesis of Abhinavagupta also adopted the doctrines of the Krama school of Shakta Tantra, whose main goddess was Kali.

[ 3 ] In Kashmir Shivaism the highest form of Kali is Kalasankarshini who is nirguna, formless and is often show as a flame above the head of Guhya Kali the highest gross form of Kali. In Nepali Newar arts, both form and formless attributes of Kali is often envisioned in a single art form showing the hierarchy of goddesses in their tradition. In it Guhyakali image culminates in flame, with Kalasankarshini, the highest deity in the sequence, who consumes time within herself and is envisioned solely as a flame representing Para Brahman .

[ 49 ] Comparison with Advaita Vedanta [ edit ] Kashmir Shaivism and Advaita Vedanta are both non-dual philosophies that recognize Universal Consciousness ( Chit or Brahman ), but have different views on the relation between this highest Reality and the phenomenal world.

[ 50 ] In Advaita Vedanta, only this consciousness (Brahman) is ultimately Real, whereas the phenomenal world is considered to be Maya , illusion, creating a fundamental ontological problem. In Kashmir Shaivism, all things are a manifestation of this Consciousness, [ 51 ] and the phenomenal world ( Śakti ) is real, existing and having its being in Consciousness ( Chit ).

[ 52 ] Jaideva Singh lists seven key differences between Advaita and Kashmir Shaivism, [ 53 ] where in Kashmir Shaivism, the absolute is active, rather than passive, the world is a real appearance, rather than false (mithyā), grace (anugraha) has a soteriological role, the ātman is present in the human body in dynamic form (spaṇda), rather than as a pure witness (sākṣī), the methods include all four upāyas, rather than solely emphasize Śāmbhavopāya, ignorance (avidyā) is uprooted at both intellectual (bauddha) and personal (paurusha) levels, rather than just the intellectual level, and liberation (muktī) is not an isolation from the world (kaivalya) but an integration into world which appears as Shiva.

Practice [ edit ] Prerequisites [ edit ] Tantric initiation ( dīkṣa ) is necessary for undertaking the tantric practices of Trika Saivism.

Since it is a Tantric tradition, a necessary prerequisite for Trika yogic practice is tantric initiation or dīkṣa . The Mālinīvijayottara Tantra, a major source for the tradition, states: "Without initiation there is no qualification for Saiva yoga." [ 54 ] Although domesticated into a householder tradition, Kashmir Shaivism recommended a secret performance of Kaula practices in keeping with its tantric heritage. This was to be done in seclusion from public eyes, therefore allowing one to maintain the appearance of a typical householder.

[ 55 ] The Mālinīvijayottara Tantra outlines several major preconditions conferring the authority to practice Yoga : The Yogin who has mastered posture [and] the mind, controlled the vital energy, subdued the senses, conquered sleep, overcome anger and agitation and who is free from deceit, should practise Yoga in a quiet, pleasant cave or earthen hut free from all obstructions.

[ 56 ] Six laksyas [ edit ] Schist statue of Shiva Mahadeva, Northern India, Kashmir , 8th century.

Cleveland Museum of Art .

Numerous texts, including the Mālinīvijayottara Tantra, outline six "varieties of the goal" or "targets" (laksyas) of yogic practices, mainly: [ 57 ] Contemplation of void ( vyoman ), which bestows all Perfections and liberation.

Contemplation of body ( vigraha ), which bestows the coercion of deities like Visnu or Rudra Contemplation of drop ( bindu ), which bestows sovereignty over Yogins Contemplation of phoneme ( varna ), which bestows the Perfection of mantra Contemplation of world ( bhuvana ), which bestows regency of a world Contemplation of resonance ( dhvani ), which leads to isolation and liberation.

Each of the goals is given specific practices. For example, in the Mālinīvijayottara Tantra, perfecting the Void is said to be reached by moving the mind and vital energy (through the use of mantric resonance) through two groups of three voids located along the central channel (which are also correlated with a system of six cakras ), reaching to the region above the head. Different scriptures outline different lists of voids and their location in the body.

[ 58 ] The practice of resonance deals with various sounds, and how the yogin is to focus on a specific sound and its resonance within the central channel.

[ 59 ] Regarding mantra, different Saiva tantras and texts teach different mantras and bija (seed) mantras. These mantras are generally intoned ( uccara ) at different positions in the body along the central channel (such as at the heart, throat, forehead, etc). The Diksottara tantra for example, teaches the intonation of the ' haṃsá ' mantra, beginning in the heart region.

[ 60 ] Some texts teach "a lineal ascent through the heart, the throat, the palate, and the forehead, culminating with the transcendence of sonic experience as the 'Limit of Resonance' [ nadanta ] in the cranium is pierced." Other texts have the mantric energy follow the breath through the nose outside the body.

[ 61 ] Yogas [ edit ] Since Trika Saivism is a synthesis of various traditions, its texts, such as the Mālinīvijayottara Tantra, distinguish four different types of Saiva yoga. According to Somadev Vasudeva: Two of these have been assimilated from the Tantras of the Siddhanta which has two schools, one monist and the other dualist [ 62 ] [ 63 ] [1.] the conquest of the reality-levels ( tattvajaya ), which has been transformed into a radically new type of yoga based on the fifteen levels of the apperceptive process, and, [2.] the yoga of six ancillaries ( ṣaḍaṅgayoga ), which is taken over with only minor variations. The third is [3.] Kaula yoga with its system of four immersions (pindastha, padastha, rupastha and rupatita) and as a fourth may be counted [4.] the three types of possession (avesa) taught in the Trika (anava, sakta and sambhava) which are innovatively presented as three meta-categories under which all yogic exercises can be subsumed.

[ 64 ] The conquest of the tattvas [ edit ] In Trika texts as well as those of other Saiva schools, it is common to formulate the process of yogic conquest of the realities (tattvas) as a series of Dhāraṇās. Dhāraṇās ("introspections") are "complex sequences of meditative practices" which focus on a series of contemplations on a "hierarchy of apperceptive states designed to bring him ever closer to the level of the highest perceiver, Shiva". This hierarchy of meditations and visualizations is based on the Shaiva schema of the 36 tattvas .

[ 65 ] According to Somadev Vasudeva, the procedure can be described thus: The Yogin starts by disengaging the mind from external stimuli and then fixes it upon a tattva [such as earth, water, etc] with ever deepening absorption. He attains an internalised vision of the reality, and compares it with his authoritative, scriptural knowledge of the highest level. By means of tarka [reasoning], an ontological value judgement, he discerns that it is different from Siva and thus transcends it. The Yogin’s ascension inevitably brings him to the reality which is Siva at the zenith of all paths.

[ 66 ] One example of the meditation on the tattva of buddhi (intellect) from the Mālinīvijayottara Tantra is as follows: Contemplating in the heart a lotus with colour of the rising sun, with eight petals containing the [eight bhavas] of dharma etc., and a pericarp, [the Yogin’s] intellect becomes steady within a month. Within six he becomes a knower of the Sruti (scripture). Within three years he himself becomes an author of scriptures. Contemplating his own [physical] form there (in the heart), he perceives the principle of intellect.

[ 67 ] Yoga with six ancillaries ( ṣaḍaṅgayoga ) [ edit ] Trika yoga generally uses a system of six "limbs" or ancillaries ( aṅgas ) which are seen as subsidiary to the principle conquest of the tattvas. This system was adopted from the Saiva Siddhanta as well as in Pāñcarātra scriptures such as the Jayakhyasamhita . According to Somadeva Vasudeva, in Trika, ṣaḍaṅgayoga "is to be understood as a collection of helpful or even indispensable yogic techniques which enable the prospective Yogin to achieve the required “coalescence” or “identification” ( tanmayata , lit. the “consisting-of-that-ness”) with the object of contemplation." [ 68 ] These six subsidiaries as outlined by the Mālinīvijayottara Tantra, are: [ 69 ] Prānāyāma , control of the "breath" or "vital energy" ( prana ), includes various forms of inhalation, exhalation, kumbhakah , as well as proper posture ( asana ), defined as either lotus or some other seated posture. The practice of udgatha (eruption) is also taught, which is a "process whereby the retained air is propelled or launched upwards from the navel-region so that it strikes the head." [ 70 ] Dhāranā (fixations or concentrations). Four are taught: Fire, Water, Sovereign (defined as bindu and nada) and Nectar (fixating upon a lunar disc above the cranium which drops divine nectar into the central channel, filling the body).

[ 71 ] Tarka (judgment or reasoning), defined as "the ascertainment of what is to be cultivated and what is to be rejected." Dhyāna (meditation), defined as "attentive contemplation on Siva" or "a focused stream of awareness directed towards the judged and thus accepted reality".

Samādhi , a deep absorption that arises from prolonged (the text states 48 minutes) and "firmly established" meditation, in which the yogin "becomes as though non-existent. He reaches a state where he becomes as though dead, from which even intense sounds and other such [sense data] cannot rouse him." [ 72 ] Pratyāhāra , complete withdrawal of the mind In the Mālinīvijayottara Tantra (chapter 17) , these are seen as six progressive steps leading to complete identification with the object of meditation.

[ 68 ] It is important to note that different Saiva tantras outline different forms of the six ancillaries, and "there is no consensus as to their order, their definition or even their subdivisions" among the different tantras.

[ 73 ] Yogic suicide [ edit ] The practice of utkrānti , also called "yogic suicide", is also taught in nondual Saiva Tantras like the Mālinīvijayottara Tantra, which uses the vital energy rising through the central channel to end one's life and proceed to union with Siva.

[ 74 ] The text says that this abandonment of the body can be done at the end of one's life, after one has mastered all that one has set out to achieve.

[ 75 ] Four upayas [ edit ] To attain moksha , sādhana or spiritual practice is necessary. Trika texts describes four major methods ( upāya -s) to reach total immersion (samāveśa) into the divine: [ 76 ] [ 77 ] āṇavopāya , the embodied method or individual method, which emphasizes various techniques which make use of the body, breath, centers of the subtle body ( chakras ) and the imagination and focuses on the power of action (kriyā-śakti). This method includes most of the usual methods of classical yoga: meditation ( dhyāna ), prāṇāyāma , visualization, mantras, meditation with seed syllables (varṇa-uccāra), activation of the subtle centers, yogic postures (karaṇa), and meditative ritual performance (pūjā).

[ 78 ] In the Tantrasāra, Abhinavagupta defines this method as "that which is applied in the spheres of imagination, prāṇa, the body, and external things. There is absolutely no difference among these methods in that the practice of any of them may yield the supreme fruit." [ 78 ] śāktopāya , the empowered method, or the method of the power of consciousness. Wallis writes that this method "focuses on shedding mental constructs that are not in alignment with reality (aśuddha-vikalpas) and the cultivation of wisdom, that is, modes of understanding that are in alignment with reality (śuddha-vikalpas)." [ 79 ] This method mainly works with the power of knowing (jñāna-śakti) and emphasizes the use of the power of cognition to purify and refine our mental constructs (vikalpas) and the energy of our thoughts and emotions so as to bring them into full alignment with the truth.

[ 79 ] śāmbhavopāya , the method of consciousness. This method is a way of grace which works with the pure will (icchā-śakti) of consciousness. It is a non-conceptual (nirvikalpa) method, which may work with everyday experiences, bija mantras or certain simple techniques to access the divine, such as gazing at the sky, becoming absorbed in a powerful emotion or the practice of "catching hold of the first moment of perception." [ 80 ] Wallis defines it as an "immediate intuitive apprehension of the total flow of reality as it is, free of thought-constructs, dawning within awareness already whole and complete (pūrṇa), even if momentary." [ 80 ] anupāya the ‘methodless’ method. Wallis explains this as a very rare case in which "a śaktipāta awakening so intense that one single teaching from a true guru is enough to stabilize that awakening permanently." [ 77 ] Texts [ edit ] According to Mark S. G. Dyczkowski , Kashmiri Trika Shaivism looks to three scriptures "as its primary authorities", the Mālinīvijayottara Tantra , the Siddhayogeśvarīmata and the Anāmaka-tantra.

[ 6 ] As a monistic tantric system, Trika Shaivism, as it is also known, draws teachings from shrutis , such as the monistic Bhairava Tantras , Shiva Sutras of Vasugupta , and also a unique version of the Bhagavad Gītā which has a commentary by Abhinavagupta , known as the Gitartha Samgraha . Teachings are also drawn from the Tantrāloka of Abhinavagupta, prominent among a vast body of smritis employed by Kashmir Shaivism.

In general, the whole written tradition of Shaivism can be divided in three fundamental parts: Āgama Śāstra , Spanda Śāstra and Pratyabhijñā Śāstra .

[ 81 ] 1.

Āgama Śāstra are those writings that are considered as being a direct revelation from Siva. These writings were first communicated orally, from the master to the worthy disciple. They include essential works such as Mālinīvijaya Tantra , Svacchanda Tantra , Vijñāna Bhairava Tantra , Netra Tantra , Mṛgendra Tantra , Rudrayāmala Tantra , Śivasūtra and others. There are also numerous commentaries to these works, Śivasūtra having most of them.

[ 82 ] 2.

Spanda Śāstra , the main work of which is Spanda Kārikā of Bhatta Kallata , a disciple of Vasugupta , with its many commentaries. Out of them, two are of major importance: Spanda Sandoha (this commentary talks only about the first verses of Spanda Kārikā ), and Spanda Nirṇaya (which is a commentary of the complete text).

[ 82 ] 3.

Pratyabhijñā Śāstra are those writings which have mainly a metaphysical content. Due to their extremely high spiritual and intellectual level, this part of the written tradition of Shaivism is the least accessible for the uninitiated. Nevertheless, this corpus of writings refers to the simplest and most direct modality of spiritual realization.

Pratyabhijñā means "recognition" and refers to the spontaneous recognition of the divine nature hidden in each human being ( atman ). The most important works in this category are: Īśvara Pratyabhijñā , the fundamental work of Utpaladeva , and Pratyabhijñā Vimarśinī , a commentary to Īśvara Pratyabhijñā .

Īśvara Pratyabhijñā means in fact the direct recognition of the Lord ( Īśvara ) as identical to one's Heart. Before Utpaladeva , his master Somānanda wrote Śiva Dṛṣṭi ( The Vision of Siva ), a devotional poem written on multiple levels of meaning.

[ 83 ] Influence [ edit ] The Trika Shaiva tradition was widely influential on other Indian religious traditions, particularly the Haṭha-yoga traditions, such as the Nāth school of Gorakṣa and the Dasanāmī Sannyāsins, which draw much of their yogic practice and ideas of the subtle body from Trika scriptures.

[ 21 ] Trika Shaivism also strongly influenced Shakta traditions.

Śrīvidyā , which likely originated in Kashmir, relied heavily on Trika philosophy in its seminal explanatory texts like the Yoginīhṛdaya and received commentaries by Trika masters like Jayaratha, and became an influential tradition on mainstream Hinduism, flourishing with institutional support in South India .

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] Another tantric tradition influenced by Trika was the post-classical Kalikula (family of Kali ) form of Shaktism which is influential in northeastern Indian regions, such as in Bengal, Orissa, and Nepāl.

[ 21 ] See also [ edit ] Shri Vidya Lalleshwari Swami Lakshman Joo Bhagwan Gopinath Notes [ edit ] ^ Wallis (2013) : "... the second phase, the exegetical writings of the Śaiva Tantrik masters from Kashmīr. It is this body of literature that has been called “Kashmīr Shaivism” since the early 20th century and taught in the West under that name but entirely disassociated from the full context of Śaiva Tantra and its scriptures References [ edit ] ^ a b c Dyczkowski 1989 , p. 17.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Lawrence .

^ a b c d e f Wallis 2013 .

^ Olson 2007 , p. 237.

^ a b Singh 1982 , p. 117.

^ a b Dyczkowski 1989 , p. 12.

^ a b c Sanderson 2014 .

^ Muller-Ortega 1989 , p. 42-43.

^ a b Ganapathy 2004 , p. 464.

^ Flood 2006 , p. 61.

^ Flood 1996 , p. 188.

^ Parmeshwaranand 2004 .

^ Dyczkowski 1989 , p. 21.

^ Sanderson 2009 , p. 31-32.

^ a b c Torella 2021 , p. 1-3.

^ Torella 2021 , p. 4.

^ a b Wallis 2013 , p. 292-306.

^ Mason, Christine Marie.

"Episode #146 Near Enemies of the Truth: The Spiritual Bypassing Platitudes with Gold at the Center" .

The Rose Woman Podcast . Retrieved 10 August 2025 .

^ Flood 1996 , p. 164-167.

^ Flood 2006 , p. 66.

^ a b c Wallis 2013 , pp. 308–319.

^ Potter, Karl H., ed. (2019).

Kashmir Śaiva philosophy . Encyclopedia of Indian philosophies / general editor: Karl H. Potter. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers.

ISBN 978-81-208-4220-5 .

^ Kashmir Shaivism, The Secret Supreme, Revealed by Swami Lakshmanjoo ^ "Foreword", Lance E. Nelson in Self Realization in Kashmir Shaivism, John Hughes, pp.xxii-iv ^ Consciousness is Everything, The Yoga of Kashmir Shaivism, Swami Shankarananda pp. 47-8 ^ a b Pratyabhijna Press Varanasi, Publishers Arun Krishna Joshi, Vijay Krishna Joshi, Nichi bag Varanasi ^ Lal Ded: The great Kashmiri Saint-poetess, Proceedings of the National Seminar Conducted by Kashmir Education, Culture and Science Society. p12 ^ Play of Consciousness – A Spiritual Autobiography, Swami Muktananda, p117 ^ Swami Durgananda,‘To See the World Full of Saints’ in Meditation Revolution, Brooks, Durgananda et al, pp96-97 ^ Siva Sutras – The Yoga of Supreme Identity, Jaideva Singh p iv ^ Swami Durgananda, ‘To See the World Full of Saints’ in Meditation Revolution, Brooks, Durgananda et al, pp.96-97 ^ Secret of the Siddhas, Swami Muktananda, Chapters 9-37 ^ Paul Reps, Zen Flesh, Zen Bones, A Collection of Zen and Pre-Zen Writings ( ISBN 0-8048-0644-6 ) ^ de Vietri, Christian (9 October 2024).

Trika Maṇḍala Prakāśa: Illuminating the mandalas of Abhinavagupta's Tantrāloka (in English and Sanskrit). Perth, Australia: The Magnetic Citadel Press.

ISBN 978-1763555310 .

^ Wallis, Christopher D.

The Philosophy of the Śaiva Religion in Context, Field Statement for Dr. Robert Goldman ^ Torella, Raffaele. 1992. "The Pratyabhijñā and the Logical-Epistemological School of Buddhism" in Ritual and Speculation in Early Tantrism: Studies in Honor of Andre Padoux.

Albany: SUNY Press.

^ The Trika Śaivism of Kashmir, Moti Lal Pandit, pag. 13 ^ a b Wallis, Christopher (2013).

Tantra Illuminated , pp. 283-292.

^ Dyczkowski 1989 , p. 24.

^ Dyczkowski 1989 , p. 25.

^ Dyczkowski 1989 , p. 26.

^ The Yoga of Kashmir Shaivism – S.Shankarananda, p. 45 ^ Kapoor , p. 254.

^ Dyczkowski 1989 , p. 17-18.

^ Wallis, Christopher (2013).

Tantra Illuminated , chapter I, 1. The Philosophy of Nondual Śaiva Tantra.

^ Parā-trīśikā Vivaraṇa , Jaideva Singh , page 194 ^ Parā-trīśikā Vivaraṇa , Jaideva Singh, page 180 ^ Parā-trīśikā Vivaraṇa , Jaideva Singh, page 127 ^ Time and Space In Tantric arts, Sthaneshwar Timalsina ^ Jaideva Singh (2008), Pratyãbhijñahṛdayam: The Secret of Self-Recognition , Moltilal Banarsidass, 2008 p.24-26 ^ Dyczkowski 1989 , p. 44.

^ Ksemaraja, trans. by Jaidev Singh, Spanda Karikas: The Divine Creative Pulsation, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, p.119 ^ Singh, Jaideva (1985).

Vedanta and Advaita Shaivagama Of Kashmir: A Comparative Study .

Ramakrishna Mission Institute of Culture . pp.

44– 51.

ISBN 9788187332930 .

^ Vasudeva Somadeva 2004 , p. 244.

^ Flood, Gavin. 2006. The Tantric Body. P.14 ^ Vasudeva Somadeva 2004 , p. 248.

^ Vasudeva Somadeva 2004 , p. 256-261.

^ Vasudeva Somadeva 2004 , p. 266.

^ Vasudeva Somadeva 2004 , p. 279.

^ Vasudeva Somadeva 2004 , p. 284-285.

^ Vasudeva Somadeva 2004 , p. 286-287.

^ Ganapathy, T.N.

2004.

The Yoga of Tirumular: essays on the Tirumandiram . P.463 ^ Ganapathy, T.N.

2013.

The Tirumandiram / by Siddhar Tirumular; English translation and commentary . P.3457 ^ Vasudeva Somadeva 2004 , p. 368-369.

^ Vasudeva Somadeva 2004 , p. 293-294.

^ Vasudeva Somadeva 2004 , p. 298.

^ Vasudeva Somadeva 2004 , p. 353.

^ a b Vasudeva Somadeva 2004 , pp. 367–370 ^ Vasudeva Somadeva 2004 , p. 367-375.

^ Vasudeva Somadeva 2004 , p. 403.

^ Vasudeva Somadeva 2004 , p. 417.

^ Vasudeva Somadeva 2004 , p. 433-434.

^ Vasudeva Somadeva 2004 , p. 376.

^ Vasudeva Somadeva 2004 , p. 437.

^ Vasudeva Somadeva 2004 , p. 442.

^ Kamalakar Mishra , Kashmir Shaivism, The Central Philosophy of Tantrism , p. 339-350 ^ a b Wallis, Christopher (2013).

Tantra Illuminated , pp. 346-350.

^ a b Wallis, Christopher (2013).

Tantra Illuminated , pp. 383-409 ^ a b Wallis, Christopher (2013).

Tantra Illuminated , pp. 357-83 ^ a b Wallis, Christopher (2013).

Tantra Illuminated , pp. 350-57 ^ The Trika Shaivism of Kashmir, Moti Lal Pandit, pag. IX ^ a b The Trika Shaivism of Kashmir, Moti Lal Pandit, pag. X ^ The Trika Shaivism of Kashmir, Moti Lal Pandit, pag. XI ^ Brooks 1992 , pp. 38–43.

^ Padoux & Jeanty 2013 , pp. 4–10.

Sources [ edit ] Brooks, Douglas Renfrew (1992).

Auspicious wisdom: the texts and traditions of Srīvidyā Sākta Tantrism in South India . SUNY series in tantric studies. Albany, NY: State Univ. of New York Press. pp.

38– 43.

ISBN 978-0-7914-1146-9 .

Dyczkowski, Mark S. G. (1989).

The Doctrine of Vibration: An Analysis of the Doctrines and Practices of Kashmir Shaivism . Motilal Banarsidass Publ.

Flood, Gavin (1996), An Introduction to Hinduism , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-43878-0 Flood, Gavin (2006).

The Tantric Body .

Ganapathy, T.N. (2004).

The Yoga of Tirumular: essays on the Tirumandiram .

Kapoor, S.

The Philosophy of Saivism . Vol. 1.

Lawrence, David Peter.

"Kashmiri Shaiva Philosophy" . Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

Muller-Ortega, Paul E. (1989).

The Triadic Heart of Siva: Kaula Tantricism of Abhinavagupta in the Non-dual Shaivism of Kashmir . SUNY Press.

Olson, Carl (2007).

The Many Colors of Hinduism . Rutgers University Press.

Padoux, André; Jeanty, Roger-Orphé, eds. (2013).

The heart of the yoginī: the Yoginīhṛdaya, a Sanskrit tantric treatise . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-998233-2 .

Parmeshwaranand (2004).

Encyclopaedia of the Śaivism . Sarup & Sons.

ISBN 978-81-7625-427-4 .

Sanderson, Alexis (2009).

"The Hinduism of Kashmir" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 October 2015.

Sanderson, Alexis (2014).

"The Śaiva Literature" (PDF) .

Journal of Indological Studies (Kyoto), Nos. 24 & 25 (2012–2013), 2014, pp. 52-53 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016.

Singh, Jaideva (1982).

Pratyabhijñāhrdayam .

ISBN 8120803221 .

Torella (2021). "Nondualistic Saivism of Kashmir". In Goetz, Stewart; Taliaferro, Charles (eds.).

The Encyclopedia of Philosophy of Religion, 4 Volume Set . Wiley.

Vasudeva Somadeva (2004).

The Yoga of the Mālinīvijayottara Tantra. Critical edition, translation & notes . Institut Francais de Pondichery, Ecole Francaise d’Extreme-Orient.

Wallis, Christopher (2013).

Tantra Illuminated, Part II, A History of Śaiva Tantra . Mattamayura Press.

Further reading [ edit ] Primary Lakshmanjoo, Swami (2003).

Kashmir Shaivism: The Secret Supreme . 1st Books Library.

ISBN 1-58721-505-5 .

Shankarananda, Swami (2003).

Consciousness is Everything, The Yoga of Kashmir Shaivism . Shaktipat Press.

ISBN 0-9750995-0-7 .

Muktananda, Swami (2000).

Play of Consciousness – A Spiritual Autobiography . SYDA Foundation.

ISBN 0-911307-81-8 .

Muktananda, Swami (1980).

Secret of the Siddhas . SYDA Foundation.

ISBN 81-86693-07-6 .

Durgananda, Swami; Brooks; et al. (1997).

Meditation Revolution . Agama Press.

ISBN 0-9654096-1-9 .

Secondary Dyczkowski, Mark S. G. (1987).

The Doctrine of Vibration: An Analysis of the Doctrines and Practices of Kashmir Shaivism . Albany, New York: State University of New York Press.

ISBN 0-88706-432-9 .

Muller-Ortega, Paul E. (2010).

Triadic Heart of Siva: Kaula Tantricism of Abhinavagupta in the Non-Dual Shaivism of Kashmir . Suny press.

Mishra, Kamalakar (1999).

Kashmir Saivism, The Central Philosophy of Tantrism . Sri Satguru Publications.

ISBN 81-7030-632-9 .

Hughes, John (1994).

Self Realization in Kashmir Shaivism . State University of New York Press.

ISBN 0-7914-2179-1 .

Translations Singh, Jaideva (2000).

Śiva Sutras – The Yoga of Supreme Identity (PDF) . Delhi: Moltilal Banarsidass.

ISBN 81-208-0406-6 .

Singh, Jaideva (2005).

Spanda-Kārikas - The Divine Creative Pulsation . Delhi: Moltilal Banarsidass.

ISBN 81-208-0821-5 .

Singh, Jaideva (2008).

Pratyãbhijñahṛdayam - The Secret of Self-Recognition . Delhi: Moltilal Banarsidass.

ISBN 978-81-208-0323-7 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Kashmir Shaivism .

David Peter Lawrence (2005) Kashmiri Shaiva Philosophy , Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Piyaray L. Raina, Kashmir Shaivism versus Vedanta – A Synopsis v t e Shaivism History Deities Shiva Bhairava Dakshinamurti Harihara Ishana Nataraja Sadyojata Tatpurusha Vamadeva Shakti Ardhanarishvara Sati Parvati Ganesha Kartikeya Devasena Valli Nandi Texts Shvetashvatara Upanishad Shivarahasya Purana Shiva Purana Shiva Sutras of Vasugupta Tirumurai Mantra / Stotra Om Namah Shivaya Rudrashtakam Mahāmrityunjaya Shiva Tandava Sahasranama Chalisa Shri Rudram Shiva Mahimna Hara Hara Mahadeva Traditions Shaiva Siddhanta Pashupata Shaivism Kapalika Aghori Kaula Trika Shaivism Veera Shaivism Siddha Siddhanta Shiva Advaita Shaiva Smartas Festivals and observances Kanwar Yatra Maha Shivaratri Pradosha Shiva Puja Shiva temples Panch Kedar Kedarnath Tungnath Rudranath Madhyamaheshwar Kalpeshwar Pancha Sabhai Rathinam Pon Velli Thamiram Chitiram Pancha Bhuta Sthalam Chidambaram (Ether) Tirukalahasti (Air) Tiruvannamalai (Fire) Tiruvanaikaval (Water) Kanchipuram (Earth) Jyotirlingas Bhimashankar Grishneshwar Kedarnath Mallikarjun Mahakaleshwar Nageshvar Omkareshwar Ramanathaswamy Somnath Trimbakeshwar Vaidyanath Vishwanath Others Amarnath Brihadeeswarar Kailash Mansarovar Katas Raj Lingaraja Meenakshi Sundareshwarar Tiruchengode Vadakkum Nathan Related topics Lingam Rasalingam Siddha Vibhuti Other names Category Portal v t e Yoga Subtle body Three bodies Five sheaths Chakra Nadi Ida Sushumna Pingala Prana Hinduism Three Yogas Karma yoga Bhakti yoga Jnana yoga and sometimes Rāja yoga Philosophy Bhagavad Gita Yoga Sutras of Patanjali Yoga Vasistha Yoga Yajnavalkya Concepts Eight limbs Yama Niyama Asana Lotus position Pranayama Pratyahara Dhāraṇā Dhyana Samadhi Kriyā Mantra Pranava Nada Surat Shabd Aghor Yoga Mudras Bandha Mahamudra Viparita Karani List Nyasa Kumbhaka Sama vritti Shatkarmas Neti Dhauti Nauli Basti Kapalabhati Bhastrika Trataka Tapas Sādhanā Tantra Yogi Yogini Siddhi Mahasiddha Shaiva Siddhanta Laya Yoga Kundalini Sexual Yoga Hatha yoga Amaraugha Prabodha Amritasiddhi Bahr al-Hayat Hathabhyasapaddhati Hatha Ratnavali Hatha Yoga Pradipika Hatha Yoga: The Report of a Personal Experience Gheranda Samhita Joga Pradipika Shiva Samhita Sritattvanidhi Vasishtha Samhita Vimanarcanakalpa Yogasopana Purvacatuska Buddhism Theravada Samatha Samadhi (Buddhism) Vipassana Anapanasati Visuddhimagga Mahayana India Yogachara Japan Tendai Zazen Vajrayana India Kriyayoga (Buddhist) Caryayoga Anuttarayoga Sahajayana Tibet Devata yoga Yantra yoga Six Yogas of Naropa Tummo Ösel Karmamudra Milam Bardo Phowa Mahayoga Anuyoga Atiyoga Mahamudra China Tangmi Japan Shingon Modern As exercise Asana Downward dog Standing asanas List of asanas Drishti Sun Salutation Vinyāsa Hasta Vinyasas Yoga as therapy Yoga for women Props Light on Yoga Related Yoga hybrids Mindful Yoga International Day of Yoga List of yoga schools Modern yoga gurus Yoga Nidra Yoga scholars (template) Journals Asana Journal Yoga Journal Related Stopping thought Authority control databases : National Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐xhszm
Cached time: 20250814215949
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.940 seconds
Real time usage: 1.110 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8612/1000000
Revision size: 53650/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 202871/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10729/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 182508/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.532/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18954841/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  843.746      1 -total
 16.52%  139.416     74 Template:Sfn
 15.40%  129.941     28 Template:Cite_book
 14.36%  121.172      3 Template:Reflist
 11.55%   97.489     24 Template:IAST
 11.25%   94.941     24 Template:Transliteration
 10.44%   88.085      3 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  9.34%   78.812      1 Template:Saivism
  8.39%   70.752      3 Template:Cite_web
  7.83%   66.101      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1308594:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215949 and revision id 1305036568. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kashmir_Shaivism&oldid=1305036568 " Categories : Kashmir Shaivism Hindu denominations Theistic Indian philosophy Advaita Shaivism Nonduality Yoga styles Hidden categories: CS1 Sanskrit-language sources (sa) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2018 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 17:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kashmir Shaivism 18 languages Add topic

