Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Mathematical work 3 Notes 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Farkas Bolyai 26 languages العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Gaelg Galego Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar Malagasy 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hungarian mathematician (1775–1856) The native form of this personal name is Bolyai Farkas . This article uses Western name order when mentioning individuals.

Farkas Bolyai Farkas Bolyai Born ( 1775-02-09 ) 9 February 1775 Bólya, Kingdom of Hungary , Habsburg monarchy (now Buia as part of Șeica Mare , Romania ) Died 20 November 1856 (1856-11-20) (aged 81) Marosvásárhely , Kingdom of Hungary , Austrian Empire (now Târgu Mureş, Romania) Alma mater University of Jena University of Göttingen Known for Contributions to the foundations of geometry Wallace–Bolyai–Gerwien theorem Scientific career Fields Mathematics Academic advisors Abraham Gotthelf Kästner Notable students János Bolyai Farkas Bolyai ( Hungarian: [ˈfɒrkɒʃ ˈboːjɒi] ; 9 February 1775 – 20 November 1856; also known as Wolfgang Bolyai in Germany) was a Hungarian mathematician , mainly known for his work in geometry .

Biography [ edit ] Bolyai was born in Bólya, a village near Nagyszeben , Grand Principality of Transylvania , Kingdom of Hungary (now Buia , Sibiu County , Romania ). His father was Gáspár Bolyai and his mother Krisztina Vajna. Farkas was taught at home by his father until the age of six when he was sent to the Calvinist school in Nagyszeben . His teachers recognized his talents in arithmetics and in learning languages. He learned Latin , Greek , Romanian , Hebrew and later also French , Italian and English . He easily multiplied, divided 13- or 14-digit numbers in his head, and was able to draw square and cubic roots from them.

[ 1 ] At the age of 12 he left school and was appointed as a tutor to the eight-year-old son of the count Kemény. This meant that Bolyai was now treated as a member of one of the leading families in the country, and he became not only a tutor but a real friend to the count's son. In 1790 Bolyai and his pupil both entered the Calvinist College in Kolozsvár (today Cluj-Napoca ) where they spent five years.

The professor of philosophy at the College in Kolozsvár tried to turn Bolyai against mathematics and towards religious philosophy. Bolyai, however, decided to go abroad with Simon Kemény on an educational trip in 1796 and began to study mathematics systematically at German universities first at Jena and then at Göttingen . In these times Bolyai became a close friend of Carl Friedrich Gauss .

He returned home to Kolozsvár in 1799. It was there he met and married Zsuzsanna Benkő and where their son János Bolyai – later an even more famous mathematician than his father – was born in 1802. Soon thereafter he accepted a teaching position for mathematics and sciences at the Calvinist College in Marosvásárhely (today Târgu-Mureş ), where he spent the rest of his life.

Mathematical work [ edit ] Bolyai's main interests were the foundations of geometry and the parallel axiom .

His main work, Tentamen juventutem studiosam in elementa matheseos purae, elementaris ac sublimioris, methodo intuitiva, evidentiaque huic propria, introducendi ( An Attempt to Introduce Studious Youths to the Elements of Pure Mathematics ; 1832), [ 2 ] was an attempt at a rigorous and systematic foundation of geometry, arithmetic, algebra and analysis. In this work, he gave iterative procedures to solve equations which he then proved convergent by showing them to be monotonically increasing and bounded above. His study of the convergence of series includes a test equivalent to Raabe's test , which he discovered independently and at about the same time as Raabe . Other important ideas in the work include a general definition of a function and a definition of an equality between two plane figures if they can both be divided into a finite equal number of pairwise congruent pieces.

He first dissuaded his son from the study of non-Euclidean geometry , but by 1832 he became enthusiastic enough to persuade his son to publish his path-breaking thoughts. János's ideas were published an appendix to the Tentamen .

Notes [ edit ] ^ Szénássy, Barna (1975).

Bolyai Farkas (1775-1856) . Budapest: Akadémiai kiadó. p. 17.

^ Online version References [ edit ] (in Romanian) A. Todea, F. Maria, M. Avram, Oameni de știință mureșeni - Dicționar biobibliografic , CJ Mureș Biblioteca Județeană Mureș, tipografia Mediaprint SRL, 2004 External links [ edit ] Media related to Farkas Bolyai at Wikimedia Commons Quotations related to Farkas Bolyai at Wikiquote O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Farkas Bolyai" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Further references on Farkas Bolyai Archived 2008-03-15 at the Wayback Machine Farkas Bolyai at the Mathematics Genealogy Project The Bolyai Memorial Museum Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Poland Israel Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Farkas_Bolyai&oldid=1301614105 " Categories : 1775 births 1856 deaths 18th-century Hungarian mathematicians 19th-century Hungarian mathematicians People from Sibiu County Hungarian Calvinist and Reformed Christians Hungarian inventors Members of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences Mathematicians from the Austrian Empire Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages with Hungarian IPA Articles with Romanian-language sources (ro) Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 20:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Farkas Bolyai 26 languages Add topic

