Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Transit rights Toggle Transit rights subsection 2.1 First freedom 2.2 Second freedom 3 Traffic rights Toggle Traffic rights subsection 3.1 Third and fourth freedoms 3.2 Beyond rights 3.2.1 Fifth freedom 3.2.2 Sixth freedom 3.3 Cabotage 3.3.1 Modified sixth freedom (indirect cabotage) 3.3.2 Seventh and ninth freedoms (standalone cabotage) 3.3.3 Eighth freedom (consecutive cabotage) 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Freedoms of the air 18 languages Català Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Magyar 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский Suomi Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Flyover rights ) Set of international commercial aviation rights "Open skies" redirects here. For other uses, see Open skies (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Six degrees of freedom .

The freedoms of the air , also called five freedoms of air transport , are a set of commercial aviation rights granting a country's airlines the privilege to enter and land in another country's airspace . They were formulated as a result of disagreements over the extent of aviation liberalisation in the Convention on International Civil Aviation of 1944, known as the Chicago Convention.

[ 1 ] The United States had called for a standardized set of separate air rights to be negotiated between states, but most other countries were concerned that the size of the U.S. airlines would dominate air travel if there were not strict rules. The freedoms of the air are the fundamental building blocks of the international commercial aviation route network. The use of the terms "freedom" and "right" confers entitlement to operate international air services only within the scope of the multilateral and bilateral treaties ( air services agreements ) that allow them.

The first two freedoms concern the passage of commercial aircraft through foreign airspace and airports , while the other freedoms are about carrying people, mail and cargo internationally. The first through fifth freedoms are officially enumerated by international treaties, especially the Chicago Convention. Several other freedoms have been added, and although most are not officially recognised under broadly applicable international treaties, they have been agreed to by a number of countries. The lower-numbered freedoms are relatively universal while the higher-numbered ones are rarer and more controversial. Liberal open skies agreements often represent the least restrictive form of air services agreements and may include many if not all freedoms. They are relatively rare, but examples include the recent single aviation markets established in the European Union ( European Common Aviation Area ), and between Australia and New Zealand .

Overview [ edit ] Freedoms of the air apply to commercial aviation .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] : 145–146 The terms 'freedom' and 'right' are a shorthand way of referring to the type of international services permitted between two or more countries.

[ 3 ] : 145–146 Even when such services are allowed by countries, airlines may still face restrictions to accessing them by the terms of treaties or for other reasons.

[ 3 ] : 145–146 [ 4 ] : 19 a diagram of the nine freedoms, with blue circles indicating the operating airline's domestic market and red or yellow circles indicating foreign markets Freedom Description Example 1st The right to fly over a foreign country without landing.

[ 5 ] A flight from Canada to Mexico, flown by a Mexican airline, flying over the United States.

2nd The right to refuel or carry out maintenance in a foreign country without embarking or disembarking passengers or cargo.

[ 5 ] A flight from the United Kingdom to the United States, flown by a British airline, refueling at an Irish airport such as Shannon .

3rd The right to fly from one's own country to another country.

[ 5 ] A flight from New Zealand to Japan, flown by a New Zealand airline.

4th The right to fly from another country to one's own.

[ 5 ] A flight from Chile to Brazil, flown by a Brazilian airline.

5th The right to fly between two foreign countries on a journey originating or ending in one's own country. Each leg can be flown by a different aircraft so long as the same flight number is used.

[ 5 ] A flight from Melbourne, Australia to Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, with a stop in Denpasar, Indonesia, flown by a Malaysian airline. Passengers and cargo may travel between Melbourne and Denpasar, with no intention to continue on to Kuala Lumpur.

6th The right to fly from a foreign country to another while stopping in one's own country for non-technical reasons.

[ 5 ] A flight from New Zealand to Colombia, flown by an airline based in Chile, with a stop in Santiago, Chile. This can also be a flight by a Colombian airline flying under the 5th freedom, allowing codeshare by the Chilean airline which uses the 6th freedom.

modified 6th The right to fly between two places in a foreign country while stopping in one's own country for non-technical reasons.

[ 5 ] A flight between two airports in the United States, flown by a Canadian airline, with a stop in Canada.

Such as a flight from Seattle (US) to Boston (US) via Toronto (CA), with a passenger ticketed from Seattle to Boston.

7th The right to fly between two foreign countries, where the flights do not touch one's own country.

[ 5 ] A flight between Spain and Sweden, flown by an Irish airline.

8th The right to fly inside a foreign country, having started from or continuing to one's own country.

[ 5 ] A flight operated by a South African airline between San Francisco and Cape Town, with a full stop in New York. Passengers and cargo may board or disembark the flight in New York, with no intention to board the flight to Cape Town.

9th The right to fly within a foreign country without continuing to one's own country.

[ 5 ] A flight flown between Paris and Lyon by a German airline.

Transit rights [ edit ] The first and second freedoms grant rights to pass through a country without carrying traffic that originates or terminates there and are known as 'transit rights'.

[ 3 ] : 146 The Chicago Convention drew up a multilateral agreement in which the first two freedoms, known as the International Air Services Transit Agreement (IASTA) or "Two Freedoms Agreement", were open to all signatories. At the end of 2017, the treaty was accepted by 133 countries.

[ 6 ] A country granting transit rights may impose fees for the privilege.  The reasonableness of such fees has caused controversy at times.

First freedom [ edit ] IASTA participants (and some of their dependent territories) The United States has authority to charge overflight fees over its territory ( en route , yellow) and over ocean regions where it has been delegated air traffic control responsibilities by the ICAO ( oceanic , blue). The fees are applicable only to overflights; domestic and international flights arriving/departing the US are taxed through landing fees.

[ a ] The first freedom is the right to fly over a foreign country without landing.

[ 7 ] : 31 It grants the privilege to fly over the territory of a treaty country without landing. Member states of the International Air Services Transit Agreement grant this freedom (as well as the second freedom) to other member states, [ 8 ] subject to the transiting aircraft using designated air routes.

[ 9 ] As of the summer of 2007, 129 countries were parties to this treaty, including such large ones as the United States, India, and Australia. However, Brazil, Russia, Indonesia, and China never joined, with Canada leaving the treaty in 1988.

[ 10 ] These large and strategically located non-IASTA-member states prefer to maintain tighter control over foreign airlines' overflight of their airspace and negotiate transit agreements with other countries on a case-by-case basis.

[ 4 ] : 23 During the Cold War , the Soviet Union and China did not allow airlines to enter their airspace.

[ citation needed ] There were flights from Europe to Japan that refueled in Alaska . Since the end of the Cold War, first freedom rights are almost completely universal.

[ 3 ] : 151 Most countries require prior notification before an overflight and charge fees, which can sometimes be substantial.

[ 11 ] IASTA allows each member country to charge foreign airlines "reasonable" fees for using its airports (which is applicable, presumably, only to the second freedom) and "facilities"; [ 9 ] according to IATA, such fees should not be higher than those charged to domestic airlines engaged in similar international services.

[ 9 ] Such fees indeed are commonly charged merely for the privilege of the overflight of a country's national territory, when no airport usage is involved.

[ 12 ] (Overflights might still be using services of a country's air traffic control centers ). For example, the Federal Aviation Administration of the U.S., an IASTA signatory, charges overflight fees based on the great circle distance between an aircraft's points of entry into and exit from U.S.-controlled airspace. This transit is then divided into overland (referred to as en route ) and oceanic components; the latter include flights over international waters where air traffic is controlled by the U.S., including sections of Atlantic and Arctic Oceans and much of the northern Pacific Ocean.

[ 13 ] Since 2019 these have been charged at $0.6175/nmi ($0.3334/km; $0.5366/mi) for en route components, and  $0.2651/nmi ($0.1431/km; $0.2304/mi) for the oceanic components.

[ 14 ] Countries that are not signatories of the IASTA charge overflight fees as well; among them, Russia is known for charging high fees, especially on the transarctic routes (between North America and Asia) that cross Siberia.

[ 12 ] In 2008, Russia temporarily denied Lufthansa Cargo permission to overfly its airspace with cargo ostensibly due to "delayed payments for its flyover rights".

[ 15 ] In 2008, European airlines were paying Russia €300 million a year for flyover permissions.

[ 15 ] Due to the Russo-Ukrainian War , in 2022 the US, EU and other countries cancelled the third and fourth freedoms for Russian airlines, preventing them flying to these countries. In response Russia blocked all freedoms for western airlines, including the first freedom. Flights from the EU to Japan now fly over central Asia and China instead. Chinese and other airlines continue to fly over Russia.

[ 16 ] Second freedom [ edit ] The second freedom allows technical stops without the embarking or disembarking of passengers or cargo.

[ 7 ] : 31 It is the right to stop in one country solely for refueling or other maintenance on the way to another country.

[ 3 ] : 146 Because of longer range of modern airliners, second freedom rights are comparatively rarely exercised by passenger carriers today, and then often as fifth freedom, allowing new passengers to embark at the stop. But second freedom rights are widely used by air cargo carriers, and are more or less universal between countries.

[ 12 ] The most famous example of the second freedom is Shannon Airport ( Ireland ), which was used as a stopping point for most transatlantic flights until the 1960s, since Shannon Airport was the closest European airport to the United States.

Anchorage was similarly used for flights between Western Europe and East Asia, bypassing Soviet airspace, closed until the end of the Cold War . Anchorage was still used by some Chinese airlines for flights to the U.S. and Toronto until the 2000s.  Flights between Europe and South Africa often stopped at Ilha do Sal (Sal Island) in Cabo Verde , off the coast of Senegal , due to many African nations refusing to allow South African flights to overfly their territory during the Apartheid regime.

Gander, Newfoundland was also a frequent stopping point for airlines from the USSR and the Eastern Bloc on the way to the Caribbean, Central America, Mexico, and South America.

Traffic rights [ edit ] In contrast to transit rights, 'traffic rights' allow commercial international services between, through and in some cases within the countries that are parties to air services agreements or other treaties.

[ 3 ] : 146 While it was agreed that the third to fifth freedoms would be negotiated between states, the International Air Transport Agreement (or "Five Freedoms Agreement") was also opened for signatures, encompassing the first five freedoms.

[ 17 ] : 108 The remaining four freedoms are made possible by some air services agreements but are not 'officially' recognized because they are not mentioned by the Chicago Convention.

[ 17 ] : 108 Third and fourth freedoms [ edit ] The third and fourth freedoms allow basic international service between two countries.

[ 3 ] : 146 Even when reciprocal third and fourth freedom rights are granted, air services agreements (e.g. the Bermuda Agreements ) may still restrict many aspects of the traffic, such as the capacity of aircraft, the frequency of flights, the airlines permitted to fly and the airports permitted to be served.

[ 3 ] : 146–147 The third freedom is the right to carry passengers or cargo from one's own country to another.

[ 7 ] : 31 The right to carry passengers or cargo from another country to one's own is the fourth freedom.

[ 7 ] : 31 Third and fourth freedom rights are almost always granted simultaneously in bilateral agreements between countries.

Beyond rights [ edit ] Beyond rights allow the carriage of traffic between (and sometimes within) countries that are foreign to the airlines that operate them.

[ 3 ] : 146 Today, the most controversial of these are fifth freedom rights.

[ 3 ] : 146 [ 17 ] : 108–109 [ 17 ] : 112 Less controversial but still restricted at times, though relatively more common are sixth freedom rights.

[ 3 ] : 146 [ 18 ] : 94–95 Beyond rights also encompass international flights with a foreign intermediate stop where passengers may only embark and disembark at the intermediate point on the leg of the flight that serves the origin of an airline operating it.

[ 3 ] : 146 It also includes 'stopover' traffic where passengers may embark or disembark at an intermediate stop as part of an itinerary between the endpoints of a multi-leg flight or connecting flights.

[ b ] [ 3 ] : 146 Some international flights stop at multiple points in a foreign country and passengers may sometimes make stopovers in a similar manner, but because the traffic being carried does not originate in the country where the flight takes place it is not cabotage but another form of beyond rights.

[ 20 ] : 110 Fifth freedom [ edit ] The fifth freedom allows an airline to carry revenue traffic between foreign countries as a part of services connecting the airline's own country.

[ 21 ] It is the right to carry passengers from one's own country to a second country, and from that country onward to a third country (and so on). An example of a fifth freedom traffic right is an Emirates flight in 2004 from Dubai to Brisbane, Australia and onward to Auckland , New Zealand, where tickets can be sold on any sector.

[ 7 ] : 34 Fifth freedom traffic rights are intended to enhance the economic viability of an airline's long haul routes, but tend to be viewed by local airlines and governments as potentially unfair competition.

[ 22 ] : 33–34 The negotiations for fifth freedom traffic rights can be lengthy, because in practice the approval of at least three different nations is required.

[ c ] [ 19 ] : 131 Fifth freedom traffic rights were instrumental to the economic viability of long-haul flight until the early 1980s, when advances in technology and increased passenger volume enabled the operation of more non-stop flights .

[ 7 ] : 31–32 The excess capacity on multi-sector routes could be filled by picking up and dropping off passengers along the way.

[ 22 ] : 33 It was not uncommon for carriers to schedule stops in one or more foreign countries on the way to a flight's final destination. Fifth freedom flights were common between Europe and Africa, South America and the Far East .

[ 7 ] : 31–32 An example of a multi-sector flight in the mid-1980s was an Alitalia service from Rome to Tokyo via Athens, Delhi, Bangkok and Hong Kong.

[ 7 ] : 31–32 Fifth freedom flights remained highly common in East Asia during the 2000s, particularly on routes serving Tokyo , Hong Kong and Bangkok . Between the latter two destinations, in 2004, service was provided by at least four airlines whose home base was not in either Hong Kong or Bangkok.

[ 7 ] : 32 The Singapore -Bangkok route has also constituted an important fifth freedom market. In the late 1990s, half of the seats available between the two cities were offered by airlines holding fifth freedom traffic rights.

[ 17 ] : 112 Other major markets served by fifth freedom flights can be found in Europe, South America, the Caribbean and the Tasman Sea .

[ 7 ] : 32–33, 36 Fifth freedom traffic rights are sought by airlines wishing to take up unserved or underserved routes, or by airlines whose flights already make technical stops at a location as allowed by the second freedom.

[ 7 ] : 32 Governments (e.g.

Thailand ) may sometimes encourage fifth freedom traffic as a way of promoting tourism , by increasing the number of seats available. In turn, though, there may be reactionary pressure to avoid liberalizing traffic rights too much in order to protect a flag carrier 's commercial interests.

[ 17 ] : 110 By the 1990s, fifth freedom traffic rights stirred controversy in Asia because of loss-making services by airlines in the countries hosting them.

[ 23 ] : 16–19 Particularly in protest over US air carriers' service patterns in Asia, some nations have become less generous in granting fifth freedom traffic rights, while sixth freedom traffic has grown in importance for Asian airlines.

[ 17 ] : 112 The Japan-United States bilateral air transport agreement of 1952 has been viewed as being particularly contentious because unlimited fifth freedom traffic rights have been granted to designated US air carriers serving destinations in the Asia Pacific region west of Japan. For example, in the early 1990s, the Japanese government's refusal to permit flights on the New York City—Osaka—Sydney route led to protests by the US government and the airlines that applied to serve that route. The Japanese government countered that only about 10% of the traffic on the Japan—Australia sector was third and fourth freedom traffic to and from the US, while the bilateral agreement specified that primary justification for unlimited fifth freedom traffic was to fill up aircraft carrying a majority of US-originated or US-destined traffic under those rights. Japan had held many unused fifth freedom traffic rights beyond the USA. However, these were seen as being less valuable than the fifth freedom traffic rights enjoyed by US air carriers via Japan, because of the higher operating costs of Japanese airlines and also geographical circumstances. Japan serves as a useful gateway to Asia for North American travelers. The US contended that Japan's favourable geographical location and its flag airlines' carriage of a sizeable volume of sixth freedom traffic via gateway cities in Japan helped to level the playing field. In 1995, the air transport agreement was updated by way of liberalizing Japanese carriers' access to US destinations, while placing selected restrictions on US air carriers.

[ 23 ] : 19–24 Up until the 1980s, Air India's flights to New York JFK from India were all operated under fifth freedom rights. From its 1962 initiation of Boeing 707 service to Idlewild (renamed JFK in 1964), flights had intermediate stops at one Middle East airport (Kuwait, Cairo, or Beirut), then two or three European airports, the last of which was always London's Heathrow, with trans-Atlantic service operating between Heathrow and JFK. This service continued well into the Boeing 747 era. Currently, Air India's North American flights are nonstop Boeing 777 service to India, with one exception, that being a revival of fifth freedom flights operating Boeing 787 service on the Newark—Heathrow—Ahmedabad route. However, Air India does not currently operate that route.

The fifth freedom has been discussed in 2017 in connection with the Saint Helena Airport . Flights (by a South African airline) serving it have to refuel at Walvis Bay Airport ; but they are not allowed to board more passengers coming from connecting flights, which means that passengers from Johannesburg must do a detour over Cape Town with fairly little connecting time, with risk of missing the once-weekly flight.

Sixth freedom [ edit ] The unofficial sixth freedom combines the third and fourth freedoms and is the right to carry passengers or cargo from a second country to a third country by stopping in one's own country.

[ 7 ] : 31 It can also be characterized as a form of the fifth freedom with an intermediate stop in the operating airline's home market. This characterization is often invoked as protectionist policy as the traffic, like fifth freedom traffic, is secondary in nature to third and fourth freedom traffic.

[ 22 ] : 33–34 Consequently, some nations seek to regulate sixth freedom traffic as though it were fifth freedom traffic.

[ 19 ] : 130 Sixth-freedom traffic has historically been widespread in Asia, where Southeast Asian carriers such as Thai Airways and Singapore Airlines carried traffic on the Kangaroo Route between Europe and Australia, and Japanese carriers carried traffic between Southeast Asia and the Americas. More recently, carriers in the Persian Gulf region have developed intercontinental sixth-freedom hubs, and Copa Airlines has developed a sixth-freedom hub in Panama to connect many cities in North and South America.

[ 24 ] Another example is Air Canada , which has pursued a strategy of carrying passengers between the US and points in Europe and Asia through its Canadian hubs.

[ 25 ] While sixth freedom operations are rarely legally-restricted, they may be controversial: for example, Qantas has complained that Emirates , Singapore Airlines and other sixth-freedom carriers have unfair advantages in the market between Europe and Australia.

[ 24 ] Because the nature of air services agreements is essentially a mercantilist negotiation that strives for an equitable exchange of traffic rights, the outcome of a bilateral agreement may not be fully reciprocal but rather a reflection of the relative size and geographic position of two markets, especially in the case of a large country negotiating with a much smaller one.

[ 19 ] : 129 In exchange for a smaller state granting fifth freedom rights to a larger country, the smaller country may be able to gain sixth freedom traffic to onward destinations from the larger country.

[ 19 ] : 129–130 On 2 October 2007, the United Kingdom and Singapore signed an agreement that allowed unlimited sixth freedom rights from 30 March 2018, along with a full exchange of other freedoms of the air.

Cabotage [ edit ] Cabotage is the transport of goods or passengers between two points in the same country by a vessel or an aircraft registered in another country. Originally a shipping term, cabotage now covers aviation , railways and road transport . It is "trade or navigation in coastal waters, or, the exclusive right of a country to operate the air traffic within its territory".

[ 26 ] Modified sixth freedom (indirect cabotage) [ edit ] The unofficial modified sixth freedom is the right to carry passengers or cargo between two points in one foreign country, while making a stop in the home country.

For example, (the unofficial modified sixth freedom): a Canadian carrier departs from a US airport, stops in its Canadian hub and departs/continues onward to a different US airport.

Seventh and ninth freedoms (standalone cabotage) [ edit ] The unofficial seventh and ninth freedoms are variations of the fifth freedom .  It is the right to carry passengers or cargo in foreign territories without any service to, from or via one's own country.

[ 7 ] : 31 The seventh freedom is to provide international services between two foreign countries, and the ninth between points within a single foreign country.

The right to carry passengers or cargo within a foreign country without continuing service to or from one's own country, [ 27 ] is sometimes known as "stand-alone cabotage ". It differs from the aviation definition of "true cabotage", in that it does not directly relate to one's own country.

Eighth freedom (consecutive cabotage) [ edit ] The unofficial eighth freedom is the right to carry passengers or cargo between two or more points in one foreign country and is also known as cabotage .

[ 7 ] : 31 It is extremely rare outside Europe.  The main example is the European Union , where such rights exist between all its member states.  Other examples include the Single Aviation Market (SAM) established between Australia and New Zealand in 1996; the 2001 Protocol to the Multilateral Agreement on the Liberalization of International Air Transportation (MALIAT) between Brunei , Chile , New Zealand and Singapore ; United Airlines ' " Island Hopper " route, from Guam to Honolulu, able to transport passengers within the Federated States of Micronesia and the Marshall Islands , although the countries involved are closely associated with the United States . Such rights have usually been granted only where the domestic air network is very underdeveloped. One instance was Pan Am 's authority to fly between Frankfurt and West Berlin from the 1950s to the 1980s, although political circumstances and not the state of the domestic air network dictated this – only airlines of the Allied Powers of France, the United Kingdom and the United States had the right to carry air traffic between West Germany and the legally separate and distinct territory of West Berlin until 1990.

[ 28 ] In 2005, the United Kingdom and New Zealand concluded an agreement granting unlimited cabotage rights.

[ 29 ] Given the distance between the two countries, the agreement can be seen as reflecting a political principle rather than an expectation that these rights will be taken up in the near future. Similarly, New Zealand had exchanged eighth-freedom rights with Ireland in 1999.

[ 30 ] See also [ edit ] Air rights Bilateral agreement Air transport agreement Freedom of movement Flight permits Treaty on Open Skies for unarmed aerial surveillance flights Notes [ edit ] ^ Some US island territories lie within the oceanic fee regions, while the en route fee is charged over the Bahamas and Bermuda, where it provides only high-altitude ATC service) ^ Even when fifth freedom rights are in place further restrictions on capacity and frequency may result in an airline only using the rights for stopover traffic or not being able to carry any traffic at all.

[ 19 ] : 131 ^ Because of this three types of fifth freedom traffic can be distinguished: 'intermediate point', where the right is granted from a third country to a second one between the third and the grantee; 'beyond-point', where the country giving the right allows traffic to continue to third countries; and 'behind-point' or 'anterior-point' where the grantor allows service between other destinations outside of the grantee's country of origin.

[ 17 ] : 108 [ 19 ] : 131 References [ edit ] ^ Wragg, David W. (1973).

A Dictionary of Aviation (first ed.). Osprey. p. 132.

ISBN 9780850451634 .

^ Follesdal, Andreas; Wessel, Ramses; Wouters, Jan (2008).

Multilevel Regulation and the EU: The Interplay Between Global, European and National Normative Processes . The Netherlands: Brill. p. 187.

ISBN 978-90-04-16438-3 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Ralph Huenemann; Anming Zhang (2005). "7: The airline industry". In Erlinda M. Medalla (ed.).

Competition Policy In East Asia . New York: Routledge. pp.

145– 169.

ISBN 0415350751 . Retrieved 19 February 2013 .

^ a b Haanappel, P. P. C. (1998). "2, The transformation of sovereignty in the air". In Chia-Jui Cheng; Jiarui Cheng (eds.).

The Use of Air & Outer Space Cooperation & Competition . London: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers.

ISBN 90-411-05972 . Retrieved 20 February 2013 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j "4.1".

Manual on the Regulation of International Air Transport (2nd ed.).

International Civil Aviation Organization . 2004.

ISBN 92-9194-404-1 .

^ International Air Services Transit Agreement - list of signatory states, which notified the U.S. Secretary of State of its acceptance of the treaty.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Vallero, Luigi (August 2004). "The Freedom of Fifth Freedom Flights".

Airways .

11 (102). Airways International Inc: 31– 36.

ISSN 1074-4320 .

^ "International Air Services Transit Agreement (IASTA), Article 1, Section 1" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 January 2016.

^ a b c IASTA, Article I, Section 4 ^ "International Air Services Transit Agreement - list of signatory states" (PDF) .

International Civil Aviation Organization . Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 July 2011.

The document is not signed by, but includes Kazakhstan, which notified the US Secretary of States of its acceptance of the treaty in July 2007.

[ citation needed ] ^ Mulrine, Anna (9 June 2008).

Targeting the Enemy . U.S. News & World Report.

^ a b c Vasigh, Bijann; Tacker, Tomn; Fleming, Ken (2008).

Introduction to Air Transport Economics: From Theory to Applications . Ashgate Publishing. p. 156.

ISBN 978-0-7546-7081-0 .

^ "Overflight Fees" .

(FAA) ^ Although the FAA fee schedule quotes rates per 100 nautical miles, their "calculation" section makes it clear that the exact distance is used. See "§ 187.53 Calculation of overflight fees", Federal Register (PDF) , vol. 81 #229, 2016, p. 85854 . Note that all an aircraft's fees for a calendar month are waived when they total less than $400.

^ a b "Russia 'Blackmails' Lufthansa over Cargo Hubs" .

Spiegel International . 2 November 2007 . Retrieved 5 June 2008 .

^ "Which airlines are still flying over Russia?" .

www.alternativeairlines.com .

^ a b c d e f g h David J.J Yang (1998). "9, The New Dimension of Fifth Freedom: the conflict of interest between Asian and American airlines". In Chia-Jui Cheng, Jiarui Cheng (ed.).

The Use of Air & Outer Space Cooperation & Competition . London: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers.

ISBN 9041105972 . Retrieved 20 February 2013 .

^ David Timothy Duvall (13 February 2008).

"5, Aeropolitics, global aviation networks and the regulation of international visitor flows" . In Tim Coles, C. Michael Hall (ed.).

International Business and Tourism: Global Issues, Contemporary Interactions . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0203931035 . Retrieved 20 February 2013 .

^ a b c d e f Hanlon, Pat (2012).

Global Airlines . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1136400735 .

^ Mendes de León, Pablo (1992).

Cabotage in Air Transport Regulation . Martinus Nijhoff Publishers.

ISBN 0792317955 . Retrieved 22 February 2016 .

^ Rowell, David (12 November 2002).

"Freedoms of the Air" .

The Travel Insider . Archived from the original on 5 January 2013 . Retrieved 25 November 2010 .

^ a b c Wassenbergh, H.A. (1970).

Public International Air Transportation Law in a New Era . The Hague: Nijhoff.

ISBN 9024750032 . Retrieved 22 February 2016 .

^ a b La Croix, Sumner J.; David Johnathan Wolff (October 1995).

"The Asia-Pacific Airline Industry: Economic Boom and Political Conflict" .

East-West Center Special Reports (4).

ISBN 9780788126215 . Retrieved 20 February 2013 .

^ a b "Taking the sixth" .

Flightglobal.com . 20 February 2006 . Retrieved 10 December 2018 .

^ "Air Canada bets big on sixth freedom traffic flows in 2016 with a new transborder push" .

CAPA - Centre for Aviation . Retrieved 10 December 2018 .

^ The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language , Fourth Edition ^ "ICAO FAQ: Freedoms of the Air" .

International Civil Aviation Organization . Retrieved 10 June 2011 .

^ West Berlin#Air traffic ^ "New Zealand Government: "Agreement allows unlimited UK flights" " . Archived from the original on 29 September 2007.

^ "Minister Signs Air Agreement In Dublin" . beehive.govt.nz. 28 May 1999 . Retrieved 27 August 2012 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Freedoms of the air .

ICAO Freedoms of the Air Multilateral Agreement on the Liberalization of International Air Transportation (MALIAT) Basic Position of Japanese Side in Japan-Us Passenger Air Talks (1996) "International traffic rights" (PDF) . Boeing. 2009.

List of Parties (pdf) List of signatories to the transit agreement v t e Commercial aviation Airlines Airline codes Airline holding companies Cargo airline Charter airlines Flag carriers Low-cost airlines Non-scheduled airline Passenger airlines Regional airlines Alliances Oneworld SkyTeam Star Alliance Value Alliance Vanilla Alliance U-FLY Alliance Trade groups International ACO ATAG IATA IATAN IFALPA ISTAT United States A4A RAA Europe A4E ASD ECA EBAA ERA ETWF Other regions AACO AAPA AFRAA RAAA Aircrew Pilot in command (Captain) First officer Second officer Third officer Relief crew Flight attendant Flight engineer Loadmaster Aircraft pilot Purser Dead mileage Airliner Travel class First class Business class Premium economy class Economy class Basic economy class Aircraft cabin Aircraft lavatory Aircraft seat map Airline meal Airline seat Buy on board Crew rest compartment In-flight entertainment Inflight smoking Galley Sickness bag Airport Aerodrome Airline hub Airport check-in Airport lounge Airport rail link Airport terminal Airside pass Airstair Boarding Domestic airport Gate International airport Jet bridge Low-cost carrier terminal Runway Transit hotel Customs / Immigration Arrival card Border control ( internal ) Departure card Passport Timatic Travel document Travel visa (Electronic) Environmental effects Hypermobility Environmental effects of aviation Law Air transport agreement Air route authority between the United States and China Bermuda Agreement (UK–US, 1946–1978) Bermuda II Agreement (UK–US, 1978–2008) Cross-strait charter Beijing Convention Cape Town Treaty Chicago Convention Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives European Common Aviation Area Flight permit Freedoms of the air EU–US Open Skies Agreement Hague Hijacking Convention Hague Protocol Montreal Convention Paris Convention of 1919 Rome Convention Sabotage Convention Tokyo Convention Warsaw Convention Intergovernmental organizations ICAO ECAC Eurocontrol EASA ENCASIA Baggage Bag tag Baggage allowance Baggage carousel Baggage cart Baggage reclaim Baggage handler Baggage handling system Baggage sizer Checked baggage Hand luggage Lost luggage ( WorldTracer ) Luggage lock Aviation safety Air rage Air traffic control Air traffic service Aircraft safety card Airport authority Airport crash tender Airport police Airport security Airspace class Area control center Brace position Civil aviation authority Control area Control zone Controlled airspace Evacuation slide Flight information region Flight information service Flight recorder Instrument flight rules Overwing exits Pre-flight safety demonstration Sky marshal Special use airspace Special visual flight rules Terminal control area Terminal control center Uncontrolled airspace Upper information region Visual flight rules Airline tickets Airline booking ploys Airline reservations system Airline ticket Airline timetable Bereavement flight Boarding pass Codeshare agreement Continent pass Electronic ticket Fare basis code Flight cancellation and delay Frequent-flyer program Government contract flight One-way travel Open-jaw ticket Overbooking ( Overselling ) Passenger name record Red-eye flight Round-the-world ticket Standby Tracking Travel agency Ground crew Aircraft maintenance technician Aircraft ground handling Baggage handler Flight dispatcher Miscellaneous Air cargo Air travel Aviation taxation and subsidies Mile high club NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐xbkgt
Cached time: 20250812000957
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.693 seconds
Real time usage: 0.823 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 15520/1000000
Revision size: 38477/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 119283/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7783/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 121670/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.364/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9492703/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  721.404      1 -total
 28.86%  208.210      2 Template:Reflist
 28.76%  207.484     51 Template:Rp
 27.35%  197.328     51 Template:R/superscript
 15.17%  109.465     12 Template:Cite_book
 13.52%   97.522    153 Template:R/where
  9.21%   66.411      1 Template:Short_description
  9.02%   65.081      1 Template:Commercial_air_travel
  8.71%   62.828      1 Template:Navbox
  5.65%   40.766      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:483651:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812000957 and revision id 1302314496. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Freedoms_of_the_air&oldid=1302314496#First_freedom " Categories : Aviation agreements 2007 in aviation Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2021 CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2021 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 July 2025, at 17:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Freedoms of the air 18 languages Add topic

