Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Parenting approach 2 Examples of moral courage 3 Moral courage anonymity 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Moral courage 9 languages العربية Dansk Deutsch Español 한국어 Hrvatski Norsk bokmål Polski Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For the 1917 film, see Moral Courage (film) .

Moral courage is the courage to take action for moral reasons despite the risk of adverse consequences.

[ 1 ] Courage is required in order to take action when one has doubts or fears about the consequences. Moral courage therefore involves deliberation or careful thought.

Reflex action or dogmatic fanaticism do not involve moral courage because such impulsive actions are not based upon moral reasoning.

[ 2 ] Moral courage may also require physical courage when the consequences are punishment or other bodily peril.

[ 3 ] Moral courage has been seen as the exemplary modernist form of courage.

[ 4 ] Parenting approach [ edit ] Incorporating moral courage into parenting [ how?

] can affect the self-expression [ specify ] of the child during late adolescence.

[ 5 ] It is more likely for a person to exemplify moral courage in adulthood if they were raised receiving respect and compassion from their parents than if they were raised in a violent environment.

[ 6 ] Parents teaching moral values such as empathy, justice, equality, and a caring focus on others are indicative of the development of moral courage.

[ 6 ] The development [ specify ] of moral courage within parenting is not only affected by the parent's passed-down moral values but the children's autonomy on how to perceive and practice their moral values.

[ 5 ] Those who incorporate the practice of their moral values into their everyday lives engage in moral courage to protect those values as well.

[ 7 ] Examples of moral courage [ edit ] Moral courage can be shown through selfless actions aimed at diminishing or eliminating discrimination . A study used qualitative research methods to analyze the process of how and why individuals become LGBT allies .

[ 7 ] The study mentions how human resources development play a role to help prevent LGBT discrimination in the workplace.

[ relevant?

] Moral courage is demonstrated when individuals stand up for moral principles, even if it puts them in danger or the violation of those principles does not directly affect them. During the Holocaust , many non-Jews demonstrated moral courage by risking their lives to save and help rescue Jews, often individuals and families they had never met.

[ 6 ] The likelihood of this kind of moral courage is less determined by external situational factors and more indicative of the internal traits and qualities of the individuals rescuing Jews. Some traits that drive people to exhibit this kind of moral courage include empathy, a sense of social responsibility, strong ethical standards such as justice and equality, advanced moral judgment, and the openness to take risks.

[ 6 ] Moral courage anonymity [ edit ] Many different aspects can contribute to moral courage. Something that may inhibit moral courage however, is the undesirable consequences in their personal, social, and work life. A way of counteracting those adverse consequences and increasing moral courage may be by adding anonymity.

[ 8 ] In a study on online moral courage, they found that moral courage and anonymity online had a positive correlation. Moral courage was also correlated with gender, age, and education levels, therefore, those who are older, male, and have lower levels of education are more likely to perform acts of moral courage when they perceive that they are acting anonymously compared to those who are young, female, and have higher levels of education.

[ 8 ] Even when controlling those factors, there is still a positive correlation.

References [ edit ] ^ Vesilind, P. Aarne (2006).

"The Courage To Do The Right Thing" .

The right thing to do: an ethics guide for engineering students (2nd ed.). Woodsville, N.H.: Lakeshore Press.

ISBN 9780965053969 .

^ Walton, Douglas N. (1986).

"Moral Deliberation and Conduct" .

Courage, a philosophical investigation . University of California Press.

ISBN 9780520054431 .

^ Putman, Daniel A. (2004).

Psychological Courage . University Press of America.

ISBN 9780761828204 .

^ Shippey, T. A. (1992).

The Road to Middle Earth . pp.

72– 73.

^ a b Bronstein, Phyllis; Fox, Barbara J.; Kamon, Jody L.; Knolls, Michelle L. (30 May 2007). "Parenting and Gender as Predictors of Moral Courage in Late Adolescence: A Longitudinal Study".

Sex Roles .

56 ( 9– 10): 661– 74.

doi : 10.1007/s11199-007-9182-8 .

S2CID 21740863 .

^ a b c d Izen, Seth (2011).

"Roots of Moral Courage" (PDF) .

UMass Lowell .

^ a b Brooks, A. K.; Edwards, K. (5 January 2009). "Allies in the Workplace: Including LGBT in HRD".

Advances in Developing Human Resources .

11 (1): 136– 49.

doi : 10.1177/1523422308328500 .

S2CID 145066844 .

^ a b Pan, Xinyu; Hou, Yubo; Wang, Qi (November 2023).

"Are we braver in cyberspace? Social media anonymity enhances moral courage" .

Computers in Human Behavior .

148 : 107880.

doi : 10.1016/j.chb.2023.107880 .

ISSN 0747-5632 .

Further reading [ edit ] Mackenzie, Compton (1962).

On moral courage . Collins.

Pianalto, Matthew (2012). "Moral Courage and Facing Others".

International Journal of Philosophical Studies .

20 (2): 165– 184.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.1017.3905 .

doi : 10.1080/09672559.2012.668308 .

S2CID 143490856 .

v t e Virtues About virtues Endowment Moral character Nicomachean Ethics Positive psychology Trait theory Virtue ethics Virtue families Bodhipakkhiyā dhammā Brahmavihārās Bushidō Catalogue of Vices and Virtues Emi Omo Eso Epistemic virtues Five virtues Four Cardinal Principles and Eight Virtues Intellectual virtues Moral virtues Nine Noble Virtues Omoluwabi Pāramīs Prussian virtues Scout Law Seven virtues Cardinal Theological Teachings of the Seven Grandfathers Three Treasures Values in Action Inventory of Strengths Yamas Individual virtues Accountability Alertness Altruism Authenticity Calmness Charisma Charity Chastity Chivalry Cleanliness Compassion Conscientiousness Courage Civil Moral Courtesy Diligence Discernment Discipline Duty Empathy Endurance Equanimity Etiquette Faith Faithfulness Fidelity Foresight Forgiveness Frugality Generosity Glory Good faith Gratitude Heroism Honesty Honour Hope Hospitality Humanity Humility Impartiality Innocence Insight Integrity Intelligence Emotional Social Judgement Justice Kindness Love Loyalty Magnanimity Magnificence Meekness Mercy Moderation Modesty Nonattachment Patience Patriotism Perspicacity Philanthropy Piety Filial Pity Politeness Prudence Punctuality Religion Renunciation Resilience Respect Reverence Righteous indignation Righteousness Self-control Self-cultivation Self-transcendence Simplicity Sincerity Solidarity Sportsmanship Sympathy Taste Temperance Tranquillity Trust Wisdom Wit Workmanship Chinese De Jing Li Ren Yi Greek Agape Arete Ataraxia Eutrapelia Philotimo Phronesis Sophia Sophrosyne Indian Adhiṭṭhāna Ahimsa Akrodha Aparigraha Ārjava Asteya Brahmacharya Dāna Dhṛti Hrī Karuṇā Kshama Kshanti Mettā Muditā Nishkama Karma Prajñā Samatva Satya Shaucha Sevā Śraddhā / Saddhā Upekṣā Vīrya Latin Auctoritas Caritas Decorum Dignitas Fides Gravitas Humanitas Pietas Virtus Other Ganbaru Giri Sadaqah Seny Sisu Virtù Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Moral_courage&oldid=1292088695 " Categories : Morality Moral psychology Courage Concepts in ethics Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2023 Articles needing more detailed references All articles that may have off-topic sections Wikipedia articles that may have off-topic sections from August 2023 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Catalan-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 04:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Moral courage 9 languages Add topic

