Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Hypermodernity 2 Supermodernity 3 See also 4 Bibliography 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Hypermodernity 6 languages Afrikaans Català Español Français Português Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Stage of society in postmodernism This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( February 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may be too technical for most readers to understand .

Please help improve it to make it understandable to non-experts , without removing the technical details.

( August 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Postmodernism Preceded by Modernism Postmodernity Deconstruction Hypermodernity Hyperreality Posthumanism Post-structuralism Fields Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Criminology Dance Feminism Film Television Literature ( Picture books ) Music International relations Philosophy Anarchism Marxism Postpositivism Psychology Political science Theatre Theology and Religion Reactions Criticism Metamodernism Post-postmodernism Remodernism v t e Hypermodernity (or supermodernity ) is a type, mode, or stage of society that reflects an inversion of modernity . Hypermodernism stipulates a world in which the object has been replaced by its own attributes.  The new attribute-driven world is driven by the rise of technology and aspires to a convergence between technology and biology and more importantly information and matter .  Hypermodernism finds its validation in emphasis on the value of new technology to overcome natural limitations. It rejects essentialism and instead favours postmodernism . In hypermodernism the function of an object has its reference point in the form of an object rather than function being the reference point for form.  In other words, it describes an epoch in which teleological meaning is reversed from the standpoint of functionalism in favor of constructivism .

Hypermodernity [ edit ] Hypermodernity emphasizes a hyperbolic separation between past and present because: The past oriented attributes and their functions around objects.

Objects that do exist in the present are only extant due to some useful attribute in the hypermodern era.

Hypermodernity inverts modernity to allow the attributes of an object to provide even more individuality than modernism. Modernity trapped form within the bounds of limited function; hypermodernity posits that function is now evolving so rapidly, it must take its reference point from form itself.  Both positive and negative societal changes occur due to hyper-individualism and increased personal choice.

Postmodernity rejected the idea of the past as a reference point and curated objects from the past for the sole purpose of freeing form from function.  In postmodernism, truth was ephemeral as the focus was to avoid non-falsifiable tenets. Postmodernity described a total collapse of modernity and its faith in progress and improvement in empowering the individual.

Supermodernity [ edit ] If distinguished from hypermodernity, supermodernity is a step beyond the ontological emptiness of postmodernism and relies upon plausible heuristic truths.  Whereas modernism focused upon the creation of great truths (or what Lyotard called " master narratives " or " metanarratives "), and postmodernity was intent upon their destruction ( deconstruction ); supermodernity operates extraneously of meta-truth.  Instead, attributes are extracted from objects of the past based on their present relevance.  Since attributes are both true and false, a truth value is not necessary including falsifiability.  Supermodernity curates useful attributes from modern and postmodern objects in order to escape nihilistic postmodern tautology . Related authors are Terry Eagleton After Theory , and Marc Augé Non-Places: Introduction to an Anthropology of Supermodernity .

See also [ edit ] Altermodern Hypermodernism Hypermodernism (chess) Metamodernism Bibliography [ edit ] S. Charles and G. Lipovetsky, Hypermodern Times , Polity Press, 2006.

S. Charles, Hypermodern Explained to Children , Liber, 2007 (in French).

R. Colonna, L'essere contro l'umano. Preludi per una filosofia della surmodernità , Edises, Napoli, 2010 (in Italian).

F. Schoumacher, Eidolon: simulacre et hypermodernité , Paris, Balland, 2024.

External links [ edit ] Gilles Lypovetsky interviewed by Denis Failly for his book "le bonheur paradoxal" v t e Criticism of postmodernism Concepts Altermodern Anti-anti-art Hypermodernity Metamodernism Neomodern Neomodernism New sincerity Post-irony Post-postmodernism Remodernism Remodernist film Stuckism International Transmodernism Critics Anderson Benson Berman Bricmont Bunge Chomsky Crews Dawkins Dennett Dussel Eagleton Fukuyama Hicks Jameson Kramer Lindsay Paglia Peterson Pluckrose Scruton Sokal Windschuttle Works Postmodernism, or, the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism (1991) Higher Superstition (1994) Dead White Males (1995) Fashionable Nonsense (1997) Explaining Postmodernism (2004) The Dictionary of Fashionable Nonsense (2006) Cynical Theories (2020) Related Grievance studies affair Postmodernism Generator Science wars Sokal affair Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hypermodernity&oldid=1291521420 " Categories : Modernity Criticism of postmodernism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from February 2010 All articles lacking in-text citations Wikipedia articles that are too technical from August 2021 All articles that are too technical Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 21 May 2025, at 19:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hypermodernity 6 languages Add topic

