Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Signs and symptoms Toggle Signs and symptoms subsection 1.1 Hallucinations 1.2 Delusions 1.3 Disorganized speech/thought and disorganized behavior 1.4 Negative symptoms 1.5 Psychosis in adolescents 2 Causes Toggle Causes subsection 2.1 Normal states 2.2 Trauma and stress 2.3 Psychiatric disorders 2.3.1 Subtypes 2.3.2 Cycloid psychosis 2.3.3 Postpartum psychosis 2.4 Medical conditions 2.5 Psychoactive drugs 2.5.1 Alcohol 2.5.2 Cannabis 2.5.3 Methamphetamine 2.5.4 Psychedelics 2.6 Medication 3 Pathophysiology Toggle Pathophysiology subsection 3.1 Neuroimaging 3.2 Hallucinations 3.3 Delusions 3.4 Negative symptoms 3.5 Neurobiology 3.6 Culture 4 Diagnosis 5 Prevention 6 Treatment Toggle Treatment subsection 6.1 Medication 6.2 Psychotherapy 6.3 Early intervention 6.4 Systematic reform 7 History Toggle History subsection 7.1 Etymology 7.2 Classification 7.3 Treatment 8 Society and culture Toggle Society and culture subsection 8.1 Disability 9 Research 10 References 11 Bibliography 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Psychosis 79 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Kabɩyɛ ქართული Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Mirandés Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Papiamentu Перем коми Polski Português Română Русский Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Abnormal condition of the mind For other uses, see Psychosis (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Psychopathy or Sycosis .

This article needs more reliable medical references for verification or relies too heavily on primary sources .

Please review the contents of the article and add the appropriate references if you can. Unsourced or poorly sourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "Psychosis" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2021 ) Medical condition Psychosis Other names Psychotic break ( colloquial ) Specialty Psychiatry , emergency medicine , clinical psychology Symptoms Delusions , hallucinations , incoherent speech and behavior [ 1 ] Complications Self-harm , suicide [ 2 ] Causes Mental illness ( schizophrenia , bipolar disorder ), trauma , sleep deprivation , some medical conditions, certain medications , drugs (including alcohol , caffeine and cannabis ) [ 1 ] Treatment Antipsychotics , counselling , social support [ 2 ] Prognosis Depends on cause [ 2 ] Frequency 3% of people at some point in their lives (U.S.) [ 1 ] In psychopathology , psychosis is a condition in which one is unable to distinguish, in one's experience of life, between what is and is not real .

[ 3 ] Examples of psychotic symptoms are delusions , hallucinations , and disorganized or incoherent thoughts or speech.

[ 3 ] Psychosis is a description of a person's state or symptoms, rather than a particular mental illness, and it is not related to psychopathy (a personality construct [ 4 ] [ 5 ] characterized by impaired empathy and remorse , along with bold , disinhibited , and egocentric traits).

Common causes of chronic (i.e. ongoing or repeating) psychosis include schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder , bipolar disorder , and brain damage (usually as a result of alcoholism ).

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Acute (temporary) psychosis can also be caused by severe distress , sleep deprivation , sensory deprivation , [ 8 ] some medications , and drug use (including alcohol , cannabis , hallucinogens , and stimulants ).

[ 9 ] Acute psychosis is termed primary if it results from a psychiatric condition and secondary if it is caused by another medical condition or drugs.

[ 9 ] The diagnosis of a mental-health condition requires excluding other potential causes.

[ 10 ] Tests can be done to check whether psychosis is caused by central nervous system diseases, toxins, or other health problems.

[ 11 ] Treatment may include antipsychotic medication , psychotherapy , and social support .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Early treatment appears to improve outcomes.

[ 1 ] Medications appear to have a moderate effect.

[ 12 ] Outcomes depend on the underlying cause.

[ 2 ] Psychosis is not well-understood at the neurological level, but dopamine (along with other neurotransmitters ) is known to play an important role.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] In the United States about 3% of people develop psychosis at some point in their lives.

[ 1 ] Psychosis has been described as early as the 4th century BC by Hippocrates and possibly as early as 1500 BC in the Ebers Papyrus .

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Signs and symptoms [ edit ] Hallucinations [ edit ] A hallucination is defined as sensory perception in the absence of external stimuli. Hallucinations are different from illusions and perceptual distortions, which are the misperception of external stimuli. Hallucinations may occur in any of the senses and take on almost any form. They may consist of simple sensations (such as lights, colors, sounds, tastes, or smells) or more detailed experiences (such as seeing and interacting with animals and people, hearing voices , and having complex tactile sensations). Hallucinations are generally characterized as being vivid and uncontrollable.

[ 18 ] Auditory hallucinations , particularly experiences of hearing voices, are the most common and often prominent feature of psychosis.

Up to 15% of the general population may experience auditory hallucinations (though not all are due to psychosis). The prevalence of auditory hallucinations in patients with schizophrenia is generally put around 70%, but may go as high as 98%. Reported prevalence in bipolar disorder ranges between 11% and 68%.

[ 19 ] During the early 20th century, auditory hallucinations were second to visual hallucinations in frequency, but they are now the most common manifestation of schizophrenia, although rates vary between cultures and regions. Auditory hallucinations are most commonly intelligible voices. When voices are present, the average number has been estimated at three. Content, like frequency, differs significantly, especially across cultures and demographics. People who experience auditory hallucinations can frequently identify the loudness, location of origin, and may settle on identities for voices. Western cultures are associated with auditory experiences concerning religious content, frequently related to sin. Hallucinations may command a person to do something potentially dangerous when combined with delusions.

[ 20 ] So-called "minor hallucinations", such as extracampine hallucinations, or false perceptions of people or movement occurring outside of one's visual field, frequently occur in neurocognitive disorders, such as Parkinson's disease.

[ 21 ] Visual hallucinations occur in roughly a third of people with schizophrenia, although rates as high as 55% are reported. The prevalence in bipolar disorder is around 15%. Content commonly involves animate objects, although perceptual abnormalities such as changes in lighting, shading, streaks, or lines may be seen. Visual abnormalities may conflict with proprioceptive information, and visions may include experiences such as the ground tilting.

Lilliputian hallucinations are less common in schizophrenia, and are more common in various types of encephalopathy , such as peduncular hallucinosis .

[ 20 ] [ 22 ] A visceral hallucination, also called a cenesthetic hallucination, is characterized by visceral sensations in the absence of stimuli. Cenesthetic hallucinations may include sensations of burning, or re-arrangement of internal organs.

[ 20 ] Delusions [ edit ] Psychosis may involve delusional beliefs. A delusion is a fixed, false idiosyncratic belief , which does not change even when presented with incontrovertible evidence to the contrary. Delusions are context- and culture-dependent: a belief that inhibits critical functioning and is widely considered delusional in one population may be common (and even adaptive) in another, or in the same population at a later time.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] Since normative views may contradict available evidence, a belief need not contravene cultural standards in order to be considered delusional. However, the DSM-5 considers a belief delusional only if it is not widely accepted within a cultural or subcultural context.

[ 25 ] Prevalence in schizophrenia is generally considered at least 90%, and around 50% in bipolar disorder.

The DSM-5 characterizes certain delusions as "bizarre" if they are clearly implausible, or are incompatible with the surrounding cultural context. The concept of bizarre delusions has many criticisms, the most prominent being that judging their presence is not highly reliable even among trained individuals.

[ 20 ] A delusion may involve diverse thematic content. The most common type is a persecutory delusion , in which a person believes that an entity seeks to harm them. Others include delusions of reference (the belief that some element of one's experience represents a deliberate and specific act by or message from some other entity), delusions of grandeur (the belief that one possesses special power or influence beyond one's actual limits), thought broadcasting (the belief that one's thoughts are audible) and thought insertion (the belief that one's thoughts are not one's own). A delusion may also involve misidentification of objects, persons, or environs that the afflicted should reasonably be able to recognize; such examples include Cotard's syndrome (the belief that oneself is partly or wholly dead ) and clinical lycanthropy (the belief that oneself is or has transformed into an animal).

The subject matter of delusions seems to reflect the current culture in a particular time and location. For example, in the early 1900s in the United States, syphilis was a common theme in delusions. During the Second World War, it was Germany. In the Cold War era, communists became a frequent focus. Now, in recent years, technology is a common subject matter of delusions.

[ 26 ] Some psychologists, such as those who practice the Open Dialogue method, believe that the content of psychosis represents an underlying thought process, that may in part, be responsible for psychosis, [ 27 ] though the accepted medical position is that psychosis is due to a brain disorder.

[ 28 ] Historically, Karl Jaspers classified psychotic delusions into primary and secondary types. Primary delusions are defined as arising suddenly and not being comprehensible in terms of normal mental processes, whereas secondary delusions are typically understood as being influenced by the person's background or current situation (e.g., ethnicity, religious, superstitious, or political beliefs).

[ 29 ] Disorganized speech/thought and disorganized behavior [ edit ] Disorganization is categorized into either disorganized speech (disorganized speech stemming from disorganized thought), and grossly disorganized motor behavior. Disorganized speech or thought, also formally called thought disorder , is disorganization of thinking that is inferred from speech. Characteristics of disorganized speech include rapidly switching topics which is called derailment or loose association, switching to topics that are unrelated which is called tangential thinking, incomprehensible speech which is called incoherence and referred to as a word salad . Disorganized motor behavior includes repetitive, odd, or sometimes purposeless movement. Disorganized motor behavior rarely includes catatonia, and although it was a prominent symptom historically, it is rarely seen today. Whether this may be due to the use of historical treatments or the lack thereof is unknown.

[ 20 ] [ 18 ] Catatonia describes a profoundly agitated state in which the experience of reality is generally considered impaired. There are two primary manifestations of catatonic behavior. The classic presentation is a person who does not move or interact with the world in any way while awake. This type of catatonia presents with waxy flexibility . Waxy flexibility is when someone physically moves part of a catatonic person's body and the person stays in the position even if it is bizarre and otherwise nonfunctional (such as moving a person's arm straight up in the air and the arm staying there).

[ citation needed ] The other type of catatonia is more of an outward presentation of the profoundly agitated state described above. It involves excessive and purposeless motor behaviour, as well as an extreme mental preoccupation that prevents an intact experience of reality. An example is someone walking very fast in circles to the exclusion of anything else with a level of mental preoccupation (meaning not focused on anything relevant to the situation) that was not typical of the person prior to the symptom onset. In both types of catatonia, there is generally no reaction to anything that happens outside of them. It is important to distinguish catatonic agitation from severe bipolar mania, although someone could have both.

[ citation needed ] Negative symptoms [ edit ] See also: Clouding of consciousness and Depression (mood) Negative symptoms include reduced emotional expression , decreased motivation ( avolition ), and reduced spontaneous speech (poverty of speech, alogia ). Individuals with this condition lack interest and spontaneity, and have the inability to feel pleasure ( anhedonia ).

[ 30 ] Altered Behavioral Inhibition System functioning could possibly cause reduced sustained attention in psychosis and overall contribute to more negative reactions.

[ 31 ] Psychosis in adolescents [ edit ] Psychosis is relatively rare in adolescents but not uncommon.

[ 32 ] Young people who have psychosis may have trouble connecting with the world around them and may experience hallucinations or delusions.

[ 33 ] Adolescents with psychosis may also have cognitive deficits that may make it harder for the youth to socialize and work.

[ 33 ] Potential impairments include a reduced speed of mental processing, the lack of ability to focus without getting distracted (limited attention span ), and deficits in verbal memory .

[ 33 ] If an adolescent is experiencing psychosis, they most likely have comorbidity, meaning that they could have multiple mental illnesses.

[ 34 ] Because of this, it may be difficult to determine whether it is psychosis or autism spectrum disorder, social or generalized anxiety disorder, or obsessive-compulsive disorder.

[ 34 ] Causes [ edit ] The symptoms of psychosis may be caused by serious psychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia , a number of medical illnesses, and trauma . Psychosis may also be temporary or transient, and be caused by medications or substance use disorder ( substance-induced psychosis ).

Normal states [ edit ] Brief hallucinations are not uncommon in those without any psychiatric disease, including healthy children. Causes or triggers include: [ 35 ] Falling asleep and waking: hypnagogic and hypnopompic hallucinations [ 36 ] Bereavement , in which hallucinations of a deceased loved one are common [ 35 ] [ 37 ] Severe sleep deprivation [ 38 ] [ 39 ] Extreme stress (see below) [ 40 ] Abnormal brainwaves [ 41 ] [ 42 ] Abnormal brain networks [ 43 ] [ 44 ] [ 45 ] Traumatic brain injury [ 46 ] [ 47 ] [ 48 ] Trauma and stress [ edit ] Traumatic life events have been linked with an elevated risk of developing psychotic symptoms.

[ 49 ] Childhood trauma has specifically been shown to be a predictor of adolescent and adult psychosis.

[ 50 ] Individuals with psychotic symptoms are three times more likely to have experienced childhood trauma (e.g., physical or sexual abuse, physical or emotional neglect) than those in the general population.

[ 50 ] Increased individual vulnerability toward psychosis may interact with traumatic experiences promoting an onset of future psychotic symptoms, particularly during sensitive developmental periods.

[ 50 ] Importantly, the relationship between traumatic life events and psychotic symptoms appears to be dose-dependent in which multiple traumatic life events accumulate, compounding symptom expression and severity.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] However, acute, stressful events can also trigger brief psychotic episodes.

[ 51 ] Trauma prevention and early intervention may be an important target for decreasing the incidence of psychotic disorders and ameliorating its effects.

[ 49 ] A healthy person could become psychotic if he or she is placed in an empty room with no light and sound. After about 15 minutes, psychosis can occur, this is a phenomenon known as sensory deprivation .

[ 8 ] Neuroticism , a personality trait associated with vulnerability to stressors, is an independent predictor of the development of psychosis.

[ 52 ] Psychiatric disorders [ edit ] Traditionally psychotic disorders have been believed to have one of two roots: organic or functional. Organic disorders being those caused by physical conditions directly affecting the brain with psychosis as a secondary feature, and functional disorders being primary psychological or psychiatric disorders (disorders of the functioning of the mind) in the absence of physiological causes. Subtle physical abnormalities have been found in illnesses traditionally considered functional, such as schizophrenia . The DSM-IV-TR avoids the functional/organic distinction, and instead lists traditional psychotic illnesses, psychosis due to general medical conditions, and substance-induced psychosis.

Primary psychiatric causes of psychosis include the following: [ 53 ] [ 54 ] [ 35 ] schizophrenia mood disorders including psychotic depression and bipolar disorder in the manic and mixed episodes of bipolar I disorder and depressive episodes of both bipolar I and bipolar II schizoaffective disorder delusional disorder brief psychotic disorder schizophreniform disorder Psychotic symptoms may also be seen in: [ 35 ] Personality disorders including Schizotypal personality disorder and borderline personality disorder Post-traumatic stress disorder obsessive–compulsive disorder dissociative identity disorder paraphrenia Subtypes [ edit ] Subtypes of psychosis include: Postpartum psychosis , occurring shortly after giving birth , primarily associated with maternal bipolar disorder Monothematic delusions Myxedematous psychosis Stimulant psychosis Tardive psychosis Shared psychosis Cycloid psychosis [ edit ] Cycloid psychosis is typically an acute, self-limiting form of psychosis with psychotic and mood symptoms that progress from normal to full-blown, usually between a few hours to days, and not related to drug intake or brain injury .

[ 55 ] While proposed as a distinct entity, clinically separate from schizophrenia and affective disorders, cycloid psychosis is not formally acknowledged by current ICD or DSM criteria.

[ 55 ] Its unclear place in psychiatric nosology has likely contributed to the limited scientific investigation and literature on the topic.

Postpartum psychosis [ edit ] Postpartum psychosis is a rare yet serious and debilitating form of psychosis.

[ 56 ] Symptoms range from fluctuating moods and insomnia to mood-incongruent delusions related to the individual or the infant.

[ 56 ] Women experiencing postpartum psychosis are at increased risk for suicide or infanticide. Many women who experience first-time psychosis from postpartum often have bipolar disorder, meaning they could experience an increase of psychotic episodes even after postpartum.

[ 56 ] Medical conditions [ edit ] A very large number of medical conditions can cause psychosis, sometimes called secondary psychosis .

[ 35 ] Examples include: disorders causing delirium ( toxic psychosis ), in which consciousness is disturbed neurodevelopmental disorders and chromosomal abnormalities, including velocardiofacial syndrome neurodegenerative disorders, such as Alzheimer's disease , dementia with Lewy bodies , and Parkinson's disease [ 57 ] focal neurological disease, such as stroke , brain tumors , [ 58 ] multiple sclerosis , [ 3 ] and some forms of epilepsy malignancy (typically via masses in the brain, paraneoplastic syndromes ) [ 3 ] infectious and postinfectious syndromes, including infections causing delirium , viral encephalitis , HIV/AIDS , [ 59 ] malaria , [ 60 ] syphilis [ 59 ] endocrine disease, such as hypothyroidism , hyperthyroidism , Cushing's syndrome , hypoparathyroidism and hyperparathyroidism ; [ 61 ] sex hormones also affect psychotic symptoms and sometimes giving birth can provoke psychosis, termed postpartum psychosis [ 62 ] inborn errors of metabolism, such as Wilson's disease, porphyria, and homocysteinemia.

[ 63 ] nutritional deficiency, such as vitamin B 12 deficiency [ 9 ] other acquired metabolic disorders, including electrolyte disturbances such as hypocalcemia , hypernatremia , hyponatremia , hypokalemia , hypomagnesemia , hypermagnesemia , hypercalcemia , and hypophosphatemia , but also hypoglycemia , hypoxia , and failure of the liver or kidneys [ 61 ] [ 9 ] autoimmune and related disorders, such as systemic lupus erythematosus (lupus, SLE), sarcoidosis , Hashimoto's encephalopathy , anti-NMDA-receptor encephalitis , and non-celiac gluten sensitivity [ 64 ] [ 65 ] poisoning by a range of plants, fungi, metals, organic compounds, and a few animal toxins [ 35 ] sleep disorders, such as in narcolepsy (in which REM sleep intrudes into wakefulness) [ 35 ] parasitic diseases, such as neurocysticercosis Psychoactive drugs [ edit ] Main article: Substance-induced psychosis Various psychoactive substances (both legal and illegal) have been implicated in causing, exacerbating, or precipitating psychotic states or disorders in users, with varying levels of evidence.

[ 66 ] This may be upon intoxication for a more prolonged period after use, or upon withdrawal .

[ 35 ] Individuals who experience substance-induced psychosis tend to have a greater awareness of their psychosis and tend to have higher levels of suicidal thinking compared to those who have a primary psychotic illness.

[ 67 ] Drugs commonly alleged to induce psychotic symptoms include alcohol , cannabis , cocaine , amphetamines , cathinones , psychedelic drugs (such as LSD and psilocybin ), κ-opioid receptor agonists (such as enadoline and salvinorin A ) and NMDA receptor antagonists (such as phencyclidine and ketamine ).

[ 35 ] [ 68 ] Caffeine may worsen symptoms in those with schizophrenia and cause psychosis at very high doses in people without the condition.

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] Cannabis and other illicit recreational drugs are often associated with psychosis in adolescents and cannabis use before 15 years old may increase the risk of psychosis in adulthood.

[ 33 ] Alcohol [ edit ] Further information: Long-term effects of alcohol consumption § Mental health effects Approximately 3% of people with alcoholism experience psychosis during acute intoxication or withdrawal. Alcohol related psychosis may manifest itself through a kindling mechanism . The mechanism of alcohol-related psychosis is due to the long-term effects of alcohol consumption resulting in distortions to neuronal membranes, gene expression , as well as thiamine deficiency. It is possible that hazardous alcohol use via a kindling mechanism can cause the development of a chronic substance-induced psychotic disorder, i.e. schizophrenia. The effects of an alcohol-related psychosis include an increased risk of depression and suicide as well as causing psychosocial impairments.

[ 71 ] Delirium tremens , a symptom of chronic alcoholism that can appear in the acute withdrawal phase, shares many symptoms with alcohol-related psychosis suggesting a common mechanism.

[ 72 ] Cannabis [ edit ] Further information: Causes of schizophrenia § Cannabis , and Long-term effects of cannabis § Chronic psychosis and schizophrenia spectrum disorders According to current studies, cannabis use is associated with increased risk of psychotic disorders, and the more often cannabis is used the more likely a person is to develop a psychotic illness.

[ 73 ] Furthermore, people with a history of cannabis use develop psychotic symptoms earlier than those who have never used cannabis.

[ 73 ] Some debate exists regarding the causal relationship between cannabis use and psychosis with some studies suggesting that cannabis use hastens the onset of psychosis primarily in those with pre-existing vulnerability.

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] [ 75 ] Indeed, cannabis use plays an important role in the development of psychosis in vulnerable individuals, and cannabis use in adolescence should be discouraged.

[ 76 ] Some studies indicate that the effects of two active compounds in cannabis, tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and cannabidiol (CBD), have opposite effects with respect to psychosis. While THC can induce psychotic symptoms in healthy individuals, limited evidence suggests that CBD may have antipsychotic effects.

[ 77 ] Methamphetamine [ edit ] Main article: Stimulant psychosis Methamphetamine induces a psychosis in 26%–46% of heavy users. Some of these people develop a long-lasting psychosis that can persist for longer than six months. Those who have had a short-lived psychosis from methamphetamine can have a relapse of the methamphetamine psychosis years later after a stressful event such as severe insomnia or a period of hazardous alcohol use despite not relapsing back to methamphetamine.

[ 78 ] Individuals who have a long history of methamphetamine use and who have experienced psychosis in the past from methamphetamine use are highly likely to re-experience methamphetamine psychosis if drug use is recommenced.

[ citation needed ] Methamphetamine-induced psychosis is likely gated by genetic vulnerability, which can produce long-term changes in brain neurochemistry following repetitive use.

[ 79 ] Methamphetamine users with more ADHD-related behaviours in childhood experience methamphetamine-related psychosis more frequently.

[ 80 ] Psychedelics [ edit ] A 2024 meta-analysis found an incidence of psychedelic-induced psychosis at 0.002% in population studies, 0.2% in uncontrolled clinical trials, and 0.6% in randomised controlled trials.

[ 81 ] This meta-analysis found that in uncontrolled clinical trials involving only patients with schizophrenia, 3.8% developed prolonged psychotic reactions. A 2024 study found that psychedelic use was not generally associated with a change in the number of psychotic symptoms.

[ 82 ] This study found that psychedelic use interacted with a family history of bipolar disorder, such that in those with a family history of bipolar disorder, psychedelic use was associated with an increase in the number of psychotic symptoms, while in those with a personal history of psychosis but no family history of psychotic disorders, psychedelic use was associated with a decrease in the number of psychotic symptoms. A 2023 study found an interaction between lifetime psychedelic use and family history of psychosis or bipolar disorder on psychotic symptoms over the past two weeks. Psychotic symptoms were highest among those with both a family history of psychosis or bipolar disorder and life-time psychedelic use, while they were lowest among those with life-time psychedelic use but no family history of these disorders.

[ 83 ] Medication [ edit ] Administration, or sometimes withdrawal, of a large number of medications may provoke psychotic symptoms.

[ 35 ] Drugs that can induce psychosis experimentally or in a significant proportion of people include: stimulants, such as amphetamine and other sympathomimetics , dopamine agonists, ketamine , corticosteroids (often with mood changes in addition), and some anticonvulsants such as vigabatrin .

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] [ 86 ] Pathophysiology [ edit ] Neuroimaging [ edit ] The first brain image of an individual with psychosis was completed as far back as 1935 using a technique called pneumoencephalography [ 87 ] (a painful and now obsolete procedure where cerebrospinal fluid is drained from around the brain and replaced with air to allow the structure of the brain to show up more clearly on an X-ray picture).

Both first episode psychosis , and high risk status is associated with reductions in grey matter volume (GMV). First episode psychotic and high risk populations are associated with similar but distinct abnormalities in GMV. Reductions in the right middle temporal gyrus , right superior temporal gyrus (STG), right parahippocampus , right hippocampus , right middle frontal gyrus , and left anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) are observed in high risk populations. Reductions in first episode psychosis span a region from the right STG to the right insula, left insula, and cerebellum, and are more severe in the right ACC, right STG, insula and cerebellum.

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] Another meta analysis reported bilateral reductions in insula, operculum, STG, medial frontal cortex, and ACC, but also reported increased GMV in the right lingual gyrus and left precentral gyrus .

[ 90 ] The Kraepelinian dichotomy is made questionable [ clarification needed ] by grey matter abnormalities in bipolar and schizophrenia; schizophrenia is distinguishable from bipolar in that regions of grey matter reduction are generally larger in magnitude, although adjusting for gender differences reduces the difference to the left dorsomedial prefrontal cortex , and right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex .

[ 91 ] During attentional tasks, first episode psychosis is associated with hypoactivation in the right middle frontal gyrus, a region generally described as encompassing the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC).Altered Behavioral Inhibition System functioning could possibly cause reduced sustained attention in psychosis and overall contribute to more negative reactions.

[ 92 ] In congruence with studies on grey matter volume, hypoactivity in the right insula, and right inferior parietal lobe is also reported.

[ 93 ] During cognitive tasks, hypoactivities in the right insula, dACC, and the left precuneus, as well as reduced deactivations in the right basal ganglia , right thalamus , right inferior frontal and left precentral gyri are observed. These results are highly consistent and replicable possibly except the abnormalities of the right inferior frontal gyrus.

[ 94 ] Decreased grey matter volume in conjunction with bilateral hypoactivity is observed in anterior insula, dorsal medial frontal cortex, and dorsal ACC. Decreased grey matter volume and bilateral hyperactivity is reported in posterior insula, ventral medial frontal cortex, and ventral ACC.

[ 95 ] Hallucinations [ edit ] Studies during acute experiences of hallucinations demonstrate increased activity in primary or secondary sensory cortices. As auditory hallucinations are most common in psychosis, most robust evidence exists for increased activity in the left middle temporal gyrus , left superior temporal gyrus , and left inferior frontal gyrus (i.e.

Broca's area ). Activity in the ventral striatum , hippocampus , [ 96 ] and ACC are related to the lucidity of hallucinations, and indicate that activation or involvement of emotional circuitry are key to the impact of abnormal activity in sensory cortices. Together, these findings indicate abnormal processing of internally generated sensory experiences, coupled with abnormal emotional processing, results in hallucinations. One proposed model involves a failure of feedforward networks from sensory cortices to the inferior frontal cortex, which normally cancel out sensory cortex activity during internally generated speech. The resulting disruption in expected and perceived speech is thought to produce lucid hallucinatory experiences.

[ 97 ] Delusions [ edit ] The two-factor model of delusions posits that dysfunction in both belief formation systems and belief evaluation systems are necessary for delusions. Dysfunction in evaluations systems localized to the right lateral prefrontal cortex, regardless of delusion content, is supported by neuroimaging studies and is congruent with its role in conflict monitoring in healthy persons. Abnormal activation and reduced volume is seen in people with delusions, as well as in disorders associated with delusions such as frontotemporal dementia , psychosis and Lewy body dementia . Furthermore, lesions to this region are associated with "jumping to conclusions", damage to this region is associated with post-stroke delusions, and hypometabolism this region associated with caudate strokes presenting with delusions.

The aberrant salience model suggests that delusions are a result of people assigning excessive importance to irrelevant stimuli. In support of this hypothesis, regions normally associated with the salience network demonstrate reduced grey matter in people with delusions, and the neurotransmitter dopamine , which is widely implicated in salience processing, is also widely implicated in psychotic disorders.

Specific regions have been associated with specific types of delusions. The volume of the hippocampus and parahippocampus is related to paranoid delusions in Alzheimer's disease , and has been reported to be abnormal post mortem in one person with delusions.

Capgras delusions have been associated with occipito-temporal damage, and may be related to failure to elicit normal emotions or memories in response to faces.

[ 98 ] Negative symptoms [ edit ] This section may be too technical for most readers to understand .

Please help improve it to make it understandable to non-experts , without removing the technical details.

( November 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Psychosis is associated with ventral striatum (VS), which is the part of the brain that is involved with the desire to naturally satisfy the body's needs.

[ 99 ] When high reports of negative symptoms were recorded, there were significant irregularities in the left VS. Anhedonia, the inability to feel pleasure, is a commonly reported symptom in psychosis; experiences are present in most people with schizophrenia.

[ 100 ] Anhedonia arises as a result of the inability to feel motivation and drive towards both the desire to engage in as well as to complete tasks and goals. Previous research has indicated that a deficiency in the neural representation in regards to goals and the motivation to achieve them, has demonstrated that when a reward is not present, a strong reaction is noted in the ventral striatum; reinforcement learning is intact when contingencies about stimulus-reward are implicit, but not when they require explicit neural processing; reward prediction errors are what the actual reward is versus what the reward was predicted to be.

[ 101 ] In most cases positive prediction errors are considered an abnormal occurrence. A positive prediction error response occurs when there is an increased activation in a brain region, typically the striatum , in response to unexpected rewards. A negative prediction error response occurs when there is a decreased activation in a region when predicted rewards do not occur.

Anterior Cingulate Cortex (ACC) response, taken as an indicator of effort allocation, does not increase with reward or reward probability increase, and is associated with negative symptoms; deficits in Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex (dlPFC) activity and failure to improve performance on cognitive tasks when offered monetary incentives are present; and dopamine mediated functions are abnormal.

Neurobiology [ edit ] Further information: Dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia This section may be too technical for most readers to understand .

Please help improve it to make it understandable to non-experts , without removing the technical details.

( November 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Psychosis has been traditionally linked to the overactivity of the neurotransmitter dopamine , in particular to its effect in the mesolimbic pathway , spanning from the ventral tegmental area to the ventral striatum . Additionally, recent evidence suggests a crucial involvement of the pathway spanning from the substantia nigra to the dorsal striatum .

[ 102 ] The two major sources of evidence given to support this theory are that dopamine receptor D2 blocking drugs (i.e., antipsychotics ) tend to reduce the intensity of psychotic symptoms, and that drugs that accentuate dopamine release, or inhibit its reuptake (such as amphetamines and cocaine ) can trigger psychosis in some people (see stimulant psychosis ).

[ 103 ] However, there is substantial evidence that dopaminergic overactivity does not fully explain psychosis, and that neurodegerative pathophysiology plays a significant role. This is evidenced by the fact that psychosis commonly occurs in neurodegenerative diseases of the dopaminergic nervous system, such as Parkinson's disease, which involved reduced, rather than increased, dopaminergic activity.

[ 104 ] The endocannabinoid system is also implicated in psychosis. This is evidenced by the propensity of CB 1 receptor agonists such as THC to induce psychotic symptoms, [ 105 ] and the efficacy of CB 1 receptor antagonists such as CBD in ameliorating psychosis.

[ 106 ] NMDA receptor dysfunction has been proposed as a mechanism in psychosis.

[ 107 ] This theory is reinforced by the fact that dissociative NMDA receptor antagonists such as ketamine , PCP and dextromethorphan (at large overdoses) induce a psychotic state. The symptoms of dissociative intoxication are also considered to mirror the symptoms of schizophrenia, including negative symptoms .

[ 108 ] NMDA receptor antagonism, in addition to producing symptoms reminiscent of psychosis, mimics the neurophysiological aspects, such as reduction in the amplitude of P50 , P300 , and MMN evoked potentials .

[ 109 ] Hierarchical Bayesian neurocomputational models of sensory feedback, in agreement with neuroimaging literature, link NMDA receptor hypofunction to delusional or hallucinatory symptoms via proposing a failure of NMDA mediated top down predictions to adequately cancel out enhanced bottom up AMPA mediated predictions errors.

[ 110 ] Excessive prediction errors in response to stimuli that would normally not produce such a response is thought to root from conferring excessive salience to otherwise mundane events.

[ 111 ] Dysfunction higher up in the hierarchy, where representation is more abstract, could result in delusions.

[ 112 ] The common finding of reduced GAD67 expression in psychotic disorders may explain enhanced AMPA mediated signaling, caused by reduced GABAergic inhibition.

[ 113 ] [ 114 ] The connection between dopamine and psychosis is generally believed to be complex. While dopamine receptor D2 suppresses adenylate cyclase activity, the D1 receptor increases it. If D2-blocking drugs are administered, the blocked dopamine spills over to the D1 receptors. The increased adenylate cyclase activity affects genetic expression in the nerve cell, which takes time. Hence antipsychotic drugs take a week or two to reduce the symptoms of psychosis. Moreover, newer and equally effective antipsychotic drugs actually block slightly less dopamine in the brain than older drugs whilst also blocking 5-HT2A receptors, suggesting the 'dopamine hypothesis' may be oversimplified.

[ 115 ] Soyka and colleagues found no evidence of dopaminergic dysfunction in people with alcohol-induced psychosis [ 116 ] and Zoldan et al. reported moderately successful use of ondansetron , a 5-HT 3 receptor antagonist, in the treatment of levodopa psychosis in Parkinson's disease patients.

[ 117 ] A review found an association between a first-episode of psychosis and prediabetes.

[ 118 ] Prolonged or high dose use of psychostimulants can alter normal functioning, making it similar to the manic phase of bipolar disorder.

[ 119 ] NMDA antagonists replicate some of the so-called "negative" symptoms like thought disorder in subanesthetic doses (doses insufficient to induce anesthesia ), and catatonia in high doses. Psychostimulants, especially in one already prone to psychotic thinking, can cause some "positive" symptoms, such as delusional beliefs, particularly those persecutory in nature.

Culture [ edit ] Cross-cultural studies into schizophrenia have found that individual experiences of psychosis and 'hearing voices' vary across cultures.

[ 120 ] [ 121 ] In countries such as the United States where there exists a predominantly biomedical understanding of the body, the mind and in turn, mental health, subjects were found to report their hallucinations as having 'violent content' and self-describing as 'crazy'.

[ 120 ] This experience is at odds with the experiences of subjects in Accra, Ghana , who describe the voices they hear as having 'spiritual meaning' and are often reported as positive in nature; or subjects in Chennai, India , who describe their hallucinations as kin, family members or close friends, and offering guidance.

[ 120 ] These differences are attributed to 'social kindling' or how one's social context shapes how an one interprets and experiences sensations such as hallucinations. This concept aligns with preexisting cognitive theory such as reality modelling and is supported by recent research that demonstrates that individuals with psychosis can be taught to attend to their hallucinations differently, which in turn alters the hallucinations themselves.

[ 122 ] Such research creates pathways for social or community-based treatment, such as reality monitoring, for individuals with schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders, providing alternatives to, or supplementing traditional pharmacologic management.

Cross-cultural studies explore the way in which psychosis varies in different cultures, countries and religions. The cultural differences are based on the individual or shared illness narratives surrounding cultural meanings of illness experience.

[ 123 ] In countries such as India , Cambodia and Muslim majority countries, they each share alternative epistemologies. These are known as knowledge systems that focus on the connections between mind, body, culture, nature and society.

[ 124 ] Cultural perceptions of mental disorders such as psychosis or schizophrenia are believed to be caused by jinn (spirits) in Muslim majority countries.

[ 125 ] Furthermore, those in Arab -Muslim societies perceive those who act differently than the social norm as "crazy" or as abnormal behaviour.

[ 125 ] This differs from the experiences of individuals in India and how they attain their perspectives on mental health issues through a variety of spiritual and healing traditions.

[ 126 ] In Cambodia, hallucinations are linked with spirit visitation, a term they call "cultural kindling".

[ 127 ] These examples of differences are attributed to culture and the way it shapes conceptions of mental disorders.

[ 125 ] These cultural differences can be useful in bridging the gap of cultural understanding and psychiatric signs and symptoms.

[ 123 ] Diagnosis [ edit ] To make a diagnosis of a mental illness in someone with psychosis other potential causes must be excluded .

[ 128 ] An initial assessment includes a comprehensive history and physical examination by a health care provider. Tests may be done to exclude substance use, medication, toxins, surgical complications, or other medical illnesses. A person with psychosis is referred to as psychotic.

Delirium should be ruled out, which can be distinguished by visual hallucinations, acute onset and fluctuating level of consciousness, indicating other underlying factors, including medical illnesses.

[ 129 ] Excluding medical illnesses associated with psychosis is performed by using blood tests to measure: thyroid-stimulating hormone to exclude hypo- or hyperthyroidism , vitamin B 12 serum and urinary MMA to role out pernicious anemia or vitamin B 12 deficiency , basic electrolytes and serum calcium to rule out a metabolic disturbance, full blood count including ESR to rule out a systemic infection or chronic disease, and serology to exclude syphilis or HIV infection.

Other investigations include: EEG to exclude epilepsy , and an MRI or CT scan of the head to exclude brain lesions.

Because psychosis may be precipitated or exacerbated by common classes of medications, medication-induced psychosis should be ruled out , particularly for first-episode psychosis. Both substance- and medication-induced psychosis can be excluded to a high level of certainty, using toxicology screening.

Because some dietary supplements may also induce psychosis or mania, but cannot be ruled out with laboratory tests, a psychotic individual's family, partner, or friends should be asked whether the patient is currently taking any dietary supplements.

[ 130 ] Common mistakes made when diagnosing people who are psychotic include: [ 128 ] Not properly excluding delirium , Not appreciating medical abnormalities (e.g., vital signs), Not obtaining a medical history and family history, Indiscriminate screening without an organizing framework, Missing a toxic psychosis by not screening for substances and medications, Not asking their families or others about dietary supplements, Premature diagnostic closure, and Not revisiting or questioning the initial diagnostic impression of primary psychiatric disorder.

Only after relevant and known causes of psychosis are excluded, a mental health clinician may make a psychiatric differential diagnosis using a person's family history, incorporating information from the person with psychosis, and information from family, friends or romantic partners.

Types of psychosis in psychiatric disorders may be established by formal rating scales. The Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS) [ 131 ] assesses the level of 18 symptom constructs of psychosis such as hostility , suspicion , hallucination , and grandiosity . It is based on the clinician's interview with the patient and observations of the patient's behavior over the previous 2–3 days. The patient's family can also answer questions on the behavior report. During the initial assessment and the follow-up, both positive and negative symptoms of psychosis can be assessed using the 30 item Positive and Negative Symptom Scale ( PANSS ).

[ 132 ] The DSM-5 characterizes disorders as psychotic or on the schizophrenia spectrum if they involve hallucinations, delusions, disorganized thinking, grossly disorganized motor behavior, or negative symptoms.

[ 18 ] The DSM-5 does not include psychosis as a definition in the glossary, although it defines "psychotic features", as well as "psychoticism" with respect to personality disorder. The ICD-10 has no specific definition of psychosis.

[ 133 ] The PSQ (Psychosis Screening Questionnaire) is the most common tool in detecting psychotic symptoms and it includes five root questions that assess the presence of PLE (mania, thought insertion, paranoia, strange experiences and perceptual disturbances) [ 134 ] The different tools used to assess symptom severity include the Revised Behavior and Symptom Identification Scale (BASIS-R), a 24-item self-report instrument with six scales: psychosis, depression/functioning, interpersonal problems, alcohol/drug use, self-harm, and emotional lability. The Symptom Checklist-90-Revised (SCL-90-R), a 90-item self assessment tool that measures psychoticism and paranoid ideation in addition to seven other symptom scales. Finally, the Brief Symptom Inventory (BSI), a 53-item self-administered scale developed from the SCL-90-R. The BSI has good psychometric properties and is an acceptable brief alternative to the SCL-90-R.

[ 135 ] These seem to be the most accurate tools at the moment, but a research in 2007 that focused on quantifying self-reports of auditory verbal hallucinations (AVH) in persons with psychosis, suggest that The Hamilton Program for Schizophrenia Voices Questionnaire (HPSVQ) is also potentially a reliable and useful measure for specifically quantifying AVHs in relation to psychosis.

[ 136 ] Factor analysis of symptoms generally regarded as psychosis frequently yields a five factor solution, albeit five factors that are distinct from the five domains defined by the DSM-5 to encompass psychotic or schizophrenia spectrum disorders. The five factors are frequently labeled as hallucinations, delusions, disorganization, excitement, and emotional distress.

[ 133 ] The DSM-5 emphasizes a psychotic spectrum , wherein the low end is characterized by schizoid personality disorder, and the high end is characterized by schizophrenia.

[ 3 ] Gouzoulis-Mayfrank et al. said that the pleasant or emotionally positive experiences that are common in psychosis, particularly in the early stages, are more easily overlooked in clinical practice than the negative experiences.

[ 137 ] Nev Jones and Mona Shattel wrote that there is less curiosity towards the complications, or towards the richness of the good things as well as the bad things.

[ 137 ] Prevention [ edit ] The evidence for the effectiveness of early interventions to prevent psychosis appeared inconclusive.

[ 138 ] But psychosis caused by drugs can be prevented.

[ 139 ] Whilst early intervention in those with a psychotic episode might improve short-term outcomes, little benefit was seen from these measures after five years.

[ 140 ] However, there is evidence that cognitive behavioral therapy (C.B.T.) may reduce the risk of  becoming psychotic in those at high risk, [ 141 ] and in 2014 the U.K.

National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (N.I.C.E.) recommended preventive C.B.T. for people at risk of psychosis.

[ 142 ] [ 143 ] Treatment [ edit ] The treatment of psychosis depends on the specific diagnosis (such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorder or substance intoxication). The first-line treatment for many psychotic disorders is antipsychotic medication, [ 144 ] which can reduce the positive symptoms of psychosis in about 7 to 14 days. For youth or adolescents, treatment options include medications, psychological interventions, and social interventions.

[ 33 ] Medication [ edit ] The choice of which antipsychotic to use is based on benefits, risks, and costs.

[ 140 ] It is debatable whether, as a class, typical or atypical antipsychotics are better.

[ 145 ] [ 146 ] Tentative evidence supports that amisulpride , olanzapine , risperidone and clozapine may be more effective for positive symptoms but result in more side effects.

[ 147 ] Typical antipsychotics have equal drop-out and symptom relapse rates to atypicals when used at low to moderate dosages.

[ 148 ] There is a good response in 40–50%, a partial response in 30–40%, and treatment resistance (failure of symptoms to respond satisfactorily after six weeks to two or three different antipsychotics) in 20% of people.

[ 149 ] Clozapine is an effective treatment for those who respond poorly to other drugs ("treatment-resistant" or "refractory" schizophrenia), [ 150 ] but it has the potentially serious side effect of agranulocytosis (lowered white blood cell count) in less than 4% of people.

[ 140 ] [ 151 ] [ 152 ] Most people on antipsychotics get side effects. People on typical antipsychotics tend to have a higher rate of extrapyramidal side effects while some atypicals are associated with considerable weight gain, diabetes and risk of metabolic syndrome ; this is most pronounced with olanzapine, while risperidone and quetiapine are also associated with weight gain.

[ 147 ] Risperidone has a similar rate of extrapyramidal symptoms to haloperidol.

[ 147 ] Psychotherapy [ edit ] Psychological treatments such as acceptance and commitment therapy (A.C.T.) are possibly useful in the treatment of psychosis, helping people to focus more on what they can do in terms of valued life directions despite challenging symptomology.

[ 153 ] Metacognitive training (MCT) is associated with reduced delusions , hallucinations and negative symptoms as well as improved self-esteem and functioning in individuals with schizophrenia spectrum disorders.

[ 154 ] There are many psychosocial interventions that seek to treat the symptoms of psychosis: need adapted treatment , Open Dialogue , psychoanalysis/psychodynamic psychotherapy, major role therapy , soteria , psychosocial outpatient and inpatient treatment, milieu therapy , and  cognitive behavioral therapy ( C.B.T.

). In relation to the success of C.B.T. for psychosis, a randomized controlled trial for a web-based C.B.T.P. (Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Psychosis) skills program named Coping With Voices (C.W.V.) suggest that the program has promise for increasing access to C.B.T.P. It also associated benefits in the management of distressing psychotic symptoms and improved social functioning. When C.B.T. and the other psychosocial interventions [ 155 ] these are used without antipsychotic medications, they may be somewhat effective for some people, especially for C.B.T., need-adapted treatment, and soteria.

[ 156 ] Early intervention [ edit ] Main article: Early intervention in psychosis Early intervention in psychosis is based on the observation that identifying and treating someone in the early stages of a psychosis can improve his or her longer-term outcome.

[ 157 ] This approach advocates the use of an intensive multi-disciplinary approach during what is known as the critical period , where intervention is the most effective, and prevents the long-term morbidity associated with chronic psychotic illness.

Systematic reform [ edit ] Addressing systematic reform is essential to creating effective prevention as well as supporting treatments and recovery for those with psychosis.

Waghorn et al.

[ 158 ] suggest that education interventions can be a building block to support those with psychosis to successfully participate in society. In their study they analyse the relationship between successful education attainment and psychosis. Findings suggest proportionately more school-aged persons with psychosis discontinued their education compared to those without psychosis.

[ 158 ] Waghorn et al.

[ 158 ] finds that specialised supported education for those with psychotic disorders can help lead to successful education attainment. Additionally, future employment outcomes are relative to such education attainment. Established approaches to supported education in the U.S. include three basic models, self-contained classrooms, onsite support model and the mobile support model. Each model includes the participation of mental health service staff or educational facility staff in the student's education arrangements.

[ 158 ] Potential benefits of specialised supported education found from this study include coordination with other service providers (e.g. income support, housing, etc.) to prevent disrupting education, providing specialised career counselling, development of coping skills in the academic environment.

[ 158 ] These examples provide beneficial ways for people with psychosis to finish studies successfully as well as counter future experiences of psychosis.

[ 158 ] History [ edit ] Etymology [ edit ] The word psychosis was introduced to the psychiatric literature in 1841 by Karl Friedrich Canstatt in his work Handbuch der Medizinischen Klinik . He used it as a shorthand for 'psychic neurosis'. At that time neurosis meant any disease of the nervous system , and Canstatt was thus referring to what was considered a psychological manifestation of brain disease.

[ 159 ] Ernst von Feuchtersleben is also widely credited as introducing the term in 1845, [ 160 ] as an alternative to insanity and mania .

The term stems from Modern Latin psychosis , "a giving soul or life to, animating, quickening" and that from Ancient Greek ψυχή ( psyche ), "soul" and the suffix -ωσις (- osis ), in this case  "abnormal condition".

[ 161 ] [ 162 ] In its adjective form "psychotic", references to psychosis can be found in both clinical and non-clinical discussions. However, in a non -clinical context, "psychotic" is a nonspecific colloquialism used to mean "insane".

Classification [ edit ] The word was also used to distinguish a condition considered a disorder of the mind, as opposed to neurosis , which was considered a disorder of the nervous system.

[ 163 ] The psychoses thus became the modern equivalent of the old notion of madness , and hence there was much debate on whether there was only one (unitary) or many forms of the new disease.

[ 164 ] One type of broad usage would later be narrowed down by Koch in 1891 to the 'psychopathic inferiorities'—later renamed abnormal personalities by Schneider .

[ 159 ] The division of the major psychoses into manic depressive illness (now called bipolar disorder ) and dementia praecox (now called schizophrenia ) was made by Emil Kraepelin , who attempted to create a synthesis of the various mental disorders identified by 19th-century psychiatrists , by grouping diseases together based on classification of common symptoms. Kraepelin used the term 'manic depressive insanity' to describe the whole spectrum of mood disorders , in a far wider sense than it is usually used today.

In Kraepelin's classification this would include 'unipolar' clinical depression , as well as bipolar disorder and other mood disorders such as cyclothymia . These are characterised by problems with mood control and the psychotic episodes appear associated with disturbances in mood, and patients often have periods of normal functioning between psychotic episodes even without medication.

Schizophrenia is characterized by psychotic episodes that appear unrelated to disturbances in mood, and most non-medicated patients show signs of disturbance between psychotic episodes.

Treatment [ edit ] Written record of supernatural causes and resultant treatments can be traced back to the New Testament .

Mark 5 :8–13 describes a man displaying what would today be described as psychotic symptoms.

Christ cured this " demonic madness" by casting out the demons and hurling them into a herd of swine. Exorcism is still utilized in some religious circles as a treatment for psychosis presumed to be demonic possession.

[ 165 ] A research study of out-patients in psychiatric clinics found that 30% of religious patients attributed the cause of their psychotic symptoms to evil spirits. Many of these patients underwent exorcistic healing rituals that, though largely regarded as positive experiences by the patients, had no effect on symptomology. Results did however show a significant worsening of psychotic symptoms associated with exclusion of medical treatment for coercive forms of exorcism.

[ 166 ] Bust of Hippocrates The medical teachings of the fourth-century philosopher and physician Hippocrates of Cos proposed a natural, rather than supernatural, cause of human illness. In Hippocrates' work, the Hippocratic corpus , a holistic explanation for health and disease was developed to include madness and other "diseases of the mind". Hippocrates writes: Men ought to know that from the brain, and from the brain only, arise our pleasures, joys, laughter, and jests, as well as our sorrows, pains, griefs and tears. Through it, in particular, we think, see, hear, and distinguish the ugly from the beautiful, the bad from the good, the pleasant from the unpleasant.... It is the same thing which makes us mad or delirious, inspires us with dread and fear, whether by night or by day, brings sleeplessness, inopportune mistakes, aimless anxieties, absentmindedness, and acts that are contrary to habit.

[ 167 ] Hippocrates espoused a theory of humoralism wherein disease is resultant of a shifting balance in bodily fluids including blood , phlegm , black bile , and yellow bile .

[ 168 ] According to humoralism, each fluid or " humour " has temperamental or behavioral correlates. In the case of psychosis, symptoms are thought to be caused by an excess of both blood and yellow bile. Thus, the proposed surgical intervention for psychotic or manic behavior was bloodletting .

[ 169 ] 18th-century physician, educator, and widely considered "founder of American psychiatry", Benjamin Rush , also prescribed bloodletting as a first-line treatment for psychosis. Although not a proponent of humoralism, Rush believed that active purging and bloodletting were efficacious corrections for disruptions in the circulatory system, a complication he believed was the primary cause of "insanity".

[ 170 ] Although Rush's treatment modalities are now considered antiquated and brutish, his contributions to psychiatry, namely the biological underpinnings of psychiatric phenomenon including psychosis, have been invaluable to the field. In honor of such contributions, Benjamin Rush's image is in the official seal of the American Psychiatric Association .

Early 20th-century treatments for severe and persisting psychosis were characterized by an emphasis on shocking the nervous system. Such therapies include insulin shock therapy , cardiazol shock therapy, and electroconvulsive therapy .

[ 171 ] Despite considerable risk, shock therapy was considered highly efficacious in the treatment of psychosis including schizophrenia . The acceptance of high-risk treatments led to more invasive medical interventions including psychosurgery .

[ 172 ] Gottlieb Burckhardt (1836–1907) In 1888, Swiss psychiatrist Gottlieb Burckhardt performed the first medically sanctioned psychosurgery in which the cerebral cortex was excised. Although some patients showed improvement of symptoms and became more subdued, one patient died and several developed aphasia or seizure disorders. Burckhardt would go on to publish his clinical outcomes in a scholarly paper. This procedure was met with criticism from the medical community and his academic and surgical endeavors were largely ignored.

[ 173 ] In the late 1930s, Egas Moniz conceived the leucotomy (AKA prefrontal lobotomy ) in which the fibers connecting the frontal lobes to the rest of the brain were severed. Moniz's primary inspiration stemmed from a demonstration by neuroscientists John Fulton and Carlyle's 1935 experiment in which two chimpanzees were given leucotomies and pre- and post-surgical behavior was compared. Prior to the leucotomy, the chimps engaged in typical behavior including throwing feces and fighting. After the procedure, both chimps were pacified and less violent. During the Q&A, Moniz asked if such a procedure could be extended to human subjects, a question that Fulton admitted was quite startling.

[ 174 ] Moniz would go on to extend the controversial practice to humans with various psychotic disorders, an endeavor for which he received a Nobel Prize in 1949.

[ 175 ] Between the late 1930s and early 1970s, the leucotomy was a widely accepted practice, often performed in non- sterile environments such as small outpatient clinics and patient homes.

[ 174 ] Psychosurgery remained standard practice until the discovery of antipsychotic pharmacology in the 1950s.

[ 176 ] The first clinical trial of antipsychotics (also commonly known as neuroleptics) for the treatment of psychosis took place in 1952.

Chlorpromazine (brand name: Thorazine) passed clinical trials and became the first antipsychotic medication approved for the treatment of both acute and chronic psychosis. Although the mechanism of action was not discovered until 1963, the administration of chlorpromazine marked the advent of the dopamine antagonist , or first generation antipsychotic.

[ 177 ] While clinical trials showed a high response rate for both acute psychosis and disorders with psychotic features, the side effects were particularly harsh, which included high rates of often irreversible Parkinsonian symptoms such as tardive dyskinesia . With the advent of atypical antipsychotics (also known as second generation antipsychotics) came a dopamine antagonist with a comparable response rate but a far different, though still extensive, side-effect profile that included a lower risk of Parkinsonian symptoms but a higher risk of cardiovascular disease.

[ 178 ] Atypical antipsychotics remain the first-line treatment for psychosis associated with various psychiatric and neurological disorders including schizophrenia, bipolar disorder , major depressive disorder , anxiety disorders , dementia , and some autism spectrum disorders.

[ 179 ] Dopamine is now one of the primary neurotransmitters implicated in psychotic symptomology. Blocking dopamine receptors (namely, the dopamine D2 receptors) and decreasing dopaminergic activity continues to be an effective but highly unrefined effect of antipsychotics, which are commonly used to treat psychosis. Recent pharmacological research suggests that the decrease in dopaminergic activity does not eradicate psychotic delusions or hallucinations , but rather attenuates the reward mechanisms involved in the development of delusional thinking; that is, connecting or finding meaningful relationships between unrelated stimuli or ideas.

[ 103 ] The author of this research paper acknowledges the importance of future investigation: The model presented here is based on incomplete knowledge related to dopamine, schizophrenia, and antipsychotics—and as such will need to evolve as more is known about these.

— Shitij Kapur, From dopamine to salience to psychosis—linking biology, pharmacology and phenomenology of psychosis Freud 's former student Wilhelm Reich explored independent insights into the physical effects of neurotic and traumatic upbringing, and published his holistic psychoanalytic treatment with a schizophrenic. With his incorporation of breathwork and insight with the patient, a young woman, she achieved sufficient self-management skills to end the therapy.

[ 180 ] Lacan extended Freud's ideas to create a psychoanalytic model of psychosis based upon the concept of " foreclosure ", the rejection of the symbolic concept of the father.

Psychiatrist David Healy has criticised pharmaceutical companies for promoting simplified biological theories of mental illness that seem to imply the primacy of pharmaceutical treatments while ignoring social and developmental factors that are known important influences in the etiology of psychosis.

[ 181 ] Society and culture [ edit ] Symptoms of psychosis can also include visions or quasi-visual experiences, felt presences, alterations of time, alterations of space, or alterations of spatiotemporal qualities of objects and things.

[ 137 ] While there are many overwhelmingly negative experiences of psychosis, some experiences of psychosis can be overwhelmingly positive and can be experienced as uplifting or as healing or as difficult but meaningful.

[ 137 ] Jones and Shattell said that mutual dialogue in clinical practice would in theory allow the meaning and complexity of psychotic experiences to emerge.

[ 137 ] Disability [ edit ] The classification of psychosis as a social disability is a common occurrence.

Psychosis is considered to be among the top ten causes of social disability among adults in developed countries.

[ 182 ] The traditional, negative narrative around disability has been shown to adversely influence employment and education for people experiencing psychosis.

[ 183 ] Social disability by way of social disconnection is a significant public health concern and is associated with a broad range of negative outcomes, including premature mortality. Social disconnection refers to the ongoing absence of family or social relationships with marginal participation in social activities.

Research on psychosis found that reduced participation in social networks, not only negatively effects the individual on a physical and mental level, it has been shown that failure to be included in social networks influences the individual's ability to participate in the wider community through employment and education opportunities.

[ 184 ] [ 185 ] [ 186 ] Equal opportunity to participate in meaningful relationships with friends, family and romantic partners, as well as engaging in social constructs such as employment, can provide significant physical and mental value to people's lives.

[ 184 ] And how breaking the disability mind-set around people experiencing psychosis is imperative for their overall, long-term health and well-being as well as the contributions they are able to make to their immediate social connections and the wider community.

[ 185 ] Research [ edit ] Further research in the form of randomized controlled trials is needed to determine the effectiveness of treatment approaches for helping adolescents with psychosis.

[ 33 ] Through 10 randomized clinical trials, studies showed that Early Intervention Services (EIS) for patients with early-phase schizophrenia spectrum disorders have generated promising outcomes.

[ 187 ] EIS are specifically intended to fulfill the needs of patients with early-phase psychosis.

[ 187 ] In addition, one meta-analysis that consisted of four randomized clinical trials has examined and discovered the efficacy of EIS to Therapy as Usual (TAU) for early-phase psychosis, revealing that EIS techniques are superior to TAU.

[ 187 ] A study suggests that combining cognitive behavioral therapy (C.B.T.) with SlowMo, an application that helps notice their "unhelpful quick-thinking", might be more effective for treating paranoia in people with psychosis than C.B.T. alone.

[ 188 ] [ 189 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f "RAISE Questions and Answers" .

NIMH . Archived from the original on 8 October 2019 . Retrieved 23 January 2018 .

^ a b c d e "Psychosis" .

NHS . 23 December 2016.

Archived from the original on 15 October 2018 . Retrieved 24 January 2018 .

^ a b c d e Arciniegas DB (June 2015).

"Psychosis" .

Continuum .

21 (3 Behavioral Neurology and Neuropsychiatry): 715– 736.

doi : 10.1212/01.CON.0000466662.89908.e7 .

PMC 4455840 .

PMID 26039850 .

^ Blackburn, Ronald (2005).

"Psychopathy as a Personality Construct" .

American Psychiatric Association .

Archived from the original on 5 September 2023 . Retrieved 12 June 2024 .

^ Driessen, Josi M. A.; van Baar, Jeroen M.; Sanfey, Alan G.; Glennon, Jeffrey C.; Brazil, Inti A. (July 2021). "Moral strategies and psychopathic traits".

Journal of Abnormal Psychology .

130 (5): 550– 561.

doi : 10.1037/abn0000675 .

hdl : 2066/236779 .

ISSN 1939-1846 .

PMID 34472890 .

^ Radua J, Ramella-Cravaro V, Ioannidis JP, Reichenberg A, Phiphopthatsanee N, Amir T, et al. (February 2018).

"What causes psychosis? An umbrella review of risk and protective factors" .

World Psychiatry .

17 (1): 49– 66.

doi : 10.1002/wps.20490 .

PMC 5775150 .

PMID 29352556 .

^ "Korsakoff Psychosis – Special Subjects" .

MSD Manual Professional Edition . Retrieved 2024-04-10 .

^ a b Gelder, Michael G.; Gath, Dennis; Mayou, Richard (1983).

Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-261294-6 .

^ a b c d Griswold KS, Del Regno PA, Berger RC (June 2015).

"Recognition and Differential Diagnosis of Psychosis in Primary Care" .

American Family Physician .

91 (12): 856– 863.

PMID 26131945 .

Archived from the original on 2021-02-22 . Retrieved 2021-12-06 .

^ Cardinal RN, Bullmore ET (2011).

The Diagnosis of Psychosis . Cambridge University Press. p. 279.

ISBN 978-1-139-49790-9 .

Archived from the original on 2020-08-06 . Retrieved 2020-06-25 .

^ Foster NL (2011).

The American Psychiatric Publishing Textbook of Geriatric Neuropsychiatry . American Psychiatric Pub. p. 523.

ISBN 978-1-58562-952-7 .

Archived from the original on 2020-08-19 . Retrieved 2020-06-25 .

^ Haddad PM, Correll CU (November 2018).

"The acute efficacy of antipsychotics in schizophrenia: a review of recent meta-analyses" .

Therapeutic Advances in Psychopharmacology .

8 (11): 303– 318.

doi : 10.1177/2045125318781475 .

PMC 6180374 .

PMID 30344997 .

^ Stahl SM (June 2018).

"Beyond the dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia to three neural networks of psychosis: dopamine, serotonin, and glutamate" .

CNS Spectrums .

23 (3): 187– 191.

doi : 10.1017/S1092852918001013 .

PMID 29954475 .

S2CID 49599226 .

^ Grace AA (August 2016).

"Dysregulation of the dopamine system in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia and depression" .

Nature Reviews. Neuroscience .

17 (8): 524– 532.

doi : 10.1038/nrn.2016.57 .

PMC 5166560 .

PMID 27256556 .

^ Leucht S, Leucht C, Huhn M, Chaimani A, Mavridis D, Helfer B, et al. (October 2017).

"Sixty Years of Placebo-Controlled Antipsychotic Drug Trials in Acute Schizophrenia: Systematic Review, Bayesian Meta-Analysis, and Meta-Regression of Efficacy Predictors" .

The American Journal of Psychiatry .

174 (10): 927– 942.

doi : 10.1176/appi.ajp.2017.16121358 .

PMID 28541090 .

S2CID 27256686 .

^ Gibbs RS (2008).

Danforth's Obstetrics and Gynecology . Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. p. 508.

ISBN 978-0-7817-6937-2 .

^ Giddens JF (2015).

Concepts for Nursing Practice – E-Book . Elsevier Health Sciences. p. 348.

ISBN 978-0-323-38946-4 .

Archived from the original on 2020-08-19 . Retrieved 2020-06-25 .

^ a b c American Psychiatric Association (2013).

Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders : DSM-5 (5th ed.). Washington, D.C.: American Psychiatric Association. p.

125 .

ISBN 978-0-89042-554-1 .

^ Toh WL, Thomas N, Rossell SL (September 2015). "Auditory verbal hallucinations in bipolar disorder (BD) and major depressive disorder (MDD): A systematic review".

Journal of Affective Disorders .

184 : 18– 28.

doi : 10.1016/j.jad.2015.05.040 .

PMID 26066781 .

^ a b c d e Lewis S, Escalona R, Keith S (2017). "Phenomenology of Schizophrenia". In Sadock V, Sadock B, Ruiz P (eds.).

Kaplan and Sadock's Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry . Wolters Kluwer.

ISBN 978-1-45-110047-1 .

^ Lenka A, Pagonabarraga J, Pal PK, Bejr-Kasem H, Kulisvesky J (August 2019).

"Minor hallucinations in Parkinson disease: A subtle symptom with major clinical implications" .

Neurology .

93 (6): 259– 266.

doi : 10.1212/WNL.0000000000007913 .

PMC 6709995 .

PMID 31289146 .

^ Blom JD (June 2021). "Leroy's elusive little people: A systematic review on lilliputian hallucinations".

Neurosci Biobehav Rev .

125 : 627– 636.

doi : 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.03.002 .

PMID 33676962 .

^ Joseph, Shawn M.; Siddiqui, Waquar (2024). "Delusional Disorder".

StatPearls . StatPearls Publishing.

PMID 30969677 . Retrieved 19 August 2024 .

^ Ashinoff, Brandon K.; Singletary, Nicholas M.; Baker, Seth C.; Horga, Guillermo (July 2022).

"Rethinking delusions: A selective review of delusion research through a computational lens" .

Schizophrenia Research .

245 : 23– 41.

doi : 10.1016/j.schres.2021.01.023 .

PMC 8413395 .

PMID 33676820 .

^ "Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders" , DSM-5® Clinical Cases , American Psychiatric Publishing, 2013-08-11, doi : 10.1176/appi.books.9781585624836.jb02 , ISBN 978-1-58562-463-8 , retrieved 2025-03-17 ^ Cannon BJ, Kramer LM (May 2012). "Delusion content across the 20th century in an American psychiatric hospital".

The International Journal of Social Psychiatry .

58 (3). SAGE Publications: 323– 327.

doi : 10.1177/0020764010396413 .

PMID 21421637 .

S2CID 42421925 .

^ Seikkula J, Alakare B, Aaltonen J (2001). "Open Dialogue in Psychosis I: An Introduction and Case Illustration".

Journal of Constructivist Psychology .

14 (4): 247– 265.

doi : 10.1080/10720530125965 .

ISSN 1072-0537 .

S2CID 216136239 .

^ Saugstad, Letten F. (June 2008). "What is a psychosis and where is it located?".

European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience . 258 Suppl 2: 111– 117.

doi : 10.1007/s00406-008-2014-1 .

ISSN 0940-1334 .

PMID 18516523 .

^ Jaspers K (1997-11-27) [1963].

Allgemeine Psychopathologie [ General Psychopathology ] (in German). Translated by Hoenig J, Hamilton M (Reprint ed.). Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8018-5775-1 .

^ Lyne J, O'Donoghue B, Roche E, Renwick L, Cannon M, Clarke M (August 2018).

"Negative symptoms of psychosis: A life course approach and implications for prevention and treatment" (PDF) .

Early Intervention in Psychiatry .

12 (4): 561– 571.

doi : 10.1111/eip.12501 .

hdl : 11343/293781 .

PMID 29076240 .

S2CID 38777906 .

^ Osborne, K. Juston; Zhang, Wendy; Gupta, Tina; Farrens, Jaclyn; Geiger, McKena; Kraus, Brian; Krugel, Chloe; Nusslock, Robin; Kappenman, Emily S.; Mittal, Vijay A. (November 2023).

"Clinical high risk for psychosis syndrome is associated with reduced neural responding to unpleasant images" .

Journal of Psychopathology and Clinical Science .

132 (8): 1060– 1071.

doi : 10.1037/abn0000862 .

ISSN 2769-755X .

PMC 11812458 .

PMID 37796541 .

S2CID 263669772 .

^ Kelleher, I.; Connor, D.; Clarke, M. C.; Devlin, N.; Harley, M.; Cannon, M. (2012).

"Prevalence of psychotic symptoms in childhood and adolescence: a systematic review and meta-analysis of population-based studies" .

Psychological Medicine .

42 (9): 1857– 1863.

doi : 10.1017/S0033291711002960 .

ISSN 1469-8978 .

PMID 22225730 .

^ a b c d e f Datta SS, Daruvala R, Kumar A, et al. (Cochrane Schizophrenia Group) (July 2020).

"Psychological interventions for psychosis in adolescents" .

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

7 (7): CD009533.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD009533.pub2 .

PMC 7388907 .

PMID 32633858 .

^ a b Joyce EM (July 2018).

"Organic psychosis: The pathobiology and treatment of delusions" .

CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics .

24 (7): 598– 603.

doi : 10.1111/cns.12973 .

PMC 6489844 .

PMID 29766653 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Cardinal RN, Bullmore, ET (2011).

The Diagnosis of Psychosis . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-16484-9 .

^ Waters F, Blom JD, Dang-Vu TT, Cheyne AJ, Alderson-Day B, Woodruff P, Collerton D (September 2016).

"What Is the Link Between Hallucinations, Dreams, and Hypnagogic–Hypnopompic Experiences?" .

Schizophrenia Bulletin .

42 (5): 1098– 1109.

doi : 10.1093/schbul/sbw076 .

PMC 4988750 .

PMID 27358492 .

^ Elsaesser, Evelyn; Roe, Chris A.; Cooper, Callum E.; Lorimer, David (September 2021).

"The phenomenology and impact of hallucinations concerning the deceased" .

BJPsych Open .

7 (5): e148.

doi : 10.1192/bjo.2021.960 .

ISSN 2056-4724 .

PMC 8388006 .

^ Waters F, Chiu V, Atkinson A, Blom JD (2018).

"Severe Sleep Deprivation Causes Hallucinations and a Gradual Progression Toward Psychosis With Increasing Time Awake" .

Frontiers in Psychiatry .

9 : 303.

doi : 10.3389/fpsyt.2018.00303 .

PMC 6048360 .

PMID 30042701 .

^ Cosgrave J, Wulff K, Gehrman P (May 2018). "Sleep, circadian rhythms, and schizophrenia: where we are and where we need to go".

Current Opinion in Psychiatry .

31 (3): 176– 182.

doi : 10.1097/YCO.0000000000000419 .

PMID 29537983 .

S2CID 4414751 .

^ Pruessner M, Cullen AE, Aas M, Walker EF (February 2017).

"The neural diathesis-stress model of schizophrenia revisited: An update on recent findings considering illness stage and neurobiological and methodological complexities" .

Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews .

73 : 191– 218.

doi : 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.12.013 .

PMID 27993603 .

S2CID 3971965 .

Archived from the original on 2022-06-30 . Retrieved 2022-05-05 .

^ Grent-‘t-Jong, Tineke; Gajwani, Ruchika; Gross, Joachim; Gumley, Andrew I.; Krishnadas, Rajeev; Lawrie, Stephen M.; Schwannauer, Matthias; Schultze-Lutter, Frauke; Uhlhaas, Peter J. (2020-08-01).

"Association of Magnetoencephalographically Measured High-Frequency Oscillations in Visual Cortex With Circuit Dysfunctions in Local and Large-scale Networks During Emerging Psychosis" .

JAMA Psychiatry .

77 (8): 852– 862.

doi : 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2020.0284 .

ISSN 2168-622X .

PMC 7097849 .

PMID 32211834 .

^ Supekar, Kaustubh; de los Angeles, Carlo; Ryali, Srikanth; Kushan, Leila; Schleifer, Charlie; Repetto, Gabriela; Crossley, Nicolas A.; Simon, Tony; Bearden, Carrie E.; Menon, Vinod (October 2024).

"Robust and replicable functional brain signatures of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome and associated psychosis: a deep neural network-based multi-cohort study" .

Molecular Psychiatry .

29 (10): 2951– 2966.

doi : 10.1038/s41380-024-02495-8 .

ISSN 1476-5578 .

PMID 38605171 .

^ Ding, Ningning; Zhang, Entu; Liu, Yangyang; Zhang, Shuaiqi; Lu, Pei; Zhang, Haisan (2024-11-30).

"Network integration and segregation changes in schizophrenia: impact of electroconvulsive therapy" .

BMC Psychiatry .

24 (1): 862.

doi : 10.1186/s12888-024-06331-9 .

ISSN 1471-244X .

PMC 11607971 .

PMID 39616308 .

^ Li, Siyi; Hu, Na; Zhang, Wenjing; Tao, Bo; Dai, Jing; Gong, Yao; Tan, Youguo; Cai, Duanfang; Lui, Su (2019-07-12).

"Dysconnectivity of Multiple Brain Networks in Schizophrenia: A Meta-Analysis of Resting-State Functional Connectivity" .

Frontiers in Psychiatry .

10 : 482.

doi : 10.3389/fpsyt.2019.00482 .

ISSN 1664-0640 .

PMC 6639431 .

PMID 31354545 .

^ Kinsey, Spencer; Kazimierczak, Katarzyna; Camazón, Pablo Andrés; Chen, Jiayu; Adali, Tülay; Kochunov, Peter; Adhikari, Bhim M.; Ford, Judith; van Erp, Theo G. M.; Dhamala, Mukesh; Calhoun, Vince D.; Iraji, Armin (2024-11-21).

"Networks extracted from nonlinear fMRI connectivity exhibit unique spatial variation and enhanced sensitivity to differences between individuals with schizophrenia and controls" .

Nature Mental Health .

2 (12): 1464– 1475.

doi : 10.1038/s44220-024-00341-y .

ISSN 2731-6076 .

PMC 11621020 .

PMID 39650801 .

^ Batty, Rachel A.; Rossell, Susan L.; Francis, Andrew J.P.; Ponsford, Jennie (May 2013).

"Psychosis Following Traumatic Brain Injury" .

Brain Impairment .

14 (1): 21– 41.

doi : 10.1017/BrImp.2013.10 .

ISSN 1443-9646 .

^ David, A S (2005-03-01).

"Psychosis following head injury: a critical review" .

Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry .

76 (suppl_1): i53 – i60 .

doi : 10.1136/jnnp.2004.060475 .

ISSN 0022-3050 .

PMC 1765686 .

PMID 15718223 .

^ Fujii, Daryl; Fujii, Daniel C. (July 2012).

"Psychotic Disorder Due to Traumatic Brain Injury: Analysis of Case Studies in the Literature" .

The Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences .

24 (3): 278– 289.

doi : 10.1176/appi.neuropsych.11070176 .

ISSN 0895-0172 .

PMID 23037642 .

^ a b c Gibson LE, Alloy LB, Ellman LM (November 2016).

"Trauma and the psychosis spectrum: A review of symptom specificity and explanatory mechanisms" .

Clinical Psychology Review .

49 : 92– 105.

doi : 10.1016/j.cpr.2016.08.003 .

PMC 5157832 .

PMID 27632064 .

^ a b c d Misiak B, Krefft M, Bielawski T, Moustafa AA, Sąsiadek MM, Frydecka D (April 2017). "Toward a unified theory of childhood trauma and psychosis: A comprehensive review of epidemiological, clinical, neuropsychological and biological findings".

Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews .

75 : 393– 406.

doi : 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.02.015 .

PMID 28216171 .

S2CID 21614845 .

^ Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders : DSM-5 . Arlington, VA : American Psychiatric Association. 2013.

ISBN 978-0-89042-554-1 .

^ Jeronimus BF, Kotov R, Riese H, Ormel J (October 2016).

"Neuroticism's prospective association with mental disorders halves after adjustment for baseline symptoms and psychiatric history, but the adjusted association hardly decays with time: a meta-analysis on 59 longitudinal/prospective studies with 443 313 participants" .

Psychological Medicine .

46 (14): 2883– 2906.

doi : 10.1017/S0033291716001653 .

PMID 27523506 .

S2CID 23548727 .

Archived from the original on 2019-07-24 . Retrieved 2019-07-03 .

^ World Health Organization , The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders: Clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines (CDDG) Archived 2004-10-17 at the Wayback Machine , 1992.

^ Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders : DSM-5 . Arlington, VA : American Psychiatric Association. 2013.

ISBN 978-0-89042-554-1 – via Internet Archive.

^ a b El-Mallakh RS, Furdek C (June 2018).

"Cycloid Psychosis" .

The American Journal of Psychiatry .

175 (6): 502– 505.

doi : 10.1176/appi.ajp.2017.17030282 .

PMID 29869551 .

^ a b c VanderKruik R, Barreix M, Chou D, Allen T, Say L, Cohen LS (July 2017).

"The global prevalence of postpartum psychosis: a systematic review" .

BMC Psychiatry .

17 (1) 272.

doi : 10.1186/s12888-017-1427-7 .

PMC 5534064 .

PMID 28754094 .

^ Karameh WK, Murari G, Schweizer TA, Munoz DG, Fischer CE (March 2019). "Psychosis in neurodegenerative disorders: recent developments".

Current Opinion in Psychiatry .

32 (2): 117– 122.

doi : 10.1097/YCO.0000000000000476 .

PMID 30520740 .

S2CID 54560300 .

^ Lisanby SH, Kohler C, Swanson CL, Gur RE (January 1998). "Psychosis Secondary to Brain Tumor".

Seminars in Clinical Neuropsychiatry .

3 (1): 12– 22.

PMID 10085187 .

^ a b Munjal S, Ferrando SJ, Freyberg Z (July 2017).

"Neuropsychiatric Aspects of Infectious Diseases: An Update" .

Critical Care Clinics .

33 (3): 681– 712.

doi : 10.1016/j.ccc.2017.03.007 .

PMC 5771230 .

PMID 28601141 .

^ Nevin RL, Croft AM (June 2016).

"Psychiatric effects of malaria and anti-malarial drugs: historical and modern perspectives" .

Malaria Journal .

15 332.

doi : 10.1186/s12936-016-1391-6 .

PMC 4918116 .

PMID 27335053 .

^ a b Skikic M, Arriola JA (January 2020). "First Episode Psychosis Medical Workup: Evidence-Informed Recommendations and Introduction to a Clinically Guided Approach".

Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics of North America .

29 (1): 15– 28.

doi : 10.1016/j.chc.2019.08.010 .

PMID 31708044 .

S2CID 207965670 .

^ Davies W (June 2017).

"Understanding the pathophysiology of postpartum psychosis: Challenges and new approaches" .

World Journal of Psychiatry .

7 (2): 77– 88.

doi : 10.5498/wjp.v7.i2.77 .

PMC 5491479 .

PMID 28713685 .

^ Turkel SB, Wong D, Randolph L (2020-09-01). "Psychiatric Symptoms Associated with Inborn Errors of Metabolism".

SN Comprehensive Clinical Medicine .

2 (9): 1646– 1660.

doi : 10.1007/s42399-020-00403-z .

ISSN 2523-8973 .

S2CID 221130135 .

^ Losurdo G, Principi M, Iannone A, Amoruso A, Ierardi E, Di Leo A, Barone M (April 2018).

"Extra-intestinal manifestations of non-celiac gluten sensitivity: An expanding paradigm" .

World Journal of Gastroenterology (Review).

24 (14): 1521– 1530.

doi : 10.3748/wjg.v24.i14.1521 .

PMC 5897856 .

PMID 29662290 .

^ Najjar S, Steiner J, Najjar A, Bechter K (February 2018).

"A clinical approach to new-onset psychosis associated with immune dysregulation: the concept of autoimmune psychosis" .

Journal of Neuroinflammation .

15 (1) 40.

doi : 10.1186/s12974-018-1067-y .

PMC 5809809 .

PMID 29433523 .

^ Baldaçara, Leonardo; Ramos, Artur; Castaldelli-Maia, João Maurício (2023). "Managing drug-induced psychosis".

International Review of Psychiatry .

35 ( 5– 6): 496– 502.

doi : 10.1080/09540261.2023.2261544 .

ISSN 1369-1627 .

PMID 38299647 .

^ Grant KM, LeVan TD, Wells SM, Li M, Stoltenberg SF, Gendelman HE , et al. (March 2012).

"Methamphetamine-associated psychosis" .

Journal of Neuroimmune Pharmacology .

7 (1): 113– 139.

doi : 10.1007/s11481-011-9288-1 .

PMC 3280383 .

PMID 21728034 .

^ Krebs TS, Johansen PØ (August 2013).

"Psychedelics and mental health: a population study" .

PLOS ONE .

8 (8): e63972.

Bibcode : 2013PLoSO...863972K .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0063972 .

PMC 3747247 .

PMID 23976938 .

^ Alasmari F (April 2020).

"Caffeine induces neurobehavioral effects through modulating neurotransmitters" .

Saudi Pharmaceutical Journal .

28 (4): 445– 451.

doi : 10.1016/j.jsps.2020.02.005 .

PMC 7132598 .

PMID 32273803 .

^ Beauchamp G, Amaducci A, Cook M (2017-09-01). "Caffeine Toxicity: A Brief Review and Update".

Clinical Pediatric Emergency Medicine . Toxicology.

18 (3): 197– 202.

doi : 10.1016/j.cpem.2017.07.002 .

ISSN 1522-8401 .

^ Castillo-Carniglia A, Keyes KM, Hasin DS, Cerdá M (December 2019).

"Psychiatric comorbidities in alcohol use disorder" .

The Lancet. Psychiatry .

6 (12): 1068– 1080.

doi : 10.1016/S2215-0366(19)30222-6 .

PMC 7006178 .

PMID 31630984 .

^ Jordaan GP, Emsley R (June 2014).

"Alcohol-induced psychotic disorder: a review" .

Metabolic Brain Disease .

29 (2): 231– 243.

doi : 10.1007/s11011-013-9457-4 .

PMID 24307180 .

S2CID 17239167 .

Archived from the original on 2021-10-18 . Retrieved 2021-01-20 .

^ a b c Hasan A, von Keller R, Friemel CM, Hall W, Schneider M, Koethe D, et al. (June 2020). "Cannabis use and psychosis: a review of reviews".

European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience .

270 (4): 403– 412.

doi : 10.1007/s00406-019-01068-z .

PMID 31563981 .

S2CID 203567900 .

^ Ortiz-Medina MB, Perea M, Torales J, Ventriglio A, Vitrani G, Aguilar L, Roncero C (November 2018). "Cannabis consumption and psychosis or schizophrenia development".

The International Journal of Social Psychiatry .

64 (7): 690– 704.

doi : 10.1177/0020764018801690 .

hdl : 10366/163120 .

PMID 30442059 .

S2CID 53563635 .

^ Hamilton I, Monaghan M (June 2019).

"Cannabis and Psychosis: Are We any Closer to Understanding the Relationship?" .

Current Psychiatry Reports .

21 (7) 48.

doi : 10.1007/s11920-019-1044-x .

PMC 6546656 .

PMID 31161275 .

^ van der Steur SJ, Batalla A, Bossong MG (February 2020).

"Factors Moderating the Association Between Cannabis Use and Psychosis Risk: A Systematic Review" .

Brain Sciences .

10 (2): 97.

doi : 10.3390/brainsci10020097 .

PMC 7071602 .

PMID 32059350 .

^ Chesney E, Oliver D, McGuire P (July 2021).

"Cannabidiol (CBD) as a novel treatment in the early phases of psychosis" .

Psychopharmacology .

239 (5): 1179– 1190.

doi : 10.1007/s00213-021-05905-9 .

PMC 9110455 .

PMID 34255100 .

S2CID 235807339 .

^ Shin EJ, Dang DK, Tran TV, Tran HQ, Jeong JH, Nah SY, et al. (April 2017). "Current understanding of methamphetamine-associated dopaminergic neurodegeneration and psychotoxic behaviors".

Archives of Pharmacal Research .

40 (4): 403– 428.

doi : 10.1007/s12272-017-0897-y .

PMID 28243833 .

S2CID 22791168 .

^ Greening DW, Notaras M, Chen M, Xu R, Smith JD, Cheng L, et al. (August 2021).

"Chronic methamphetamine interacts with BDNF Val66Met to remodel psychosis pathways in the mesocorticolimbic proteome" .

Molecular Psychiatry .

26 (8): 4431– 4447.

doi : 10.1038/s41380-019-0617-8 .

PMID 31822818 .

S2CID 209169489 .

Archived from the original on 2020-08-06 . Retrieved 2020-01-05 .

^ Salo, Ruth; Fassbender, Catherine; Iosif, Ana-Maria; Ursu, Stefan; Leamon, Martin H; Carter, Cameron (2013-12-15).

"Predictors of methamphetamine psychosis: History of ADHD-relevant childhood behaviors and drug exposure" .

Psychiatry Research .

210 (2): 529– 535.

doi : 10.1016/j.psychres.2013.06.030 .

ISSN 0165-1781 .

PMC 3818411 .

PMID 23896355 .

^ Sabé, Michel; Sulstarova, Adi; Glangetas, Alban; De Pieri, Marco; Mallet, Luc; Curtis, Logos; Richard-Lepouriel, Héléne; Penzenstadler, Louise; Seragnoli, Federico; Thorens, Gabriel; Zullino, Daniele; Preller, Katrin; Böge, Kerem; Leucht, Stefan; Correll, Christoph U. (November 2024).

"Reconsidering evidence for psychedelic-induced psychosis: an overview of reviews, a systematic review, and meta-analysis of human studies" .

Molecular Psychiatry .

30 (3): 1223– 1255.

doi : 10.1038/s41380-024-02800-5 .

ISSN 1476-5578 .

PMC 11835720 .

PMID 39592825 .

^ Honk, Ludwig; Stenfors, Cecilia U. D.; Goldberg, Simon B.; Hendricks, Peter S.; Osika, Walter; Dourron, Haley Maria; Lebedev, Alexander; Petrovic, Predrag; Simonsson, Otto (2024-04-15).

"Longitudinal associations between psychedelic use and psychotic symptoms in the United States and the United Kingdom" .

Journal of Affective Disorders .

351 : 194– 201.

doi : 10.1016/j.jad.2024.01.197 .

ISSN 0165-0327 .

PMC 10922895 .

PMID 38280572 .

^ Simonsson, Otto; Goldberg, Simon B.; Chambers, Richard; Osika, Walter; Simonsson, Charlotta; Hendricks, Peter S. (2023-10-24).

"Psychedelic use and psychiatric risks" .

Psychopharmacology .

242 (7): 1577– 1583.

doi : 10.1007/s00213-023-06478-5 .

ISSN 1432-2072 .

PMC 11039563 .

PMID 37874345 .

^ Guadalupe MT, Páramo IA (2020-03-23). "Corticosteroid-induced psychosis: Case report and review of the literature".

European Psychiatry .

41 (S1): s840.

doi : 10.1016/j.eurpsy.2017.01.1659 .

ISSN 0924-9338 .

S2CID 232174454 .

^ Gray LA (2020-03-01). "Anticonvulsant toxicity".

Medicine .

48 (3): 192– 193.

doi : 10.1016/j.mpmed.2019.12.011 .

ISSN 1357-3039 .

S2CID 243053658 .

^ Ward K, Citrome L (February 2018). "Lisdexamfetamine: chemistry, pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, and clinical efficacy, safety, and tolerability in the treatment of binge eating disorder".

Expert Opinion on Drug Metabolism & Toxicology .

14 (2): 229– 238.

doi : 10.1080/17425255.2018.1420163 .

PMID 29258368 .

S2CID 3494618 .

^ Moore MT, Nathan D, Elliott AR, Laubach C (1935). "Encephalographic studies in mental disease".

American Journal of Psychiatry .

92 (1): 43– 67.

doi : 10.1176/ajp.92.1.43 .

^ Fusar-Poli P, Radua J, McGuire P, Borgwardt S (November 2012).

"Neuroanatomical maps of psychosis onset: voxel-wise meta-analysis of antipsychotic-naive VBM studies" .

Schizophrenia Bulletin .

38 (6): 1297– 1307.

doi : 10.1093/schbul/sbr134 .

PMC 3494061 .

PMID 22080494 .

^ Palaniyappan L, Balain V, Liddle PF (October 2012). "The neuroanatomy of psychotic diathesis: a meta-analytic review".

Journal of Psychiatric Research .

46 (10): 1249– 1256.

doi : 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2012.06.007 .

PMID 22790253 .

^ Radua J, Borgwardt S, Crescini A, Mataix-Cols D, Meyer-Lindenberg A, McGuire PK, Fusar-Poli P (November 2012).

"Multimodal meta-analysis of structural and functional brain changes in first episode psychosis and the effects of antipsychotic medication" .

Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews .

36 (10): 2325– 2333.

doi : 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2012.07.012 .

PMID 22910680 .

Patients with an FEP showed large and robust bilateral decreases of GMV in a peri-Sylvian cluster that included the insula, operculum and the superior temporal gyrus, and in the medial frontal and anterior cingulate cortices (MeF/ACC) (Fig. 2A and Supplementary Table S2). Patients had relatively greater GMV than controls in the right lingual gyrus and left precentral gyrus.

^ Bora E, Fornito A, Yücel M, Pantelis C (February 2012). "The effects of gender on grey matter abnormalities in major psychoses: a comparative voxelwise meta-analysis of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder".

Psychological Medicine .

42 (2): 295– 307.

doi : 10.1017/S0033291711001450 .

PMID 21835091 .

S2CID 206252132 .

^ Osborne, K. Juston; Zhang, Wendy; Gupta, Tina; Farrens, Jaclyn; Geiger, McKena; Kraus, Brian; Krugel, Chloe; Nusslock, Robin; Kappenman, Emily S.; Mittal, Vijay A. (November 2023).

"Clinical high risk for psychosis syndrome is associated with reduced neural responding to unpleasant images" .

Journal of Psychopathology and Clinical Science .

132 (8): 1060– 1071.

doi : 10.1037/abn0000862 .

ISSN 2769-755X .

PMC 11812458 .

PMID 37796541 .

^ Del Casale A, Kotzalidis GD, Rapinesi C, Sorice S, Girardi N, Ferracuti S, Girardi P (2016). "Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging Correlates of First-Episode Psychoses during Attentional and Memory Task Performance".

Neuropsychobiology .

74 (1): 22– 31.

doi : 10.1159/000448620 .

PMID 27698323 .

S2CID 5806628 .

^ Radua et al. 2012 , 3.3. Changes in regional brain response to cognitive tasks. "In the anterior part of the right insula and in the dorsal ACC there was hypoactivation relative to controls, whereas in the right basal ganglia/thalamus extending to the posterior part of the insula and in the medial frontal cortex, there was a relative reduction in deactivation... Patients also showed reductions in deactivation in the right inferior frontal and left precentral gyri, as well as hypoactivation in left precuneus. ... The analyses of robustness showed that all these results were highly replicable, with the possible exception of the abnormalities in right inferior frontal gyrus..." ^ Radua et al. 2012 , 3.4. Multimodal analysis of grey matter volume and brain response. "Specifically, the anterior parts of the insulae and the dorsal part of the MeF/ACC showed hypoactivation, whereas the posterior parts of the insulae and the ventral part of the MeF/ACC showed reductions in deactivation (Fig. 3 and Table 1)." ^ Pines, Andrew R.; Frandsen, Summer B.; Drew, William; Meyer, Garance M.; Howard, Calvin; Palm, Stephan T.; Schaper, Frederic L. W. V. J.; Lin, Christopher; Butenko, Konstantin; Ferguson, Michael A.; Friedrich, Maximilian U.; Grafman, Jordan H.; Kappel, Ari D.; Neudorfer, Clemens; Rost, Natalia S.; Sanderson, Lauren L.; Taylor, Joseph J.; Wu, Ona; Kletenik, Isaiah; Vogel, Jacob W.; Cohen, Alexander L.; Horn, Andreas; Fox, Michael D.; Silbersweig, David; Siddiqi, Shan H. (12 February 2025). "Mapping Lesions That Cause Psychosis to a Human Brain Circuit and Proposed Stimulation Target".

JAMA Psychiatry .

82 (4): 368– 378.

doi : 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2024.4534 .

PMC 11822627.

PMID 39937525 .

^ Brown G, Thompson W. "Functional Brain Imaging in Schizophrenia: Selected Results and Methods". In Swerdlow N (ed.).

Behavioral Neurobiology of Schizophrenia and its Treatment . Springer. pp.

185– 189.

^ Naasan G. "The Anatomy of Delusions". In Lehner T, Miller B, State M (eds.).

Genomics, Circuits, and Pathways in Clinical Neuropsychiatry . Elsevier Science. pp.

366– 369.

^ Jensen J, McIntosh AR, Crawley AP, Mikulis DJ, Remington G, Kapur S (December 2003).

"Direct activation of the ventral striatum in anticipation of aversive stimuli" .

Neuron .

40 (6): 1251– 1257.

doi : 10.1016/S0896-6273(03)00724-4 .

PMID 14687557 .

S2CID 14691522 .

^ Germans MK, Kring AM (April 2000).

"Hedonic deficit in anhedonia: support for the role of approach motivation" .

Personality and Individual Differences .

28 (4): 659– 672.

doi : 10.1016/S0191-8869(99)00129-4 .

Archived from the original on 2018-07-01 . Retrieved 2021-10-16 .

^ Schultz W (May 2017).

"Reward prediction error" .

Current Biology .

27 (10): R369 – R371 .

Bibcode : 2017CBio...27.R369S .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2017.02.064 .

PMID 28535383 .

S2CID 29170534 .

^ Grimaldi, D-A; Patane', A; Cattarinussi, G; Sambataro, F (2 May 2025). "Functional connectivity of the striatum in psychosis: Meta-analysis of functional magnetic resonance imaging studies and replication on an independent sample".

Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews .

174 106179.

doi : 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2025.106179 .

PMID 40288705 .

^ a b Kapur S, Mizrahi R, Li M (November 2005). "From dopamine to salience to psychosis—linking biology, pharmacology and phenomenology of psychosis".

Schizophrenia Research .

79 (1): 59– 68.

doi : 10.1016/j.schres.2005.01.003 .

PMID 16005191 .

S2CID 2654713 .

^ Fénelon, Gilles; Alves, Guido (2010-02-15).

"Epidemiology of psychosis in Parkinson's disease" .

Journal of the Neurological Sciences . Mental Dysfunction in Parkinson's Disease.

289 (1): 12– 17.

doi : 10.1016/j.jns.2009.08.014 .

ISSN 0022-510X .

PMID 19740486 .

^ D'Souza, Deepak Cyril (2007-01-01), "Cannabinoids and Psychosis" , International Review of Neurobiology , Integrating the Neurobiology of Schizophrenia, 78 , Academic Press: 289– 326, doi : 10.1016/S0074-7742(06)78010-2 , ISBN 978-0-12-373737-3 , PMID 17349865 , retrieved 2024-11-06 ^ Chesney, Edward; Oliver, Dominic; McGuire, Philip (2022-05-01).

"Cannabidiol (CBD) as a novel treatment in the early phases of psychosis" .

Psychopharmacology .

239 (5): 1179– 1190.

doi : 10.1007/s00213-021-05905-9 .

ISSN 1432-2072 .

PMC 9110455 .

PMID 34255100 .

^ Egerton A, Fusar-Poli P, Stone JM (2012). "Glutamate and psychosis risk".

Current Pharmaceutical Design .

18 (4): 466– 478.

doi : 10.2174/138161212799316244 .

PMID 22239577 .

^ Bergeron R, Coyle JT (2012).

"NAAG, NMDA receptor and psychosis" .

Current Medicinal Chemistry .

19 (9): 1360– 1364.

doi : 10.2174/092986712799462685 .

PMC 3424071 .

PMID 22304714 .

^ Adams RA, Stephan KE, Brown HR, Frith CD, Friston KJ (2013).

"The computational anatomy of psychosis" .

Frontiers in Psychiatry .

4 : 47.

doi : 10.3389/fpsyt.2013.00047 .

PMC 3667557 .

PMID 23750138 .

^ Corlett PR, Frith CD, Fletcher PC (November 2009).

"From drugs to deprivation: a Bayesian framework for understanding models of psychosis" .

Psychopharmacology .

206 (4): 515– 530.

doi : 10.1007/s00213-009-1561-0 .

PMC 2755113 .

PMID 19475401 .

^ Corlett PR, Honey GD, Krystal JH, Fletcher PC (January 2011).

"Glutamatergic model psychoses: prediction error, learning, and inference" .

Neuropsychopharmacology .

36 (1): 294– 315.

doi : 10.1038/npp.2010.163 .

PMC 3055519 .

PMID 20861831 .

^ Corlett PR, Taylor JR, Wang XJ, Fletcher PC, Krystal JH (November 2010).

"Toward a neurobiology of delusions" .

Progress in Neurobiology .

92 (3): 345– 369.

doi : 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2010.06.007 .

PMC 3676875 .

PMID 20558235 .

^ Kalkman HO, Loetscher E (July 2003). "GAD(67): the link between the GABA-deficit hypothesis and the dopaminergic- and glutamatergic theories of psychosis".

Journal of Neural Transmission .

110 (7): 803– 812.

doi : 10.1007/s00702-003-0826-8 .

PMID 12811640 .

S2CID 31685339 .

^ Akbarian S, Huang HS (September 2006). "Molecular and cellular mechanisms of altered GAD1/GAD67 expression in schizophrenia and related disorders".

Brain Research Reviews .

52 (2): 293– 304.

doi : 10.1016/j.brainresrev.2006.04.001 .

PMID 16759710 .

S2CID 25771139 .

^ Jones HM, Pilowsky LS (October 2002).

"Dopamine and antipsychotic drug action revisited" .

The British Journal of Psychiatry .

181 (4): 271– 275.

doi : 10.1192/bjp.181.4.271 .

PMID 12356650 .

^ Soyka M, Zetzsche T, Dresel S, Tatsch K (May 2000). "FDG-PET and IBZM-SPECT suggest reduced thalamic activity but no dopaminergic dysfunction in chronic alcohol hallucinosis".

The Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences .

12 (2): 287– 288.

doi : 10.1176/appi.neuropsych.12.2.287 .

PMID 11001615 .

^ Zoldan J, Friedberg G, Livneh M, Melamed E (July 1995). "Psychosis in advanced Parkinson's disease: treatment with ondansetron, a 5-HT3 receptor antagonist".

Neurology .

45 (7): 1305– 1308.

doi : 10.1212/WNL.45.7.1305 .

PMID 7617188 .

S2CID 45540572 .

^ Perry BI, McIntosh G, Weich S, Singh S, Rees K (November 2016).

"The association between first-episode psychosis and abnormal glycaemic control: systematic review and meta-analysis" (PDF) .

The Lancet. Psychiatry .

3 (11): 1049– 1058.

doi : 10.1016/S2215-0366(16)30262-0 .

PMID 27720402 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2020-10-01 . Retrieved 2019-07-03 .

^ Curran C, Byrappa N, McBride A (September 2004).

"Stimulant psychosis: systematic review" .

The British Journal of Psychiatry .

185 (3): 196– 204.

doi : 10.1192/bjp.185.3.196 .

PMID 15339823 .

^ a b c Luhrmann TM, Padmavati R, Tharoor H, Osei A (October 2015).

"Hearing Voices in Different Cultures: A Social Kindling Hypothesis" .

Topics in Cognitive Science .

7 (4): 646– 663.

doi : 10.1111/tops.12158 .

PMID 26349837 .

^ Luhrmann TM, Marrow J, eds. (2016-09-27).

Our Most Troubling Madness . University of California Press.

doi : 10.1525/california/9780520291089.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-520-29108-9 .

Archived from the original on 2021-10-18 . Retrieved 2021-08-26 .

^ Jenner JA, van de Willige G, Wiersma D (November 1998).

"Effectiveness of cognitive therapy with coping training for persistent auditory hallucinations: a retrospective study of attenders of a psychiatric out-patient department" .

Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica .

98 (5): 384– 389.

doi : 10.1111/j.1600-0447.1998.tb10103.x .

PMID 9845177 .

S2CID 39279836 .

Archived from the original on 2021-08-26 . Retrieved 2021-08-26 .

^ a b Jenkins J (2018) 'Anthropology and Psychiatry: A contemporary convergence for global mental health', in Bhugra D and Bhui K (eds) Textbook of Cultural Psychiatry, 2nd edn, Cambridge University Press, London.

^ Scheper-Hughes N and Lock M (1987) 'The mindful body: a prolegomenon to future work in medical anthropology', Medical Anthropology Quarterly, 1(1):6–41 ^ a b c Valaitė, Dovilė; Berniūnas, Renatas (2024).

"Majnūn or Mental Disorders: Between Cultural Traditions and Western Psychology in Jordan" .

Culture, Medicine, and Psychiatry .

48 (1): 136– 157.

doi : 10.1007/s11013-022-09787-0 .

PMID 35948861 .

^ Raghavan, Raghu; Brown, Brian; Horne, Francesca; Kamal, Sreedevi Ram; Parameswaran, Uma; Raghu, Ardra; Wilson, Amanda; Venkateswaran, Chitra; Svirydzenka, Nadia; Lakhanpaul, Monica; Dasan, Chandra (2023).

"Multiple Mental Health Literacies in a Traditional Temple Site in Kerala: The Intersection Between Beliefs, Spiritual and Healing Regimes" .

Culture, Medicine, and Psychiatry .

47 (3): 743– 765.

doi : 10.1007/s11013-022-09800-6 .

hdl : 2086/21950 .

PMID 35771306 .

^ Hinton, Devon E.; Reis, Ria; de Jong, Joop (2020).

"Ghost Encounters Among Traumatized Cambodian Refugees: Severity, Relationship to PTSD, and Phenomenology" .

Culture, Medicine, and Psychiatry .

44 (3): 333– 359.

doi : 10.1007/s11013-019-09661-6 .

PMID 31701326 .

^ a b Freudenreich O (3 December 2012).

"Differential Diagnosis of Psychotic Symptoms: Medical "Mimics" " .

Psychiatric Times . UBM Medica.

Archived from the original on 4 June 2013 . Retrieved 16 March 2017 .

^ Nordqvist C (August 8, 2016).

"What Is Schizoaffective Disorder? What Causes Schizoaffective Disorder?" .

Medical News Today .

Archived from the original on June 5, 2010 . Retrieved March 16, 2017 .

^ Food Drug Administration, HHS (February 2004).

"Final rule declaring dietary supplements containing ephedrine alkaloids adulterated because they present an unreasonable risk. Final rule" .

Federal Register .

69 (28): 6787– 6854.

PMID 14968803 .

Archived from the original on 2021-08-29 . Retrieved 2014-09-29 .

(69 FR 6814 and 69 FR 6818 ) ^ Overall JE, Gorham DR (1962). "The Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale".

Psychol. Rep .

10 (3): 799– 812.

doi : 10.2466/pr0.1962.10.3.799 .

S2CID 143531021 .

^ Kay SR, Fiszbein A, Opler LA (1987).

"The positive and negative syndrome scale (PANSS) for schizophrenia" .

Schizophrenia Bulletin .

13 (2): 261– 276.

doi : 10.1093/schbul/13.2.261 .

PMID 3616518 .

^ a b Gaebel W, Zielasek J (March 2015).

"Focus on psychosis" .

Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience .

17 (1): 9– 18.

doi : 10.31887/DCNS.2015.17.1/wgaebel .

PMC 4421906 .

PMID 25987859 .

^ Thungana, Yanga A.; Zingela, Zukiswa; Wyk, Stefan J. Van; Kim, Hannah H.; Ametaj, Amantia; Stevenson, Anne; Stroud, Rocky E.; Stein, Dan J.; Gelaye, Bizu (2023).

"Psychosis screening questionnaire: Exploring its factor structure among South African adults" .

South African Journal of Psychiatry .

29 : 7.

doi : 10.4102/sajpsychiatry.v29i0.2051 .

PMC 10696556 .

PMID 38059200 .

^ U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. (2024, February 15).

VA.gov | Veterans affairs . MIRECC / CoE Home. https://www.mirecc.va.gov/visn22/Assessment_Tools_for_Measuring_Outcomes_in_Psychosis.asp#top ^ Van Lieshout, R. J., & Goldberg, J. O. (2007). Quantifying self-reports of auditory verbal hallucinations in persons with psychosis.

Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science/Revue Canadienne Des Sciences Du Comportement, 39 (1), 73–77. https://doi.org/10.1037/cjbs2007006 ^ a b c d e Friesen P. Psychosis and psychedelics: Historical entanglements and contemporary contrasts. Transcultural Psychiatry. 2022;59(5):592-609.

https://doi.org/10.1177/13634615221129116 ^ Marshall M, Rathbone J (June 2011).

"Early intervention for psychosis" .

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (6): CD004718.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD004718.pub3 .

PMC 4163966 .

PMID 21678345 .

^ NHS (2017-10-23).

"Psychosis – Prevention – NHS Choices" .

www.nhs.uk .

Archived from the original on 2018-10-15 . Retrieved 2018-10-15 .

^ a b c van Os J, Kapur S (August 2009). "Schizophrenia".

Lancet .

374 (9690): 635– 645.

doi : 10.1016/S0140-6736(09)60995-8 .

PMID 19700006 .

S2CID 208792724 .

^ Stafford MR, Jackson H, Mayo-Wilson E, Morrison AP, Kendall T (January 2013).

"Early interventions to prevent psychosis: systematic review and meta-analysis" .

BMJ .

346 : f185.

doi : 10.1136/bmj.f185 .

PMC 3548617 .

PMID 23335473 .

^ "Offer talking therapies to people at risk of psychosis and schizophrenia" . Nice.org.uk. 2014-02-12.

Archived from the original on 2014-03-05 . Retrieved 2014-04-15 .

^ "Psychosis and schizophrenia in adults" . Nice.org.uk. 2014-03-31.

Archived from the original on 2014-03-05 . Retrieved 2014-04-15 .

^ National Collaborating Centre for Mental Health (12 February 2014).

"Schizophrenia: Full national clinical guideline on core interventions in primary and secondary care" .

Archived from the original on 1 September 2022 . Retrieved 21 September 2022 .

^ Kane JM, Correll CU (2010).

"Pharmacologic treatment of schizophrenia" .

Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience .

12 (3): 345– 357.

doi : 10.31887/DCNS.2010.12.3/jkane .

PMC 3085113 .

PMID 20954430 .

^ Hartling L, Abou-Setta AM, Dursun S, Mousavi SS, Pasichnyk D, Newton AS (October 2012).

"Antipsychotics in adults with schizophrenia: comparative effectiveness of first-generation versus second-generation medications: a systematic review and meta-analysis" .

Annals of Internal Medicine .

157 (7): 498– 511.

doi : 10.7326/0003-4819-157-7-201210020-00525 .

PMID 22893011 .

^ a b c Barry SJ, Gaughan TM, Hunter R (June 2012).

"Schizophrenia" .

BMJ Clinical Evidence .

2012 .

PMC 3385413 .

PMID 23870705 . Archived from the original on 2014-09-11.

^ Schultz SH, North SW, Shields CG (June 2007). "Schizophrenia: a review".

American Family Physician .

75 (12): 1821– 1829.

PMID 17619525 .

^ Smith T, Weston C, Lieberman J (August 2010). "Schizophrenia (maintenance treatment)".

American Family Physician .

82 (4): 338– 339.

PMID 20704164 .

^ Taylor DM, Duncan-McConnell D (2000). "Refractory schizophrenia and atypical antipsychotics".

Journal of Psychopharmacology .

14 (4): 409– 418.

doi : 10.1177/026988110001400411 .

PMID 11198061 .

S2CID 27270415 .

^ Picchioni MM, Murray RM (July 2007).

"Schizophrenia" .

BMJ .

335 (7610): 91– 95.

doi : 10.1136/bmj.39227.616447.BE .

PMC 1914490 .

PMID 17626963 .

^ Essali A, Al-Haj Haasan N, Li C, Rathbone J (January 2009).

"Clozapine versus typical neuroleptic medication for schizophrenia" .

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

2009 (1): CD000059.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD000059.pub2 .

PMC 7065592 .

PMID 19160174 .

^ Ost LG (October 2014). "The efficacy of Acceptance and Commitment Therapy: an updated systematic review and meta-analysis".

Behaviour Research and Therapy .

61 : 105– 121.

doi : 10.1016/j.brat.2014.07.018 .

PMID 25193001 .

^ Penney D, Sauvé G, Mendelson D, Thibaudeau É, Moritz S, Lepage M (March 2022).

"Immediate and Sustained Outcomes and Moderators Associated With Metacognitive Training for Psychosis: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis" .

JAMA Psychiatry .

79 (5): 417– 429.

doi : 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2022.0277 .

PMC 8943641 .

PMID 35320347 .

^ Gottlieb, J. D., Gidugu, V., Maru, M., Tepper, M. C., Davis, M. J., Greenwold, J., Barron, R. A., Chiko, B. P., & Mueser, K. T. (2017). Randomized controlled trial of an internet cognitive behavioral skills-based program for auditory hallucinations in persons with psychosis.

Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal, 40 (3), 283–292. https://doi.org/10.1037/prj0000258 ^ Cooper RE, Laxhman N, Crellin N, Moncrieff J, Priebe S (November 2020).

"Psychosocial interventions for people with schizophrenia or psychosis on minimal or no antipsychotic medication: A systematic review" .

Schizophrenia Research .

225 : 15– 30.

doi : 10.1016/j.schres.2019.05.020 .

PMID 31126806 .

S2CID 159040608 .

Archived from the original on 2020-06-25 . Retrieved 2020-05-28 .

^ Birchwood M, Todd P, Jackson C (1998). "Early intervention in psychosis. The critical period hypothesis".

The British Journal of Psychiatry. Supplement .

172 (33): 53– 59.

doi : 10.1192/S0007125000297663 .

PMID 9764127 .

S2CID 32411917 .

^ a b c d e f Waghorn G, Still M, Chant D, Whiteford H (2004).

"Specialised Supported Education for Australians with Psychotic Disorders" .

Australian Journal of Social Issues .

39 (4): 443– 458.

doi : 10.1002/j.1839-4655.2004.tb01193.x .

^ a b Bürgy M (November 2008).

"The concept of psychosis: historical and phenomenological aspects" .

Schizophrenia Bulletin .

34 (6): 1200– 1210.

doi : 10.1093/schbul/sbm136 .

PMC 2632489 .

PMID 18174608 .

^ Beer MD (June 1995). "Psychosis: from mental disorder to disease concept".

History of Psychiatry .

6 (22 Pt 2): 177– 200.

doi : 10.1177/0957154X9500602204 .

PMID 11639691 .

S2CID 36424931 .

^ "Psychosis, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon , at Perseus" . Perseus.tufts.edu.

Archived from the original on 2021-10-18 . Retrieved 2011-06-11 .

^ "Online Etymology Dictionary" . Douglas Harper. 2001.

Archived from the original on 2007-10-11 . Retrieved 2006-08-19 .

^ Berrios GE (July 1987). "Historical aspects of psychoses: 19th century issues".

British Medical Bulletin .

43 (3): 484– 498.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordjournals.bmb.a072197 .

PMID 3322481 .

^ Berrios GE, Beer D (March 1994). "The notion of a unitary psychosis: a conceptual history".

History of Psychiatry .

5 (17 Pt 1): 13– 36.

doi : 10.1177/0957154X9400501702 .

PMID 11639278 .

S2CID 21417530 .

^ Vlachos IO, Beratis S, Hartocollis P (1997). "Magico-religious beliefs and psychosis".

Psychopathology .

30 (2): 93– 99.

doi : 10.1159/000285035 .

PMID 9168565 .

^ Pfeifer S (September 1994). "Belief in demons and exorcism in psychiatric patients in Switzerland".

The British Journal of Medical Psychology .

67 (3): 247– 258.

doi : 10.1111/j.2044-8341.1994.tb01794.x .

PMID 7803317 .

^ Hippocratic corpus ^ Bennet S (2008). "Mind and Madness in Classical Antiquity".

History of Psychiatry and Medical Psychology . pp.

175– 197.

doi : 10.1007/978-0-387-34708-0_3 .

ISBN 978-0-387-34707-3 .

^ Spring B, Weinstein L, Lemon M, Haskell A (1991). "Schizophrenia from Hippocrates to Kraepelin".

Clinical Psychology . pp.

259– 277.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-4757-9715-2_10 .

ISBN 978-1-4757-9717-6 .

^ Rush B (1830).

Medical Inquiries and Observations upon Diseases of the Mind . Philadelphia. pp.

98– 190.

ISBN 978-0-559-92167-4 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Shorter E (1998).

A History of Psychiatry: From the Era of the Asylum to the Age of Prozac . Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 978-0-471-24531-5 .

^ Stone JL (March 2001). "Dr. Gottlieb Burckhardt—the pioneer of psychosurgery".

Journal of the History of the Neurosciences .

10 (1): 79– 92.

doi : 10.1076/jhin.10.1.79.5634 .

PMID 11446267 .

S2CID 29727830 .

^ Gross D, Schäfer G (February 2011).

"Egas Moniz (1874–1955) and the "invention" of modern psychosurgery: a historical and ethical reanalysis under special consideration of Portuguese original sources" .

Neurosurgical Focus .

30 (2): E8.

doi : 10.3171/2010.10.FOCUS10214 .

PMID 21284454 .

S2CID 25332947 .

^ a b Pressman JD (1998).

Last Resort: Psychosurgery and the Limits of Medicine . Cambridge Studies in the History of Medicine. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. pp.

18– 40.

ISBN 978-0-521-35371-7 .

OCLC 36729044 .

^ Berrios GE (March 1997). "The origins of psychosurgery: Shaw, Burckhardt and Moniz".

History of Psychiatry .

8 (29 pt 1): 61– 81.

doi : 10.1177/0957154X9700802905 .

PMID 11619209 .

S2CID 22225524 .

^ Mashour GA, Walker EE, Martuza RL (June 2005). "Psychosurgery: past, present, and future".

Brain Research. Brain Research Reviews .

48 (3): 409– 419.

doi : 10.1016/j.brainresrev.2004.09.002 .

PMID 15914249 .

S2CID 10303872 .

^ Stip E (May 2002).

"Happy birthday neuroleptics! 50 years later: la folie du doute" .

European Psychiatry .

17 (3): 115– 119.

doi : 10.1016/S0924-9338(02)00639-9 .

PMID 12052571 .

S2CID 29883863 .

^ Crossley NA, Constante M, McGuire P, Power P (June 2010).

"Efficacy of atypical v. typical antipsychotics in the treatment of early psychosis: meta-analysis" .

The British Journal of Psychiatry .

196 (6): 434– 439.

doi : 10.1192/bjp.bp.109.066217 .

PMC 2878818 .

PMID 20513851 .

^ Maher AR, Maglione M, Bagley S, Suttorp M, Hu JH, Ewing B, et al. (September 2011).

"Efficacy and comparative effectiveness of atypical antipsychotic medications for off-label uses in adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis" .

JAMA .

306 (12): 1359– 1369.

doi : 10.1001/jama.2011.1360 .

PMID 21954480 .

^ Reich W (1980).

"The Schizophrenic Split" . In Higgins M, Raphael CM (eds.).

Character Analysis . Translated by Carfango VR. Macmillan. p. 437.

ISBN 9781466846876 .

Archived from the original on 2022-04-29 . Retrieved 2022-04-29 .

^ Healy D (2002).

The Creation of Psychopharmacology . Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-00619-5 .

^ Green MF, Horan WP, Lee J, McCleery A, Reddy LF, Wynn JK (February 2018).

"Social Disconnection in Schizophrenia and the General Community" .

Schizophrenia Bulletin .

44 (2): 242– 249.

doi : 10.1093/schbul/sbx082 .

PMC 5814840 .

PMID 28637195 .

^ Blajeski S (September 2020). "Family support, forming careers, and breaking the disability mindset: implications for addressing structural barriers to employment pathways in coordinated specialty care for first-episode psychosis".

Social Work in Mental Health .

18 (5): 461– 81.

doi : 10.1080/15332985.2020.1785603 .

S2CID 221380722 .

^ a b Myers N (2019). "Beyond the "Crazy House": Mental/Moral Breakdowns and Moral Agency in First-Episode Psychosis".

Ethos .

47 (1): 13– 34.

doi : 10.1111/etho.12225 .

S2CID 151061439 .

^ a b Myers NA (May 2012). "Toward an Applied Neuroanthropology of Psychosis: the Interplay of Culture, Brains, and Experience".

Annals of Anthropological Practice .

36 (1): 113– 130.

doi : 10.1111/j.2153-9588.2012.01095.x .

^ Brown JA (June 2011). "Talking about life after early psychosis: the impact on occupational performance".

Canadian Journal of Occupational Therapy .

78 (3): 156– 163.

doi : 10.2182/cjot.2011.78.3.3 .

PMID 21699009 .

S2CID 34151007 .

^ a b c Correll CU, Galling B, Pawar A, Krivko A, Bonetto C, Ruggeri M, et al. (June 2018).

"Comparison of Early Intervention Services vs Treatment as Usual for Early-Phase Psychosis: A Systematic Review, Meta-analysis, and Meta-regression" .

JAMA Psychiatry .

75 (6): 555– 565.

doi : 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2018.0623 .

PMC 6137532 .

PMID 29800949 .

^ "Mobile app combined with face-to-face therapy helped people with psychosis" .

NIHR Evidence (Plain English summary). National Institute for Health and Care Research. 2022-05-19.

doi : 10.3310/nihrevidence_50569 .

S2CID 249945572 .

^ Garety, Philippa; Ward, Thomas; Emsley, Richard; Greenwood, Kathryn; Freeman, Daniel; Fowler, David; Kuipers, Elizabeth; Bebbington, Paul; Dunn, Graham; Hardy, Amy (August 2021).

"Digitally supported CBT to reduce paranoia and improve reasoning for people with schizophrenia-spectrum psychosis: the SlowMo RCT" .

Efficacy and Mechanism Evaluation .

8 (11): 1– 90.

doi : 10.3310/eme08110 .

ISSN 2050-4365 .

PMID 34398537 .

S2CID 238644547 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Badcock JC, Paulik G, eds. (2019).

A Clinical Introduction to Psychosis: Foundations for Clinical Psychologists and Neuropsychologists (1st ed.).

Cambridge, Massachusetts : Academic Press , imprint of Elsevier .

doi : 10.1016/C2017-0-01829-3 .

ISBN 978-0-12-815012-2 .

S2CID 243510002 .

Lewandowski KE, Moustafa A, eds. (2019).

Social Cognition in Psychosis (1st ed.).

Cambridge, Massachusetts : Academic Press , imprint of Elsevier .

doi : 10.1016/C2017-0-03061-6 .

ISBN 978-0-12-815315-4 .

S2CID 239126550 .

Semple D, Smyth R (2019). "Schizophrenia and related psychoses". In Semple D, Smyth R (eds.).

Oxford Handbook of Psychiatry (4th ed.).

Oxford : Oxford University Press . pp.

179– 240.

doi : 10.1093/med/9780198795551.003.0005 .

ISBN 978-0-19-879555-1 .

Tamminga CA, van Os J, Reininghaus U, Ivleva E, eds. (2020).

Psychotic Disorders: Comprehensive Conceptualization and Treatments (1st ed.).

Oxford : Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1093/med/9780190653279.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19-065327-9 .

Thompson AD, Broome MR, eds. (2020).

Risk Factors for Psychosis: Paradigms, Mechanisms, and Prevention (1st ed.).

Cambridge, Massachusetts : Academic Press , imprint of Elsevier .

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-12-813201-2.00001-6 .

ISBN 978-0-12-813201-2 .

S2CID 213499429 .

Further reading [ edit ] Program for Risk Evaluation and Prevention (PREP) Early Psychosis Clinic (2021).

"Psychosis Spectrum Disorders & Managing Stress during the COVID-19 Pandemic" .

Psychiatry .

Michigan Medicine ( University of Michigan ).

Archived from the original on 3 February 2021 . Retrieved 28 February 2021 .

Sims A (2002).

Symptoms in the mind: An introduction to descriptive psychopathology (3rd ed.). Edinburgh: Elsevier Science Ltd.

ISBN 978-0-7020-2627-0 .

Murray ED, Buttner N, Price BH (April 2012). "Depression and Psychosis in Neurological Practice". In Bradley WG, Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J (eds.).

Neurology in Clinical Practice (6th ed.). Butterworth Heinemann.

ISBN 978-1-4377-0434-1 .

Williams P (2012).

Rethinking Madness: Towards a Paradigm Shift In Our Understanding and Treatment of Psychosis . Sky's Edge Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-9849867-0-5 .

Personal accounts Dick PK (1981).

VALIS . London: Gollancz.

ISBN 978-0-679-73446-8 .

[Semi-autobiographical] Jamison KR (1995).

An Unquiet Mind: A Memoir of Moods and Madness . London: Picador.

ISBN 978-0-679-76330-7 .

Schreber DP (2000).

Memoirs of My Nervous Illness . New York: New York Review of Books.

ISBN 978-0-940322-20-2 .

Hinshaw SP (2002).

The Years of Silence are Past: My Father's Life with Bipolar Disorder . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521817806 .

McLean R (2003).

Recovered Not Cured: A Journey Through Schizophrenia . Australia: Allen & Unwin.

ISBN 978-1-86508-974-4 .

Saks ER (2007).

The Center Cannot Hold – My Journey Through Madness . New York: Hyperion.

ISBN 978-1-4013-0138-5 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Psychosis .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Psychosis .

National Institute of Mental Health Classification D ICD - 11 : 6A25.0 , 6A25.1 , 6A2Z ICD - 10 : F20 - F29 ICD - 9-CM : 290 - 299 OMIM : 603342 External resources MedlinePlus : 001553 v t e Psychiatry Subspecialties Addiction psychiatry Biological psychiatry Child and adolescent psychiatry Cognitive neuropsychiatry Cross-cultural psychiatry Developmental disability Descriptive psychiatry Eating disorder Emergency psychiatry Forensic psychiatry Geriatric psychiatry Immuno-psychiatry Liaison psychiatry Military psychiatry Nutritional psychiatry Narcology Neuropsychiatry Palliative medicine Pain medicine Psychotherapy Sleep medicine Telepsychiatry Organizations American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology American Neuropsychiatric Association American Psychiatric Association British Neuropsychiatry Association Campaign Against Psychiatric Abuse Chinese Society of Psychiatry Democratic Psychiatry European Psychiatric Association Global Initiative on Psychiatry Hong Kong College of Psychiatrists Independent Psychiatric Association of Russia Indian Psychiatric Society National Institute of Mental Health Philadelphia Association Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists Royal College of Psychiatrists Taiwanese Society of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Working Commission to Investigate the Use of Psychiatry for Political Purposes World Psychiatric Association Related topics Behavioral medicine Clinical neuroscience Controversies about psychiatry Anti-psychiatry Biopsychiatry controversy Electroconvulsive therapy Insulin shock therapy Political abuse of psychiatry Psychiatric survivors movement Imaging genetics Neuroimaging Neurophysiology Pentylenetetrazol Philosophy of psychiatry Psychiatric epidemiology Psychiatric genetics Psychiatric hospital Psychiatrist Psychoanalysis Psycho-oncology Psychopharmacology Psychosomatic medicine Psychosurgery Lists Counseling topics Neurological conditions and disorders Psychiatric medications by condition treated Psychiatric survivors movement Psychiatrists Psychotherapies Portal Outline v t e Mood disorder Spectrum Bipolar disorder Bipolar I Bipolar II Cyclothymia Bipolar NOS Childhood Hypomania Mania Mixed affective state Rapid cycling Depression Major depressive disorder Dysthymia Seasonal affective disorder Atypical depression Melancholic depression Major depressive episode Depression in childhood and adolescence Comorbidities Schizoaffective disorder Symptoms Delusion Depression (differential diagnoses) Emotional dysregulation Anhedonia Dysphoria Suicidal ideation Episodic memory Hallucination Mood swing Sleep disorder Hypersomnia Insomnia Psychosis Psychotic depression Racing thoughts Reduced affect display Diagnosis Bipolar Spectrum Diagnostic Scale Child Mania Rating Scale General Behavior Inventory Hypomania Checklist Mood Disorder Questionnaire Rating scales for depression Young Mania Rating Scale Treatment Anticonvulsants Carbamazepine Lamotrigine Oxcarbazepine Valproate Sodium valproate Valproate semisodium Sympathomimetics , SSRIs and similar Bupropion Dextroamphetamine Escitalopram Fluoxetine Methylphenidate Sertraline Other mood stabilizers Antipsychotics Atypical antipsychotics Lithium Lithium carbonate Lithium citrate Lithium sulfate Lithium toxicity Non-pharmaceutical Clinical psychology Cognitive behavioral therapy Dialectical behavior therapy Electroconvulsive therapy Involuntary commitment Light therapy Psychotherapy Transcranial magnetic stimulation History Emil Kraepelin Frederick K. Goodwin John Cade Karl Leonhard Kay Redfield Jamison Mogens Schou v t e Mental disorders ( Classification ) Adult personality and behavior Sexual Ego-dystonic sexual orientation Paraphilia Fetishism Voyeurism Sexual anhedonia Sexual anorexia Sexual maturation disorder Sexual relationship disorder Other Factitious disorder Munchausen syndrome Fear of intimacy Gender dysphoria Intermittent explosive disorder Dermatillomania Kleptomania Pyromania Trichotillomania Personality disorder Childhood and learning Emotional and behavioral ADHD Conduct disorder ODD Emotional and behavioral disorders Separation anxiety disorder Movement disorders Stereotypic Social functioning DAD RAD Selective mutism Speech Cluttering Stuttering Tic disorder Tourette syndrome Intellectual disability X-linked intellectual disability Lujan–Fryns syndrome Psychological development ( developmental disabilities ) Pervasive Specific Mood (affective) Bipolar Bipolar I Bipolar II Bipolar NOS Cyclothymia Depression Atypical depression Dysthymia Major depressive disorder Melancholic depression Seasonal affective disorder Mania Neurological and symptomatic Autism spectrum Autism Asperger syndrome High-functioning autism PDD-NOS Savant syndrome Dementia AIDS dementia complex Alzheimer's disease Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease Frontotemporal dementia Huntington's disease Mild cognitive impairment Parkinson's disease Pick's disease Sundowning Vascular dementia Wandering Other Delirium Organic brain syndrome Post-concussion syndrome Neurotic , stress -related and somatoform Adjustment Adjustment disorder with depressed mood Anxiety Phobia Agoraphobia Childhood phobia Social anxiety Social phobia Anthropophobia Specific social phobia Specific phobia Claustrophobia Other Generalized anxiety disorder OCD Panic attack Panic disorder Paranoia Stress Acute stress reaction PTSD Dissociative Depersonalization-derealization disorder Dissociative identity disorder Dissociative amnesia Dissociative fugue Dissociative disorder not otherwise specified Other specified dissociative disorder Somatic symptom Body dysmorphic disorder Conversion disorder Ganser syndrome Globus pharyngeus Psychogenic non-epileptic seizures False pregnancy Hypochondriasis Mass psychogenic illness Nosophobia Psychogenic pain Somatization disorder Physiological and physical behavior Eating Anorexia nervosa Bulimia nervosa Rumination syndrome Other specified feeding or eating disorder Nonorganic sleep Hypersomnia Insomnia Parasomnia Night terror Nightmare REM sleep behavior disorder Postnatal Postpartum depression Postpartum psychosis Sexual desire Hypersexuality Hypoactive sexual desire disorder Psychoactive substances, substance abuse and substance-related Drug overdose Hallucinogen persisting perception disorder Intoxication Physical dependence Rebound effect Stimulant psychosis Substance dependence Substance-induced psychosis Withdrawal Schizophrenia , schizotypal and delusional Delusional Delusional disorder Folie à deux Psychosis and schizophrenia-like Brief reactive psychosis Schizoaffective disorder Schizophreniform disorder Schizophrenia Childhood schizophrenia Disorganized (hebephrenic) schizophrenia Pseudoneurotic schizophrenia Simple-type schizophrenia Other Catatonia Symptoms and uncategorized Impulse-control disorder Klüver–Bucy syndrome Psychomotor agitation Stereotypy Caregiver burden Category Authority control databases : National Israel NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5667c77bf8‐h88kp
Cached time: 20250818144528
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.670 seconds
Real time usage: 2.925 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14316/1000000
Revision size: 152330/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 659704/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7317/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 18/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 831950/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.831/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 31316523/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2553.014      1 -total
 61.56% 1571.637      1 Template:Reflist
 37.58%  959.355    143 Template:Cite_journal
  8.36%  213.376     12 Template:Navbox
  7.15%  182.640     36 Template:Cite_book
  6.99%  178.500     11 Template:Cite_web
  6.62%  168.955      1 Template:Medical_resources
  5.49%  140.283      2 Template:Harvnb
  5.30%  135.276      2 Template:Hlist
  4.01%  102.474      2 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:24514:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818144528 and revision id 1301402178. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Psychosis&oldid=1301402178 " Categories : Psychosis 1840s neologisms Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value CS1 German-language sources (de) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional medical references from February 2021 All articles needing additional references Articles requiring reliable medical sources All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2019 Wikipedia articles that are too technical from November 2019 All articles that are too technical Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Commons category link from Wikidata Wikipedia medicine articles ready to translate This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 16:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Psychosis 79 languages Add topic

