Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Activities Toggle Activities subsection 2.1 Journals 2.2 Competitions 2.3 Conferences 2.4 The AIAA Foundation 3 Awards and lectureships delivered Toggle Awards and lectureships delivered subsection 3.1 Awards 3.2 Lectureships 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 12 languages العربية Deutsch Eesti فارسی Français Italiano 日本語 Polski Português తెలుగు Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Professional society for the field of aerospace engineering "AIAA" redirects here. For other uses, see AIAA (disambiguation) .

This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics Founded January 31, 1963 Type Professional Organization Origins Merger of the American Rocket Society and the Institute of the Aerospace Sciences Area served Worldwide Method Industry standards, Conferences, Publications Members 30,000 (2015) Key people Daniel E. Hastings (President) Clay Mowry (CEO) [ 1 ] Revenue US$21 million (2009) Website www.aiaa.org The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics ( AIAA ) is a professional society for the field of aerospace engineering . The AIAA is the U.S. representative on the International Astronautical Federation and the International Council of the Aeronautical Sciences. In 2015, it had more than 30,000 members among aerospace professionals worldwide (a majority are American or live in the United States).

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] History [ edit ] The AIAA was founded in 1963 from the merger of two earlier societies: the American Rocket Society (ARS), founded in 1930 as the American Interplanetary Society (AIS), and the Institute of the Aerospace Sciences (IAS), founded in 1932 as the Institute of the Aeronautical Sciences. Paul Johnston was the first executive director of the organization. Jim Harford took his seat after 18 months. The newly-formed structure gathered 47 technical committees and one broad technical publication, the AIAA Journal . The AIAA Student Journal was also launched in 1963. The merger also led to the sale of the organizations' former headquarter buildings, and the relocation in the Sperry Rand Building.

[ 5 ] In 1967, the Technical Committee on Space and Atmospheric Science launched a study to capture the opinion of its members in California on the UFO phenomenon.

[ 6 ] Activities [ edit ] Journals [ edit ] As a major activity, AIAA currently publishes several technical journals. The AIAA Journal is published on a monthly basis and serves as the flagship journal of the society. In January 2015 the Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics became the second AIAA journal published on a monthly basis. The other journals are published bi-monthly and have more specialized topics: [ 7 ] Journal of Air Transportation (Starting in 2016) Journal of Aerospace Information Systems (formerly Journal of Aerospace Computing, Information, and Communication ) Journal of Aircraft Journal of Energy (published from 1977 to 1983) Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics Journal of Hydronautics (published from 1967 to 1980) Journal of Propulsion and Power Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets (Starting in 1964) Journal of Thermophysics and Heat Transfer AIAA's flagship magazine Aerospace America was started in 1990 [ 8 ] and is distributed monthly to all members, and is published online in digital format. AIAA also produces several series of technical books ranging from education to progress in advanced research topics.

Competitions [ edit ] AIAA annually holds design competitions and Design/Build/Fly competitions to provide a real-world design experience for engineering students, both undergraduate and graduate, by giving them the opportunity to validate their analytic studies.

[ 9 ] Conferences [ edit ] AIAA hosts many conferences and smaller events throughout the year.  The largest of those is the AIAA Science and Technology Forum and Exposition ("AIAA SciTech").  Others include AIAA Aviation and Aeronautics Forum and Exposition ("AIAA Aviation"), AIAA Propulsion and Energy Forum and Exposition ("AIAA P&E"), and AIAA Space and Astronautics Forum and Exposition ("AIAA Space").

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] The AIAA Foundation [ edit ] AIAA currently has over 6,500 student members in 160 active student branches, including 12 foreign student branches. The student branches host annual conferences.

The AIAA Foundation is devoted to the education of both practicing and future aerospace professionals. The AIAA Foundation funds numerous scholarships for both undergraduate and graduate students. Undergraduate scholarships range from $2,000 to $2,500. Graduate scholarships are $5,000 or $10,000.

[ 12 ] Awards and lectureships delivered [ edit ] Awards [ edit ] Goddard Astronautics Award: AIAA's highest award for astronautics, endowed by Esther Kisk-Goddard in commemoration of her husband Robert Goddard 's pioneering efforts that led to the development of the fields of astronautics.

[ 13 ] Reed Aeronautics Award: AIAA's highest award for aeronautical science and engineering, named for Dr.

Sylvanus Albert Reed , pioneer of the use of metal in propeller blades.

[ 13 ] Holt Ashley Award for Aeroelasticity: Given every four years for those who have contributed significantly to the area of aeroelasticity , named after famous aeroelastician Prof.

Holt Ashley who served as a faculty member at MIT and Stanford .

Missile Systems Award: 2 categories, Technical and Management. The Technical Award is presented for a significant accomplishment in developing or using technology that is required for missile systems. The Technical and Management award are presently alternatively at the biannual Missile Sciences Conference. Thus, the awards are presented once every four years.

[ 13 ] Wyld Propulsion Award: Presented annually to honor "outstanding achievement in the development or application of rocket propulsion systems", named after James Hart Wyld .

[ 14 ] Lectureships [ edit ] Dryden Lectureship in Research, named for Dr. Hugh L. Dryden [ 15 ] [ 16 ] Durand Lectureship, named for William F. Durand [ 17 ] von Kármán Lectureship in Astronautics, named for Theodore von Kármán [ 18 ] Wright Brothers Lectureship in Aeronautics, named for Orville and Wilbur Wright [ 19 ] See also [ edit ] Spaceflight portal International Astronautical Federation National Association of Rocketry SpaceOps Tripoli Rocketry Association References [ edit ] ^ "AIAA Names Clay Mowry as Chief Executive Officer" .

American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (Press release). September 3, 2024 . Retrieved August 4, 2025 .

^ Netburn, Deborah (March 2, 2018).

"A former NASA astronaut says it wouldn't be so bad to transfer the space station to private management" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved March 27, 2018 .

^ "This Week On The Space Show | International Space Fellowship" .

spacefellowship.com . Retrieved March 27, 2018 .

^ "Aviation Week Network Announces 20 Twenties Winners for 2018" .

aviationweek.com . Archived from the original on September 28, 2018 . Retrieved March 27, 2018 .

^ "The Merger – 1963" .

Aiaa.org . Archived from the original on December 3, 2013 . Retrieved July 9, 2018 .

^ Peter Sturrock (May 1974).

"UFO Reports from AIAA (American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics) Members" .

Ufoevidence.org . Retrieved July 9, 2018 .

^ "Journals" . Archived from the original on October 21, 2011 . Retrieved October 22, 2011 .

^ "List of journals and magazines" .

Ebsco . Retrieved April 8, 2023 .

^ "AIAA Student Participation" (PDF) .

^ "Events : The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics" .

www.aiaa.org . Retrieved March 27, 2018 .

^ "Conferences : The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics" .

www.aiaa.org . Retrieved March 27, 2018 .

^ "Home : The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics" .

www.aiaa.org . Retrieved March 27, 2018 .

^ a b c "Honors and Awards" (PDF) .

AIAA . Archived from the original (PDF) on August 11, 2011.

^ "Wyld Propulsion Award Recipients" . AIAA. Archived from the original on March 13, 2014 . Retrieved March 30, 2012 .

^ "Lectureships : The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics" .

www.aiaa.org . Archived from the original on March 27, 2018 . Retrieved March 27, 2018 .

^ "Home : The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics" .

www.aiaa.org . Archived from the original on March 28, 2018 . Retrieved March 27, 2018 .

^ "Home : The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics" .

www.aiaa.org . Archived from the original on March 27, 2018 . Retrieved March 27, 2018 .

^ "Home : The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics" .

www.aiaa.org . Archived from the original on March 27, 2018 . Retrieved March 27, 2018 .

^ "Home : The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics" .

www.aiaa.org . Archived from the original on March 27, 2018 . Retrieved March 27, 2018 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics People G. Edward Pendray David Lasser Laurence Manning Publications AIAA Journal Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics Aeronautical Engineering Review Conferences and activities Design/Build/Fly International Conference on Environmental Systems International Electric Propulsion Conference Related organizations SpaceOps International Astronautical Federation National Aeronautic Association Parent organizations American Rocket Society Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF 2 National Germany 2 United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic 2 Norway Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=American_Institute_of_Aeronautics_and_Astronautics&oldid=1304155893 " Categories : 1963 establishments in the United States Aerospace engineering organizations American engineering organizations American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics Organizations established in 1963 Professional associations based in the United States Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from May 2020 Articles lacking reliable references from December 2016 All articles lacking reliable references This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 09:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 12 languages Add topic

