Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Ionic subdialects 3 Phonology Toggle Phonology subsection 3.1 Vowels 3.2 Consonants 4 Glossary 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 Sources 9 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Ionic Greek 29 languages العربية বাংলা Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara Français 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Plattdüütsch Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Greek dialect Ionic Greek Ἰωνικὴ διάλεκτος Region Circum- Aegean , Magna Graecia Ethnicity Ionians Era c.

1000–300 BC Language family Indo-European Hellenic Greek Attic –Ionic Ionic Greek Early form Proto-Greek Writing system Greek alphabet Language codes ISO 639-3 – Linguist List grc-ion Glottolog ioni1244 Distribution of Greek dialects in Greece in the classical period .

[ 1 ] Western group: Doric proper Northwest Doric Achaean Doric (probably Northwest Doric) Central group: Aeolic Arcado-Cypriot Eastern group: Attic Ionic Distribution of Greek dialects in Magna Graecia (Southern Italy and Sicily) in the classical period.

Western group: Doric proper Northwest Doric Achaean Doric (probably Northwest Doric) Eastern group: Attic - Ionic Ionic or Ionian Greek ( Ancient Greek : Ἰωνική , romanized : Iōnikḗ ) was a subdialect of the Eastern or Attic –Ionic dialect group of Ancient Greek . The Ionic group traditionally comprises three dialectal varieties that were spoken in Euboea (West Ionic), the northern Cyclades (Central Ionic), and from c.

1000 BC onward in Asiatic Ionia (East Ionic), where Ionian colonists from Athens founded their cities.

[ 2 ] Ionic was the base of several literary language forms of the Archaic and Classical periods, both in poetry and prose.

[ 3 ] The works of Homer and Hesiod are among the most popular poetic works that were written in a literary form of the Ionic dialect, known as Epic or Homeric Greek . The oldest Greek prose , including that of Heraclitus , Herodotus , Democritus , and Hippocrates , was also written in Ionic. By the end of the 5th century BC, Ionic was supplanted by Attic, which had become the dominant dialect of the Greek world.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] The Ionic dialect appears to have originally spread from the Greek mainland across the Aegean around the 11th century BC, during the early Greek Dark Ages . According to tradition, the ancestors of Ionians first set out from Athens, in a series of migrations, to establish their colonies on the coast of Asia Minor and the islands of the Cyclades, around the beginning of the Protogeometric period (1075/1050 BC).

[ 4 ] Between the 11th and 9th century BC, the Ionians continued to spread around those areas. The linguistic affinity of Attic and Ionic is evident in several unique features, like the early loss of /w/, or the merger of /ā/ and /ē/, as seen in both dialects.

[ 4 ] By the end of Archaic Greece and early Classical Greece in the 5th century BC, the central west coast of Asia Minor , along with the islands of Chios and Samos , formed the heartland of Ionia proper.

[ citation needed ] The Ionic dialect was also spoken on islands across the central Aegean and on the large island of Euboea north of Athens. The dialect was soon spread by Ionian colonization to areas in the northern Aegean, the Black Sea , and the western Mediterranean, including Magna Graecia in Sicily and Italy .

[ citation needed ] The Ionic dialect is generally divided into two major time periods, Old Ionic (or Old Ionian) and New Ionic (or New Ionian). The transition between the two is not clearly defined, but 600 BC is a good approximation.

[ citation needed ] The works of Homer ( The Iliad , The Odyssey , and the Homeric Hymns ) and of Hesiod were written in a literary dialect called Homeric Greek or Epic Greek , which largely comprises Old Ionic, but with some admixture from the neighboring Aeolic dialect to the north, [ 5 ] as well as with some Mycenaean elements as a result of a long pre-Homeric epic tradition.

[ 2 ] This Epic Ionic was used in all later hexametric and elegiac poetry, not only by Ionians, but also by foreigners such as the Boeotian Hesiod .

[ 2 ] Ionic would become the conventional dialect used for specific poetical and literary genres. Ιt was used by many authors, regardless of their origin; like the Dorian Tyrtaeus , composing elegies in a form of Ionic.

[ 6 ] This ability of poets to switch between dialects would eventually temper regional differences, while contributing to the awareness of the Greekness that all dialects had in common.

[ 6 ] The poet Archilochus wrote in late Old Ionic.

The most famous New Ionic authors are Anacreon , Theognis , Herodotus , Hippocrates , and, in Roman times, Aretaeus , Arrian , and the Lucianic or Pseudo-Lucianic On the Syrian Goddess .

[ citation needed ] Ionic acquired prestige among Greek speakers because of its association with the language used by both Homer and Herodotus and the close linguistic relationship with the Attic dialect as spoken in Athens.

[ citation needed ] This was further enhanced by the writing reform implemented in Athens in 403 BC, whereby the old Attic alphabet was replaced by the Ionic alphabet, as used by the city of Miletus . This alphabet eventually became the standard Greek alphabet, its use becoming uniform during the Koine era. It was also the alphabet used in the Christian Gospels and the book of Acts .

[ citation needed ] Ionic subdialects [ edit ] Map of the Ionian Greek dialects On the basis of inscriptions, three subdialects of Ionic may be discerned: [ 7 ] 1. Western Ionic, the dialect of Euboea and parts of Attica , like Oropos ; 2. Central or Cycladic Ionic, the dialect of the Cycladic Islands ; 3. Eastern Ionic, the dialect of Samos , Chios , and the west coast of Asia Minor .

[ 8 ] Eastern Ionic stands apart from both other dialects because it lost at a very early time the /h/ sound ( psilosis ) ( Herodotos should therefore properly be called Erodotos). The /w/ sound ( digamma ) is also completely absent from Eastern Ionic, but was sometimes retained in Western and Cycladic Ionic. Also pronouns that begin with /hop-/ in Western and Cycladic Ionic (ὅπου where , ὅπως how ), begin with ok- (conventionally written hok-) in Eastern Ionic (ὅκου/ὄκου, ὅκως/ὄκως).

Western Ionic differs from Cycladic and Eastern Ionic by the sounds -tt- and -rr- where the other two have -ss- and -rs- (τέτταρες vs. τέσσαρες, four ; θάρρος vs. θάρσος, bravery ). Western Ionic also stands apart by using the form ξένος (xenos, foreigner, guest ), where the other two use ξεῖνος (xeinos).

[ 9 ] Cycladic Ionic may be further subdivided: Keos , Naxos , and Amorgos retained a difference between two /æ/ sounds, namely original /æ/ (written as Ε), and /æ/ evolved from /ā/ (written as Η); for example ΜΗΤΕΡ = μήτηρ < μάτηρ, mother . On the other Cycladic Islands this distinction was not made, Η and Ε were used there interchangeably.

[ 10 ] Within Eastern Ionic, Herodotus recognized four subgroups ( Histories , I.142), three of them apparently influenced by a neighbouring language: a. The dialect of Miletus , Myus , and Priene , and their colonies, influenced by Carian ; b. The Ionic of Ephesos , Kolophon , Lebedos , Teos , Klazomenai , and Phokaia , and their colonies, influenced by Lydian ; c. The dialect of Chios and Erythrai and their colonies, influenced by Aeolic Greek; d. The dialect of Samos and its colonies.

Differences between these four groups are not clearly visible from inscriptions, probably because inscriptions were usually ordered by a high social group that everywhere spoke the same kind of "civilized Ionic". However, local speech by the "man in the street" must have shown differences. An inkling of this may be witnessed in the language of Ephesian "beggar poet" Hipponax , who often used local slang (νικύρτας, σάβαυνις: terms of abuse; χλούνης, thief ; κασωρικός, whorish ) and Lydian loanwords (πάλμυς, king ).

[ 11 ] Phonology [ edit ] Vowels [ edit ] Proto-Greek ā > Ionic ē ; in Doric , Aeolic , ā remains; in Attic , ā after e, i, r , but ē elsewhere.

[ 12 ] Attic νε ᾱ νί ᾱ ς ne ā ní ā s , Ionic νε η νί η ς ne ē ní ē s "young man" original and Doric ἁ (ᾱ) h ā > Attic-Ionic ἡ h ē "the" (feminine nominative singular) original and Doric μ ᾱ́ τηρ m ā tēr > Attic-Ionic μ ή τηρ m ḗ tēr "mother" Proto-Greek e, o > East/Central Ionic ei, ou : [ note 1 ] compensatory lengthening after loss of w in the sequences enw-, erw-, onw-, orw- . In Attic and West Ionic, e, o are not lengthened.

[ 13 ] Proto-Greek *k órw ā [ 14 ] > Attic κ όρ η k ór ē , East Ionic κ ούρ η k oúr ē "girl" * órw os > ὄρ ος ór os , οὖρ ος oúr os "mountain" *ks énw os > ξ έν ος x én os , ξ εῖν ος x eĩn os "guest, stranger" East Ionic generally removes initial aspiration (Proto-Greek h V - > Ionic V-).

[ 15 ] Proto-Greek * h āwélios > Attic h ēlios , Homeric (early East Ionic) ēélios "sun" Ionic contracts less often than Attic.

[ 16 ] Ionic γέν εα gén ea , Attic γέν η gén ē "family" (neuter nominative plural) Consonants [ edit ] Proto-Greek *kʷ before o > Attic, West/Central Ionic p , some East Ionic k .

Proto-Greek *hó kʷ ōs > East Ionic ὅ κ ως hó k ōs , Attic ὅ π ως hó p ōs "in whatever way, in which way" Proto-Greek *ťť > East/Central Ionic ss , West Ionic, Attic tt .

[ 17 ] This feature of East and Central Ionic made it into Koine Greek.

Proto-Greek *táťťō > Ionic τά σσ ω tá ss ō , Attic τά ττ ω tá tt ō "I arrange" Glossary [ edit ] This Glossary's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines .

Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references .

( September 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ἄβδης ábdês scourge ( Hipponax .98) ἄεθλον áethlon (Attic ἆθλον athlon prize) ἀειναῦται aeinaûtai archontes in Miletus and Chalcis ( aeí always + naûtai sailors) ἀλγείη algeíē illness  (Cf.Attic ἀλγηδών algēdṓn pain) Algophobia ἄμπωτις ámpōtis ebb , being sucked back, i.e. of sea (Attic anápōtis, verb anapínō) (Koine, Modern Greek ampotis) ἄνου anou (Attic ἄνω ánō, up) Απατούρια Apatoúria Pan-ionic festival ( see also Panionium ) ἀππαλλάζειν appallázein (Attic ἐκκλησιάζειν ekklesiázein gather together, decide) (Doric apellazein ) ἀχάντιον achántion (Attic ἀκάνθιον akánthion small thorn acanthus ) βάθρακοι báthrakoi (Attic βάτραχοι bátrachoi, frogs) in Pontus babakoi βροῦκος broûkos species of locust (Attic akrís) ( Cypriots call the green locust βρούκα broúka) βυσσός byssós (Attic βυθός bythós depth, bottom, chaos) γάννος gánnos Ephesian (Attic huaina (glanos Aristotle .HA594a31.) ( Phrygian and Tsakonian ganos εἴδη eídē   (Attic ὕλη hýle forest) ( Aeolic Greek eide  also) (Greek Eidos) ἐνθαῦτα enthaûta here ( entoutha also) (Attic ἐνταῦθα entaûtha) ( Elean ἐνταῦτα entaûta) ἐργύλος ergýlos (Attic ἐργάτης ergátēs worker) ἑστιᾶχος hestiâchos ionic epithet for Zeus, related to Hestia (oikourós, housekeeper, οἰκῶναξ oikônax ) ἠγός ēgós (Attic εὐδαίμων eudaímon happy) (Hesychius s.v.

εὐηγεσίη )  (τ 114) ἠέλιος êélios (Attic hḗlios sun) (Cretan abelios) Ἰαστί Iastí, "the ionic way" ( Ἰάονες , Iáones , Ionians; Ἰάς , Iás , old name of Attica, Strabo IX, 1.5 ) ἴδη ídē forested mountain (Attic δρυμῶν ὄρος drymôn óros) ( Herodotus 4,109,2) ( Mount Ida ) ἰητρός iētrós, iētēr (Attic iatrós, iatēr doctor) ἴκκος íkkos (Attic ἵππος híppos, horse) ( Mycenaean i-qo ) κάρη kárē head (Common kara) (Poetic kras ) κιθών kithṓn (Attic χιτών chitṓn ) κοεῖν koeîn (Attic νοεῖν noeîn to think) noesis κοῖος koîos (Attic ποῖος poîos who?) κύθρη kýthrē (Attic χύτρα chýtra  cooking pot) μύτταξ mýttax (Attic πώγων pṓgōn beard) Ξουθίδαι Xouthidai  Ionians from Xuthus ὀδμή odmḗ (Attic ὀσμή osmḗ scent, smell) πηλός pēlós thick wine, lees (Attic πηλός pelós mud, silt ) ( proverbial phrase mê dein ton Oinea Pêlea poiein , don't make wine into lees, Ath.9.383c, cf. Demetr.Eloc.171) ῥηχίη rhêchíê flood-tide, loanword to Attic as ῥαχία rhachía (Homeric, Koine, Modern Greek πλημμυρίς plêmmurís -ída) σαβακός sabakís (Attic σαθρός sathrís decayed) Chian σάρμοι sármoi lupins (Attic θέρμοι thermoi } Carystian σκορπίζω skorpízô scatter, disperse (probably from skorpios scorpion and an obsolete verb skerpô , penetrate) ταῦροι [ 18 ] taûroi (Attic tauroi bulls) ( Ephesian word, the youths who acted as cupbearers at the local festival of Poseidon ) φοινικήια phoinikḗia grámmata Lydians and Ionians called so the letters χλοσσός chlossós (Attic ἰχθύς ichthús fish) ὦ οἰοῖ ô oioî exclamation of discontent ἐπιφώνημα σχετλιαστικὸν παρ' Ἴωσι See also [ edit ] Wiktionary has a category on Ionic Greek .

Ionians Yona Dayuan Notes [ edit ] ^ Among Greek dialects, Ionic was the fondest of long vowels and was thus considered especially suited to solo singing; the more austere, broad-sounding Doric was preferred in choral singing.

References [ edit ] ^ Roger D. Woodard (2008), "Greek dialects", in: The Ancient Languages of Europe , ed. R. D. Woodard, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p. 51.

^ a b c d "Ionic dialect | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 2023-11-29 .

^ Barrio, María Luisa del (2013-09-24), "Ionic" , Encyclopedia of Ancient Greek Language and Linguistics , Brill , retrieved 2023-11-29 ^ a b Miller 2013 , p. 139.

^ Horrocks 2009 , p. 44.

^ a b Derks & Roymans 2009 , p. 45.

^ Thumb, Albert; Scherer, A. (1959).

Handbuch der griechischen Dialekte (2 ed.). Heidelberg: Carl Winter. p. II, 247.

^ Derks & Roymans 2009 , p. 44.

^ Thumb & Scherer (1959), pp. 247, 264-265.

^ Thumb & Scherer (1959), pp. 251-252.

^ Hoffmann, O.; Scherer, A. (1969).

Geschichte der griechischen Sprache . Berlin: Walter de Gruyter & Co. p. I, 55.

^ Smyth , par. 30 and note, 31: long a in Attic and other dialects ^ Smyth, par. 37 note: Ionic compensatory lengthening after loss of w ^ κόρη .

Liddell, Henry George ; Scott, Robert ; A Greek–English Lexicon at the Perseus Project .

^ Smyth, par. 9 note: early loss of rough breathing in Ionic of Asia Minor ^ Smyth, par. 59 note: contraction in dialects ^ Smyth, par. 112, 78: ky, khy > tt; = ss in non-Attic dialects ^ Athenaeus Deipnosophists 10 425c Sources [ edit ] Christides, Anastasios-Phoivos (2007).

A History of Ancient Greek: From the Beginnings to Late Antiquity . UK: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521833073 .

Giannakis, Georgios K. (2014).

Encyclopedia of Ancient Greek Language and Linguistics . Brill.

ISBN 9789004225978 .

Miller, D. Gary (2013).

Ancient Greek Dialects and Early Authors, Introduction to the Dialect Mixture in Homer, with Notes on Lyric and Herodotus . De Gruyter.

ISBN 9781614512950 .

Fisk, Benjamin Franklin (1830).

"Ionic" .

A Grammar of the Greek Language . Hilliard, Gray, Little, and Wilkins.

Horrocks, Geoffrey (2009).

Greek: A History of the Language and its Speakers . John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 978-1444318920 .

Palmer, Leonard Robert (1996).

The Greek Language . University of Oklahoma Press.

ISBN 0806128445 .

Derks, Ton; Roymans, Nico (2009).

Ethnic Constructs in Antiquity, The Role of Power and Tradition . Amsterdam University Press.

ISBN 9789089640789 .

Further reading [ edit ] Library resources about Ionic Greek Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Bakker, Egbert J., ed. 2010.

A companion to the Ancient Greek language.

Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.

Colvin, Stephen C. 2007.

A historical Greek reader: Mycenaean to the koiné.

Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Horrocks, Geoffrey C. 1987. "The Ionian epic tradition: Was there an Aeolic phase in its development?" Minos 20–22: 269–94.

Palmer, Leonard R. 1980.

The Greek language.

London: Faber & Faber.

West, Martin L. 1974.

Studies in Greek elegy and iambus.

Berlin: de Gruyter.

v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline v t e Greek language Origin and genealogy Graeco-Aryan Graeco-Armenian Pre-Greek substrate Graeco-Phrygian Hellenic languages Periods Proto-Greek ( c.

2900 –1600 BC) Mycenaean Greek ( c.

1600 –1100 BC) Ancient Greek ( c.

800 –300 BC) Koine Greek ( c.

300 BC –AD 330) Medieval Greek ( c.

330 –1453) Modern Greek (since 1453) Varieties Ancient Central Aeolic Mycenaean Arcadocypriot East Attic Ionic Homeric West Doric Northwest Achaean Epirote Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Hellenistic Koine Jewish Koine Greek Modern Demotic Katharevousa Cappadocian Misthiotika Cretan Cypriot Himariote Constantinople Italiot Greco/Calabrian Griko/Apulian Maniot Mariupolitan Pontic Romano-Greek Tsakonian Yevanic Greco-Australian Phonology Ancient ( accent / teaching ) Koine Standard Modern Grammar Ancient Koine Standard Modern Writing systems Cypriot syllabary Linear B Greek alphabet History Archaic forms Attic numerals Greek numerals Orthography Diacritics Braille Cyrillization and Romanization Greeklish Literature Ancient Byzantine Modern Promotion and study Hellenic Foundation for Culture Center for the Greek Language Institute for Language and Speech Processing Other Eteocretan language Eteocypriot language Greek language question Morphemes in English Terms of endearment Place names Proverbs Minoan language Greek Language Day Trojan language Comparison of Ancient Greek dictionaries v t e Ages of Greek c.

3rd millennium BC c.

1600–1100 BC c.

800–300 BC c.

300 BC – AD 600 c.

600–1453 Since 1453 Proto-Greek Mycenaean Ancient Koine Medieval Modern Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ionic_Greek&oldid=1300869551 " Categories : Ionic Greek Ionia Languages of ancient Macedonia Languages of ancient Thrace Languages of ancient Anatolia Languages of ancient Italy Languages attested from the 11th century BC 11th-century BC establishments Languages extinct in the 3rd century BC 3rd-century BC disestablishments Hidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Language articles with Linglist code Dialects of languages with ISO 639-3 code Dialects with Linguist List code Languages without ISO 639-3 code but with Glottolog code Language articles with unreferenced extinction date All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2024 Wikipedia external links cleanup from September 2024 This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 20:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ionic Greek 29 languages Add topic

