Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Production Toggle Production subsection 3.1 Development 3.2 Filming 4 Soundtrack 5 Critical reception 6 Awards and honors 7 Home media 8 In popular culture 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Insignificance (film) 12 languages Català Cymraeg Français Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский Suomi Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1985 film by Nicolas Roeg Insignificance Theatrical release poster Directed by Nicolas Roeg Written by Terry Johnson Produced by Alexander Stuart Jeremy Thomas Starring Gary Busey Michael Emil Theresa Russell Will Sampson Tony Curtis Cinematography Peter Hannan Edited by Tony Lawson Music by Stanley Myers Hans Zimmer (uncredited) Production companies Recorded Picture Company Zenith Distributed by Palace Pictures Release date 2 August 1985 ( 1985-08-02 ) Running time 110 minutes Country United Kingdom Language English Budget $6 million [ 1 ] Insignificance is a 1985 British alternative history drama film directed by Nicolas Roeg , and starring Gary Busey , Michael Emil, Theresa Russell , Tony Curtis , and Will Sampson . Adapted by Terry Johnson from his 1982 play of the same name, the film follows four famous characters who converge in a New York City hotel one night in 1954: Joe DiMaggio , Albert Einstein , Marilyn Monroe , and Joseph McCarthy —billed as The Ballplayer, The Professor, The Actress and The Senator, respectively.

Plot [ edit ] On a crowded New York City street, people have gathered to watch a film crew shoot a sequence where The Actress in a white dress is standing on a grate while the rush of wind caused by a huge fan to imitate the subway going by below blows her skirt up around her waist. The Actress's husband, The Ballplayer , watches with obvious discomfort as she is ogled. The Actress, rather than join him afterwards, disappears in a taxi, leaving him behind. She stops at a store and picks up a variety of toys, flashlights, and balloons.

Meanwhile, The Professor is in his hotel room, working on pages of mathematical calculations. He is interrupted by The Senator , who has come to alternately coax and threaten him into appearing before a committee to investigate his activities and answer the famous question, " Are you now or have you ever been...?

". The Professor refuses and says he will never appear. The Senator leaves, saying he'll be back to get him at 8 a.m. the following morning.

The Actress appears at the door of the Professor's hotel room, and he invites her in. They talk about fame, being chased, and the stars. She does a lively demonstration of the theory of relativity using the toys and flashlights and balloons. She tells The Professor he is at the top of her list of people she'd like to sleep with. They decide to go to bed, but are interrupted by the arrival of The Ballplayer, who has tracked her to the hotel. The Professor leaves them alone and goes to find another room, meeting a Cherokee elevator man with whom he speaks. The Actress and The Ballplayer talk about their marriage; The Actress tells her husband she believes she is pregnant, but he has fallen asleep.

The following morning The Senator arrives at The Professor's room to find him gone, but The Actress naked and alone in The Professor's bed. He mistakes her for a call girl and threatens to use her to expose and embarrass The Professor, then punches her hard in the abdomen, causing her to collapse in pain. The Professor returns while The Senator is collecting all of the hundreds of pages of The Professor's work to take away with him. The Professor grabs the papers and throws them out of the windows, while The Actress writhes in agony on the bed. The Senator leaves, defeated in his purpose. The Ballplayer returns and talks about his fame in the baseball world, and confides in him about his marital problems while The Actress is in the bathroom, possibly suffering a miscarriage . She finally announces to him that their marriage is over, and he leaves.

The Actress becomes impatient with The Professor, sensing that he is hiding something. He is sitting on the bed with his watch, which has stopped at 8:15, in one hand, and the alarm clock in the other as the hour approaches 8:15 (the time that " Little Boy " was dropped on Hiroshima ). He confesses his terrible feelings of guilt about the event, and she reassures him. Right at 8:15 a.m. as she is leaving, he has a vision of the destruction of the room, Hiroshima, and the world. The Actress's skirt swirls in flames as she burns in his vision. Suddenly The Professor's vision stops and reverses itself, and the world is restored to order. The Actress smiles at The Professor, who smiles back as she waves and leaves.

[ 2 ] Cast [ edit ] Gary Busey as The Ballplayer Michael Emil as The Professor Theresa Russell as The Actress Tony Curtis as The Senator Will Sampson as Elevator attendant ("The Indian") Patrick Kilpatrick as Driver Ian O'Connell as Assistant director George Holmes as Actor Richard Davidson as Director of photography Mitchell Greenberg as Technician Raynor Scheine as Autograph hunter Jude Ciccolella as Gaffer Lou Hirsch as Charlie Ray Charleson as Bud Joel Cutrara as Drunk in bar Future WCW wrestler Daffney appears as a featured extra.

[ 3 ] Production [ edit ] Development [ edit ] Russell as the Actress Insignificance was originally a play, written by Terry Johnson and performed at the Royal Court Theatre in London in 1982, with Judy Davis as The Actress. The seed for the play was Johnson's having read that an autographed photograph of Einstein was found amongst Marilyn Monroe's possessions upon her death. The idea of their meeting piqued his interest, and he wrote what became a meditation on the nature of fame.

[ 4 ] "It was always meant to be a play about the era, about fame ... what these people stood for, the fact that this was different from what they are." He was interested in exploring the differences between who these people really were, as opposed to what qualities others assumed or imbued them with. Johnson acknowledges that there are "lots of little cheats" in the play, mostly to do with exactly where and when The Seven Year Itch was filmed, and the timing of Monroe's marriage to Joe DiMaggio. Einstein was also never called to testify before the House Un-American Activities Committee , "but," he said, "had it gone on longer, I can see that as having been a big possibility. He was there in spirit, as it were." [ 5 ] Roeg saw the play and felt it "might be a tool to use. An incident came up in my own life and I thought, 'Good God, nobody knows a damn thing about anyone.' That was the premise that started me thinking about the piece again." Roeg notes that Insignificance is usually talked about as a meeting between Marilyn Monroe and Albert Einstein, but what moved him was the pain of the problems between The Actress and The Ballplayer, who are married but seem to know nothing about each other.

[ 5 ] Insignificance would become his first film adapted from a play.

Roeg asked Johnson to work on the screenplay, which at first meant simply reducing the play to approximately 90 minutes as opposed to two hours, but then Roeg began making suggestions which would expand the screenplay and include flashbacks to the characters' histories, and flash-forwards of imagination. His suggestions inspired Johnson to focus on a deeper development of the characters, while Roeg himself began to imagine how the film could open the play spatially as well as laterally.

[ 6 ] "He opened it backwards," Johnson said.

[ 5 ] Filming [ edit ] All of the interiors for Insignificance as well as the Seven Year Itch scene, were shot at Lee Studios in Wembley Park , England, with second-unit exteriors shot in New York City.

Mise-en-scène was created through the use of Pablo Picasso 's post-cubism painting Woman and Child on the Seashore which underscores The Actress' pain about her childlessness, [ 7 ] while the fractured structure of the narrative was mirrored in the splintered image of Theresa Russell used as a nude calendar shot of The Actress. Created by photographer-collagist David Hockney , the image is, according to film critic Chuck Stephens, "a pinup in a hundred pieces, a centerfold sent through a centrifuge..." and is a reflection of The Actress. With "her much-exposed and famously exploited psyche already splintered into jagged, mingled shards of kittenish innocence, movie business cunning, overwhelming erotic appeal, and abject inner terror, Monroe was post-cubism's quintessential glittering star...perfectly pieced together and seen prismatically all at once..." [ 8 ] The image is also a metaphor for Roeg's non-linear filmmaking, Stephens notes that "for a cine-cubist like Roeg, two entirely disparate spatial and temporal dimensions are never more than a splice apart, and in Insignificance , the past is always present, and never goes away." [ 8 ] Soundtrack [ edit ] The soundtrack to the film, titled The Shape of the Universe , was released in the UK by the British label ZTT Records on 5 August 1985 as ZTT IQ4. It features six tracks performed and produced by Stanley Myers , who is credited in the film for the score.

Roy Orbison sings the song " Wild Hearts ", written by Orbison and Will Jennings , and Theresa Russell sings "Life Goes On", which is uncredited.

Glenn Gregory , Claudia Brucken and Will Jennings perform "When Your Heart Runs Out of Time", written by Jennings, which Jennings also sings by himself on another track.  Composer Hans Zimmer contributed three tracks he performed and produced, and Gil Evans and his orchestra contributed an interpretation of Mozart's Jupiter Symphony .  The record also includes dialogue excerpts from the film.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Critical reception [ edit ] Insignificance received mostly positive reviews at the time of its release, and currently has a 73% approval rating at Rotten Tomatoes based on 15 reviews, with an average score of 6.4/10.

[ 11 ] The film has been written about extensively in the years since it was first seen.

Film4 's movie critic wrote: "Roeg really is the perfect director to bring Johnson's stage play to the screen. Throughout, tortured childhood flashbacks and pessimistic flash-forwards (ka-boom!) draw unexpected connections between time, place and circumstance, with the repeated visual motif of a wristwatch employed to mark time's passing – but perhaps also to suggest all time is one time; each moment co-existing. As evinced by his back catalogue, it's something of a hobbyhorse for a director enchanted with the notion of synchronicity – see Don't Look Now in particular. Here, 1920 bleeds into 1945 and drip-feeds into the 1980s, a period in which another 'Actor' has taken on his greatest role as the President of the United States." Frederic and Mary Ann Brussat write: " Insignificance shines with some incandescent moments of acting bravado delivered by Theresa Russell, Tony Curtis, and Gary Busey. As a weird meditation on sex, power, knowledge, and fame, this is a four-star treat for those who savor exotic movie fare...Nicolas Roeg ( Don't Look Now , The Man Who Fell to Earth ) draws out the inner psychological nuances of the drama and delivers the philosophical freight in Terry Johnson's screenplay." [ 12 ] Awards and honors [ edit ] The film was entered into the 1985 Cannes Film Festival where it was nominated for the Palme d'Or and won the Technical Grand Prize.

[ 13 ] Home media [ edit ] Insignificance was released on VHS in 1985, on Laserdisc a few years later, and on DVD in 2003. In June 2011, The Criterion Collection released a fully restored and re-mastered DVD and Blu-ray edition, containing interviews with Nicolas Roeg, Terry Johnson, long-time Roeg editor Tony Lawson, and the short film, "Making Insignificance ". The release also contains a booklet with excerpts from the August 1985 Roeg-Johnson interview called "Relatively Speaking" in the 1985 Monthly Film Bulletin, and an essay by film critic Chuck Stephens.

[ 14 ] In popular culture [ edit ] The film is featured in Big Audio Dynamite 's music video for " E=MC 2 ". Clips of the film are shown throughout the video and are referenced throughout the song.

Jim O'Rourke 's 2001 album Insignificance is named after the film.

References [ edit ] ^ "The Unstoppables" .

Spy . November 1988. p. 90.

^ Lim, Dennis (26 June 2011).

"A Second Look: 'Insignificance' " .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved 8 August 2013 .

^ Oliver, Greg (2 September 2021).

" 'Daffney' Shannon Spruill dead at 46" .

Slam Wrestling . Retrieved 26 July 2025 .

^ Sinyard, Neil (1991) The Films of Nicolas Roeg . Charles Letts & Co. pp.95–96 ^ a b c Staff (August 1985) "Relatively Speaking".

Monthly Film Bulletin . p.237 ^ Sinyard, Neil (1991) The Films of Nicolas Roeg . Charles Letts & Co. p.97 ^ Criterion Collection Interview with Nicolas Roeg and Terry Johnson, 2011 ^ a b Essay in Criterion Collection DVD/Blu-ray release, August 2011 ^ "Insignificance (soundtrack)" Amazon Music ^ "Various: The Shape of the Universe" zang tuum tumb and all that ^ "Insignificance (1985)" .

Rotten Tomatoes .

^ "Insignificance – Film Reviews" .

Spirituality and Practice .

^ "Festival de Cannes: Insignificance" .

festival-cannes.com . Retrieved 28 June 2009 .

^ "Insignificance" . The Criterion Collection.

External links [ edit ] Insignificance at IMDb Insignificance at the TCM Movie Database McCarthyism and the Movies Insignificance: Stargazing , an essay by Chuck Stephen at the Criterion Collection Interview with Theresa Russell, by Sam Wasson at the Criterion Collection v t e Films directed by Nicolas Roeg Feature films Performance (1970) Walkabout (1971) Don't Look Now (1973) The Man Who Fell to Earth (1976) Bad Timing (1980) Eureka (1983) Insignificance (1985) Castaway (1986) Track 29 (1988) The Witches (1990) Cold Heaven (1991) Two Deaths (1995) Puffball (2007) Short films Un Ballo in Maschera (1987) Hotel Paradise (1995) Documentaries Glastonbury Fayre (1972) Television Sweet Bird of Youth (1989) Heart of Darkness (1993) Full Body Massage (1995) Samson and Delilah (1996) v t e Marilyn Monroe Performances and accolades Death Songs " Diamonds Are a Girl's Best Friend " " Happy Birthday, Mr. President " " Heat Wave " " My Heart Belongs to Daddy " " That Old Black Magic " " You'd Be Surprised " Clothes Pink dress White dress John F. Kennedy birthday dress Artworks of Marilyn Diptych (1962) Gold Marilyn Monroe (1962) Shot Marilyns (1964) Marilyn Monroe portfolio (1967) Marilyn Monroe mural (1981) Films about Marilyn (1963 documentary) The Legend of Marilyn Monroe (1966 documentary) Goodbye, Norma Jean (1976 film) This Year's Blonde (1980 film) Marilyn: The Untold Story (1980 film) Goodnight, Sweet Marilyn (1989 film) Marilyn and Me (1991 film) Norma Jean & Marilyn (1996 film) Blonde (2001 film) My Week with Marilyn (2011 film) Love, Marilyn (2012 documentary) The Secret Life of Marilyn Monroe (2015 film) Blonde (2022 film) Popular culture " Candle in the Wind " (1973 song) Marilyn (1980 opera) Insignificance (1985 film) Taxi (1988 pinball machine) Calendar Girl (1993 film) Marilyn Forever Blonde (2007 play) Marilyn and Ella (2008 play) Forever Marilyn (2011 statue) " Marilyn Monroe " (2012 song) Smash 2012 TV series Bombshell Norma Jeane Baker of Troy (2019 play) " Nxde " (2022 song) Smash (2025 musical) Related James Dougherty (first husband) Joe DiMaggio (second husband) Arthur Miller (third husband) Gladys Pearl Baker (mother) Berniece Baker Miracle (sister) John F. Kennedy document hoax The Last Sitting 12305 Fifth Helena Drive v t e Albert Einstein Physics Theory of relativity Special relativity General relativity Mass–energy equivalence (E=mc 2 ) Brownian motion Photoelectric effect Einstein coefficients Einstein solid Equivalence principle Einstein field equations Einstein radius Einstein relation (kinetic theory) Einstein ring Cosmological constant Bose–Einstein condensate Bose–Einstein statistics Bose–Einstein correlations Einstein–Cartan theory Einstein–Infeld–Hoffmann equations Einstein–de Haas effect EPR paradox Bohr–Einstein debates Teleparallelism Thought experiments Unsuccessful investigations Wave–particle duality Gravitational wave Tea leaf paradox Works Annus mirabilis papers (1905) " Investigations on the Theory of Brownian Movement " (1905) Relativity: The Special and the General Theory (1916) The Meaning of Relativity (1922) The World as I See It (1934) The Evolution of Physics (1938) " Why Socialism?

" (1949) Russell–Einstein Manifesto (1955) In popular culture Die Grundlagen der Einsteinschen Relativitäts-Theorie (1922 documentary) The Einstein Theory of Relativity (1923 documentary) Relics: Einstein's Brain (1994 documentary) Insignificance (1985 film) Young Einstein (1988 film) Picasso at the Lapin Agile (1993 play) I.Q.

(1994 film) Einstein's Gift (2003 play) Einstein and Eddington (2008 TV film) Genius (2017 series) Oppenheimer (2023 film) Prizes Albert Einstein Award Albert Einstein Medal Kalinga Prize Albert Einstein Peace Prize Albert Einstein World Award of Science Einstein Prize for Laser Science Einstein Prize (APS) Books about Einstein Albert Einstein: Creator and Rebel Einstein and Religion Einstein for Beginners Einstein: His Life and Universe Einstein in Oxford Einstein on the Run Einstein's Cosmos I Am Albert Einstein Introducing Relativity Subtle is the Lord Family Mileva Marić (first wife) Elsa Einstein (second wife; cousin) Lieserl Einstein (daughter) Hans Albert Einstein (son) Pauline Koch (mother) Hermann Einstein (father) Maja Einstein (sister) Eduard Einstein (son) Robert Einstein (cousin) Bernhard Caesar Einstein (grandson) Evelyn Einstein (granddaughter) Thomas Martin Einstein (great-grandson) Siegbert Einstein (distant cousin) Related Awards and honors Brain House Memorial Political views Religious views Things named after Einstein–Oppenheimer relationship Albert Einstein Archives Einstein's Blackboard Einstein Papers Project Einstein refrigerator Einsteinhaus Einsteinium Max Talmey Emergency Committee of Atomic Scientists Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Insignificance_(film)&oldid=1302625105 " Categories : 1985 films 1985 comedy-drama films British alternative history films British comedy-drama films British films based on plays Films about the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki Films directed by Nicolas Roeg Films set in 1954 Films set in the 1950s Films shot in New York City Cultural depictions of Marilyn Monroe Cultural depictions of Albert Einstein Cultural depictions of Joseph McCarthy Cultural depictions of Joe DiMaggio Films about McCarthyism Films scored by Stanley Myers Films scored by Hans Zimmer Films produced by Jeremy Thomas Films à clef 1980s English-language films 1980s British films English-language comedy-drama films Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from September 2013 Use dmy dates from May 2024 Template film date with 1 release date This page was last edited on 26 July 2025, at 15:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Insignificance (film) 12 languages Add topic

