Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early federalism Toggle Early federalism subsection 1.1 Federalist Party 2 Under the Marshall Court 3 Dual federalism 4 Between dual federalism and the New Deal Toggle Between dual federalism and the New Deal subsection 4.1 State government policies 4.2 Local government policies 5 Cooperative federalism 6 New Federalism Toggle New Federalism subsection 6.1 Recent federalism 6.1.1 Presidency of George W. Bush 6.1.2 Presidency of Barack Obama 6.1.3 Presidency of Donald Trump 6.1.4 Presidency of Joe Biden 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References and further reading Toggle the table of contents Federalism in the United States 8 languages Deutsch فارسی Simple English کوردی Svenska ไทย اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Division of powers between national, state, tribal and local governments This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Federalism in the United States" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( February 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is part of a series on the Constitution of the United States Preamble and Articles Preamble I II III IV V VI VII Amendments to the Constitution I II III IV V VI VII VIII IX X XI XII XIII XIV XV XVI XVII XVIII XIX XX XXI XXII XXIII XXIV XXV XXVI XXVII Unratified Amendments : Congressional Apportionment Titles of Nobility Corwin Child Labor Equal Rights D.C. Voting Rights History Drafting and ratification timeline Convention Signing Federalism Republicanism Bill of Rights Reconstruction Amendments Full text Preamble and Articles I–VII Amendments I–X Amendments XI–XXVII Unratified Amendments United States portal Law portal Politics portal v t e Constitutional law of the United States Overview Articles Amendments History Judicial review Principles Separation of powers Individual rights Rule of law Federalism Republicanism Equal footing Tiers of scrutiny Government structure Legislative branch Executive branch Judicial branch State government Local government Individual rights Freedom of religion Freedom of speech Freedom of the press Freedom of assembly Right to petition Freedom of association Right to keep and bear arms Right to trial by jury Criminal procedural rights Right to privacy Freedom from slavery Due process Equal protection Citizenship Voting rights Right to candidacy Comprehensible rules Theory Living Constitution Originalism Substantive due process Political process theory Judicial restraint Purposivism Textualism Strict constructionism Common good constitutionalism Unitary executive theory v t e This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e In the United States, federalism is the constitutional division of power between U.S. state governments and the federal government of the United States . Since the founding of the country, and particularly with the end of the American Civil War , power shifted away from the states and toward the national government. The progression of federalism includes dual , cooperative , and New Federalism .

Early federalism [ edit ] Federalism is a form of political organization that seeks to distinguish states and unites them, assigning different types of decision-making power at different levels to allow a degree of political independence in an overarching structure.

[ 1 ] Federalism was a political solution to the problems with the Articles of Confederation which gave little practical authority to the confederal government . For example, the Articles allowed the Congress of the Confederation the power to sign treaties and declare war, but it could not raise taxes to pay for an army and all major decisions required an unanimous vote.

[ 2 ] The movement for federalism was greatly strengthened by the reaction to Shays' Rebellion of 1786–1787, which was an armed uprising of yeoman farmers in western Massachusetts . The rebellion was fueled by a poor economy that was created, in part, by the inability of the confederal government to deal effectively with the debt from the American Revolutionary War . Moreover, the confederal government had proven incapable of raising an army to quell the rebellion, so that Massachusetts had been forced to raise its own.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The Annapolis Convention met in 1786 in which twelve delegates from five U.S. states ( New Jersey , New York , Pennsylvania , Delaware , and Virginia ) gathered to discuss and develop a consensus on reversing the protectionist trade barriers that each state had erected.

New Hampshire , Massachusetts , Rhode Island , and North Carolina had appointed commissioners, who failed to arrive in Annapolis in time to attend the meeting, and Connecticut , Maryland , South Carolina , and Georgia had taken no action at all.

[ 5 ] The final report of the convention was adopted unanimously and sent to the Congress and to the states. It sought support for a broader constitutional convention to be held the following May in Philadelphia. It hoped that more states would be represented and that their delegates or deputies would be authorized to examine areas broader than simply commercial trade.

[ 6 ] On May 15, 1787, fifty-five delegates met at what would be known as the Constitutional Convention in the Philadelphia State House. There, the delegates debated the structure, provisions, and limitations of Federalism in what would be the Constitution of the United States . This was a clear development in federal thought.

[ 1 ] Preceding examples, such as in the Virginia Declaration of Rights , influenced the delegates whilst framing their ideas of Federal bicameral legislature ( United States Congress ), balanced representation of small and large states ( Great Compromise ), and checks and balances structures.

[ 7 ] James Madison stated in a pre-convention memorandum to the delegates that because "one could hardly expect the state legislatures to take enlightened views on national affairs", a stronger central government was necessary.

[ 8 ] Madison later wrote in Federalist No. 10 on his support for a federal government, "the smaller the number of individuals composing a majority, and the smaller the compass within which they are placed, the more easily will they concert and execute their plans of oppression. Extend the sphere, and you take in a greater variety of parties and interests; you make it less probable that a majority of the whole will have a common motive to invade the rights of other citizens".

[ 9 ] The convention had begun altering its original plan but then decided to abandon continued efforts of emendation, and officially set about constructing a new Constitution of the United States . Because George Washington lent his prestige to the Constitution and because of the ingenuity and organizational skills of its proponents, the Constitution was eventually ratified in all states. Once the convention concluded and released the Constitution for public consumption, the Federalist and Anti-Federalist movements soon began publicizing their disagreeing beliefs in local newspapers and segments.

[ 10 ] The most forceful defense of the new Constitution was The Federalist Papers , a compilation of 85 anonymous essays published in New York City to convince the people of the state to vote for ratification. These articles, written by Alexander Hamilton and James Madison , with some contributed by John Jay , examined the benefits of the new, proposed Constitution, and analyzed the political theory and function behind the various articles of the Constitution.

The Federalist Papers remain one of the most important sets of documents in American history and political science.

[ 11 ] Anti-Federalists, who were opposed to the new Constitution, were generally local rather than cosmopolitan in perspective, oriented to plantations and farms rather than commerce or finance, and wanted strong state governments and a weak national government.  According to political scientist James Wilson, the Anti-Federalists "were much more committed to strong states and a weak national government....A strong national government, they felt, would be distant from the people and would use its powers to annihilate or absorb the functions that properly belonged to the states." [ 12 ] The Anti-Federalist critique soon centered on the absence of a bill of rights , which Federalists in the ratifying conventions promised to provide. Washington and Madison had personally pledged to consider amendments, realizing that they would be necessary to reduce pressure for a second constitutional convention that might drastically alter and weaken the new federal government. Madison proposed amendments that gave more rights to individuals than to states, which led to criticisms of diversion by Anti-Federalists.

[ 13 ] The outgoing Congress of the Confederation scheduled elections for the new government, and set March 4, 1789 as the date that the new government would take power. In 1789, the new Congress of the United States submitted twelve articles of amendment to the states. Ten of these articles, written by congressional committees, achieved passage on December 15, 1791 and became the United States Bill of Rights .

[ 13 ] The Tenth Amendment set the guidelines for federalism in the United States.

[ 14 ] Federalist Party [ edit ] Main article: Federalist Party After the first federalist movement achieved its aims in promoting the Constitution, an official Federalist Party emerged with slightly different aims. This one was based on the policies of Alexander Hamilton and his allies for a stronger national government, a loose construction of the Constitution, and a mercantile (rather than agricultural) economy. As time progressed, the factions which adhered to these policies organized themselves into the nation's first political party, the Federalist Party, and the movement's focus and fortunes began to track those of the party it spawned.

While the Federalist movement of the 1780s and the Federalist Party were distinct entities, they were related in more than just a common name. The Jeffersonian or Democratic-Republican Party , the opposition to the Federalist Party, emphasized the fear that a strong national government was a threat to the liberties of the people. They stressed that the national debt created by the new government would bankrupt the country, and that federal bondholders were paid through taxes collected from honest farmers and workingmen. These themes resonated with the Anti-Federalists, the opposition to the Federalist movement of the 1780s. As Norman Risjord has documented for Virginia, of the supporters of the Constitution in 1788, 69% joined the Federalist party, while nearly all (94%) of the opponents joined the Republicans. 71% of Thomas Jefferson 's supporters in Virginia were former Anti-Federalists who continued to fear centralized government, while only 29% had been proponents of the Constitution a few years before. However, James Madison, who was one of the strongest proponents of the Constitution and a member of the first federalist movement, became a Jeffersonian, [ 15 ] while some who were Anti-Federalists prior to the ratification of the Constitution, such as Patrick Henry , became supportive of the Federalist Party.

The movement reached its zenith with the election of John Adams , an overtly Federalist President. However, with the defeat of Adams in the election of 1800 and the death of Hamilton , the Federalist Party began a long decline from which it never recovered. What finally finished off the Federalist party was the Hartford Convention of 1814, in which five New England states gathered to discuss several constitutional amendments necessary to protect New England's interests in regard to the blockade of their ports by the British during the War of 1812 . The threat of secession also was proposed during these secret meetings. Three delegates were sent to Washington, DC to negotiate New England's terms only to discover the signing of the Treaty of Ghent , ending the war with the British.

[ 16 ] Across the nation, Republicans used the great victory at New Orleans to ridicule the Federalists as cowards or defeatists. The Federalists were thereafter associated with the disloyalty and parochialism of the Hartford Convention and destroyed as a political force.

[ 17 ] Under the Marshall Court [ edit ] See also: John Marshall The United States Supreme Court under Chief Justice John Marshall played an important role in defining the power of the federal and state governments during the early 19th century. As the U.S. Constitution does not specifically define many dividing lines between the layers of government, the Supreme Court settled the issue in New York. The question was answered particularly in the cases, McCulloch v. Maryland , in which the court unanimously found that the states could not tax a federal institution that was deemed legitimate and appropriate, Gibbons v. Ogden , in which Congress was confirmed control of interstate commerce under the commerce clause instead of the states, and Marbury v. Madison , which broadly expanded the power of the national government.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] A notable instance in which the Marshall Court empowered the states under federalism was in that of Barron v. Baltimore , a case which resulted in Marshall’s court unanimously concluding that the 5th amendment only applied to the federal government and not the states.

[ 20 ] Dual federalism [ edit ] Main article: Dual federalism Despite Chief Justice Marshall's strong push for the federal government, the court of his successor, Roger B. Taney (1835–1864), decided cases that favored equally strong national and state governments. The basic philosophy during this time was that the U.S. Government ought to be limited to its enumerated powers and that all others belonged to the states. Any powers that were not granted to the U. S. Government by the Constitution were handed over to the states through the Tenth Amendment. Dual federalism had a significant impact on social issues in the United States.

Dred Scott v. Sanford was an example of how Taney's dual federalism helped stir up tensions eventually leading to the outbreak of the Civil War. Another example of dual federalism's social impact was in the Plessy v. Ferguson ruling. Dual federalism had set up that the U.S. Government could not legislate on moral issues. It was an issue that had to be decided by the states, and thus "separate but equal" could exist. Lastly, near the end of dual federalism's lifespan, both the Sixteenth and the Seventeenth Amendment bolstered the power of the national government, and divided state and federal power (Fuad Nor, 1977).

Between dual federalism and the New Deal [ edit ] The ratification of the Fourteenth Amendment in 1868 marked a significant transfer of authority from state governments to the federal government, declaring United States citizenship paramount to state citizenship. Over time, the application of the Fourteenth Amendment and incorporation of the Bill of Rights to the states strengthened the federal government’s power to protect against state intrusions upon individual rights.

[ 21 ] The 14th Amendment ensured the shielding of fundamental rights of the individual citizen against the threats presented by rights of the state by the Privileges or Immunities Clause .

[ 22 ] Still, in the immediate aftermath of the Taney court and the rise of Dual federalism , the division of labor between federal, state, and local governments was relatively unchanged for over a century. Political scientist Theodore J. Lowi summarized the system in place during those years in The End of the Republican Era [ 23 ] This lack of change is nowhere more apparent than in Supreme Court rulings that addressed federalism against the backdrop of the laissez-faire, pro-business Gilded Age. In United States v. E.C. Knight Co.

(1895), the Supreme Court continued along the path of promoting dual federalism in striking down a provision of the Sherman Antitrust Act. In an 8–1 decision, the Court ruled that Congress lacked the authority under the Commerce Clause to regulate monopolies by adopting a limited interpretation of interstate commerce, a win for states’ rights. In 1918, a 5–4 majority ruled similarly in Hammer v. Dagenhart , a challenge against the constitutionality of the Federal Child Labor Act of 1915. However, by 1941, this ruling was reversed in United States v. Darby Lumber Company . The Court delivered another victory for dual federalism in Coyle v. Smith (1911), where Oklahoma’s effort to relocate their capital to Oklahoma City was halted. The state agreed to keep the capital in Guthrie until at least 1913 as part of the terms of their Enabling Act of 1906, which outlined the conditions for Oklahoma’s acceptance into the Union as a state. These cases illustrate the Supreme Court’s consistent willingness to rule in favor of states’ rights until National Labor Relations Board v. Jones & Laughlin Steel Corporation (1937), which ushered in a new era of cooperative federalism for the courts.

[ 21 ] Despite the Supreme Court’s stubbornness on guarding states’ rights, much of the modern federal apparatus owes its origins to changes that occurred during the period between 1861 and 1933. While banks had long been incorporated and regulated by the states, the National Bank Acts of 1863 and 1864 saw Congress establish a network of national banks that had their reserve requirements set by officials in Washington. During World War I, a system of federal banks devoted to aiding farmers was established, and a network of federal banks designed to promote homeownership came into existence in the last year of Herbert Hoover 's administration. Congress used its power over interstate commerce to regulate the rates of interstate (and eventually intrastate) railroads and even regulated their stock issues and labor relations, going so far as to enact a law regulating pay rates for railroad workers on the eve of World War I. During the 1920s, Congress enacted laws bestowing collective bargaining rights on employees of interstate railroads. Congress also used the commerce power to enact morals legislation, such as the Mann Act of 1907 barring the transfer of women across state lines for immoral purposes, even as the commerce power remained limited to interstate transportation—it did not extend to what were viewed as intrastate activities such as manufacturing and mining.

As early as 1913, there was talk of regulating stock exchanges, and the Capital Issues Committee formed to control access to credit during World War I recommended federal regulation of all stock issues and exchanges shortly before it ceased operating in 1921. With the Morrill Land-Grant Acts Congress used land sale revenues to make grants to the states for colleges during the Civil War on the theory that land sale revenues could be devoted to subjects beyond those listed in Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution. On several occasions during the 1880s, one house of Congress or the other passed bills providing land sale revenues to the states for the purpose of aiding primary schools. During the first years of the twentieth century, the endeavors funded with federal grants multiplied, and Congress began using general revenues to fund them—thus utilizing the general welfare clause 's broad spending power, even though it had been discredited for almost a century (Hamilton's view that a broad spending power could be derived from the clause had been all but abandoned by 1840).

During Herbert Hoover's administration, grants went to the states for the purpose of funding poor relief. The 1920s saw Washington expand its role in domestic law enforcement. Disaster relief for areas affected by floods or crop failures dated from 1874, and these appropriations began to multiply during the administration of Woodrow Wilson (1913–21). By 1933, the precedents necessary for the federal government to exercise broad regulatory power over all economic activity and spend for any purpose it saw fit were almost all in place. Virtually all that remained was for the will to be mustered in Congress and for the Supreme Court to acquiesce.

[ 24 ] State government policies [ edit ] Property law Education Estate and inheritance law Commerce laws of ownership and exchange Banking and credit laws Labor law and professional licensure Insurance laws Family laws Morals laws Public health and quarantine laws Public works laws, including eminent domain Building codes Corporations law Land use laws Water and mineral resource laws Judiciary and criminal procedure laws Electoral laws, including parties Civil service laws Local government policies [ edit ] Variances (adaptation of state law to local conditions) Public works Contracts for public works Licensing of public accommodations Assessable improvements Basic public services [ 25 ] Cooperative federalism [ edit ] Main article: Cooperative federalism Cooperative Federalism involves a looser interpretation of the Tenth Amendment . More specifically, it supports the idea that the Tenth Amendment does not provide any additional powers to the states.

[ 26 ] It operates under the assumption that the federal and state governments are "partners," with the federal creating laws for the states to carry out. It relies on the Supremacy Clause and the Necessary and Proper Clause as constitutional bases for its argument. Court cases such as United States v. Darby Lumber Co.

and Garcia v. San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Authority expanded the role of Cooperative Federalism by forcing states to enforce federal labor laws.

Although Cooperative Federalism has roots in the civil war, the Great Depression marked an abrupt end to Dual Federalism and a dramatic shift to a strong national government. President Franklin D. Roosevelt 's New Deal policies reached into the lives of U.S. citizens like no other federal measure had. As the Supreme Court had rejected nearly all of Roosevelt's economic proposals, the president proposed the Judicial Procedures Reform Bill of 1937 to add more members. The expansion of the Court, which never materialized, along with a Democrat-controlled Congress would tilt Court rulings in favor of Roosevelt's policies.

[ 27 ] Lowi notes three Supreme Court cases that validated the shift in power: [ 28 ] National Labor Relations Board v. Jones & Laughlin Steel Corporation , Helvering v. Davis , and Steward Machine Company v. Davis .

The national government was forced to cooperate with all levels of government to implement the New Deal policies; local government earned an equal standing with the other layers, as the federal government relied on political machines at a city level to bypass state legislatures . The formerly distinct division of responsibilities between state and national government had been described as a "layer cake," but, with the lines of duty blurred, cooperative federalism was likened to a "marble cake" or a "picket fence." In cooperative federalism, federal funds are distributed through grants in aid or categorical grants which gave the federal government more control over the use of the money.

New Federalism [ edit ] Main article: New Federalism This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "Federalism in the United States" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Another movement calling itself "New Federalism" appeared in the late 20th century and early 21st century. Many of the ideas of New Federalism originated with Richard Nixon .

[ 29 ] New Federalism, which is characterized by a gradual return of power to the states, was initiated by President Ronald Reagan (1981–89) with his "devolution revolution" in the early 1980s and lasted until 2001. Previously, the federal government had granted money to the states categorically, limiting the states to use this funding for specific programs. Reagan's administration, however, introduced a practice of giving block grants, freeing state governments to spend the money at their own discretion. An example and the first case of this was Garcia v. San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Authority (SAMTA) (1985). Garcia was a worker for SAMTA and appealed that because SAMTA received federal money, that they had to abide by federal labor regulations. SAMTA argued that they did not because the money received was to be used at their own discretion and did not need to abide by federal statutes because they are locally operated and make decisions about the transit system. This gave more autonomy and power to the states by allowing them to use more discretion, not having to abide by federal regulations.

Under New Federalism, the question that is asked is may the federal government constitutionally command the states to carry out federal policy? For this, the courts use the anti-commandeering principle. "The anti-commandeering doctrine says that the federal government cannot require states or state officials to adopt or enforce federal law." This became the principle by New York v. United States (1992). In this case, New York sued the federal government, questioning the authority of Congress to regulate waste management. The courts ruled that it violated the 10th amendment because congress made the state of New York commandeer to federal regulations when states already take legal ownership and liability for waste treatment. Establishing this principle, giving states more autonomy on issues that fall under their discretion.

A modern-day application of this rule can be found in Murphy v. National Collegiate Athletic Association (2018). New Jersey’s governor attacked the federal government's prohibition on sports gambling. The courts again used the anti-commandeering principle, allowing states to regulate sports gambling at their discretion. This is starting to become a trend because now states are passing laws on issues that are often federally prohibited or heavily regulated by Congress under the commerce clause, as in the areas of medical marijuana ( Gonzales v. Raich ), partial-birth abortion ( Gonzales v. Carhart ), gun possession ( United States v. Lopez ), federal police powers ( United States v. Morrison , which struck down portions of the Violence Against Women Act ), or agriculture ( Wickard v. Filburn ).

Recent federalism [ edit ] The balance between state and federal power has fluctuated in the 21st century. In a 2009 Rockefeller Institute report by Martha Derthick , she argues that "the normal tendency of federal-state relations in the United States is toward centralization." [ 30 ] Presidency of George W. Bush [ edit ] About the Bush administration (2001-2009), Derthick stated "conventional federalism has survived the test of an aggressive presidency" in regards to military and emergency action, and further, the Bush administration was "in retrospect, more centralizing than militarizing." [ 30 ] In a 2007 paper in Publius: The Journal of Federalism , Sidney Milkis and Jesse Rhodes argue that "The Republican Party has traditionally stood for 'limited government', but Bush's principal legacy for federalism is centralization of power in the federal government and the executive branch." [ 31 ] According to Thomas L. Gais on federalism in the Obama Administration, "effort to impose central control is nothing new: GWB Administration did much the same." [ 32 ] Presidency of Barack Obama [ edit ] The federal government increased its powers under the presidency of Barack Obama (2009–2017), and to an extent, the powers of the state governments also grew. In 2011, scholar Gillian Metzger discussed that "national developments entail some preemption and new state burdens. But each also has brought with it significant regulatory and financial opportunities for the states." Metzger points out that the states had increased regulatory responsibilities under Dodd-Frank , increased responsibilities in implementing and operating federal health care legislation under the Affordable Care Act , and received additional stimulus funding.

[ 33 ] Obama took office following the 2008 financial crisis , which called for him to take action to stabilize the economy. In 2009, he subsequently introduced The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA). This act placed a federal focus on providing stabilizing state and local budgets, financial bailouts, and ensuring jobs were secure.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] ARRA was seen as a significant exertion of federal power which many conservatives criticized—however, this was through a coalition that included state governments as very active participants who worked closely in drafting and implementation.

[ 35 ] According to a 2010 article by Thomas L. Gais of the Rockefeller Institute, the Obama administration had been engaged with states more heavily than any administration since the 1960s, was more reliant than ever on state action, and states had the highest proportion of government employees compared to the federal government in history up to that point. Gais labelled this "assertive federalism".

[ 32 ] The cannabis policy of the Barack Obama administration was an easing of federal enforcement, granting more rights to the states in determining the legality of marijuana.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] Presidency of Donald Trump [ edit ] Federalism under Donald Trump (2017-2021) was more complicated. In 2020, during the coronavirus pandemic , the presidency delayed action and federal agencies faced interference from the presidency, despite the federal government traditionally dealing with matters of national importance, including natural disasters or virus outbreaks.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] This would suggest that Trump attempted to weaken the role of the federal government, although he also attempted to override state powers or exercise powers that the Constitution did not grant the presidency.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] Punitive federalism, or the punishment of states and local areas by the federal government, became an issue during the Trump administration.

[ 39 ] Goelzhauser and Konisky state that punitive federalism is exemplified most by the Trump administration's interference with California through the EPA in 2018, and the withholding of disaster relief from Puerto Rico. They further state that "the pandemic has brought on, in addition to immense human suffering, the federalism event of the century".

[ 41 ] Another issue was Trump's response to the Black Lives Matter protests, in which he took a more confrontational stance, including deploying federal troops and agents to protests , despite several states opposing this measure and the action being condemned for possible unconstitutionality.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] According to Thompson, Wong, and Rabe, "Trump [was] particularly aggressive in the use of executive power, or the 'administrative presidency', to pursue his goals, including executive orders and regulatory changes." However, "the forces of federalism, especially state attorneys general, governors, and legislatures, have often undercut Trump’s executive initiatives and reduced their impact".

[ 44 ] Presidency of Joe Biden [ edit ] The federalism of the Biden administration is an emerging discussion. One federalism topic includes the measures available to the federal government in combatting the COVID-19 pandemic, and the promotion of public health.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] See also [ edit ] Anti-Federalists Federalism Laboratories of democracy Tenth Amendment to the United States Constitution Federalist Society Notes [ edit ] Further information: Bibliography of the United States Constitution ^ a b Follesdal, Andreas (2018), "Federalism" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2018 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved February 6, 2021 ^ Gerston 2007 , pp. 24–25 ^ "Shays' Rebellion" .

HISTORY . Retrieved February 6, 2021 .

^ Franklin, Benjamin; Jefferson, Thomas; Jay, John; Adams, Abigail; Madison, James; Smith, John Rubens; Washington, George; Birch, William; Monroe, James (April 12, 2008).

"Road to the Constitution - Creating the United States | Exhibitions - Library of Congress" .

www.loc.gov . Retrieved February 6, 2021 .

^ "Annapolis Convention Resolution, 1786" .

TeachingAmericanHistory.org . Ashland, Ohio: Ashbrook Center at Ashland University . Retrieved March 30, 2016 .

^ Morris, Richard Brandon (1987).

The forging of the Union, 1781–1789 . Harper & Row. p. 254.

ISBN 9780060157333 . Retrieved March 29, 2014 .

^ "1791: US Bill of Rights (1st 10 Amendments) - with commentary" . Online Library of Liberty . Retrieved March 25, 2022 .

^ Gerston 2007 , p. 26 ^ "Full Text of The Federalist Papers" . Library of Congress . Retrieved March 25, 2022 .

^ Roche, John P. (1961). "The Founding Fathers: A Reform Caucus in Action".

The American Political Science Review .

55 (4): 814.

doi : 10.2307/1952528 .

ISSN 0003-0554 .

JSTOR 1952528 .

S2CID 145725823 .

^ Jackson, Kenneth T.

The Encyclopedia of New York City : The New York Historical Society; Yale University Press; 1995. p. 194.

^ James Wilson (2008).

American Government: Brief Edition . Cengage Learning. pp.

21– 22.

ISBN 978-0547212760 .

.

^ a b "Demand for a Bill of Rights - Creating the United States | Exhibitions - Library of Congress" .

www.loc.gov . Library of Congress . Retrieved January 11, 2021 .

^ "Tenth Amendment" .

LII / Legal Information Institute . Retrieved January 11, 2021 .

^ "1784 to 1807 | James Madison Timeline | Articles and Essays | James Madison Papers, 1723-1859 | Digital Collections | Library of Congress" .

Library of Congress . Retrieved February 6, 2021 .

^ War of 1812 Sparknotes.com ^ Stoltz, Joseph F. (2012). " "It Taught our Enemies a Lesson:" the Battle of New Orleans and the Republican Destruction of the Federalist Party".

Tennessee Historical Quarterly .

71 (2): 112– 127.

JSTOR 42628249 .

^ "Marshall's Interpretation of the National Supremacy Clause" .

LII / Legal Information Institute . Retrieved February 6, 2021 .

^ "John Marshall" .

HISTORY . Retrieved February 6, 2021 .

^ "Barron v. Baltimore (1833) - Federalism in America" .

encyclopedia.federalism.org . Retrieved February 6, 2021 .

^ a b Epstein, Lee; Walker, Thomas G. (October 2, 2015).

Constitutional law for a changing America. Rights, liberties, and justice (Ninth ed.). Thousand Oaks, California.

ISBN 9781483384016 .

OCLC 910310223 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ "Privileges and Immunities Clause" .

LII / Legal Information Institute . Retrieved February 6, 2021 .

^ Lowi, T.

The End of the Republican Era ( ISBN 0-8061-2887-9 ), University of Oklahoma Press, 1995–2006. p. 6.

^ Zavodnyik, Peter (2011).

The Rise of the Federal Colossus: The Growth of Federal Power from Lincoln to F.D.R.

Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. pp.

21– 30, 186– 93, 213– 19, 291– 93, 313– 27, 363– 64, 380– 93, 416– 19.

ISBN 978-0-313-39293-1 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Lowi, T.

The End of the Republican Era , p. 17 ^ Epstein, L., & Walker, T. G. (2019). Constitutional law for a changing America. Thousand Oaks, CA: CQ Press, an imprint of SAGE Publications, Inc.

^ Gerston 2007 , p. 57 ^ Lowi 1995 , p. 17 ^ Katz, Bruce (August 11, 2014).

"Nixon's New Federalism 45 Years Later" .

Brookings . Retrieved August 29, 2021 .

^ a b "Bush, Federalism, and Emergency Management" .

Rockefeller Institute of Government . Retrieved February 6, 2021 .

^ Milkis, Sidney M.; Rhodes, Jesse H. (January 1, 2007).

"George W. Bush, the Party System, and American Federalism" .

Publius: The Journal of Federalism .

37 (3): 478– 503.

doi : 10.1093/publius/pjm012 .

ISSN 0048-5950 .

^ a b "Federalism During the Obama Administration" .

Rockefeller Institute of Government . Retrieved February 6, 2021 .

^ Metzger, Gillian (January 1, 2011).

"Federalism Under Obama" .

Wm. & Mary L. Rev .

53 : 567.

^ "American Recovery and Reinvestment Act 2009" .

Congress.Gov . Congress. Gov . Retrieved December 14, 2020 .

^ a b "Agile Federalism in Times of Crisis" .

National Academy Of Public Administration . Retrieved February 6, 2021 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Sessions terminates US policy that let legal pot flourish" .

AP NEWS . January 4, 2018 . Retrieved February 6, 2021 .

^ Bulman-Pozen, Jessica; Metzger, Gillian E. (July 1, 2016).

"The President and the States: Patterns of Contestation and Collaboration under Obama" .

Publius: The Journal of Federalism .

46 (3): 308– 336.

doi : 10.1093/publius/pjw008 .

ISSN 0048-5950 .

^ Yamey, Gavin (April 24, 2020).

"Donald Trump: a political determinant of covid-19" .

The BMJ .

369 : m1643.

doi : 10.1136/bmj.m1643 .

PMID 32332028 .

S2CID 216129911 . Retrieved December 14, 2020 .

^ a b "Pandemic Lockdown Battles Offer Glimpses of Political Conflicts to Come" .

Reason.com . December 11, 2020 . Retrieved February 6, 2021 .

^ Selin, Jennifer (April 17, 2020).

"Trump versus the states: What federalism means for the coronavirus response" .

The Conversation . Retrieved February 6, 2021 .

^ a b Goelzhauser, Greg; Konisky, David M. (July 1, 2020).

"The State of American Federalism 2019–2020: Polarized and Punitive Intergovernmental Relations" .

Publius: The Journal of Federalism .

50 (3): 311– 343.

doi : 10.1093/publius/pjaa021 .

ISSN 0048-5950 .

PMC 7454864 .

PMID 34191881 .

^ "Were Portland Protesters 'Kidnapped' by Federal Officers in Unmarked Vans?" .

Snopes.com . July 22, 2020 . Retrieved February 6, 2021 .

^ "Federal agents, local streets: A 'red flag' in Oregon" .

AP NEWS . July 20, 2020 . Retrieved February 6, 2021 .

^ Thompson, Frank; Wong, Kenneth; Rabe, Barry (November 4, 2019).

"Trump, the Administrative Presidency, and Federalism" .

Brookings . Retrieved February 6, 2021 .

^ "Federalism 2021: COVID-19 Mandates | The Rose Institute of State and Local Government" .

roseinstitute.org . March 19, 2021 . Retrieved August 29, 2021 .

^ "Why President Biden can't make states vaccinate teachers — or anyone else" .

NBC News . February 23, 2021 . Retrieved August 29, 2021 .

References and further reading [ edit ] Gerston, Larry N. (2007), American Federalism: A Concise Introduction , Armonk, New York: M.E. Sharp, ISBN 978-0-7656-1671-5 Hafer, Catherine; Landa, Dimitri (August 2007). "Public goods in Federal systems".

Quarterly Journal of Political Science .

2 (3). Now Publishing Inc.: 253– 275.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.485.7813 .

doi : 10.1561/100.00006001 .

Pdf.

LaCroix, Alison L. (2010), The Ideological Origins of American Federalism , Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, ISBN 978-0-674-04886-7 Lowi, Theodore (1995), The End of the Republican Era , Norman: University of Oklahoma, ISBN 0-8061-2887-9 Taylor, Jeff (2013), Politics on a Human Scale: The American Tradition of Decentralism , Lanham, Maryland: Lexington Books , ISBN 978-0-7391-8674-9 U.S. Constitution Zavodnyik, Peter (2011), The Rise of the Federal Colossus: The Growth of Federal Power from Lincoln to F.D.R.

, Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO [ permanent dead link ] Phelps, Richard P. (2023), The Malfunction of US Education Policy: Elite Misinformation, Disinformation, and Selfishness , Lanham, Maryland: Rowman and Littlefield, ISBN 978-1-4758-6994-1 v t e United States History By period 1776–1789 1789–1815 1815–1849 1849–1865 1865–1917 1917–1945 1945–1964 1964–1980 1980–1991 1991–2016 2016–present By event Pre-colonial era Colonial era Stamp Act Congress Thirteen Colonies Continental Congress Continental Association United Colonies military history Founding Fathers Halifax Resolves Lee Resolution Declaration of Independence American Revolution War Treaty of Paris Articles of Confederation Perpetual Union Confederation period American frontier Constitution drafting and ratification Bill of Rights Federalist Era War of 1812 Territorial evolution Mexican–American War Civil War Reconstruction era Indian Wars Native genocide Gilded Age Progressive Era Women's suffrage Civil rights movement 1865–1896 1896–1954 1954–1968 Spanish–American War Imperialism World War I Roaring Twenties Great Depression World War II home front American Century Cold War Korean War Space Race Feminist Movement LGBTQ Movement Vietnam War Post-Cold War (1991–2016) September 11 attacks War on Terror War in Afghanistan Iraq War Great Recession COVID-19 pandemic By topic Outline of U.S. history Demographic Discoveries Economic Inventions Military Postal Technological and industrial Geography Territory Contiguous United States counties federal district federal enclaves Indian reservations insular zones minor outlying islands populated places states Earthquakes Extreme points Islands Mountains peaks ranges Appalachian Rocky Sierra Nevada National Park Service National Parks Regions East Coast West Coast Great Plains Gulf Mid-Atlantic Midwestern New England Pacific Central Eastern Northern Northeastern Northwestern Southern Southeastern Southwestern Western Longest rivers Arkansas Colorado Columbia Mississippi Missouri Red (South) Rio Grande Yukon Time Water supply and sanitation World Heritage Sites Politics Federal Executive President of the United States powers Executive Office Vice President Cabinet Executive departments Independent agencies Intelligence Community Director of National Intelligence Central Intelligence Agency National Security Agency National Reconnaissance Office Law enforcement ATF CBP Diplomatic Security DEA FBI ICE Marshals Secret Service TSA Inspector generals Civil service Public policy Legislative House of Representatives current members Speaker Senate current members President pro tempore President Capitol Police Library of Congress Congressional Budget Office Government Accountability Office Government Publishing Office Judicial Supreme Court Chief Justice Associate Justices list Courts of appeals list of judges District courts / Territorial courts list of courts list of judges Other tribunals U.S. attorney Law Bill of Rights civil liberties Code of Federal Regulations Constitution federalism preemption separation of powers civil rights United States Code Uniformed Armed Forces Army Marine Corps Navy Air Force Space Force Coast Guard National Guard NOAA Corps Public Health Service Corps State , Federal District , and Territorial Executive Governor list Lieutenant governor list Secretary of state Attorney general Treasurer Auditor/Comptroller Agriculture commissioner Insurance commissioner Public utilities commission State police list Legislative List of legislatures List of legislators Judicial Supreme courts Chief justices District attorney list Law State constitutions Statutory codes Uniform act Comparison of governments Tribal Tribal sovereignty Native American recognition in the United States Federally recognized tribes Federally recognized Alaska Native tribes State-recognized tribes Indian reservation list Hawaiian home land Local County List of counties and county equivalents County executive Sheriff Clerk Cities Consolidated city-county Independent city Coterminous municipality Charter Mayor–council government Council–manager government City commission government Mayor City manager City council Minor divisions Township Town meeting Special district School district list Corruption Democratic backsliding Elections Electoral College Red states and blue states Foreign relations foreign policy Imperial presidency Ideologies Anti-Americanism exceptionalism nationalism Parties Democratic Republican Third parties Scandals Economy By sector Agriculture Banking Communications Companies Energy Insurance Manufacturing Mining Science and technology Tourism Trade by state Currency Exports Federal budget Greenhouse gas emissions by the United States Federal Reserve System Financial position Labor unions Public debt Social welfare programs Taxation Unemployment Wall Street Transport Aviation Driving Public transportation Rail transportation Transportation policy Transportation safety Trucking industry Society Culture Americana Architecture Cinema Crime Cuisine Dance Demographics Economic issues affluence eviction homeownership household income income inequality middle class personal income poverty standard of living wealth working class Education attainment literacy Family Fashion Flag list Folklore Holidays Federal holidays Homelessness Housing Human rights Languages American English Indigenous languages ASL Literature Media journalism internet newspapers radio television Music Names National anthem National symbols Columbia Mount Rushmore Statue of Liberty Uncle Sam People Philosophy Political ideologies Race Religion Sexuality Social class Society Sports history Theater Transportation Video games Visual art Social class Affluence American Dream Educational attainment Homelessness Homeownership Household income Income inequality Middle class Personal income Poverty Standard of living Health Aging Healthcare Abortion Birth control Prenatal care Hospice care Immigrant health care Rationing Health care finance Health insurance costs Health care prices Prescription drug prices Disability Health insurance Food safety Physician shortage Poverty and health Race and health Obesity Medical deserts Women's reproductive health Life expectancy Issues Capital punishment Crime incarceration Criticism of government Discrimination affirmative action antisemitism intersex rights Islamophobia LGBTQ rights racism Native American African American Energy policy Environmental issues Environmental movement Climate change Gun politics Mass shootings Hunger Smoking Human rights Immigration illegal National security Terrorism Opioid epidemic Separation of church and state Xenophobia Outline Index Category v t e U.S. Supreme Court Article III case law Federalism Abstention Railroad Commission v. Pullman Co.

(1941) Burford v. Sun Oil Co.

(1943) Louisiana Power & Light Co. v. City of Thibodaux (1959) United Gas Pipe Line Co. v. Ideal Cement Co.

(1962) England v. Louisiana State Board of Medical Examiners (1964) Younger v. Harris (1971) Colorado River Water Conservation District v. United States (1976) Moses H. Cone Memorial Hospital v. Mercury Construction Corp.

(1983) Adequate and independent state ground Murdock v. City of Memphis (1875) Seneca Nation of Indians v. Christy (1896) Fox Film Corp. v. Muller (1935) Harrison v. NAACP (1959) Michigan v. Long (1983) Federal common law United States v. Hudson (1812) Swift v. Tyson (1842) Black & White Taxicab & Transfer Co. v. Brown & Yellow Taxicab & Transfer Co.

(1928) Erie Railroad Co. v. Tompkins (1938) Hinderlider v. La Plata River & Cherry Creek Ditch Co.

(1938) Clearfield Trust Co. v. United States (1943) Rooker–Feldman doctrine Rooker v. Fidelity Trust Co.

(1923) District of Columbia Court of Appeals v. Feldman (1983) Exxon Mobil Corp. v. Saudi Basic Industries Corp.

(2005) Sovereign immunity and presidential immunity Little v. Barreme (1804) The Schooner Exchange v. M'Faddon (1812) Mississippi v. Johnson (1867) United States v. Lee (1882) Schillinger v. United States (1894) Feres v. United States (1950) United States v. Wunderlich (1951) Banco Nacional de Cuba v. Sabbatino (1964) Santa Clara Pueblo v. Martinez (1978) Nixon v. Fitzgerald (1982) United States v. Stanley (1987) Oklahoma Tax Commission v. Citizen Band, Potawatomi Indian Tribe of Oklahoma (1991) Saudi Arabia v. Nelson (1993) Clinton v. Jones (1997) Kiowa Tribe of Oklahoma v. Manufacturing Technologies, Inc.

(1998) College Savings Bank v. Florida Prepaid Postsecondary Education Expense Board (1999) C & L Enterprises, Inc. v. Citizen Band, Potawatomi Indian Tribe of Oklahoma (2001) Inyo County v. Paiute-Shoshone Indians of the Bishop Community (2003) United States v. White Mountain Apache Tribe (2003) Republic of Austria v. Altmann (2004) City of Sherrill v. Oneida Indian Nation of New York (2005) Dolan v. United States Postal Service (2006) Permanent Mission of India v. City of New York (2007) Ali v. Federal Bureau of Prisons (2008) Samantar v. Yousuf (2010) United States v. Bormes (2012) Republic of Argentina v. NML Capital, Ltd.

(2014) OBB Personenverkehr AG v. Sachs (2015) Jam v. International Finance Corp.

(2019) Republic of Sudan v. Harrison (2019) Opati v. Republic of Sudan (2020) Trump v. United States (2024) Jurisdiction Chisholm v. Georgia (1793) Marbury v. Madison (1803) United States v. More (1805) Martin v. Hunter's Lessee (1816) American Insurance Co. v. 356 Bales of Cotton (1828) Sheldon v. Sill (1850) United States v. Jackalow (1862) Ex parte Vallandigham (1864) Ex parte McCardle (1869) United States v. Klein (1871) City of St. Louis v. Myers (1885) Barrett v. United States (1898) Burton v. United States I (1905) Burton v. United States II (1906) Louisville & Nashville Railroad Co. v. Mottley (1908) Muskrat v. United States (1911) American Well Works Co. v. Layne & Bowler Co.

(1916) Smith v. Kansas City Title & Trust Co.

(1921) Hartsville Oil Mill v. United States (1926) Wisconsin v. Illinois (1929) Crowell v. Benson (1932) Colegrove v. Green (1946) Glidden Co. v. Zdanok (1962) Oneida Indian Nation of New York v. County of Oneida (1974) Arizona v. New Mexico (1976) Mt. Healthy City School District Board of Education v. Doyle (1977) Northern Pipeline Construction Co. v. Marathon Pipe Line Co.

(1982) Thomas v. Union Carbide (1985) Commodity Futures Trading Commission v. Schor (1986) Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals Inc. v. Thompson (1986) Plaut v. Spendthrift Farm, Inc.

(1995) JPMorgan Chase Bank v. Traffic Stream (BVI) Infrastructure Ltd.

(2002) Grable & Sons Metal Products, Inc. v. Darue Engineering & Mfg.

(2005) Bowles v. Russell (2007) Patchak v. Zinke (2018) Justiciability Mootness DeFunis v. Odegaard (1974) Campbell-Ewald Co. v. Gomez (2016) Uzuegbunam v. Preczewski (2021) Acheson Hotels, LLC v. Laufer (2023) Political question Baker v. Carr (1962) Goldwater v. Carter (1979) Nixon v. United States (1993) Ripeness Poe v. Ullman (1961) Toilet Goods Ass'n, Inc. v. Gardner (1967) Laird v. Tatum (1972) Williamson County Regional Planning Commission v. Hamilton Bank of Johnson City (1985) Trump v. New York (2020) Standing Bailiff v. Tipping (1805) Fairchild v. Hughes (1922) Massachusetts v. Mellon (1923) Ex parte Levitt (1937) Altvater v. Freeman (1943) Flast v. Cohen (1968) Sierra Club v. Morton (1972) United States v. Students Challenging Regulatory Agency Procedures (1973) Schlesinger v. Reservists Committee to Stop the War (1974) Warth v. Seldin (1975) Illinois Brick Co. v. Illinois (1977) Pfizer Inc. v. Government of India (1978) Valley Forge Christian College v. Americans United for Separation of Church & State (1982) City of Los Angeles v. Lyons (1983) Allen v. Wright (1984) Diamond v. Charles (1986) Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife (1992) Raines v. Byrd (1997) FEC v. Akins (1998) Friends of the Earth, Inc. v. Laidlaw Environmental Services, Inc.

(2000) DaimlerChrysler Corp. v. Cuno (2006) Hein v. Freedom From Religion Foundation (2007) Massachusetts v. Environmental Protection Agency (2007) Arizona Christian School Tuition Organization v. Winn (2011) Bond v. United States (2011) Clapper v. Amnesty International USA (2013) Spokeo, Inc. v. Robins (2016) Texas v. Pennsylvania (2020) Trump v. New York (2020) Uzuegbunam v. Preczewski (2021) TransUnion LLC v. Ramirez (2021) California v. Texas (2021) FDA v. Alliance for Hippocratic Medicine (2024) Murthy v. Missouri (2024) Others Hayburn's Case (1792) County of Oneida v. Oneida Indian Nation of New York State (1985) Davis v. Bandemer (1986) Vieth v. Jubelirer (2004) Rucho v. Common Cause / Benisek v. Lamone (2019) Treason Ex parte Bollman (1807) United States v. Burr (1807) Cramer v. United States (1945) Others Stuart v. Laird (1803) Osborn v. Bank of the United States (1824) Forrester v. White (1988) Mistretta v. United States (1989) Peretz v. United States (1991) United States v. Hatter (2001) Stern v. Marshall (2011) Bank Markazi v. Peterson (2016) v t e Federalism in  North America Sovereign states Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Dependencies and other territories Anguilla Aruba Bermuda Bonaire British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Curaçao Greenland Guadeloupe Martinique Montserrat Puerto Rico Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saba Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten Turks and Caicos Islands United States Virgin Islands Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Federalism_in_the_United_States&oldid=1304614096 " Categories : Federalism in the United States Federalism by country Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from April 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2016 All articles needing additional references Articles that may contain original research from February 2021 All articles that may contain original research Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use American English from March 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from March 2019 Articles needing additional references from November 2023 This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 03:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Federalism in the United States 8 languages Add topic

