Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Paintings 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Alessandro Turchi 13 languages Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar مصرى Polski Português Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian painter (1578-1649) Alessandro Turchi Portrait of Alessandro Turchi Born 1578 ( 1578 ) Verona, Italy Died 22 January 1649 (aged 70–71) Rome, Italy Known for Painting Movement Baroque Alessandro Turchi (1578 – 22 January 1649) was an Italian painter of the early Baroque , born and active mainly in Verona , and moving late in life to Rome . He also went by the name Alessandro Veronese or the nickname L'Orbetto . His style has been described as soft and Caravaggesque at the same time.

Biography [ edit ] Diana and Actaeon Turchi initially trained with Felice Riccio ( il Brusasorci ) in Verona. By 1603, he was working as independent painter, and in 1606–1609, Turchi painted the organ shutters for the Accademia Filarmonica of Verona. When Brusasorci died in 1605, Turchi and his fellow painter Pasquale Ottino completed a series of their deceased master's canvases. In 1610, he completed an Assumption altarpiece for the church of San Luca of Verona. In 1612, the Veronese Guild of the Goldsmiths commissioned from Turchi an altarpiece, today lost, of the Madonna and Saints . On leaving the school of Riccio, he went to Venice , where he worked for a time under Carlo Cagliari.

By 1616, Turchi traveled to Rome and participated in the fresco decoration depicting the Gathering of Manna for the Sala Reggia of the Quirinal Palace , and painting a Christ, Magdalen, and Angels for cardinal Scipione Borghese .

[ 1 ] In competition with Andrea Sacchi and Pietro da Cortona , he painted some pictures in the church of Santa Maria della Concezione dei Cappuccini . In 1619, he sent an altarpiece of the 40 martyrs for the Chapel of the Innocents in the church of Santo Stefano, Verona , to hang next to paintings by Pasquale Ottino and Marcantonio Bassetti . He also painted a Flight into Egypt for the church of San Romualdo, Rome ; a Holy Family for San Lorenzo in Lucina ; and a San Carlo Borromeo in San Salvatore in Lauro . He was much employed on cabinet pictures, representing historical subjects, which he frequently painted on black marble. Among his pupils, Giovanni Ceschini and Giovanni Battista Rossi (il Gobbino), practiced in Verona , the former painting copies of his master's works, which were often taken for originals.

David with the Head of Goliath For the Count Giangiacomo Giusti, in 1620 he painted an Allegory of Fame between Mercury and Pallas Athena and three canvases of Faith , Hope , and Charity . In 1621 he executed for French cardinal François de Sourdis the Resurrection of Christ , now in the cathedral of Sant'Andrea of Bordeaux, and the Adoration of the Magi for the Gherardini family in Verona. By 1621, he had completed a painting of San Carlo Borromeo and the Madonna in Glory for San Salvatore in Lauro in Rome. Documents from 1629 indicate that Turchi was paid 110 scudi for painting St. Anthony of Padua for the Farnese Palace at Caprarola . In 1632, an inventory of the Palazzo Mattei di Giove , records a Saint Marta and Maria Madalena and a Samaritan Women by Turchi.

His sister married Giacinto Gimignani . In 1623, Turchi married Lucia San Giuliano. In 1637, with the sponsorship of the cardinal Francesco Barberini , he became Principe or director of the Accademia di San Luca . In 1638, he joined the papal guild of artists, called the Pontifical Academy of Fine Arts and Letters of the Virtuosi al Pantheon . He died in Rome in 1649.

Paintings [ edit ] (selection) Christ and Adulterous Woman Mystical Marriage of St Catherine (Louvre) Erminia Finds the Wounded Tancred (Kunsthistorisches Museum) Saint Agatha Attended by Saint Peter and an Angel in Prison .

The Walters Art Museum .

Vision of Christ of the Passion Death of Cleopatra Diana and Acteon , Mougins Museum of Classical Art Abduction of Helen , Mougins Museum of Classical Art Abduction of Helen , Mougins Museum of Classical Art A young general (Alexander ?) showing clemency to two prisoners , Mougins Museum of Classical Art References [ edit ] ^ now in Galleria Borghese Biography , see Alessandro Turchi 1578-1649 detto l'Orbetto .

Bryan, Michael (1889). Walter Armstrong; Robert Edmund Graves (eds.).

Dictionary of Painters and Engravers, Biographical and Critical . Vol. II: L-Z. London: George Bell and Sons. p. 591.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Alessandro Turchi (L'Orbetto) .

Alessandro Turchi en Artcyclopedia Alessandro Turchi en la Enciclopedia online del Museo del Prado Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Poland Vatican Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN RKD Artists KulturNav Victoria Prado People Italian People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alessandro_Turchi&oldid=1092065670 " Categories : 1578 births 1649 deaths 16th-century Italian painters Italian male painters 17th-century Italian painters Painters from Verona Italian Baroque painters Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards CS1: long volume value Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 June 2022, at 00:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Alessandro Turchi 13 languages Add topic

