Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Zoology 2 Bacteriology 3 Botany 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Nomen dubium 31 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Magyar മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Simple English Slovenčina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Dubious species ) Doubtful name in taxonomy In binomial nomenclature , a nomen dubium ( Latin for "doubtful name", plural nomina dubia ) is a scientific name that is of unknown or doubtful application.

Zoology [ edit ] In case of a nomen dubium, it may be impossible to determine whether a specimen belongs to that group or not. This may happen if the original type series (i.e.

holotype , isotype , syntype or paratype ) is lost or destroyed. The zoological and botanical codes allow for a new type specimen, or neotype , to be chosen in this case.

preserved specimen of Tritonellium barthi Valenciennes, 1858 ( nomen dubium ) A name may also be considered a nomen dubium if its name-bearing type is fragmentary or lacking important diagnostic features (this is often the case for species known only as fossils). To preserve stability of names, the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature allows a new type specimen, or neotype, to be chosen for a nomen dubium in this case.

75.5. Replacement of unidentifiable name-bearing type by a neotype. When an author considers that the taxonomic identity of a nominal species-group taxon cannot be determined from its existing name-bearing type (i.e. its name is a nomen dubium ), and stability or universality are threatened thereby, the author may request the Commission to set aside under its plenary power [Art. 81] the existing name-bearing type and designate a neotype.

[ 1 ] For example, the crocodile -like archosaurian reptile Parasuchus hislopi Lydekker , 1885 was described based on a premaxillary rostrum (part of the snout), but this is no longer sufficient to distinguish Parasuchus from its close relatives. This made the name Parasuchus hislopi a nomen dubium . In 2001 a paleontologist proposed that a new type specimen, a complete skeleton, be designated.

[ 2 ] The International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature considered the case and agreed in 2003 to replace the original type specimen with the proposed neotype.

[ 3 ] Bacteriology [ edit ] In bacteriological nomenclature , nomina dubia may be placed on the list of rejected names by the Judicial Commission. The meaning of these names is uncertain. Other categories of names that may be treated in this way (rule 56a) are: [ 4 ] ambiguous names, nomina ambigua , have been used with more than one meaning names causing confusion, nomina confusa , are based on a mixed culture perplexing names, nomina perplexa , confusingly similar names perilous names, nomina periculosa , names that may lead to accidents endangering life or health or with potential serious economic consequences Botany [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( December 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In botanical nomenclature the phrase nomen dubium has no status, although it is informally used for names whose application has become confusing. In this regard, its synonym nomen ambiguum is of more frequent use. Such names may be proposed for rejection .

See also [ edit ] Glossary of scientific naming species inquirenda , a species of doubtful identity requiring further investigation nomen nudum , a name proposed with no description (or illustration) nomen oblitum , an obsolete name References [ edit ] ^ International Code of Zoological Nomenclature Archived 24 May 2009 at the Wayback Machine (4th edition, 1999) ^ Case 3165, Bulletin of Zoological Nomenclature 58:1 Archived 28 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine , 30 March 2001.

^ Opinion 2045, Bulletin of Zoological Nomenclature 60:2 Archived 28 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine , 30 June 2003.

^ SP Lapage; PHA Sneath; EF Lessel; VBD Skerman; HPR Seeliger; WA Clark, eds. (1992). "Rules of Nomenclature with Recommendations".

International Code of Nomenclature of Bacteria: Bacteriological Code, 1990 Revision . ASM Press.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nomen_dubium&oldid=1303284444 " Categories : Zoological nomenclature Nomina dubia Latin biological phrases Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2021 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from October 2023 This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 03:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nomen dubium 31 languages Add topic

