Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Doctrine Toggle Doctrine subsection 1.1 Passional attraction 1.2 Stages of society 1.3 Economics 1.4 Social life 1.5 Role of force 1.6 Fantastic theories 1.7 Influence on new religious movements 2 See also 3 References Toggle References subsection 3.1 Notes 3.2 Bibliography 3.3 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Fourierism 6 languages العربية Čeština Español Français Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ideology asserting the inevitability of communal association Fourierism is the set of ideas first put forward by French utopian socialist François Marie Charles Fourier (1772–1837).

Fourierism ( / ˈ f ʊər i ə r ɪ z əm / ) [ 1 ] is the systematic set of economic, political, and social beliefs first espoused by French intellectual Charles Fourier (1772–1837). It is based on a belief in the inevitability of communal associations of people who work and live together as part of the human future. Fourier's supporters called his doctrines associationism . Political contemporaries and subsequent scholarship have identified Fourier's set of ideas as a form of utopian socialism .

Never tested in practice at any scale in Fourier's lifetime, Fourierism enjoyed a brief boom in the United States during the mid-1840s owing largely to the efforts of his American popularizer, Albert Brisbane (1809–1890), and the American Union of Associationists , but ultimately failed as a social and economic model.

[ citation needed ] The system was briefly revived in the mid-1850s by Victor Considerant (1808–1893), a French disciple of Fourier's who unsuccessfully attempted to relaunch the model in Texas in the 1850s.

[ 2 ] Doctrine [ edit ] Passional attraction [ edit ] In contrast to the thoroughly secular communitarianism of his contemporary Robert Owen (1771–1858), Charles Fourier's thinking starts from a presumption of the existence of God and a divine social order on Earth in accordance with the will of God.

[ 3 ] Fourier saw himself as a figure of world-historical importance akin to Isaac Newton for having identified the fundamental force driving social development, which he called "passional attraction" ( attraction passionelle ).

[ 4 ] Fourier believed that the structure of the world—its economic, political, and social system—inhibited humanity from the pursuit of its God-given individual passions, thereby preventing it from achieving universal harmony.

[ 5 ] Rather than seeking to mold individuals to fit the existing form of economic, political, and social life, as had been the traditional goal of the educational and what we today call the socialization process, Fourier believed that instead the form of economic, political, and social life should itself be altered to fit the inherent passions of the individual, since these economic and social structures were manmade and not God-given.

[ 5 ] Through conscious understanding of this process, which Fourier called "social science", new economic and social formations called "associations" could be created, structured so as to allow people to follow their passions and thereby advance toward universal harmony.

[ 5 ] Fourier listed 12 basic passions of humanity grouped around three branches of a "passional tree": "luxurious passions" of the five senses; "affective passions" of love, friendship, and parenthood; and "distributive passions", such as the need for political intrigue, the need for variety, and the pure enthusiasm of spiritual pursuits.

[ 6 ] The sum of all these passions Fourier called "unityism", characterized as a universal feeling of benevolence and fraternity.

[ 6 ] Although fettered and mutated by Civilization, the free development of these passions would be allowed in the bright future world, Fourier believed.

[ 6 ] Stages of society [ edit ] Fourier believed himself the discoverer of the universal laws of societal evolution, theorizing the existence of 32 distinct periods beginning with Edenism and continuing through Savagery, Patriarchate, and Barbarism.

[ 7 ] Each of these stages was held to have distinctive material and ideological features, with the treatment afforded to women a particular marker of one stage from the next.

[ 8 ] Of far greater concern to Fourier and his disciples was the current 5th form of society, Modern Society, as well as three emerging forms believed to be just around the corner: 6 (Guarantism), 7 (Simple Association), and 8 (Compound Association).

[ 9 ] "Modern Society", from the Fourierist perspective, was based upon capital and labor and the buying and selling of goods through a network of useless middlemen.

[ 10 ] With a sneer, Fourier called contemporary society "Civilization", deeming it the cause of fraud, waste, and human unhappiness.

[ 11 ] The "isolated family" he deemed inefficient, the wage system demoralizing and exploitative, and organized religion corrupt.

[ 11 ] An entire book was written detailing 36 types of bankruptcy and 76 sorts of "cuckoldry" to which humanity was subjected by its system of so-called Civilization, which Fourier saw as wholly unacceptable.

[ 11 ] Fourier believed that, fortunately for humanity, Civilization was a fleeting economic formation, soon to vanish.

[ 11 ] The emerging socioeconomic structure of "Guarantism" would be based upon the fundamental principle of universal insurance, Fourier believed, which was to guarantee the security of capital and the right of labor to gainful employment.

[ 9 ] Petty traders and speculative profiteers would be eliminated from the economy in this new system of organized production and distribution.

[ 10 ] The next stage in the Fourierist schema, "Simple Association", was to be based upon the cooperative enterprise of like bodies of farmers or artisans or industrial workers as distinct groups.

[ 10 ] Farmers would associate with other farmers, artisans with other artisans, industrial producers with other industrial producers, producing and selling their goods collectively.

[ 10 ] Simultaneously, these economic organizations would for the first time include the association of family living and domestic labor, [ 10 ] thereby eliminating the economic waste and social isolation of individual living.

Wage labor would be eliminated, as the members of these associations would be co-proprietors, producing in tandem and sharing alike in the proceeds of their efforts.

[ 10 ] Subsequently, the Fourierists believed, there would emerge "Compound Association" or "Harmonism". Under Compound Association all pursuits would join in large associations that would shatter all economic lines.

[ 12 ] One Fourierian enthusiast described the system of Compound Association in the following terms: Every interest is provided for, by an organization which embraces all details of production and distribution; and a system of natural and integral education is instituted—that is, a complete system of physical, mental, and emotional development, intimately connected with daily pursuits, provided for; that art and the science which underlies art may be taught together; that theory and practice may go hand in hand and that the individual may have the command of his whole personal power and enjoy the conditions of expressing it.

[ 12 ] Every individual in these Compound Associations would be free to take part in the labor of a dozen or more different work groups, according to their interests and pleasure, over the course of any year.

[ 12 ] What Marxists called alienation of labor would thereby be eliminated and production boosted, since "a man having himself on his own side works with more force, greater skill, and better effect than one who works against his inclinations," in the words of one Fourierian.

[ 12 ] Economics [ edit ] Fourier believed that economic output was the product of three factors: labor, capital, and talent.

[ 13 ] Each of these, he argued, was important to production and needed to be compensated as such for the general prosperity of the organized association.

[ 13 ] The communal associations based upon Fourier's ideas were generally formed as joint stock companies , and their investor-members were compensated separately on the basis both of amount of capital invested and amount of labor performed, with labor time given a range of values based on both the necessity and difficulty of the work and the degree of talent and skill with which it was performed.

Social life [ edit ] Elevated view of a Fourierist Phalanstère from the works of Victor Considerant Fourier's prescription was the establishment of communities called Phalanxes or Associations in the countryside. Housed inside gigantic serpentine edifices called " phalanstries " would be 1620 people of various occupations and social classes.

[ 14 ] The residents were to be arranged in occupational "series"—major divisions such as between agrarians and industrial producers and artisans—that would be further divided into smaller "groups" to cooperatively conduct specific aspects of the work.

[ 15 ] Mobility of the individual between various groups and even sections according to personal desires was to be allowed.

[ 15 ] Fundamental to the Fourierian ideal was the notion of collective living and the rational performance of domestic duties. Individual households were seen as both wasteful in terms of duplicated effort performed and isolating of individuals—standing in the way of true cooperation and social harmony.

Remaining in unpublished manuscript form until 1967 were Fourier's imaginative predictions about degrees of sexual promiscuity and the institutions and moral codes that would emerge to govern love and interpersonal relationships in the harmonious world of Compound Association.

[ 15 ] Role of force [ edit ] The Fourierian system of associations was based on voluntary participation and expansion through the force of example. Once founded, associations would demonstrate their practical merits and inspire emulation, with the first model communities replicating and spreading from localities to regions to nations and internationally. Never in his writings does Fourier appeal to governmental legislation or coercive power of any sort, instead believing association to be a natural and wholly voluntary structure, [ 16 ] part of a Divine Social Code.

[ 12 ] Moreover, the achievement on an international scale would eliminate war.

[ 12 ] Instead, industrial armies would form to engage in gigantic reclamation projects, irrigating deserts, restoring vegetation, draining marshes and cultivating the land.

[ 12 ] The elimination of disease would follow, as such banes as cholera , typhus , and yellow fever would vanish with the unhealthful places whence they originated before society's restorative efforts.

[ 12 ] Through the planting of vast swaths of timber, cropland would be protected and the Earth's climate would be slowly transformed, Fourier believed.

[ 17 ] Fantastic theories [ edit ] Fourier's theoretical system, described by one scholar as "vast and eccentric", [ 15 ] was only part of the output of what another called "a most riotous and unpruned imagination".

[ 18 ] Fourier believed that in the new world people would live for 144 years, that new species of friendly and pacifistic animals such as "anti-lions" would emerge, and that over time human beings would develop long and useful tails.

[ 15 ] Fourier also professed a belief in the ability of human souls to migrate between physical and "aromal" worlds.

[ 15 ] Such thinking was set aside during the last 15 years of Fourier's life, when he instead began to concentrate on testing his economic and social ideas.

[ 19 ] Fourier's disciples, including Albert Brisbane and Victor Considerant, later pared down his writings into a comprehensible system for economic and social organization, with the Fourierist movement experiencing a brief boom in the United States during the mid-1840s, when some 30 Fourierist associations were established.

[ 20 ] Influence on new religious movements [ edit ] The Fourierist doctrine of attractions, correspondences, and analogies was identified with esoteric doctrines like Martinism by Fourierists like Just Muiron from an early point on.

[ 21 ] Louis Reybaud, the author of the first study of the socialists, perceived Fourierism and other early socialist schools in the context of mysticism, magic, kabbalah, or the occult sciences.

[ 22 ] Fourierism exerted a decisive influence on new religious movements like Spiritualism and Occultism after 1848.

[ 23 ] Before that, Fourierism had already coined the ideas of US-American spiritualist thinkers such as Andrew Jackson Davis .

[ 24 ] Eliphas Lévi , who is regarded as the founder of modern occultism, was an adherent of Fourierism in the 1840s.

[ 25 ] Until the early 20th century, there was a strong Fourierist presence in French socialist-spiritualist circles.

See also [ edit ] List of Fourierist Associations in the United States Albert Brisbane The Phalanx/The Harbinger , an American Fourierist newspaper of the 1840s.

American Union of Associationists Kibbutz W. E. Smythe Utopian socialism References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ "Fourierism" .

Collins English Dictionary .

HarperCollins . Retrieved 14 May 2021 .

^ Beecher, Victor Considerant .

^ Julia Franklin (ed.), "Introduction" to Selections from the Works of Fourier.

London: Swan Sonnenschein & Co., 1901; pg. 17.

^ Franklin, "Introduction" to Selections from the Works of Fourier, pp. 17-18.

^ a b c Franklin, "Introduction" to Selections from the Works of Fourier, pg. 18.

^ a b c Carl J. Guarneri, The Utopian Alternative: Fourierism in Nineteenth-Century America.

Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1991; pg. 18.

^ Guarneri, The Utopian Alternative, pp. 17-18.

^ Guarneri, The Utopian Alternative, pg. 18.

^ a b Charles Sears, The North American Phalanx: An Historical and Descriptive Sketch.

Prescott, WI: John M. Pryse, Publisher, 1886; pp. 1-2.

^ a b c d e f Sears, The North American Phalanx, pg. 1.

^ a b c d Guarneri, The Utopian Alternative, pg. 17.

^ a b c d e f g h Sears, The North American Phalanx, pg. 2.

^ a b Franklin, "Introduction" to Selections from the Works of Fourier, pg. 20.

^ Guarneri, The Utopian Alternative, pp. 18-19.

^ a b c d e f Guarneri, The Utopian Alternative, pg. 19.

^ Franklin, "Introduction" to Selections from the Works of Fourier, pg. 21.

^ Sears, The North American Phalanx, pp. 2-3.

^ Alexander Gray to the Aberdeen Philosophical Society, March 15, 1923. Quoted in "The Chaos and Sense of Fourier," Aberdeen Journal, March 16, 1923, pg. 1.

^ Guarneri, The Utopian Alternative, pg. 20.

^ William Alfred Hinds, American Communities.

Second edition. Chicago, IL: Charles H. Kerr & Co., 1908; pg. 250.

^ Strube, Sozialismus , pp. 122-127; Beecher, Charles Fourier , pp. 160-167.

^ Strube, Sozialismus, pp. 105-115.

^ Strube, "Socialist Religion"; cf. Strube, Sozialismus and Monroe, Laboratories .

^ Albanese, Republic , pp. 171-176, 208-218.

^ Strube, Sozialismus, pp. 316-351.

Bibliography [ edit ] In French Oeuvres complètes de Charles Fourier (Complete Works of Charles Fourier). In 12 volumes. Paris: Anthropos, 1966–1968.

Individual works in English The Hierarchies of Cuckoldry and Bankruptcy.

Cambridge, MA: Wakefield Press, 2011.

The Passions of the Human Soul and their Influence on Society and Civilization.

New York: Augustus M. Kelley, 1968.

The Theory of the Four Movements.

New York: Cambridge University Press, 1996.

Theory of Social Organization.

New York: C.P. Somerby, 1876.

Collections Jonathan Beecher and Richard Bienvenu (eds.), The Utopian vision of Charles Fourier: Selected Texts on Work, Love, and Passionate Attraction.

Boston, MA: Beacon Press, 1971.

Julia Franklin (ed.), Selections from the Works of Fourier.

London: Swan Sonnenschein & Co., 1901.

Mark Poster (ed.), Harmonian Man: Selected Writings of Charles Fourier.

Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1971.

Design for Utopia: Selected Writings of Charles Fourier.

New York: Schocken Books, 1971.

Further reading [ edit ] Catherine L. Albanese, A Republic of Mind and Spirit: A Cultural History of American Metaphysical Religion . New Haven/London: Yale University Press, 2007.

Jonathan Beecher, Charles Fourier: The Visionary and his World . Berkeley: University of California Press, 1986.

Jonathan Beecher, Victor Considerant and the Rise and Fall of French Romantic Socialism . Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001.

Arthur Bestor, American Phalanxes: A Study of Fourierist Socialism in the United States.

PhD dissertation. Yale University, 1938.

William Hall Brock, Phalanx on a Hill: Responses to Fourierism in the Transcendentalist Circle.

PhD dissertation. Loyola University of Chicago, 1995.

Sterling F. Delano, The Harbinger and New England Transcendentalism: A Portrait of Associationism in America.

Cranbury, NJ: Associated University Presses, 1983.

Carl J. Guarneri, The Utopian Alternative: Fourierism in Nineteenth-Century America.

Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1991.

Andrew Loman, "Somewhat on the Community System": Fourierism in the Works of Nathaniel Hawthorne.

New York: Routledge, 2005.

Karen Bergström McKnight, Seeds of Utopia: The Germination of Fourierism in America.

MA thesis. University of Vermont, 1982.

Cecilia Koretsky Michael, Horace Greeley and Fourierism in the United States.

MA thesis. University of Rochester, 1949.

John Warne Monroe, Laboratories of Faith: Mesmerism, Spiritism, and Occultism in Modern France . Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2008.

Charles Pellarin, The Life of Charles Fourier.

New York: William H. Graham, 1848.

James R. Scales, Fourierism and its Influence in America.

Shawnee, OK: Oklahoma Baptist University, 1951.

Julian Strube, " Socialist Religion and the Emergence of Occultism: A Genealogical Approach to Socialism and Secularization in 19th-Century France ". In: Religion , 2016.

Julian Strube, Sozialismus, Katholizisimus und Okkultismus im Frankreich des 19. Jahrhunderts.

Berlin/Boston: De Gruyter, 2016.

Troyer, Howard W., The Salt and the Savor . New York: A.A. Wyn, Inc., 1950. Fictionalized account of LaGrange Phalanx in Indiana, ch. 8 & 9.

v t e Socialism History - Outline Schools of thought 21st century Agrarian Communist Democratic Ethical Feminist Green Guild Labourism Syndicalism Liberal Market Marxian Nationalist Reformist Revolutionary Scientific Social democracy Utopian Fourierism Icarianism Owenism Saint-Simonianism Technocracy Libertarian ( from below ) Anarchism Collectivist Communist Free-market Left-wing laissez-faire Green Individualist Insurrectionary Magonism Mutualism Neozapatismo Platformism Communalism Social Syndicalist Left-libertarianism Libertarian Marxism Left communism Council communism Luxemburgism Mao-Spontex Trotskyism Pabloism Posadism Orthodox Third camp Authoritarian ( from above ) Barracks Nechayevism Blanquism Bolshevism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Brezhnevism Castroism Ceaușism Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism Dengism Maoism–Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Prachanda Path Xi Jinping Thought Stalinism Neo-Stalinism National Tkachevism State Lassallism Religious Buddhist Christian anarchism communism Islamic Jewish Regional variants African African-Caribbean Arab Bolivarian Chinese Communist Nationalist Chiangist European Eurocommunism Indian Israeli Indonesian Melanesian Mexican Soviet In one country Real Sri Lankan Third World Yugoslav Key topics and issues Anti-revisionism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Critique of political economy Critique of work Class struggle Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Egalitarianism Equal liberty Equality of opportunity Equality of outcome History of anarchism History of communism History of socialism History of social democracy Impossibilism " The Internationale " Internationalism Socialist Internationals First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Socialist International Land reform Left-wing politics Mixed economy Mode of production Nanosocialism Nationalization Planned economy Post-capitalism Proletarian revolution Reformism Revisionism Socialisation of production Socialist economics Socialist market economy Socialist state State capitalism State-owned enterprise Trade union Welfare state Workers' council Concepts Adhocracy Basic income Calculation in kind Common ownership Cooperative ownership Decentralized planning Direct democracy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal opportunity Free association of producers Industrial democracy Labor-time calculation Labour voucher Organizational self-management Production for use Public ownership Social dividend Socialist mode of production Technocracy Workplace democracy People 16th c.

Tommaso Campanella Thomas More 18th c.

Gracchus Babeuf Louis Antoine de Saint-Just Victor d'Hupay Gabriel Bonnot de Mably Sylvain Maréchal Étienne-Gabriel Morelly 19th c.

Stephen Pearl Andrews Mikhail Bakunin John Goodwyn Barmby Enrico Barone August Bebel Edward Bellamy Eduard Bernstein Louis Blanc Louis Auguste Blanqui Philippe Buchez Georg Büchner Philippe Buonarroti Francisco Largo Caballero Étienne Cabet Edward Carpenter Nikolay Chernyshevsky James Connolly Victor Prosper Considerant Claire Démar Théodore Dézamy W. E. B. Du Bois Prosper Enfantin Friedrich Engels Charles Fourier Emma Goldman William Batchelder Greene Charles Hall Alexander Herzen Thomas Hodgskin Jean Jaurès Mother Jones Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Paul Lafargue Ferdinand Lassalle Pyotr Lavrov Alexandre Ledru-Rollin Pierre Leroux Helen Macfarlane Errico Malatesta Karl Marx Louise Michel Nikolay Mikhaylovsky William Morris Robert Owen Antonie Pannekoek Giovanni Pascoli Constantin Pecqueur Georgi Plekhanov Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Luis Emilio Recabarren Henri de Saint-Simon Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin George Sand Friedrich Wilhelm Schulz Eugène Sue Lysander Spooner Fred M. Taylor William Thompson Pyotr Tkachev Benjamin Tucker Suzanne Voilquin Alfred Russel Wallace Josiah Warren Wilhelm Weitling Oscar Wilde 20th c.

Tariq Ali Salvador Allende Inejirō Asanuma Hafez al-Assad Clement Attlee Aung San Deng Xiaoping Jiang Zemin Henri Barbusse Jyoti Basu Simone de Beauvoir Walter Benjamin Tony Benn Léon Blum Grace Lee Boggs Murray Bookchin Bertolt Brecht Aristide Briand Nikolai Bukharin Cornelius Castoriadis Noam Chomsky M. N. Roy G. D. H. Cole Jeremy Corbyn Marcel Déat Guy Debord Eugene V. Debs John Dewey Alexander Dubček Albert Einstein Faiz Ahmad Faiz Muammar Gaddafi Einar Gerhardsen Mikhail Gorbachev Maxim Gorky Antonio Gramsci Safdar Hashmi Eric Hobsbawm Saddam Hussein Dolores Ibárruri Pablo Iglesias Posse Jayaprakash Narayan Russell Jacoby Kim Jong-il Kim Il Sung Martin Luther King Jr.

Alexandra Kollontai James Larkin E. M. S. Namboodiripad Jack Layton Henri Lefebvre Claude Lefort Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Rosa Luxemburg Lu Xun Alasdair MacIntyre Nestor Makhno Nelson Mandela José Carlos Mariátegui Adrien Marquet Mao Dun Salama Moussa François Mitterrand Imre Nagy Gamal Abdel Nasser Jawaharlal Nehru Ernst Niekisch Ne Win George Orwell Sylvia Pankhurst Fred Paterson Karl Polanyi Pierre Renaudel B. T. Ranadive Bertrand Russell Gaetano Salvemini Bernie Sanders Jean-Paul Sartre Arthur Scargill Léopold Sédar Senghor George Bernard Shaw Sukarno Sun Yat-sen R. H. Tawney E. P. Thompson Ernst Toller Leon Trotsky Ram Manohar Lohia H. G. Wells Cornel West Clara Zetkin Howard Zinn J. Posadas 21st c.

Pedro Castillo Hugo Chávez Bob Crow Hu Jintao Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu Kim Jong Un Hasan Piker Lula da Silva Evo Morales Yanis Varoufakis Xi Jinping Vaush Organizations International socialist organizations Socialist parties See also Economic calculation problem Marxist philosophy New Left Old Left Socialism by country Socialist calculation debate Categories Socialism WikiProject Socialism portal Communism portal Organized Labour portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fourierism&oldid=1292552228 " Categories : Eponymous economic ideologies Philosophical schools and traditions Eponymous political ideologies Fourierism Linear theories Sociological theories Socialism in France Social theories Types of socialism Utopian socialism Political terminology in France Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2020 Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 27 May 2025, at 15:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fourierism 6 languages Add topic

