Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 Origins Toggle Origins subsection 2.1 New materials and technologies 2.2 Vienna Secession and Wiener Werkstätte (1897–1912) 2.3 Society of Decorative Artists (1901–1945) 2.4 Salon d'Automne (1903–1914) 2.5 Théâtre des Champs-Élysées (1910–1913) 2.6 Cubism 3 Influences Toggle Influences subsection 3.1 Pre-World War I European styles 3.2 Ancient and non-European civilizations 3.3 Early 20th-century avant-garde movements 4 International Exhibition of Modern Decorative and Industrial Arts (1925) 5 Late Art Deco 6 Painting 7 Sculpture Toggle Sculpture subsection 7.1 Monumental and public sculpture 7.2 Studio sculpture 8 Graphic arts 9 Architecture Toggle Architecture subsection 9.1 Styles 9.1.1 Zigzag Moderne 9.1.2 Classic Moderne 9.1.3 Streamline Moderne 9.2 Building types 9.2.1 Skyscrapers 9.2.2 "Cathedrals of Commerce" 9.2.3 Movie palaces 10 Decoration and motifs 11 Furniture 12 Design 13 Textiles 14 Fashion 15 Jewelry 16 Glass art 17 Metal art 18 Animation 19 Art Deco architecture around the world Toggle Art Deco architecture around the world subsection 19.1 Africa 19.2 Asia 19.3 Australia and New Zealand 19.4 North America 19.5 Central America and the Caribbean 19.6 Europe 19.7 South America 20 Preservation and neo-Art Deco 21 Gallery 22 See also 23 References 24 Bibliography 25 Further reading 26 External links Toggle the table of contents Art Deco 69 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Қазақша Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand پنجابی Picard Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 Zeêuws 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 20th-century architectural and art style This article is about the art style. For other uses, see Art Deco (disambiguation) .

This article contains an excessive or unencyclopedic gallery of images .

Please help improve it by removing unnecessary or indiscriminate images , and by moving relevant images beside adjacent text in accordance with Wikipedia's Manual of Style .

( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Art Deco Top to bottom: Chrysler Building in New York City (1930); poster for the Chicago World's Fair (1933); and Victoire hood ornament by René Lalique at Toyota Automobile Museum in Japan (1928) Additional media Years active c.

1910s–1950s Location Global Art Deco , short for the French Arts décoratifs ( lit.

' Decorative Arts ' ), [ 1 ] is a style of visual arts, architecture, and product design that first appeared in Paris in the 1910s just before World War I [ 2 ] and flourished internationally during the 1920s to early 1930s, through styling and design of the exterior and interior of anything from large structures to small objects, including clothing, fashion, and jewelry. Art Deco has influenced buildings from skyscrapers to cinemas, bridges, ocean liners, trains, cars, trucks, buses, furniture, and everyday objects, including radios and vacuum cleaners.

[ 3 ] The name Art Deco came into use after the 1925 Exposition internationale des arts décoratifs et industriels modernes ( International Exhibition of Modern Decorative and Industrial Arts ) held in Paris.

[ 4 ] It has its origin in the bold geometric forms of the Vienna Secession and Cubism . From the outset, Art Deco was influenced by the bright colors of Fauvism and the Ballets Russes , and the exoticized styles of art from China , Japan , India , Persia , ancient Egypt , and Maya . In its time, Art Deco was tagged with other names such as style moderne , Moderne , modernistic , or style contemporain , and it was not recognized as a distinct and homogeneous style.

[ 5 ] During its heyday, Art Deco represented luxury, glamour, exuberance, and faith in social and technological progress. The movement featured rare and expensive materials such as ebony and ivory, and exquisite craftsmanship. It also introduced new materials such as chrome plating , stainless steel , and plastic. In New York, the Empire State Building , Chrysler Building , and other buildings from the 1920s and 1930s are monuments to the style. The largest concentration of art deco architecture in the world is in Miami Beach, Florida .

[ 6 ] Art Deco became more subdued during the Great Depression . A sleeker form of the style appeared in the 1930s called Streamline Moderne , featuring curving forms and smooth, polished surfaces.

[ 7 ] Art Deco was an international style but, after the outbreak of World War II , it lost its dominance to the functional and unadorned styles of modern architecture and the International Style .

[ 8 ] [ 5 ] Terminology [ edit ] Art Deco took its name, short for Arts Décoratifs , from the International Exhibition of Modern Decorative and Industrial Arts held in Paris in 1925, [ 4 ] though the diverse styles that characterised it had already appeared in Paris and Brussels before World War I .

Arts décoratifs was first used in France in 1858 in the Bulletin de la Société française de photographie .

[ 9 ] In 1868, the Le Figaro newspaper used the term objets d'art décoratifs for objects for stage scenery created for the Théâtre de l'Opéra .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] In 1875, furniture designers, textile, jewellers, glass-workers, and other craftsmen were officially given the status of artists by the French government. In response, the École royale gratuite de dessin (Royal Free School of Design), founded in 1766 under King Louis XVI to train artists and artisans in crafts relating to the fine arts, was renamed the École nationale des arts décoratifs ( National School of Decorative Arts). It took its present name, ENSAD ( École nationale supérieure des arts décoratifs ), in 1920.

The actual term art déco did not appear in print until 1966, in the title of the first modern exhibition on the subject, held by the Museum of Decorative Arts in Paris, Les Années 25 : Art déco, Bauhaus, Stijl, Esprit nouveau , which covered a variety of major styles in the 1920s and 1930s.

[ 13 ] The term was then used in a 1966 newspaper article by Hillary Gelson in The Times (London, 12 November), describing the different styles at the exhibit.

[ 14 ] Art Deco gained currency as a broadly applied stylistic label in 1968 when historian Bevis Hillier published the first major academic book on it, Art Deco of the 20s and 30s .

[ 3 ] He noted that the term was already being used by art dealers, and cites The Times (2 November 1966) and an essay named Les Arts Déco in Elle magazine (November 1967) as examples.

[ 15 ] In 1971, he organized an exhibition at the Minneapolis Institute of Arts , which he details in his book The World of Art Deco .

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Mike Hope lists many other labels that were used for Art Deco architecture: Odeon Style (after the style used by Odeon Cinemas in the 1930s), Liberty style , [Style] Moderne , Jazz Moderne , Zigzag Moderne , British Moderne, Nautical Moderne, Modern Ship Style, Pacqueboat Style, Ocean Liner Style, White Modern, Futurist Art Deco, Streamline Beaux Arts, Streamline Moderne , PWA Moderne, PWA/WPA Moderne, Federal Moderne, Depression Moderne, Classical Moderne, Classical Modernism, Modernist Classical, Chicago School, Czech Architectural Cubism, Italian Futurism, Prairie School , Atmospheric Theatre , Med Deco, Amsterdam School , Nieuwe Zakelijkheid (also Neue Sachlichkeit , Neues Bauen , New Sobriety, New Objectivity ), Mayan Revival , Japanese Secession, Spanish Pueblo Style, Pueblo Deco , Finnish National Romanticism; Neo-Gothic , Neo-Byzantine , Neo-Egyptian, Spanish Mission, International School, European International Style, Wiener Werkstätte , Free Classicism; Stripped Neo-Classicism, Deco Free Classicism, Stripped Classicism, Transitional Modern, Vogue Regency.

[ 18 ] Origins [ edit ] New materials and technologies [ edit ] New materials and technologies, especially reinforced concrete , were key to the development and appearance of Art Deco. The first concrete house was built in 1853 in the Paris suburbs by François Coignet. In 1877 Joseph Monier introduced the idea of strengthening the concrete with a mesh of iron rods in a grill pattern. In 1893, Auguste Perret built the first concrete garage in Paris, then an apartment building, house, then, in 1913, the Théâtre des Champs-Élysées . The theatre was denounced by one critic as the "Zeppelin of Avenue Montaigne", an alleged Germanic influence, copied from the Vienna Secession . Thereafter, the majority of Art Deco buildings were made of reinforced concrete, which gave greater freedom of form and less need for reinforcing pillars and columns. Perret was also a pioneer in covering the concrete with ceramic tiles , both for protection and decoration. The architect Le Corbusier first learned the uses of reinforced concrete working as a draftsman in Perret's studio.

[ 19 ] Other new technologies that were important to Art Deco were new methods in producing plate glass , which was less expensive and allowed much larger and stronger windows, and for mass-producing aluminium , which was used for building and window frames and later, by Corbusier, Warren McArthur , and others, for lightweight furniture.

Vienna Secession and Wiener Werkstätte (1897–1912) [ edit ] The architects of the Vienna Secession (formed 1897), especially Josef Hoffmann , had a notable influence on Art Deco. His Stoclet Palace , in Brussels (1905–1911), was a prototype of the Art Deco style, featuring geometric volumes, symmetry, straight lines, concrete covered with marble plaques, finely-sculpted ornament, and lavish interiors, including mosaic friezes by Gustav Klimt . Hoffmann was also a founder of the Wiener Werkstätte (1903–1932), an association of craftsmen and interior designers working in the new style. This became the model for the Compagnie des arts français , created in 1919, which brought together André Mare and Louis Süe , the first leading French Art Deco designers and decorators.

[ 20 ] Secession Building in Vienna by Joseph Maria Olbrich (1897–98) Church of St. Leopold in Vienna by Otto Wagner (1903–1907) Austrian Postal Savings Bank in Vienna by Wagner (1904–1912) Stoclet Palace in Brussels by Josef Hoffmann (1905–1911) Detail of the Stoclet Palace's façade, made of reinforced concrete covered with marble plaques Society of Decorative Artists (1901–1945) [ edit ] The emergence of Art Deco was closely connected with the rise in status of decorative artists, who until late in the 19th century were considered simply artisans. The term arts décoratifs had been invented in 1875 [ citation needed ] , giving the designers of furniture, textiles, and other decoration official status. The Société des artistes décorateurs (Society of Decorative Artists), or SAD, was founded in 1901, and decorative artists were given the same rights of authorship as painters and sculptors. A similar movement developed in Italy. The first international exhibition devoted entirely to the decorative arts, the Esposizione Internazionale d'Arte Decorativa Moderna , was held in Turin in 1902. Several new magazines devoted to decorative arts were founded in Paris, including Arts et décoration and L'Art décoratif moderne . Decorative arts sections were introduced into the annual salons of the Sociéte des artistes français , and later in the Salon d'Automne . French nationalism also played a part in the resurgence of decorative arts, as French designers felt challenged by the increasing exports of less expensive German furnishings. In 1911, SAD proposed a major new international exposition of decorative arts in 1912. No copies of old styles would be permitted, only modern works. The exhibit was postponed until 1914; and then, because of the war, until 1925, when it gave its name to the whole family of styles known as "Déco".

[ 21 ] Table and chairs by Maurice Dufrêne and carpet by Paul Follot at the 1912 Salon des artistes décorateurs Lady with Panther by George Barbier for Louis Cartier (1914). Display card commissioned by Cartier shows a woman in a Paul Poiret gown.

Armchair by Émile-Jacques Ruhlmann (1914), now in the Musée d'Orsay , Paris Parisian department stores and fashion designers also played an important part in the rise of Art Deco. Prominent businesses such as silverware firm Christofle , glass designer René Lalique , and the jewellers Louis Cartier and Boucheron began designing products in more modern styles.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Beginning in 1900, department stores recruited decorative artists to work in their design studios. The decoration of the 1912 Salon d'Automne was entrusted to the department store Printemps , [ 24 ] [ 25 ] and that year it created its own workshop, Primavera .

[ 25 ] By 1920 Primavera employed more than 300 artists, whose styles ranged from updated versions of Louis XIV , Louis XVI , and especially Louis Philippe furniture made by Louis Süe and the Primavera workshop, to more modern forms from the workshop of the Au Louvre department store. Other designers, including Émile-Jacques Ruhlmann and Paul Follot, refused to use mass production, insisting that each piece be made individually. The early Art Deco style featured luxurious and exotic materials such as ebony , ivory and silk, very bright colours and stylized motifs , particularly baskets and bouquets of flowers of all colours, giving a modernist look.

[ 26 ] Salon d'Automne (1903–1914) [ edit ] Main article: Salon d'Automne Set for Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov 's ballet Sheherazade by Léon Bakst (1910) Art Deco armchair made for art collector Jacques Doucet (1912–13) Display of early Art Deco furnishings by the Atelier français at the 1913 Salon d'Automne from Art et décoration magazine (1914) At its birth between 1910 and 1914, Art Deco was an explosion of colours, featuring bright and often clashing hues, frequently in floral designs, presented in furniture upholstery , carpets, screens, wallpaper and fabrics. Many colourful works, including chairs and a table by Maurice Dufrêne and a bright Gobelin carpet by Paul Follot were presented at the 1912 Salon des artistes décorateurs . In 1912–1913 designer Adrien Karbowsky made a floral chair with a parrot design for the hunting lodge of art collector Jacques Doucet .

[ 27 ] The furniture designers Louis Süe and André Mare made their first appearance at the 1912 exhibit, under the name of the Atelier français , combining polychromatic fabrics with exotic and expensive materials, including ebony and ivory. After World War I, they became one of the most prominent French interior design firms, producing the furniture for the first-class salons and cabins of the French transatlantic ocean liners .

[ 28 ] The vivid hues of Art Deco came from many sources, including the exotic set designs by Léon Bakst for the Ballets Russes , which caused a sensation in Paris just before World War I. Some of the colours were inspired by the earlier Fauvism movement led by Henri Matisse ; others by the Orphism of painters such as Sonia Delaunay ; [ 29 ] others by the movement known as Les Nabis , and in the work of symbolist painter Odilon Redon, who designed fireplace screens and other decorative objects. Bright shades were a feature of the work of fashion designer Paul Poiret , whose work influenced both Art Deco fashion and interior design.

[ 28 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] Théâtre des Champs-Élysées (1910–1913) [ edit ] Théâtre des Champs-Élysées by Auguste Perret at 15, avenue Montaigne, Paris (1910–1913). Reinforced concrete gave architects the ability to create new forms and bigger spaces.

La Danse , bas-relief on the façade of the Théâtre des Champs-Élysées by Antoine Bourdelle (1912) Interior of the Théâtre des Champs-Élysées, with Bourdelle's bas-reliefs over the stage Dome of the Theater, with Art Deco rose design by Maurice Denis Apollon et sa méditation entourée des 9 muses ( Apollo and His Meditation Surrounded by the 9 Muses ), bas-relief on the façade of the Théâtre des Champs-Élysées by Bourdelle (1910–1912). This work represents one of the earliest examples of what became known as Art Deco sculpture.

The Théâtre des Champs-Élysées (1910–1913), by Auguste Perret , was the first landmark Art Deco building completed in Paris. Previously, reinforced concrete had been used only for industrial and apartment buildings, Perret had built the first modern reinforced-concrete apartment building in Paris on rue Benjamin Franklin in 1903–04.

Henri Sauvage , another important future Art Deco architect, built another in 1904 at 7, rue Trétaigne (1904). From 1908 to 1910, the 21-year-old Le Corbusier worked as a draftsman in Perret's office, learning the techniques of concrete construction. Perret's building had clean rectangular form, geometric decoration and straight lines, the future trademarks of Art Deco. The décor of the theatre was also revolutionary; the façade was decorated with high reliefs by Antoine Bourdelle , a dome by Maurice Denis , paintings by Édouard Vuillard , and an Art Deco curtain by Ker-Xavier Roussel . The theatre became the venue for many of the first performances of the Ballets Russes .

[ 32 ] Perret and Sauvage became the leading Art Deco architects in Paris in the 1920s.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] Cubism [ edit ] Design for the façade of La Maison Cubiste ( Cubist House ) by Raymond Duchamp-Villon (1912) Detail of the entrance of La Maison Cubiste at the 1912 Salon d'Automne Le Salon Bourgeois , designed by André Mare inside La Maison Cubiste , in the decorative arts section of the 1912 Salon d'Automne. Metzinger's Femme à l'Éventail can be seen hanging on the left wall.

Cubist villa at 3-49 Libušina Street, Vyšehrad (Prague), by Josef Chochol (1912–13). Chochol was one of three Czech architects (members of the Mánes Union of Fine Arts ), with Pavel Janák and Josef Gočár , influenced by Cubism.

Danseuse (Femme à l'éventail, Femme à la cruche) by Joseph Csaky (1912), original plaster, exhibited at the 1912 Salon d'Automne and the 1914 Salon des Indépendants , a proto-Art Deco sculpture The art movement known as Cubism appeared in France between 1907 and 1912, influencing the development of Art Deco.

[ 32 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] In Art Deco Complete: The Definitive Guide to the Decorative Arts of the 1920s and 1930s Alastair Duncan writes "Cubism, in some bastardized form or other, became the lingua franca of the era's decorative artists." [ 30 ] [ 35 ] The Cubists, themselves under the influence of Paul Cézanne , were interested in the simplification of forms to their geometric essentials: the cylinder, the sphere, the cone.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] In 1912, the artists of the Section d'Or exhibited works considerably more accessible to the general public than the analytical Cubism of Picasso and Braque. The Cubist vocabulary was poised to attract fashion, furniture and interior designers.

[ 29 ] [ 31 ] [ 37 ] [ 38 ] In the Art Décoratif section of the 1912 Salon d'Automne, an architectural installation was exhibited known as La Maison Cubiste .

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] The façade was designed by Raymond Duchamp-Villon . The décor of the house was by André Mare .

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] La Maison Cubiste was a furnished installation with a façade, a staircase, wrought iron banisters, a bedroom, a living room—the Salon Bourgeois , where paintings by Albert Gleizes , Jean Metzinger , Marie Laurencin , Marcel Duchamp , Fernand Léger and Roger de La Fresnaye were hung.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] [ 45 ] Thousands of spectators at the salon passed through the full-scale model.

[ 46 ] The façade of the house, designed by Duchamp-Villon, was not very radical by modern standards; the lintels and pediments had prismatic shapes, but otherwise the façade resembled an ordinary house of the period. For the two rooms, Mare designed the wallpaper, which featured stylized roses and floral patterns, along with upholstery, furniture and carpets, all with flamboyant and colourful motifs. It was a distinct break from traditional décor. The critic Emile Sedeyn described Mare's work in the magazine Art et Décoration : "He does not embarrass himself with simplicity, for he multiplies flowers wherever they can be put. The effect he seeks is obviously one of picturesqueness and gaiety. He achieves it." [ 47 ] The Cubist element was provided by the paintings. The installation was attacked by some critics as extremely radical, which helped make for its success.

[ 48 ] This architectural installation was subsequently exhibited at the 1913 Armory Show , New York City, Chicago and Boston.

[ 29 ] [ 37 ] [ 49 ] [ 50 ] [ 51 ] Thanks largely to the exhibition, the term "Cubist" began to be applied to anything modern, from women's haircuts to clothing to theater performances." [ 48 ] The Cubist influence continued within Art Deco, even as Deco branched out in many other directions.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Cubism's adumbrated geometry became coin of the realm in the 1920s. Art Deco's development of Cubism's selective geometry into a wider array of shapes carried Cubism as a pictorial taxonomy to a much broader audience and wider appeal. (Richard Harrison Martin, Metropolitan Museum of Art) [ 52 ] Influences [ edit ] Pre-World War I European styles [ edit ] Ballets Russes influences – Drawing of the dancer Vaslav Nijinsky , by Paris fashion artist Georges Barbier (1913) Rococo – Chest of drawers, by Jacques Dubois (1750–1755), various wood types and gilt bronze mounts, Waddesdon Manor , Buckinghamshire, UK Rococo influences – Commode, by Paul Iribarne Garay ( c.

1912 ), mahogany and tulip wood frame, slate top, green-tinted shagreen upholstery, ebony knobs, base and garlands, Museum of Decorative Arts , Paris Beaux Arts architecture – Boulevard Diderot no. 21, Paris, unknown architect ( c.

1910 ) Beaux Arts influences – Avenue de Versailles no. 70–72, Paris, "Modern" decor in an established typology, designed by Paul Delaplace and sculpted by Jean Boucher (1928) Louis XVI style – Corner table, by Jean-Francois-Therese Chalgrin (1770), gilded wood, Corcoran Gallery of Art , Washington, D.C.

Louis XVI style influences – Dressing table and chair set, by Paul Follot (1919), marble and wood encrusted, lacquered and gilded, Musée d'Art Moderne de Paris Neoclassicism – Mercury or The Trade , by Augustin Pajou (1780), marble, Louvre , Paris Neoclassical influences – Prometheus , a stylised Art Deco update of classical sculpture, by Paul Manship (1936), gilded bronze, Rockefeller Center , New York City Art Nouveau – Hôtel Guimard ( Avenue Mozart no. 122), Paris, by Hector Guimard (1909) Art Nouveau influences – Sinuous curves on the façade of Avenue Montaigne no. 26, Paris, by Louis Duhayon and Marcel Julien (1937) [ 53 ] Art Deco was not a single style, but a collection of different and sometimes contradictory styles. In architecture, Art Deco was the successor to (and reaction against) Art Nouveau, a style which flourished in Europe between 1895 and 1900, and coexisted with the Beaux-Arts and neoclassical that were predominant in European and American architecture. In 1905 Eugène Grasset wrote and published Méthode de Composition Ornementale, Éléments Rectilignes, [ 54 ] in which he systematically explored the decorative (ornamental) aspects of geometric elements, forms, motifs and their variations, in contrast with (and as a departure from) the undulating Art Nouveau style of Hector Guimard , so popular in Paris a few years earlier. Grasset stressed the principle that various simple geometric shapes like triangles and squares are the basis of all compositional arrangements. The reinforced-concrete buildings of Auguste Perret and Henri Sauvage, and particularly the Théâtre des Champs-Élysées , offered a new form of construction and decoration which was copied worldwide.

[ 55 ] Ancient and non-European civilizations [ edit ] Ancient Egyptian art – Vegetal capitals in the courtyard of the Isis Temple, Philae , Egypt, unknown architect (380 BC–117 AD) [ 56 ] : 30 Egyptian influences – Dress with lotus flowers inspired by Ancient Egyptian decoration, by Jenny (couturier) and Lesage (embroiderer) (1925), silk, metallic thread, and crocheted embroidery, Musée Galliera , Paris Mesopotamian art – Ziggurat of Ur in Tell el-Muqayyar , Dhi Qar Province, Iraq, unknown architect (21st century BC) [ 57 ] Mesopotamian influences – Western Union Building (Hudson Street no. 60) in New York City, by Voorhees, Gmelin and Walker (1928–1930) Pre-Columbian art (in this case Maya ) – Yaxchilan Lintel 24 (702 AD), limestone, British Museum , London [ 58 ] Pre-Columbian influences (in this case Maya) – Interior detail of 450 Sutter Street in San Francisco , California, by Timothy L. Pflueger (1929) Sub-Saharian African (in this case produced in the Kuba Kingdom from present-day Democratic Republic of the Congo ) – Ndop of King Mishe miShyaang maMbul (1760–1780), wood, Brooklyn Museum , New York City Sub-Saharian African influences – Winter 1930, by Léon Benigni , oil on canvas, private collection In decoration, many different styles were borrowed and used by Art Deco. They included pre-modern art from around the world and observable at the Musée du Louvre , Musée de l'Homme and the Musée national des Arts d'Afrique et d'Océanie . There was also popular interest in archaeology due to excavations at Pompeii , Troy , and the tomb of the 18th dynasty Pharaoh Tutankhamun . Artists and designers integrated motifs from ancient Egypt , Africa , Mesopotamia , Greece , Rome , Asia, Mesoamerica and Oceania with Machine Age elements.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] [ 61 ] [ 62 ] [ 63 ] [ 64 ] Early 20th-century avant-garde movements [ edit ] Primitivism – Head of a Woman , by Amedeo Modigliani (1910–11), limestone, National Gallery of Art , Washington, D.C.

Primitivist influences – Bust for a shop window, anonymous Belgian artist ( c.

1920 ), painted papier-mâché , private collection, Cologne , Germany De Stijl – Rietveld Schröder House in Utrecht , Netherlands, by Gerrit Rietveld (1924) [ 65 ] De Stijl influences – Pavillon du Tourisme, by Robert Mallet-Stevens , International Exhibition of Modern Decorative and Industrial Arts , Paris (1925) [ 66 ] Cubism – Figure dans un Fauteuil (Seated Nude, Femme nue assise) , by Pablo Picasso (1909–10), oil on canvas, Tate Modern , London Cubist influences – Cubic coffee service, by Erik Magnussen (1927), silver, in a temporary exhibition called the " Jazz Age " at the Cleveland Museum of Art , US Constructivism – Beat the Whites with the Red Wedge , by El Lissitzky (1919–1920), lithographic poster, Russian State Library , Moscow Constructivist influences – Clock, decorated with flat geometric shapes, by Jean Goulden (1928), silvered bronze with enamel, Stephen E. Kelly Collection [ 67 ] Expressionist theatre and film – Scene from Metropolis , by Fritz Lang (1927) Influences of the Expressionist theatre and film – Interior of the Apollo Victoria Theatre in London, by Ernest Wamsley Lewis (1928–1930) [ 68 ] Futurism – Staircase house with elevators from four street levels, part of La Città Nuova , by Antonio Sant'Elia (1914), ink and pencil on paper, Musei Civici, Como , Italy [ 69 ] Futurist influences – Rue du Laos no. 25 in Paris, by Charles Thomas (1930) [ 69 ] Expressionist architecture – Rudolf Mosse Printing and Publishing Company Building in Berlin , by Erich Mendelsohn (1921–1923) [ 70 ] Expressionist architecture influences – Aux Trois-Quartiers department store in Paris, by Louis Faure-Dujarric (1932) [ 70 ] Other styles borrowed included Futurism , Orphism , Functionalism , and Modernism in general. Cubism discovers its decorative potential within the Art Deco aesthetic, when transposed from the canvas onto a textile material or wallpaper.

Sonia Delaunay conceives her dress models in an abstract and geometric style, "as live paintings or sculptures of living forms". Cubist-like designs are created by Louis Barrilet in the stained-glass windows of the American bar at the Atrium Casino in Dax (1926), but also including names of fashionable cocktails. In architecture, the clear contrast between horizontal and vertical volumes, specific both to Russian Constructivism and the Frank Lloyd Wright - Willem Marinus Dudok line, becomes a common device in articulating Art Deco façades, from individual homes and tenement buildings to cinemas or oil stations.

[ 71 ] [ 37 ] [ 59 ] [ 72 ] [ 73 ] Art Deco also used the clashing colours and designs of Fauvism, notably in the work of Henri Matisse and André Derain , inspired the designs of Art Deco textiles, wallpaper, and painted ceramics.

[ 37 ] It took ideas from the high fashion vocabulary of the period, which featured geometric designs, chevrons, zigzags, and stylized bouquets of flowers. It was influenced by discoveries in Egyptology , and growing interest in the Orient and in African art. From 1925 onwards, it was often inspired by a passion for new machines, such as airships, automobiles and ocean liners, and by 1930 this influence resulted in the style called Streamline Moderne .

[ 74 ] International Exhibition of Modern Decorative and Industrial Arts (1925) [ edit ] Postcard of the International Exhibition of Modern Decorative and Industrial Arts in Paris (1925) Entrance to the 1925 Exposition from Place de la Concorde by Pierre Patout The Polish pavilion, designed by Józef Czajkowski and Wojciech Jastrzębowski Pavilion of the Galeries Lafayette department store Salon of the Hôtel du Collectionneur, furnished by Émile-Jacques Ruhlmann , painting by Jean Dupas , design by Pierre Patout The event that marked the zenith of the style and gave it its name was the International Exhibition of Modern Decorative and Industrial Arts which took place in Paris from April to October in 1925. This was officially sponsored by the French government, and covered a site in Paris of 55 acres, running from the Grand Palais on the right bank to Les Invalides on the left bank, and along the banks of the Seine. The Grand Palais, the largest hall in the city, was filled with exhibits of decorative arts from the participating countries. There were 15,000 exhibitors from twenty different countries, including Austria, Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Great Britain, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Poland, Spain, Sweden, and the new Soviet Union . Germany was not invited because of tensions after the war; the United States, misunderstanding the purpose of the exhibit, declined to participate. The event was visited by sixteen million people during its seven-month run. The rules of the exhibition required that all work be modern; no historical styles were allowed. The main purpose of the Exhibit was to promote the French manufacturers of luxury furniture, porcelain, glass, metalwork, textiles, and other decorative products. To further promote the products, all the major Paris department stores, and major designers had their own pavilions. The Exposition had a secondary purpose in promoting products from French colonies in Africa and Asia, including ivory and exotic woods.

The Hôtel du Collectionneur was a popular attraction at the Exposition; it displayed the new furniture designs of Emile-Jacques Ruhlmann, as well as Art Deco fabrics, carpets, and a painting by Jean Dupas . The interior design followed the same principles of symmetry and geometric forms which set it apart from Art Nouveau, and bright colours, fine craftsmanship rare and expensive materials which set it apart from the strict functionality of the Modernist style. While most of the pavilions were lavishly decorated and filled with hand-made luxury furniture, two pavilions, those of the Soviet Union and Pavilion de L'Esprit Nouveau , built by the magazine of that name run by Le Corbusier, were built in an austere style with plain white walls and no decoration; they were among the earliest examples of modernist architecture .

[ 75 ] Late Art Deco [ edit ] Piața Sfântul Ștefan no. 1 in Bucharest , by unknown architect ( c.

1930 ) Church of St. John the Baptist in Molenbeek (Brussels), by Joseph Diongre (1930–1932) Lincoln Theater in Miami Beach, Florida , by Thomas W. Lamb (1936) Palais de Chaillot in Paris by Louis-Hippolyte Boileau , Jacques Carlu and Léon Azéma from the 1937 Paris International Exposition Stairway of the Economic and Social Council in Paris, originally the Museum of Public Works, built for the 1937 Exposition, by Auguste Perret (1937) High School in King City, California , built by Robert Stanton for the Works Progress Administration (1939) In 1925, two different competing schools coexisted within Art Deco: the traditionalists, who had founded the Society of Decorative Artists; included the furniture designer Emile-Jacques Ruhlmann, Jean Dunand , the sculptor Antoine Bourdelle, and designer Paul Poiret; they combined modern forms with traditional craftsmanship and expensive materials. On the other side were the modernists, who increasingly rejected the past and wanted a style based upon advances in new technologies, simplicity, a lack of decoration, inexpensive materials, and mass production. The modernists founded their own organisation, The French Union of Modern Artists , in 1929. Its members included architects Pierre Chareau , Francis Jourdain , Robert Mallet-Stevens , Corbusier, and, in the Soviet Union, Konstantin Melnikov ; the Irish designer Eileen Gray; the French designer Sonia Delaunay; and the jewellers Georges Fouquet and Jean Puiforcat . They fiercely attacked the traditional Art Deco style, which they said was created only for the wealthy, and insisted that well-constructed buildings should be available to everyone, and that form should follow function. The beauty of an object or building resided in whether it was perfectly fit to fulfil its function. Modern industrial methods meant that furniture and buildings could be mass-produced, not made by hand.

[ 76 ] [ 77 ] [ page needed ] The Art Deco interior designer Paul Follot defended Art Deco in this way: "We know that man is never content with the indispensable and that the superfluous is always needed...If not, we would have to get rid of music, flowers, and perfumes..!" [ 78 ] However, Le Corbusier was a brilliant publicist for modernist architecture; he stated that a house was simply "a machine to live in", and tirelessly promoted the idea that Art Deco was the past and modernism was the future. Le Corbusier's ideas were gradually adopted by architecture schools, and the aesthetics of Art Deco were abandoned. The same features that made Art Deco popular in the beginning, its craftsmanship, rich materials and ornament, led to its decline. The Great Depression that began in the United States in 1929, and reached Europe shortly afterwards, greatly reduced the number of wealthy clients who could pay for the furnishings and art objects. In the Depression economic climate, few companies were ready to build new skyscrapers.

[ 37 ] Even the Ruhlmann firm resorted to producing pieces of furniture in series, rather than individual hand-made items. The last buildings built in Paris in the new style were the Museum of Public Works by Auguste Perret (now the French Economic, Social and Environmental Council ), the Palais de Chaillot by Louis-Hippolyte Boileau , Jacques Carlu and Léon Azéma , and the Palais de Tokyo of the 1937 Paris International Exposition ; they looked out at the grandiose pavilion of Nazi Germany, designed by Albert Speer , which faced the equally grandiose socialist-realist pavilion of Stalin's Soviet Union.

After World War II, the dominant architectural style became the International Style pioneered by Le Corbusier, and Mies van der Rohe . A handful of Art Deco hotels were built in Miami Beach after World War II, but elsewhere the style largely vanished, except in industrial design, where it continued to be used in automobile styling and products such as jukeboxes. In the 1960s, it experienced a modest academic revival, thanks in part to the writings of architectural historians such as Bevis Hillier. In the 1970s efforts were made in the United States and Europe to preserve the best examples of Art Deco architecture, and many buildings were restored and repurposed.

Postmodern architecture , which first appeared in the 1980s, like Art Deco, often includes purely decorative features.

[ 37 ] [ 59 ] [ 79 ] [ 80 ] Deco continues to inspire designers, and is often used in contemporary fashion, jewellery, and toiletries.

[ 81 ] Painting [ edit ] Workers sorting the mail , a mural in the Ariel Rios Federal Building, Washington, D.C.

, by Reginald Marsh (1936) Art in the Tropics , mural in the William Jefferson Clinton Federal Building , Washington, D.C., by Rockwell Kent (1938) Detail of Time , ceiling mural in lobby of 30 Rockefeller Plaza in New York City, by Josep Maria Sert (1941) There was no section set aside for painting at the 1925 Exposition. Art deco painting was by definition decorative, designed to decorate a room or work of architecture, so few painters worked exclusively in the style, but two painters are closely associated with Art Deco. Jean Dupas painted Art Deco murals for the Bordeaux Pavilion at the 1925 Decorative Arts Exposition in Paris, and also painted the picture over the fireplace in the Maison du Collectionneur exhibit at the 1925 Exposition, which featured furniture by Ruhlmann and other prominent Art Deco designers. His murals were also prominent in the décor of the French ocean liner SS Normandie . His work was purely decorative, designed as a background or accompaniment to other elements of the décor.

[ 82 ] The other painter closely associated with the style is Tamara de Lempicka . Born in Poland, she emigrated to Paris after the Russian Revolution . She studied under Maurice Denis and André Lhote , and borrowed many elements from their styles. She painted portraits in a realistic, dynamic and colourful Art Deco style.

[ 83 ] In the 1930s, a dramatic new form of Art Deco painting appeared in the United States. During the Great Depression, the Federal Art Project of the Works Progress Administration was created to give work to unemployed artists. Many were given the task of decorating government buildings, hospitals and schools. There was no specific Art Deco style used in the murals; artists engaged to paint murals in government buildings came from many different schools, from American regionalism to social realism ; they included Reginald Marsh , Rockwell Kent and the Mexican painter Diego Rivera . The murals were Art Deco because they were all decorative and related to the activities in the building or city where they were painted: Reginald Marsh and Rockwell Kent both decorated U.S. postal buildings, and showed postal employees at work while Diego Rivera depicted automobile factory workers for the Detroit Institute of Arts . Diego Rivera's mural Man at the Crossroads (1933) for 30 Rockefeller Plaza featured an unauthorized portrait of Lenin .

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] When Rivera refused to remove Lenin, the painting was destroyed and a new mural was painted by the Spanish artist Josep Maria Sert .

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] [ 88 ] Sculpture [ edit ] Monumental and public sculpture [ edit ] Gold detail on the façade of the Folies Bergère cabaret music hall in Paris, by Maurice Pico (1926) Christ the Redeemer , reinforced concrete and soapstone sculpture on Corcovado Mountain , Rio de Janeiro, by Paul Landowski (1931) Guardians of Traffic , pylon on Hope Memorial Bridge in Cleveland , Ohio, by Henry Hering and Frank Walker (1932) Britain , relief sculpture in the lobby of the former Daily Express Building in London , by Ronald Atkinson (1932) Spirit of Light or Spirit of Power , metal sculpture on the façade of the Niagara Mohawk Building in Syracuse, N.Y.

, by Clayton Frye (1932) Wisdom , portal decoration at the Rockefeller Center in New York City, by Lee Lawrie (1933) Polish coat of arms (unofficial) on the façade of the post office in Warsaw , by Julian Puterman-Sadłowski (1934) Atlas , bronze sculpture in front of the Rockefeller Center, by Lawrie (1936–37) Mail Delivery East , one of four bas-relief sculptures on the Nix Federal Building in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania, by Edmond Amateis (1937) Man Controlling Trade at the Federal Trade Commission Building in Washington, D.C.

, by Michael Lantz (1942) Sculpture was a very common and integral feature of Art Deco architecture. In France, allegorical bas-reliefs representing dance and music by Antoine Bourdelle decorated the earliest Art Deco landmark in Paris, the Théâtre des Champs-Élysées , in 1912. The 1925 Exposition had major sculptural works placed around the site, pavilions were decorated with sculptural friezes, and several pavilions devoted to smaller studio sculpture. In the 1930s, a large group of prominent sculptors made works for the 1937 Exposition Internationale des Arts et Techniques dans la Vie Moderne at Chaillot.

Alfred Janniot made the relief sculptures on the façade of the Palais de Tokyo. The Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris , and the esplanade in front of the Palais de Chaillot, facing the Eiffel Tower, was crowded with new statuary by Charles Malfray , Henry Arnold, and many others.

[ 89 ] Public Art Deco sculpture was almost always representational, usually of heroic or allegorical figures related to the purpose of the building or room. The themes were usually selected by the patrons, not the artist. Abstract sculpture for decoration was extremely rare.

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] In the United States, the most prominent Art Deco sculptor for public art was Paul Manship , who updated classical and mythological subjects and themes in an Art Deco style. His most famous work was the statue of Prometheus at Rockefeller Center in New York City, a 20th-century adaptation of a classical subject. Other important works for Rockefeller Center were made by Lee Lawrie , including the sculptural façade and the Atlas statue .

During the Great Depression in the United States, many sculptors were commissioned to make works for the decoration of federal government buildings, with funds provided by the WPA, or Works Progress Administration . They included sculptor Sidney Biehler Waugh, who created stylized and idealized images of workers and their tasks for federal government office buildings.

[ 92 ] In San Francisco, Ralph Stackpole provided sculpture for the façade of the new San Francisco Stock Exchange building. In Washington D.C., Michael Lantz made works for the Federal Trade Commission building.

In Britain, Deco public statuary was made by Eric Gill for the BBC Broadcasting House , while Ronald Atkinson decorated the lobby of the former Daily Express Building in London (1932).

One of the best known and certainly the largest public Art Deco sculpture is the Christ the Redeemer by the French sculptor Paul Landowski , completed between 1922 and 1931, located on a mountain top overlooking Rio de Janeiro , Brazil.

Studio sculpture [ edit ] Tête (front and side view), limestone, by Joseph Csaky ( c.

1920 ), Kröller-Müller Museum , Otterlo, Netherlands The Hunter by Pierre Le Faguays (1920s) Actaeon by Paul Manship (1925), in a temporary exhibition called  the "Jazz Age" at the Cleveland Museum of Art , US Speed , a design for a radiator ornament by Harriet Whitney Frishmuth (1925) The Flight of Europa , bronze with gold leaf, by Paul Manship (1925), Whitney Museum of American Art , New York City Tânără (Girl), bronze, ivory and onyx, by Demétre Chiparus ( c.

1925 ) Many early Art Deco sculptures were small, designed to decorate salons. One genre of this sculpture was called the Chryselephantine statuette, named for a style of ancient Greek temple statues made of gold and ivory. They were sometimes made of bronze, or sometimes with much more lavish materials, such as ivory, onyx , alabaster, and gold leaf.

One of the best-known Art Deco salon sculptors was the Romanian-born Demétre Chiparus , who produced colourful small sculptures of dancers. Other notable salon sculptors included Ferdinand Preiss , Josef Lorenzl , Alexander Kelety, Dorothea Charol and Gustav Schmidtcassel.

[ 93 ] Another important American sculptor in the studio format was Harriet Whitney Frishmuth , who had studied with Auguste Rodin in Paris.

Pierre Le Paguays was a prominent Art Deco studio sculptor, whose work was shown at the 1925 Exposition. He worked with bronze, marble, ivory, onyx, gold, alabaster and other precious materials.

[ 94 ] François Pompon was a pioneer of modern stylised animalier sculpture. He was not fully recognised for his artistic accomplishments until the age of 67 at the Salon d'Automne of 1922 with the work Ours blanc , also known as The White Bear , now in the Musée d'Orsay in Paris.

[ 95 ] Parallel with these Art Deco sculptors, more avant-garde and abstract modernist sculptors were at work in Paris and New York City. The most prominent were Constantin Brâncuși , Joseph Csaky , Alexander Archipenko , Henri Laurens , Jacques Lipchitz , Gustave Miklos , Jean Lambert-Rucki , Jan et Joël Martel , Chana Orloff and Pablo Gargallo .

[ 96 ] Graphic arts [ edit ] Program design for Afternoon of a Faun by Léon Bakst for Ballets Russes (1912) A Vanity Fair cover by Georges Lepape (1919) Interpretation of Harlem Jazz I by Winold Reiss ( c.

1920 ) Cover of Harper's Bazaar by Erté (1922) London Underground poster by Horace Taylor (1924) Moulin Rouge poster by Charles Gesmar (1925) Wear Jewelry - You Win by Ludwig Hohlwein (circa 1930) Cover of the Jester of Columbia , unattributed (1931) The Art Deco style appeared early in the graphic arts, in the years just before World War I. It appeared in Paris in the posters and the costume designs of Léon Bakst for the Ballets Russes, and in the catalogues of the fashion designers Paul Poiret.

[ 97 ] The illustrations of Georges Barbier , and Georges Lepape and the images in the fashion magazine La Gazette du bon ton perfectly captured the elegance and sensuality of the style. In the 1920s, the look changed; the fashions stressed were more casual, sportive and daring, with the woman models usually smoking cigarettes. American fashion magazines such as Vogue , Vanity Fair and Harper's Bazaar quickly picked up the new style and popularized it in the United States. It also influenced the work of American book illustrators such as Rockwell Kent. In Germany, the most famous poster artist of the period was Ludwig Hohlwein , who created colourful and dramatic posters for music festivals, beers, and, late in his career, for the Nazi Party.

[ 98 ] During the Art Nouveau period, posters usually advertised theatrical products or cabarets. In the 1920s, travel posters, made for steamship lines and airlines, became extremely popular. The style changed notably in the 1920s, to focus attention on the product being advertised. The images became simpler, precise, more linear, more dynamic, and were often placed against a single-color background. In France, popular Art Deco designers included Charles Loupot and Paul Colin , who became famous for his posters of American singer and dancer Josephine Baker . Jean Carlu designed posters for Charlie Chaplin movies, soaps, and theatres; in the late 1930s he emigrated to the United States, where, during the World War, he designed posters to encourage war production. The designer Charles Gesmar became famous making posters for the singer Mistinguett and for Air France . Among the best-known French Art Deco poster designers was Cassandre , who made the celebrated poster of the ocean liner SS Normandie in 1935.

[ 98 ] In the 1930s a new genre of posters appeared in the United States during the Great Depression. The Federal Art Project hired American artists to create posters to promote tourism and cultural events.

[ 99 ] Architecture [ edit ] "Art Deco Architecture" redirects here. For the book by Patricia Bayer, see Art Deco Architecture: Design, Decoration and Detail from the Twenties and Thirties .

See also: List of Art Deco architecture La Samaritaine department store in Paris by Henri Sauvage (1925–1928) Los Angeles City Hall by John Parkinson , John C. Austin , and Albert C. Martin Sr.

(1928) Entrance of the Eastern Columbia Building in Los Angeles , California, by Claud Beelman (1930) Entrance of the Villa Empain in Ixelles (Brussels) by Michel Polak (1930–1934) Cincinnati Union Terminal in Cincinnati , Ohio, by Alfred T. Fellheimer and Roland A. Wank (1933) The Grace Building , Sydney , by Morrow and Gordon (1928-1930) Church of St. Joan of Arc in Nice , France, by Jacques Droz (1934) National Diet Building in Tokyo , after a design by Watanabe Fukuzo (1936) Mayakovskaya Metro Station in Moscow by Alexey Dushkin (1936) Bank of São Paulo Building in São Paulo , Brazil by Álvaro de Arruda Botelho (1938) Styles [ edit ] The architectural style of Art Deco made its debut in Paris in 1903–04, with the construction of two apartment buildings in Paris, one by Auguste Perret on rue Benjamin Franklin and the other on rue Trétaigne by Henri Sauvage. The two young architects used reinforced concrete for the first time in Paris residential buildings; the new buildings had clean lines, rectangular forms, and no decoration on the façades; they marked a clean break with the art nouveau style.

[ 100 ] Between 1910 and 1913, Perret used his experience in concrete apartment buildings to construct the Théâtre des Champs-Élysées, 15 avenue Montaigne . Between 1925 and 1928 Sauvage constructed the new Art Deco façade of La Samaritaine department store in Paris.

[ 101 ] The Art Deco style was not limited to buildings on land; the ocean liner SS Normandie , whose first voyage was in 1935, featured Art Deco design, including a dining room whose ceiling and decoration were made of glass by Lalique .

[ 102 ] Art Deco architecture is sometimes classified into three types: Zigzag [Moderne] (aka Jazz Moderne [ 103 ] ); Classic Moderne; and Streamline Moderne .

[ 104 ] Zigzag Moderne [ edit ] Main article: Zigzag Moderne Zigzag Moderne (aka Jazz Moderne ) was the first style to arrive in the United States. " Zigzag " refers to the stepping of the outline of a skyscraper to exaggerate its height, [ 104 ] [ 103 ] and was mainly used for large public and commercial buildings, in particular hotels, movie theaters, restaurants, skyscrapers, and department stores.

[ 105 ] Classic Moderne [ edit ] Classic Moderne has a more graceful appearance, and there is less ornamentation. Classic Moderne is also sometimes referred to as PWA ( Public Works Administration ) Moderne or Depression Moderne, as it was undertaken by the PWA during the Great Depression .

[ 105 ] [ 103 ] [ 104 ] Streamline Moderne [ edit ] Main article: Streamline Moderne In the late 1930s, a new variety of Art Deco architecture became common; it was called Streamline Moderne or simply Streamline, or, in France, the Style Paquebot , or Ocean Liner style. Buildings in the style had rounded corners and long horizontal lines; they were built of reinforced concrete and were almost always white; and they sometimes had nautical features, such as railings and portholes that resembled those on a ship. The rounded corner was not entirely new; it had appeared in Berlin in 1923 in the Mossehaus by Erich Mendelsohn , and later in the Hoover Building , an industrial complex in the London suburb of Perivale . In the United States, it became most closely associated with transport; Streamline moderne was rare in office buildings but was often used for bus stations and airport terminals, such as the terminal at La Guardia airport in New York City that handled the first transatlantic flights, via the PanAm Clipper flying boats; and in roadside architecture, such as gas stations and diners. In the late 1930s a series of diners, modelled upon streamlined railroad cars, were produced and installed in towns in New England; at least two examples still remain and are now registered historic buildings.

[ 106 ] The nautical-style rounded corner of Broadcasting House in London (1931) The Bournemouth Daily Echo building in Bournemouth , England, by Seal and Hardy (1932) Building in the Paquebot or ocean liner style, at 3, boulevard Victor, Paris, by Pierre Patout (1935) Pan-Pacific Auditorium in Los Angeles , California, by Wurdeman & Becket (1936) The Marine Air Terminal at La Guardia Airport (1937) was New York City's terminal for the flights of Pan Am Clipper flying boats to Europe.

The Hoover Building canteen in Perivale in London's suburbs, by Wallis, Gilbert and Partners (1938) Former Belgian National Institute of Radio Broadcasting in Ixelles (Brussels) by Joseph Diongre (1938) The Ford Pavilion at the 1939 New York World's Fair Streamline Moderne church, First Church of Deliverance in Chicago , Illinois, by Walter T. Bailey (1939). Towers added in 1948.

Building types [ edit ] Skyscrapers [ edit ] The American Radiator Building in New York City by Raymond Hood (1924) Carbide & Carbon Building in Chicago , Illinois, by Burnham Brothers (1929) Chrysler Building in New York City by William Van Alen (1930) The Times Square Building in Rochester, NY by Ralph Thomas Walker (1930) The Lefcourt Building (1930) by Frank Grad and the National Newark Building by John H. & Wilson C. Ely (1933) in Newark, NJ Empire State Building in New York City by Shreve, Lamb & Harmon (1931) Gulf Tower in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania, by Trowbridge & Livingston and Edward Mellon (1932) Crown of the General Electric Building (also known as 570 Lexington Avenue) in New York City by Cross & Cross (1933) 30 Rockefeller Plaza , now the Comcast Building, in New York City by Raymond Hood (1933) Altino Arantes Building in São Paulo by Plinio Botelho do Amaral (1947) Kimpton hotel in Shinjuku, Tokyo (2020) American skyscrapers marked the summit of the Art Deco style; they became the tallest and most recognizable modern buildings in the world, designed to show the prestige of their builders through height, shape, their color, and dramatic illumination at night.

[ 107 ] The American Radiator Building by Raymond Hood (1924) combined Gothic and Deco modern elements in the design of the building. Black brick on the frontage of the building (symbolizing coal) was selected to give an idea of solidity and to give the building a solid mass. Other parts of the façade were covered in gold bricks (symbolizing fire), and the entry was decorated with marble and black mirrors. Another early Art Deco skyscraper was Detroit's Guardian Building , which opened in 1929. Designed by modernist Wirt C. Rowland , the building was the first to employ stainless steel as a decorative element, and the extensive use of colored designs in place of traditional ornaments.

New York City's skyline was radically changed by the Chrysler Building in Manhattan (completed in 1930), designed by William Van Alen . It was a giant seventy-seven-floor tall advertisement for Chrysler automobiles. The top was crowned by a stainless steel spire, and was ornamented by deco "gargoyles" in the form of stainless steel radiator cap decorations. The base of the tower, thirty-three stories above the street, was decorated with colorful Art Deco friezes, and the lobby was decorated with Art Deco symbols and images expressing modernity.

[ 108 ] The Chrysler Building was soon surpassed in height by the Empire State Building by William F. Lamb (1931), in a slightly less lavish Deco style and the RCA Building (now 30 Rockefeller Plaza) by Raymond Hood (1933) which together completely changed New York City's skyline. The tops of the buildings were decorated with Art Deco crowns and spires covered with stainless steel, and, in the case of the Chrysler building, with Art Deco gargoyles modeled after radiator ornaments, while the entrances and lobbies were lavishly decorated with Art Deco sculpture, ceramics, and design. Similar buildings, though not quite as tall, soon appeared in Chicago and other large American cities. Rockefeller Center added a new design element: several tall buildings grouped around an open plaza, with a fountain in the middle.

[ 109 ] Across the Hudson River , Art Deco style skyscrapers were constructed in Newark, New Jersey in the '20s and '30s, namely the New Jersey Bell Headquarters (completed in 1929), designed by Ralph Thomas Walker ; the Lefcourt Building (completed in 1930), designed by Frank Grad ; and the National Newark Building (completed in 1933), designed by John H. & Wilson C. Ely .

John Cotton Dana , head of the Newark Public Library during this period, remarked contemporaneously that these skyscrapers transformed Newark from a "huge, uncouth and unthinking industrial Frankenstein monster into a place of refinement." [ 110 ] "Cathedrals of Commerce" [ edit ] The Fisher Building in Detroit , Michigan, by Joseph Nathaniel French (1928) Lower lobby of the Guardian Building in Detroit by Wirt Rowland (1929) Lobby of 450 Sutter Street in San Francisco , California, by Timothy Pflueger (1929) Lobby of the Chrysler Building in New York City, by William Van Alen (1930) Interior door in the Chrysler Building (1930) Ceiling and chandelier detail on the lobby of the Carew Tower in Cincinnati , Ohio, by Walter W. Ahlschlager (1930) Foyer of the Tuschinski Theatre in Amsterdam by Hijman Louis de Jong (1921) The grand showcases of American Art Deco interior design were the lobbies of government buildings, theaters, and particularly office buildings. Interiors were extremely colorful and dynamic, combining sculpture, murals, and ornate geometric design in marble, glass, ceramics and stainless steel. An early example was the Fisher Building in Detroit, by Joseph Nathaniel French ; the lobby was highly decorated with sculpture and ceramics. The Guardian Building (originally the Union Trust Building) in Detroit, by Wirt Rowland (1929), decorated with red and black marble and brightly colored ceramics, highlighted by highly polished steel elevator doors and counters. The sculptural decoration installed in the walls illustrated the virtues of industry and saving; the building was immediately termed the "Cathedral of Commerce". The Medical and Dental Building called 450 Sutter Street in San Francisco by Timothy Pflueger was inspired by Mayan architecture, in a highly stylized form; it used pyramid shapes, and the interior walls were covered with highly stylized rows of hieroglyphs.

[ 111 ] In France, the best example of an Art Deco interior during this period was the Palais de la Porte Dorée (1931) by Albert Laprade , Léon Jaussely and Léon Bazin . The building (now the National Museum of Immigration, with an aquarium in the basement) was built for the Paris Colonial Exposition of 1931, to celebrate the people and products of French colonies. The exterior façade was entirely covered with sculpture, and the lobby created an Art Deco harmony with a wood parquet floor in a geometric pattern, a mural depicting the people of French colonies; and a harmonious composition of vertical doors and horizontal balconies.

[ 111 ] Movie palaces [ edit ] Tuschinski Theatre in Amsterdam by Hijman Louis de Jong and Willem Kromhout (1921) Grauman's Egyptian Theatre in Hollywood (Los Angeles) , California, by Meyer & Holler (1922) Four-story high grand lobby of the Paramount Theatre in Oakland , California, by Timothy Pflueger (1932) Auditorium and stage of Radio City Music Hall in New York City by Edward Durell Stone and Donald Deskey (1932) Grand Rex in Paris by Auguste Bluysen, John Eberson , Henri-Édouard Navarre and Maurice Dufrêne (1932) The Paramount in Shanghai , China, by S. J. Young (1933) Gaumont State Cinema in London by George Coles (1937) Many of the best surviving examples of Art Deco are cinemas built in the 1920s and 1930s. The Art Deco period coincided with the conversion of silent films to sound, and movie companies built large display destinations in major cities to capture the huge audience that came to see movies. Movie palaces in the 1920s often combined exotic themes with Art Deco style; Grauman's Egyptian Theatre in Hollywood (1922) was inspired by ancient Egyptian tombs and pyramids , while the Fox Theater in Bakersfield, California attached a tower in California Mission style to an Art Deco Hall. The largest of all is Radio City Music Hall in New York City, which opened in 1932. Originally designed as theatrical performance space, it quickly transformed into a cinema, which could seat 6,015 customers. The interior design by Donald Deskey used glass, aluminum, chrome, and leather to create a visual escape from reality. The Paramount Theatre in Oakland, California, by Timothy Pflueger, had a colorful ceramic façade, a lobby four stories high, and separate Art Deco smoking rooms for gentlemen and ladies. Similar grand palaces appeared in Europe. The Grand Rex in Paris (1932), with its imposing tower, was the largest cinema in Europe after the 6,000 seats of the Gaumont-Palace (1931–1973). The Gaumont State Cinema in London (1937) had a tower modelled on the Empire State building, covered with cream ceramic tiles and an interior in an Art Deco-Italian Renaissance style. The Paramount Theatre in Shanghai, China (1933) was originally built as a dance hall called The gate of 100 pleasures ; it was converted to a cinema after the Communist Revolution in 1949, and now is a ballroom and disco. In the 1930s Italian architects built a small movie palace, the Cinema Impero, in Asmara in what is now Eritrea. Today, many of the movie theatres have been subdivided into multiplexes, but others have been restored and are used as cultural centres in their communities.

[ 112 ] Decoration and motifs [ edit ] Birds – Quai d'Orsay no. 55 in Paris, designed by Louis-Hippolyte Boileau and carved by Léon Binet (1913) Allegorical representations – Pediment of the Mihai Zisman House (Calea Călărașilor no. 44) in Bucharest , by Soru (1920) Stylized flowers (especially spiral flowers and converging fascicles) – Architectural element for the Parfumerie d'Orsay in Paris, by Georges Béal (1922) The urn – Corner cabinet made of mahogany with rose basket design of inlaid ivory, by Jacques-Émile Ruhlmann (1923), Brooklyn Museum , New York City The flower basket – Balconies and pediment of Avenue Montaigne no. 41 in Paris, unknown architect or sculptor (1924) [ 113 ] Repeating patterns – Decorative ironwork of the Madison Belmont Building (Madison Avenue no. 181–183) in New York City, by Ferrobrandt (1925) [ 114 ] The papyrus flower – Porte d'honneur, at the International Exhibition of Modern Decorative and Industrial Arts in Paris, by Edgar Brandt (1925) [ 115 ] The foliage scroll – Elevator doors, by Brandt (1926), wrought iron, glass, patinated and gilded bronze, Calouste Gulbenkian Museum , Lisbon [ 116 ] Simplified reinterpretations of the Doric columns (with a basic rectangular capital or base, or just as a shaft) – Grave of Gustave Simon in Préville Cemetery , Nancy, France, unknown architect (after 1926) Decoration not just through ornaments, but also through combinations of volumes - Withuis ( Avenue Charles Woeste no. 183) in Brussels , Belgium, by Joseph Diongre (1927) [ 117 ] Ingenious games of light and darkness – Stage design for Meșterul Manole (The Master Builder Manole), by Victor Feodorov (1927–28), collection of the National Theatre , Bucharest The octagon-shaped medallion – Sign of the La Samaritaine department store in Paris, by Henri Sauvage (1928) [ 118 ] Mosaics – Maison bleue (Rue d'Alsace no. 28) in Angers , France, designed by Roger Jusserand , and decorated with mosaics by the Odorico fréres (1928) Vertical mouldings – Greybrook House ( Brook Street no. 28) in London , by Sir John Burnet & Partners (1928–29) [ 119 ] Horizontal mouldings – Atlantic Huis (Westplein no. 51) in Rotterdam , by P.G. Buskens (1928–1930) The stepped motif – Entrance hall of the Chrysler Building in New York City, by William Van Allen (1928–1930) The artesian fountain – Lamp, by Paul Kiss ( c.

1930 ), glass and metal, in a temporary exhibition called  the "Jazz Age" at the Cleveland Museum of Art , US The cornucopia – Avenue des Champs-Élysées no. 77 in Paris, unknown architect ( c.

1930 ) Complex zigzags – Foot of a console table, by Paul Fehér ( c.

1930 ), metal, in a temporary exhibition called  the "Jazz Age" at the Cleveland Museum of Art Streamlining – Rue Gramme no. 17–21 in Paris, by Marcel Chappey (1930) The sunburst – Detail above the entrance of the Eastern Columbia Building (S. Broadway no. 849) in L.A., by Claud Beelman (1930) An aesthetic of artificial lighting – Maison de France (now showroom for Louis Vuitton ), Avenue des Champs-Élysées no. 101 in Paris, by Louis-Hippolyte Boileau and Charles-Henri Besnard (1931) [ 120 ] Ziggurat – Union Hotel (Strada Ion Câmpineanu no. 11) in Bucharest, by Arghir Culina (1931) [ 120 ] Vertical and horizontal luminous surfaces – Entrance hall of the Villa Cavrois in Croix , France, by Rob Mallet-Stevens (1932) [ 121 ] The undulating line – Relief on the Grave of the Străjescu Family in Bellu Cemetery , Bucharest, by George Cristinel (1934) [ 122 ] Decorative stylized lettering – Edificio del Parque in Mexico City , by Ernesto Buenrostro (1935) Decoration in the Art Deco period went through several distinct phases. Between 1910 and 1920, as Art Nouveau was exhausted, design styles saw a return to tradition, particularly in the work of Paul Iribe. In 1912 André Vera published an essay in the magazine L'Art Décoratif calling for a return to the craftsmanship and materials of earlier centuries and using a new repertoire of forms taken from nature, particularly baskets and garlands of fruit and flowers. A second tendency of Art Deco, also from 1910 to 1920, was inspired by the bright colours of the artistic movement known as the Fauves and by the colourful costumes and sets of the Ballets Russes. This style was often expressed with exotic materials such as sharkskin, mother of pearl, ivory, tinted leather, lacquered and painted wood, and decorative inlays on furniture that emphasized its geometry. This period of the style reached its high point in the 1925 Paris Exposition of Decorative Arts. In the late 1920s and the 1930s, the decorative style changed, inspired by new materials and technologies. It became sleeker and less ornamental. Furniture, like architecture, began to have rounded edges and to take on a polished, streamlined look, taken from the streamline modern style. New materials, such as nickel or chrome-plated steel, aluminium and bakelite , an early form of plastic, began to appear in furniture and decoration.

[ 123 ] Throughout the Art Deco period, and particularly in the 1930s, the motifs of the décor expressed the function of the building. Theatres were decorated with sculpture which illustrated music, dance, and excitement; power companies showed sunrises, the Chrysler building showed stylized hood ornaments; The friezes of Palais de la Porte Dorée at the 1931 Paris Colonial Exposition showed the faces of the different nationalities of French colonies. The Streamline style made it appear that the building itself was in motion. The WPA murals of the 1930s featured ordinary people; factory workers, postal workers, families and farmers, in place of classical heroes.

[ 124 ] Curvy – Avenue Montaigne no. 26, Paris, by Louis Duhayon and Marcel Julien (1937) [ 53 ] Angular – Entrance of the Chrysler Building in New York City, by William Van Allen (1928–1930) Asymmetric - Ministry of Justice ( Bulevardul Regina Elisabeta no. 53), Bucharest, by Constantin Iotzu (1929–1932) Symmetric – Rue Chomel no. 14, Paris, designed by Émile Boursier and sculpted by Raymond Delamarre (1934) Maximalist – Fire screen, by Edgar Brandt (1925), wrought iron, in a temporary exhibition called the " Jazz Age " at the Cleveland Museum of Art , US Minimalist – William K. Nakamura Federal Courthouse in Seattle , US, by Gilbert Stanley Underwood (1940) Art Deco, like the complex times that engendered it, can best be characterized by a series of contradictions: minimalist vs maximalist, angular vs fluid, ziggurat vs streamline, symmetrical vs irregular, to name a few. The iconography chosen by Art Deco artists to express the period is also laden with contradictions. Fair maidens in 18th-century dress seem to coexist with chic sophisticated ladies and recumbent nudes, and flashes of lightning illuminate stylized rosebuds.

[ 125 ] Furniture [ edit ] Chair by Paul Follot (1912–1914) Armchair by Louis Süe (1912) and painted screen by André Mare (1920) Dressing table and chair of marble and encrusted, lacquered, and gilded wood by Follot (1919–20) Corner cabinet of Mahogany with rose basket design of inlaid ivory by Émile-Jacques Ruhlmann (1923) Cabinet covered with shagreen or sharkskin by André Groult (1925) Cabinet by Ruhlmann (1926) Cabinet design by Ruhlmann Furniture by Gio Ponti (1927) Desk of an administrator, by Michel Roux-Spitz for the 1930 Salon of Decorative Artists Art Deco club chair (1930s) Late Art Deco furniture and rug by Jules Leleu (1930s) A Waterfall style buffet table French furniture from 1910 until the early 1920s was largely an updating of French traditional furniture styles, and the art nouveau designs of Louis Majorelle , Charles Plumet and other manufacturers. French furniture manufacturers felt threatened by the growing popularity of German manufacturers and styles, particularly the Biedermeier style, which was simple and clean-lined. The French designer Frantz Jourdain, the president of the Paris Salon d'Automne, invited designers from Munich to participate in the 1910 Salon. French designers saw the new German style and decided to meet the German challenge. The French designers decided to present new French styles in the Salon of 1912. The rules of the Salon indicated that only modern styles would be permitted. All of the major French furniture designers took part in Salon: Paul Follot, Paul Iribe, Maurice Dufrêne, André Groult, André Mare and Louis Suë took part, presenting new works that updated the traditional French styles of Louis XVI and Louis Philippe with more angular corners inspired by Cubism and brighter colours inspired by Fauvism and the Nabis.

[ 126 ] The painter André Mare and furniture designer Louis Süe both participated the 1912 Salon. After the war the two men joined to form their own company, formally called the Compagnie des Arts Française , but usually known simply as Suë and Mare. Unlike the prominent art nouveau designers like Louis Majorelle, who personally designed every piece, they assembled a team of skilled craftsmen and produced complete interior designs, including furniture, glassware, carpets, ceramics, wallpaper and lighting. Their work featured bright colors and furniture and fine woods, such as ebony encrusted with mother of pearl, abalone and silvered metal to create bouquets of flowers. They designed everything from the interiors of ocean liners to perfume bottles for the label of Jean Patou .The firm prospered in the early 1920s, but the two men were better craftsmen than businessmen. The firm was sold in 1928, and both men left.

[ 127 ] The most prominent furniture designer at the 1925 Decorative Arts Exposition was Émile-Jacques Ruhlmann , from Alsace. He first exhibited his works at the 1913 Autumn Salon, then had his own pavilion, the "House of the Rich Collector", at the 1925 Exposition. He used only most rare and expensive materials, including ebony , mahogany , rosewood , ambon and other exotic woods, decorated with inlays of ivory, tortoise shell, mother of pearl, Little pompoms of silk decorated the handles of drawers of the cabinets.

[ 128 ] His furniture was based upon 18th-century models, but simplified and reshaped. In all of his work, the interior structure of the furniture was completely concealed. The framework usually of oak, was completely covered with an overlay of thin strips of wood, then covered by a second layer of strips of rare and expensive woods. This was then covered with a veneer and polished, so that the piece looked as if it had been cut out of a single block of wood. Contrast to the dark wood was provided by inlays of ivory, and ivory key plates and handles. According to Ruhlmann, armchairs had to be designed differently according to the functions of the rooms where they appeared; living room armchairs were designed to be welcoming, office chairs comfortable, and salon chairs voluptuous. Only a small number of pieces of each design of furniture was made, and the average price of one of his beds or cabinets was greater than the price of an average house.

[ 129 ] Jules Leleu was a traditional furniture designer who moved smoothly into Art Deco in the 1920s; he designed the furniture for the dining room of the Élysée Palace , and for the first-class cabins of the steamship Normandie . his style was characterized by the use of ebony, Macassar wood, walnut, with decoration of plaques of ivory and mother of pearl. He introduced the style of lacquered Art Deco furniture in the late 1920s, and in the late 1930s introduced furniture made of metal with panels of smoked glass.

[ 130 ] In Italy, the designer Gio Ponti was famous for his streamlined designs.

The costly and exotic furniture of Ruhlmann and other traditionalists infuriated modernists, including the architect Le Corbusier, causing him to write a famous series of articles denouncing the arts décoratif style. He attacked furniture made only for the rich and called upon designers to create furniture made with inexpensive materials and modern style, which ordinary people could afford. He designed his own chairs, created to be inexpensive and mass-produced.

[ 131 ] In the 1930s, furniture designs adapted to the form, with smoother surfaces and curved forms. The masters of the late style included Donald Deskey, who was one of the most influential designers; he created the interior of the Radio City Music Hall. He used a mixture of traditional and very modern materials, including aluminium, chrome, and bakelite, an early form of plastic.

[ 132 ] Other top designers of Art Deco furniture of the 1930s in the United States included Gilbert Rohde , Warren McArthur , and Kem Weber .

The Waterfall style was popular in the 1930s and 1940s, the most prevalent Art Deco form of furniture at the time. Pieces were typically of plywood finished with blond veneer and with rounded edges, resembling a waterfall.

[ 133 ] Design [ edit ] Main article: Streamline Moderne Parker Duofold desk set ( c.

1930 ) Beau Brownie camera, design by Walter Dorwin Teague for Eastman Kodak (1930) Philips radio set (1931) Chrysler Airflow sedan , designed by Carl Breer (1934) Bugatti Aérolithe (1936) Philco table radio ( c.

1937 ) Electrolux vacuum cleaner (1937) Cord automobile model 812, designed by Gordon M. Buehrig and staff (1937) Phantom Corsair , designed by Rust Heinz (1938) New York Central 's 20th Century Limited Hudson 4-6-4 Streamlined locomotive ( c.

1939 ) Streamline was a variety of Art Deco which emerged during the mid-1930s. It was influenced by modern aerodynamic principles developed for aviation and ballistics to reduce aerodynamic drag at high velocities. The bullet shapes were applied by designers to cars, trains, ships, and even objects not intended to move, such as refrigerators , gas pumps , and buildings.

[ 61 ] One of the first production vehicles in this style was the Chrysler Airflow of 1933. It was unsuccessful commercially, but the beauty and functionality of its design set a precedent; meant modernity. It continued to be used in car design well after World War II.

[ 134 ] [ 135 ] [ 136 ] [ 137 ] New industrial materials began to influence the design of cars and household objects. These included aluminium, chrome , and bakelite , an early form of plastic. Bakelite could be easily moulded into different forms, and soon was used in telephones, radios and other appliances.

Grand dining room of the ocean liner SS Normandie by Pierre Patout (1935); bas-reliefs by Raymond Delamarre Ocean liners also adopted a style of Art Deco, known in French as the Style Paquebot , or "Ocean Liner Style". The most famous example was the SS Normandie , which made its first transatlantic trip in 1935. It was designed particularly to bring wealthy Americans to Paris to shop. The cabins and salons featured the latest Art Deco furnishings and decoration. The Grand Salon of the ship, which was the restaurant for first-class passengers, was bigger than the Hall of Mirrors of the Palace of Versailles . It was illuminated by electric lights within twelve pillars of Lalique crystal; thirty-six matching pillars lined the walls. This was one of the earliest examples of illumination being directly integrated into architecture. The style of ships was soon adapted to buildings. A notable example is found on the San Francisco waterfront, where the Maritime Museum building, built as a public bath in 1937, resembles a ferryboat, with ship railings and rounded corners. The Star Ferry Terminal in Hong Kong also used a variation of the style.

[ 37 ] Textiles [ edit ] Abundance textile design by André Mare (1911), Metropolitan Museum of Art , New York City Design of birds from Les Ateliers de Martine by Paul Iribe (1918) Rose pattern textiles designed by Mare ( c.

1919 ), Metropolitan Museum of Art Rose Mousse pattern for upholstery, cotton and silk (1920), Metropolitan Museum of Art Textiles were an important part of the Art Deco style, in the form of colourful wallpaper, upholstery and carpets, In the 1920s, designers were inspired by the stage sets of the Ballets Russes , fabric designs and costumes from Léon Bakst and creations by the Wiener Werkstätte . The early interior designs of André Mare featured brightly coloured and highly stylized garlands of roses and flowers, which decorated the walls, floors, and furniture. Stylized Floral motifs also dominated the work of Raoul Dufy and Paul Poiret , and in the furniture designs of J.E. Ruhlmann. The floral carpet was reinvented in Deco style by Paul Poiret .

[ 138 ] The use of the style was greatly enhanced by the introduction of the pochoir stencil-based printing system, which allowed designers to achieve crispness of lines and very vivid colours. Art Deco forms appeared in the clothing of Paul Poiret , Charles Worth and Jean Patou . After World War I, exports of clothing and fabrics became one of the most important currency earners of France.

[ 139 ] Late Art Deco wallpaper and textiles sometimes featured stylized industrial scenes, cityscapes, locomotives and other modern themes, as well as stylized female figures, metallic finishes and geometric designs.

[ 139 ] Fashion [ edit ] Evening coat by Paul Poiret ( c.

1912 ), silk and metal, Metropolitan Museum of Art , New York City Evening dress from the Journal des Dames et des Modes , illustrated by George Barbier (1913), Chester Beatty Library , Dublin Illustration by Barbier of a gown by Paquin (1914). Stylised floral designs and bright colours were a feature of early Art Deco.

Cécile Sorel at the Comédie-Française (1920) Evening dress by the Maison Agnès (1920–1930), silk, pearls, strass, cabochon, and other materials, Musée Galliera , Paris Desiree Lubovska in a dress by Jean Patou ( c.

1921 ) Skirt by the Maison Agnès (1925–1927), silk, Musée Galliera Coco Chanel in a sailor's blouse and trousers (1928) Louise Brooks with an à la garçonne hairstyle, in a publicity photo for Diary of Lost Girl (1929) Advertisement for pyjamas in Lisières Fleuries fabric, from Le Jardin des Modes (1930) Fashion changed dramatically during this period, thanks in particular to designers Paul Poiret and later Coco Chanel . Poiret introduced the concept of draping , a departure from the tailoring and patternmaking of the past.

[ 140 ] He designed clothing cut along straight lines and constructed of rectangular motifs.

[ 140 ] His styles offered structural simplicity [ 140 ] The corseted look and formal styles of the previous period were abandoned, and fashion became more practical, and streamlined. With the use of new materials, brighter colours and printed designs.

[ 140 ] The designer Coco Chanel continued the transition, popularising the style of sporty, casual chic.

[ 141 ] A particular typology of the era was the Flapper , a woman who cut her hair into a short bob, drank cocktails, smoked in public, and danced late into the night at fashionable clubs, cabarets or bohemian dives. Of course, most women didn't live like this, the Flapper being more a character present in popular imagination than a reality. Another female Art Deco style was the androgynous garçonne of the 1920s, with flattened bosom, dispelled waist and revealed legs, reducing the silhouette to a short tube, topped with a head-hugging cloche hat.

[ 142 ] Jewelry [ edit ] Semaphore brooch by Gerard Sandoz, in platinum, coral, onyx, diamonds, 1925 Cigarette case of leather and gold leaf by Pierre Legrain (1922), presenting a polychrome geometric decoration, Metropolitan Museum of Art , New York City Bracelet of gold, coral and jade (1925), Museum of Decorative Arts , Paris Gold buckle set with diamonds and carved onyx, lapis lazuli, jade, and coral, by Boucheron (1925) Molded glass pendants on silk cords by René Lalique (1925–1930) Mackay Emerald Necklace , emerald, diamond and platinum, by Cartier (1930), Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History , Washington, D.C.

In the 1920s and 1930s, designers including René Lalique and Cartier tried to reduce the traditional dominance of diamonds by introducing more colourful gemstones, such as small emeralds, rubies and sapphires. They also placed greater emphasis on very elaborate and elegant settings, featuring less-expensive materials such as enamel, glass, horn and ivory. Diamonds themselves were cut in less traditional forms; the 1925 Exposition saw many diamonds cut in the form of tiny rods or matchsticks. Other popular Art Deco cuts include: emerald cut, with long step-cut facets; asscher cut, more square-shaped than emerald with a high crown and the first diamond cut to ever be patented; marquise cut, to give the illusion of being bigger and bolder; baguette cut: small, rectangular step-cut shapes often used to outline bolder stones; [ 143 ] old European cut, round in shape and cut by hand so sparks of color (called fire) flash from within the stone.

[ 144 ] The settings for diamonds also changed; More and more often jewellers used platinum instead of gold, since it was strong and flexible, and could set clusters of stones. Jewellers also began to use more dark materials, such as enamels and black onyx , which provided a higher contrast with diamonds.

[ 145 ] Jewellery became much more colourful and varied in style. Cartier and the firm of Boucheron combined diamonds with colourful other gemstones cut into the form of leaves, fruit or flowers, to make brooches, rings, earrings, clips and pendants. Far Eastern themes also became popular; plaques of jade and coral were combined with platinum and diamonds, and vanity cases, cigarette cases and powder boxes were decorated with Japanese and Chinese landscapes made with mother of pearl, enamel and lacquer.

[ 145 ] Rapidly changing fashions in clothing brought new styles of jewellery. Sleeveless dresses of the 1920s meant that arms needed decoration, and designers quickly created bracelets of gold, silver and platinum encrusted with lapis-lazuli, onyx, coral, and other colourful stones; Other bracelets were intended for the upper arms, and several bracelets were often worn at the same time. The short haircuts of women in the twenties called for elaborate deco earring designs. As women began to smoke in public, designers created very ornate cigarette cases and ivory cigarette holders. The invention of the wristwatch before World War I inspired jewelers to create extraordinary, decorated watches, encrusted with diamonds and plated with enamel, gold and silver. Pendant watches, hanging from a ribbon, also became fashionable.

[ 146 ] The established jewellery houses of Paris in the period, Cartier, Chaumet , Georges Fouquet, Mauboussin , and Van Cleef & Arpels all created jewellery and objects in the new fashion. The firm of Chaumet made highly geometric cigarette boxes, cigarette lighters, pillboxes and notebooks, made of hard stones decorated with jade , lapis lazuli , diamonds and sapphires. They were joined by many young new designers, each with his own idea of deco.

Raymond Templier designed pieces with highly intricate geometric patterns, including silver earrings that looked like skyscrapers. Gerard Sandoz was only 18 when he started to design jewelry in 1921; he designed many celebrated pieces based on the smooth and polished look of modern machinery. The glass designer René Lalique also entered the field, creating pendants of fruit, flowers, frogs, fairies or mermaids made of sculpted glass in bright colors, hanging on cords of silk with tassels.

[ 146 ] The jeweller Paul Brandt contrasted rectangular and triangular patterns, and embedded pearls in lines on onyx plaques.

Jean Despres made necklaces of contrasting colours by bringing together silver and black lacquer, or gold with lapis lazuli. Many of his designs looked like highly polished pieces of machines.

Jean Dunand was also inspired by modern machinery, combined with bright reds and blacks contrasting with polished metal.

[ 146 ] Suzanne Belperron contributed sculptural designs using materials like rock crystal and semi-precious stones, exploring the period's emphasis on non-traditional elements.

Jean Fouquet , influenced by Cubism, worked with materials such as ebony and chrome-plated steel, bringing a distinctly modernist approach to Art Deco jewelry.

[ 147 ] Other notable names in the Art Deco movement include Boucheron , Lacloche, and Danish silversmith Georg Jensen , known for his work with silver and less expensive gemstones. American jewelry houses such as Tiffany & Co.

, Black, Starr & Frost , and Marcus & Co.

also made significant contributions, producing pieces that included clocks and objets d'art, as well as jewelry.

[ 148 ] Glass art [ edit ] Bottles, unknown designer or producer (1920s) The Firebird by René Lalique (1922), Dayton Art Institute , US Parrot vase  by Lalique (1922), Cincinnati Art Museum , US Window for a steel mill office  by Louis Majorelle (1928), Grands bureaux des Aciéries de Longwy , Longlaville, France Skyscraper Lamp , designed by Arnaldo dell'Ira (1929), Arnaldo dell'Ira Collection Angular chandeliers by Lanchester & Lodge ( c.

1929–1936 ), Brotherton Library , University of Leeds, West Yorkshire, UK [ 149 ] Vase by Daum ( c.

1930–1935 ), Museum of Decorative Arts , Paris Stained glass windows by Jean Gaudin (1932–1934), Amiens Cathedral , Amiens, France Like the Art Nouveau period before it, Art Deco was an exceptional period for fine glass and other decorative objects designed to fit their architectural surroundings. The most famous producer of glass objects was René Lalique, whose works, from vases to hood ornaments for automobiles, became symbols of the period. He had experimented with glass before World War I, designing bottles for the perfumes of François Coty , but he did not begin serious production of art glass until after World War I. In 1918, at the age of 58, he bought a large glass works in Combs-la-Ville and began to manufacture both artistic and practical glass objects. He treated glass as a form of sculpture, creating statuettes, vases, bowls, lamps and ornaments. He used demi-crystal rather than lead crystal, which was softer and easier to form, though not as lustrous. He sometimes used coloured glass, but more often used opalescent glass, where part or the whole of the outer surface was stained with a wash. Lalique provided the decorative glass panels, lights and illuminated glass ceilings for the ocean liners SS Île de France in 1927 and the SS Normandie in 1935, and for some of the first-class sleeping cars of the French railroads. At the 1925 Exposition of Decorative Arts, he had his own pavilion, designed a dining room with a table setting and matching glass ceiling for the Sèvres Pavilion, and designed a glass fountain for the courtyard of the Cours des Métiers, a slender glass column which spouted water from the sides and was illuminated at night.

[ 150 ] Other notable Art Deco glass manufacturers included Marius-Ernest Sabino, who specialized in figurines, vases, bowls, and glass sculptures of fish, nudes, and animals. For these he often used an opalescent glass which could change from white to blue to amber, depending upon the light. His vases and bowls featured molded friezes of animals, nudes or busts of women with fruit or flowers. His work was less subtle but more colourful than that of Lalique.

[ 150 ] Other notable Deco glass designers included Edmond Etling , who also used bright opalescent colours, often with geometric patterns and sculpted nudes; Albert Simonet, and Aristide Colotte and Maurice Marinot , who was known for his deeply etched sculptural bottles and vases. The firm of Daum from the city of Nancy , which had been famous for its Art Nouveau glass, produced a line of Deco vases and glass sculpture, solid, geometric and chunky in form. More delicate multi-coloured works were made by Gabriel Argy-Rousseau, who produced delicately shaded vases with sculpted butterflies and nymphs, and Francois Decorchemont, whose vases were streaked and marbled.

[ 150 ] The Great Depression impacted on the decorative glass industry, which depended upon wealthy clients. Some artists turned to designing stained glass windows for churches. In 1937, the Steuben glass company began the practice of commissioning famous artists to produce glassware.

[ 150 ] Louis Majorelle , famous for his Art Nouveau furniture, designed a remarkable Art Deco stained glass window portraying steel workers for the offices of the Aciéries de Longwy , a steel mill in Longwy , France.

Amiens Cathedral has a rare example of Art Deco stained glass windows in the Chapel of the Sacred Heart, made in 1932–34 by the Paris glass artist Jean Gaudin based on drawings by Jacques Le Breton.

[ 151 ] Metal art [ edit ] A grill with two wings called The Pheasants , made by Paul Kiss and displayed at the 1925 Exposition of Decorative and Industrial Arts Iron and copper grill called Oasis by Edgar Brandt, displayed at the 1925 Paris Exposition Table mirror by Franz Hagenauer of Werkstätte Hagenauer Wien ( c.

1930 ) Cocktail set of chrome-plated steel by Norman Bel Geddes (1937) Art Deco artists produced a wide variety of practical objects in the Art Deco style, made of industrial materials from traditional wrought iron to chrome-plated steel. The American artist Norman Bel Geddes designed a cocktail set resembling a skyscraper made of chrome-plated steel. Raymond Subes designed an elegant metal grille for the entrance of the Palais de la Porte Dorée, the centre-piece of the 1931 Paris Colonial Exposition. The French sculptor Jean Dunand produced magnificent doors on the theme "The Hunt", covered with gold leaf and paint on plaster (1935).

[ 152 ] Animation [ edit ] Art Deco skyscrapers in Falling Hare (1943).

Art Deco visuals and imagery was used in multiple animated films including Batman , Night Hood , All's Fair at the Fair , Merry Mannequins , Page Miss Glory , Fantasia and Sleeping Beauty .

[ 153 ] The architecture is featured in the fictitious underwater city of Rapture in the BioShock video game series.

Art Deco visuals were an inspiration for the architecture of Iacon City in the animated science fiction film Transformers One .

[ 154 ] Art Deco architecture around the world [ edit ] Art Deco architecture began in Europe, but by 1939 there were examples in large cities on every continent and in almost every country. This is a selection of prominent buildings on each continent.

For a comprehensive list of existing buildings by country, see: List of Art Deco architecture .

Africa [ edit ] See also: List of Art Deco architecture in Africa Jardin Majorelle in Marrakesh , Morocco, by Paul Sinoir (1931) Fiat Tagliero Building in Asmara , Eritrea, by Giuseppe Pettazzi (1938) [ 155 ] St. Peter's Cathedral in Rabat , Morocco (1938) Railway Station in Ressano Garcia , Mozambique (1945) Most Art Deco buildings in Africa were built during European colonial rule, and often designed by Italian, French and Portuguese architects.

Asia [ edit ] See also: List of Art Deco architecture in Asia , Art Deco in Mumbai , and Art Deco in Kolkata Kologdam Building in Bandung , Indonesia (1920) Tokyo Metropolitan Teien Art Museum in Tokyo , Japan (1933) New India Assurance Building in Mumbai , India (1936) National Diet Building in Tokyo, Japan (1936) Ankara railway station in Ankara , Turkey (1937) Cebu Provincial Capitol in Cebu City , Philippines (1938) Dare House in Chennai , India (1940) General Post Office in Bangkok , Thailand (1940) Many Art Deco buildings in Asia were designed by European architects. But in the Philippines, local architects such as Juan Nakpil , Juan Arellano , Pablo Antonio and others were preeminent. Many Art Deco landmarks in Asia were demolished during the great economic expansion of Asia the late 20th century, but some notable enclaves of the architecture still remain, particularly in Shanghai and Mumbai .

The Indian Institute of Architects, founded in Mumbai in 1929, played a prominent role in propagating the Art Deco movement. In November 1937, this institute organised the 'Ideal Home Exhibition' held in the Town Hall in Mumbai which spanned over 12 days and attracted about one hundred thousand visitors. As a result, it was declared a success by the 'Journal of the Indian Institute of Architects'. The exhibits displayed the 'ideal', or better described as the most 'modern' arrangements for various parts of the house, paying close detail to avoid architectural blunders and present the most efficient and well-thought-out models. The exhibition focused on various elements of a home ranging from furniture, elements of interior decoration as well as radios and refrigerators using new and scientifically relevant materials and methods.

[ 156 ] Guided by their desire to emulate the west, the Indian architects were fascinated by the industrial modernity that Art Deco offered.

[ 156 ] The western elites were the first to experiment with the technologically advanced facets of Art Deco, and architects began the process of transformation by the early 1930s.

[ 156 ] Mumbai's expanding port commerce in the 1930s resulted in the growth of educated middle class population. It also saw an increase of people migrating to Mumbai in search of job opportunities. This led to the pressing need for new developments through Land Reclamation Schemes and construction of new public and residential buildings.

[ 157 ] Parallelly, the changing political climate in the country and the aspirational quality of the Art Deco aesthetics led to a whole-hearted acceptance of the building style in the city's development. Most of the buildings from this period can be seen spread throughout the city neighbourhoods in areas such as Churchgate, Colaba, Fort, Mohammed Ali Road, Cumbala Hill, Dadar, Matunga, Bandra and Chembur.

[ 158 ] [ 159 ] Australia and New Zealand [ edit ] See also: List of Art Deco buildings in Sydney , List of Art Deco buildings in Melbourne , List of Art Deco buildings in Tasmania , List of Art Deco buildings in Perth , and List of Art Deco architecture in Oceania Grace Building in Sydney , Australia (1930–31) Sound Shell in Napier , New Zealand (1931) Façade of the Castlemaine Art Museum , Australia (1931), architect Percy Meldrum, frieze by Orlando Dutton Elmslea Chambers in Goulburn , Australia (1933) Anzac Memorial in Sydney, Australia (1934) Holyman House in Launceston, Tasmania , Australia (1936) Century Building in Melbourne , Australia (1939) Melbourne and Sydney, Australia, have several notable Art Deco buildings, including the Manchester Unity Building and the former Russell Street Police Headquarters in Melbourne, the Castlemaine Art Museum in Castlemaine , central Victoria and the Grace Building , AWA Tower and Anzac Memorial in Sydney.

Several towns in New Zealand, including Napier and Hastings were rebuilt in Art Deco style after the 1931 Hawke's Bay earthquake , and many of the buildings have been protected and restored. Napier has been nominated for UNESCO World Heritage Site status, the first cultural site in New Zealand to be nominated.

[ 160 ] [ 161 ] Wellington has retained a sizeable number of Art Deco buildings.

[ 162 ] North America [ edit ] See also: List of Art Deco architecture in the Americas , List of Art Deco architecture in the United States , and Art Deco in the United States Verizon Building in New York City, US (1923–1927) Miami Art Deco District in South Beach , Florida, US (1925–1940s) KiMo Theater 's Pueblo Deco architecture in Albuquerque, New Mexico , US (1927) Bullocks Wilshire in Los Angeles , California, US (1929) The Price Building in Quebec City , Quebec, Canada (1930) Louisiana State Capitol in Baton Rouge, Louisiana , US (1930–1932) Buffalo City Hall in Buffalo, N.Y.

, US (1931) Jefferson County Courthouse in Beaumont, Texas , US (1931) Niagara Mohawk Building in Syracuse, N.Y.

, US (1932) Cincinnati Union Terminal in Cincinnati , Ohio, US (1933) Interior of the Palacio de Bellas Artes (Palace of Fine Arts) in Mexico City , Mexico (1934) Vancouver City Hall in Vancouver , British Columbia, Canada (1935) Edificio El Moro in Mexico City, Mexico (1936) Monumento a la Revolución in Mexico City, Mexico (1938) In Canada, surviving Art Deco structures are mainly in the major cities; Montreal , Toronto, Hamilton, Ontario , and Vancouver . They range from public buildings like Vancouver City Hall to commercial buildings ( College Park ) to public works ( R. C. Harris Water Treatment Plant ).

In Mexico, the most imposing Art Deco example is interior of the Palacio de Bellas Artes (Palace of Fine Arts), finished in 1934 with its elaborate décor and murals. Examples of Art Deco residential architecture can be found in the Condesa district, many designed by Francisco J. Serrano .

In the United States, Art Deco buildings are found from coast to coast, in all the major cities. It was most widely used for office buildings, train stations, airport terminals, and cinemas; residential buildings are rare. During the 1920s and 1930s architects in the Southwestern United States , particularly in the US state of New Mexico , combined Pueblo Revival with Territorial Style and Art Deco to create Pueblo Deco , as seen in the KiMo Theater in Albuquerque . In the 1930s, the more austere streamline style became popular. Many buildings were demolished between 1945 and the late 1960s, but then efforts began to protect the best examples. The City of Miami Beach established the Miami Beach Architectural District to preserve the fine collection of Art Deco buildings found there.

Central America and the Caribbean [ edit ] See also: List of Art Deco architecture in the Americas Art Deco buildings can be found throughout Central America, including in Cuba.

Bacardi Building in Havana , Cuba (1930) Hotel Nacional de Cuba in Havana, Cuba (1930) Lopez Serrano Building in Havana, Cuba (1932) A rundown Art Deco building in Havana, Cuba Plaza del Mercado de Ponce in Ponce, Puerto Rico , US (1941) Normandie Hotel in San Juan, Puerto Rico The Miami Building in San Juan, Puerto Rico Casa Presidencial in Guatemala City Europe [ edit ] See also: Art Deco in Paris , Art Deco in Brussels , and List of Art Deco architecture in Europe Théâtre des Champs-Élysées in Paris, France (1910–1913) Helsinki Central Station in Helsinki , Finland (1919) National Basilica of the Sacred Heart in Koekelberg (Brussels), Belgium (1919–1969) Mossehaus with Art Deco elements by Erich Mendelsohn in Berlin , Germany (1921–1923) Radio Kootwijk in Kootwijk , Netherlands (1927) Capitol Building in Madrid 's Gran Vía , Spain (1931) Milano Centrale railway station in Milan , Italy (1931) Galleria Vittorio Emanuele III in Messina , (1929) Éden Theatre in Lisbon , Portugal (1931) Embassy of France in Belgrade , Serbia (1933) Daily Express Building in Manchester , UK (1936–1939) Palais de Tokyo , Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris, France (1937) Ventilation tower of the Maastunnel in Rotterdam , Netherlands (1937) [ 163 ] Rivoli Theater in Porto , Portugal (1937) Mayakovskaya Station in Moscow , Russia (1938) The architectural style first appeared in Paris with the Théâtre des Champs-Élysées (1910–13) by Auguste Perret but then spread rapidly around Europe, until examples could be found in nearly every large city, from London to Moscow. In Germany two variations of Art Deco flourished in the 1920s and 30s: The Neue Sachlichkeit style and Expressionist architecture . Notable examples include Erich Mendelsohn's Mossehaus and Schaubühne in Berlin, Fritz Höger 's Chilehaus in Hamburg and his Kirche am Hohenzollernplatz in Berlin, the Anzeiger Tower [ de ] in Hanover and the Borsig Tower [ af ] in Berlin.

[ 164 ] One of the largest Art Deco buildings in Western Europe is the National Basilica of the Sacred Heart in Koekelberg , Brussels. In 1925, architect Albert van Huffel won the Grand Prize for Architecture with his scale model of the basilica at the Exposition Internationale des Arts Décoratifs et Industriels Modernes in Paris.

[ 165 ] Spain and Portugal have some striking examples of Art Deco buildings, particularly movie theaters. Examples in Portugal are the Capitólio Theater (1931) and the Éden Cine-Theatre (1937) in Lisbon , the Rivoli Theater (1937) and the Coliseu (1941) in Porto and the Rosa Damasceno Theater (1937) in Santarém . An example in Spain is the Cine Rialto in Valencia (1939).

During the 1930s, Art Deco had a noticeable effect on house design in the United Kingdom, [ 59 ] as well as the design of various public buildings.

[ 79 ] Straight, white-rendered house frontages rising to flat roofs, sharply geometric door surrounds and tall windows, as well as convex-curved metal corner windows, were all characteristic of that period.

[ 80 ] [ 166 ] [ 167 ] The London Underground is famous for many examples of Art Deco architecture, [ 168 ] and there are a number of buildings in the style situated along the Golden Mile in Brentford. Also in West London is the Hoover Building, which was originally built for The Hoover Company and was converted into a superstore in the early 1990s.

Bucharest , once known as the "Little Paris" of the 19th century, engaged in a new design after World War I, redirected its inspiration towards New York City. The 1930s brought a new fashion which echoed in the cinema, theatre, dancing styles, art and architecture. Bucharest during the 1930s was marked by more and more Art Deco architecture from the bigger boulevards like Bulevardul Magheru to the private houses and smaller districts. The Telephone Palace , an early landmark of modern Bucharest, was the first skyscraper of the city. It was the tallest building between 1933 and the 1950s, with a height of 52.5 metres (172 ft). The architects were Louis Weeks and Edmond van Saanen Algi and engineer Walter Troy. The Art Deco monuments are a crucial part of the character of Bucharest since they describe and mark an important period from its history, the interbellic life (World War I–World War II). Most of the buildings from those years are prone to catastrophe, as Bucharest is located in an earthquake zone.

[ 169 ] South America [ edit ] See also: List of Art Deco architecture in the Americas Biological Institute in São Paulo , Brazil (1924) Palacio Díaz in Montevideo , Uruguay (1929) Lacerda Elevator in Salvador, Bahia , Brazil (1930) Kavanagh Building in Buenos Aires , Argentina (1934–1936) Viaduto do Chá in São Paulo , Brazil (1938) Pacaembu Stadium in São Paulo, Brazil (1940) Palácio Duque de Caxias in Rio de Janeiro , Brazil (1941) Central do Brasil Station in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (1943) Abasto Market in Buenos Aires, Argentina ( c.

1945 ) Entrance of the Higher University of San Andrés in La Paz , Bolivia (1946) Palacio Municipal and fountain in Laprida (Buenos Aires), Argentina Art Deco in South America is especially present in countries that received a great wave of immigration in the first half of the 20th century, with notable works in their richest cities, like São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro in Brazil, Buenos Aires in Argentina and Montevideo in Uruguay.

[ 170 ] The Kavanagh Building in Buenos Aires (1934), by Sánchez, Lagos and de la Torre, was the tallest reinforced-concrete structure when it was completed and is a notable example of late Art Deco style.

Preservation and neo-Art Deco [ edit ] Viaduto do Chá in São Paulo , built in 1892, is a historical heritage of the city The Miami Beach Architectural District in Miami , Florida, protects historical Art Deco buildings.

Telephone Company Building on Calea Victoriei in Bucharest (1929–1934) by Walter Froy, Louis S. Weeks and Edmond van Saanen Algi , qualified as a monument istoric ( Romanian for historic monument ) Strada Romulus no. 75 in Bucharest (1930s) by unknown architect, in a state of decay U-Drop Inn , a roadside gas station and diner on U.S. Highway 66 in Shamrock, Texas (1936), now a historical monument Messeturm in Frankfurt , Germany, by Helmut Jahn (1990), a Postmodern building that is reminiscent of Art Deco architecture [ 171 ] Rue Henri Heine no. 3–5 in Paris by J.J. Ory (2001), a neo-Art Deco building [ 172 ] Smith Center for the Performing Arts in Las Vegas , Nevada, by David M. Schwarz (2012), a neo-Art Deco building The Brooklyn Tower , in New York City (2021), a major neo-Art Deco skyscraper Capella Hanoi in Vietnam (2021), a neo-Art Deco building In many cities, efforts have been made to protect the remaining Art Deco buildings. In many U.S. cities, historic Art Deco cinemas have been preserved and turned into cultural centres. Even more modest Art Deco buildings have been preserved as part of America's architectural heritage; an Art Deco café and gas station along Route 66 in Shamrock, Texas is an historic monument. The Miami Beach Architectural District protects several hundred old buildings, and requires that new buildings comply with the style. In Havana , Cuba, many Art Deco buildings have badly deteriorated. Efforts are underway to bring the buildings back to their original appearance.

In the 21st century, modern variants of Art Deco, called Neo Art Deco (or neo-Art Deco), have appeared in some American cities, inspired by the classic Art Deco buildings of the 1920s and 1930s.

[ 173 ] Examples include the NBC Tower in Chicago, inspired by 30 Rockefeller Plaza in New York City; the Smith Center for the Performing Arts in Las Vegas, Nevada, which includes Art Deco call backs to the Hoover Dam ; 99 Hudson in Jersey City, New Jersey , the state's tallest building and the 46th tallest in the United States , which features Art Deco-inspired limestone and glass lineation; and the Brooklyn Tower in Brooklyn, New York , the borough's tallest building and the 19th tallest in the country, with its black glass and bronze piping.

[ 173 ] [ 174 ] [ 175 ] [ 176 ] [ 177 ] [ 178 ] [ 179 ] Gallery [ edit ] Municipal Auditorium of Kansas City , Missouri: Hoit Price & Barnes, and Gentry, Voskamp & Neville (1935) Niagara Mohawk Building , Syracuse, N.Y.. Melvin L. King and Bley & Lyman, architects, completed in 1932 Palacio de Bellas Artes , Mexico City, Federico Mariscal, completed in 1934 Women's Smoking Room at the Paramount Theatre, Oakland .

Timothy L. Pflueger , architect (1931) Henryk Kuna , Rytm ("Rhythm"), in Skaryszewski Park, Warsaw , Poland (1925) Snowdon Theatre , Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Daniel J. Crighton, architect. Opened 1937, closed in 1984 Federal Art Project poster promoting milk drinking in Cleveland (1940) Lobby, Empire State Building , New York City.

William F. Lamb , opened in 1931 U.S.

Works Progress Administration poster, John Wagner, artist, ca. 1940 Rotunda ceiling of Union Terminal in Cincinnati , Ohio; Paul Philippe Cret , Alfred T. Fellheimer , Steward Wagner, Roland Wank (1933) U.S. postage stamp commemorating the 1939 New York World's Fair (1939) The Statue of Hygieia in Art Deco style in Kraków , Poland (1932) See also [ edit ] See also the categories Art Deco architecture , Art Deco ships , Art Deco sculptures and memorials , Art Deco architects , Art Deco artists , Art Deco designers , and Art Deco sculptors Roaring Twenties 1920s in Western fashion Années folles 1933 Chicago World's Fair Century of Progress 1936 Fair Park built for Texas Centennial Exposition Art Deco stamps References [ edit ] ^ McLaughlin, Katherine; Stamp, Elizabeth (26 June 2023).

"Art Deco Architecture: Everything You Need to Know" .

Architectural Digest . Retrieved 28 December 2023 .

^ Texier 2012 , p. 128.

^ a b Hillier 1968 , p. 12.

^ a b Benton, Benton & Wood 2003 , p. 16.

^ a b Criticos, Mihaela (2009).

Art Deco sau Modernismul Bine Temperat - Art Deco or Well-Tempered Modernism (in Romanian and English). SIMETRIA. pp. 14, 16.

ISBN 978-973-1872-03-2 .

^ "Miami Beach celebrates 100 years of Art Deco style, culture" . CBS news. 17 January 2025 . Retrieved 20 January 2025 .

^ Renaut, Christophe and Lazé, Christophe, Les Styles de l'architecture et du mobilier (2006), Editions Jean-Paul Gisserot, pp. 110–116 ^ Benton, Benton & Wood 2003 , pp. 13–28.

^ "M. Cunny présente une Note sur un procédé vitro-héliographique applicable aux arts décoratifs" Archived 20 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine , Bulletin de la Société française de photographie , Société française de photographie. Éditeur: Société française de photographie (Paris), 1858, Bibliothèque nationale de France, département Sciences et techniques, 8-V-1012 ^ "Enfin, dans les ateliers, on travaille à l'achèvement des objets d'art décoratifs, qui sont très nombreux" Archived 20 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine , Le Figaro , Éditeur: Figaro (Paris), 1869-09-18, no. 260, Bibliothèque nationale de France ^ L'Art décoratif à Limoges , La Voix de la province : Revue littéraire, artistique, agricole et commerciale, 1862 Archived 16 August 2018 at the Wayback Machine , (1862/04/01 (N1)-1863/01/01 (N12)), Bibliothèque francophone multimédia de Limoges, 2013-220524, Bibliothèque nationale de France ^ Revue des arts décoratifs (Paris), 1880–1902 Archived 20 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine , Bibliothèque nationale de France, département Sciences et techniques, 4-V-1113 ^ Les années "25": art déco, Bauhaus, Stijl, Esprit nouveau (in French). Musée des arts décoratifs. 1966.

^ Poulin, Richard (2012).

Graphic Design and Architecture, A 20th Century History: A Guide to Type, Image, Symbol, and Visual Storytelling in the Modern World . Rockport Publishers. p. 85.

ISBN 978-1-61058-633-7 .

^ Benton, Benton & Wood 2003 , p. 430.

^ Hillier, Bevis (1971).

The World of Art Deco: An Exhibition Organized by The Minneapolis Institute of Arts, June–September 1971 . E.P. Dutton.

ISBN 978-0-525-47680-1 .

^ Benton, Charlotte; Benton, Tim; Wood, Ghislaine (2010).

Art Déco dans le monde- 1910–39 . Renaissance du Livre. pp.

16– 17.

ISBN 9782507003906 .

^ Hope 2019 .

^ Cabanne 1986 , p. 225.

^ Texier 2019 , pp. 5–7.

^ Benton, Benton & Wood 2003 , pp. 165–170.

^ " Metropolitan Review, Volume 2 , Metropolitan Press Publications, 1989, p. 8" . 1989.

^ Campbell, Gordon, The Grove Encyclopedia of Decorative Arts , Oxford University Press, USA, 9 Nov 2006 Archived 6 December 2022 at the Wayback Machine , pp. 42 (Vera), 43 (Cartier), 243 (Christofle), 15, 515, 527 (Lalique), 13, 134 (Boucheron), ISBN 0195189485 ^ "Salon d'Automne 2012, exhibition catalogue" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 February 2018 . Retrieved 10 October 2016 .

^ a b Campbell, Gordon, The Grove Encyclopedia of Decorative Arts , Oxford University Press, USA, 9 Nov 2006 Archived 6 December 2022 at the Wayback Machine , pp. 42-43 ISBN 0195189485 ^ Laurent, Stephane, "L'artiste décorateur", in Art Deco, 1910–1939 by Charlotte Benton, Tim Benton and Ghislain Wood (2002), Renaissance du Livre, pages 165–171 ^ "Bergère - Adrien Karbowsky" .

www.musee-orsay.fr . Musee d'Orsay. Archived from the original on 8 January 2022 . Retrieved 8 January 2022 .

^ a b Arwas 1992 , pp. 51–55.

^ a b c d e Arwas, Victor; Russell, Frank (1980).

Art Deco . New York: Harry N. Abrams. Inc. pp. 21, 52, 85, 171– 184, 197– 198.

ISBN 0-8109-0691-0 .

^ a b c d Duncan, Alastair (1988).

The Encyclopedia of Art Deco, An Illustrative Guide to a Decorative Style from 1920 to 1939 . New York: E. P. Dutton. pp.

46– 47, 71, 73, 76, 82, 130.

ISBN 9780525246138 .

^ a b Mackrell, Alice (1990).

Paul Poiret . New York: Holmes & Meier. pp. 16, 56.

^ a b Hillier, Bevis (1983).

The style of the century, 1900–1980 . New York: Dutton. pp. 62, 67, 70.

^ Collins, Peter (1959).

Concrete: The Vision of a New Architecture . New York: Horizon Press.

^ Poisson 2009 , pp. 318–319.

^ Duncan, Alastair (2009).

Art Deco Complete: The Definitive Guide to the Decorative Arts of the 1920s and 1930s . Abrams.

ISBN 978-0-8109-8046-4 .

^ Loran, Erle (1963).

Cézanne's Composition: Analysis of His Form, with Diagrams and Photographs of His Motifs . University of California Press. p. 9.

ISBN 978-0-520-00768-0 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ a b c d e f g h Goss, Jared (June 2010).

"French Art Deco" . Metropolitan Museum of Art.

Archived from the original on 31 March 2022.

^ La Section d'or, 1912-1920-1925 , Cécile Debray, Françoise Lucbert, Musées de Châteauroux, Musée Fabre, exhibition catalogue, Éditions Cercle d'art, Paris, 2000 ^ Eve Blau, Nancy J. Troy, "The Maison Cubiste and the meaning of modernism in pre-1914 France", in Architecture and Cubism , Montreal, Cambridge, MA, London: MIT Press−Centre Canadien d'Architecture, 1998, pp. 17–40, ISBN 0-262-52328-0 ^ Nancy J. Troy, Modernism and the Decorative Arts in France: Art Nouveau to Le Corbusier , New Haven CT, and London: Yale University Press, 1991, pp. 79–102, ISBN 0-300-04554-9 ^ "Portraits of Architects- André Mare" site of the Cité de l'Architecture et du Patrimoine (in French) ^ Green, Christopher (2000).

"Chapter 8, Modern Spaces; Modern Objects; Modern People" .

Art in France, 1900–1940 . Yale University Press. p. 161.

ISBN 978-0-300-09908-9 .

^ André Mare, Salon Bourgeois, Salon d'Automne , The Literary Digest, Doom of the Antique , 30 November 1912, p. 1012 ^ The Sun (New York, N.Y.) Archived 17 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine , 10 November 1912. Chronicling America: Historic American Newspapers. Lib. of Congress ^ Ben Davis, '"Cubism" at the Met: Modern Art That Looks Tragically Antique' Archived 27 September 2016 at the Wayback Machine , Exhibition: "Cubism: The Leonard A. Lauder Collection", Metropolitan Museum of Art, ArtNet News , 6 November 2014 ^ "La Maison Cubiste, 1912" .

kubisme.info (in Dutch). Archived from the original on 13 March 2013.

^ Arwas 1992 , p. 52.

^ a b Arwas 1992 , p. 54.

^ "Kubistische werken op de Armory Show" .

^ Detail of Duchamp-Villon's Façade architecturale , catalog number 609, unidentified photographer, 1913. Walt Kuhn, Kuhn family papers, and Armory Show records, 1859–1984, bulk 1900–1949 Archived 14 March 2013 at the Wayback Machine . Archives of American Art, Smithsonian Institution ^ "Catalogue of international exhibition of modern art: at the Armory of the Sixty-ninth Infantry, 1913 , Duchamp-Villon, Raymond, Facade Architectural ^ Richard Harrison Martin, Cubism and Fashion , Metropolitan Museum of Art (New York, N.Y.), 1998, p. 99 Archived 6 December 2022 at the Wayback Machine , ISBN 0870998889 ^ a b "26, avenue Montaigne" .

pss-archi.eu . Retrieved 27 September 2023 .

^ Grasset, Eugène (1905).

"Méthode de composition ornementale, Éléments rectilignes" (in French). Librarie Centrale des Beaux-Arts, Paris . Retrieved 18 December 2012 – via Gallica.

^ Grasset, Eugène (1905).

"Méthode de composition ornementale" (in French) (published 10 March 2001) . Retrieved 18 December 2012 .

^ * Jones, Denna, ed. (2014).

Architecture The Whole Story . Thames & Hudson.

ISBN 978-0-500-29148-1 .

^ Weston, Richard (2011).

100 Ideas That Changed Architecture . Laurence King. p. 21.

ISBN 978-1-78627-567-7 .

^ 10,000 YEARS OF ART . Phaidon. 2009. p. 174.

ISBN 978-0-7148-4969-0 .

^ a b c d "Art Deco Style" . Museum of London. Archived from the original on 7 February 2008 . Retrieved 6 November 2008 .

^ Wood, Ghislaine (2003).

Essential Art Deco . London: VA&A Publications.

ISBN 0-8212-2833-1 .

^ a b Hauffe, Thomas (1998).

Design: A Concise History (1 ed.). London: Laurence King.

^ "Art Deco Study Guide" . Victoria and Albert Museum.

Archived from the original on 25 October 2008 . Retrieved 1 November 2008 .

^ Juster, Randy.

"Introduction to Art Deco" . decopix.com. Archived from the original on 29 October 2008 . Retrieved 7 November 2008 .

^ "How Art Deco came to be".

University Times .

36 (4). University of Pittsburgh. 9 October 2003.

^ "Rietveld Schröder huis (rijksmonument #18329)" .

Monumentenregister (in Dutch).

Rijksdienst voor het Cultureel Erfgoed . Retrieved 9 February 2012 .

^ Criticos, Mihaela (2009).

Art Deco sau Modernismul Bine Temperat - Art Deco or Well-Tempered Modernism (in Romanian and English). SIMETRIA. p. 69.

ISBN 978-973-1872-03-2 .

^ Raizman, David (2012).

History of Modern Design - 3rd Edition . Laurence King. p. 164.

ISBN 978-1-78627-682-7 .

^ Criticos, Mihaela (2009).

Art Deco sau Modernismul Bine Temperat - Art Deco or Well-Tempered Modernism (in Romanian and English). SIMETRIA. p. 74.

ISBN 978-973-1872-03-2 .

^ a b Criticos, Mihaela (2009).

Art Deco sau Modernismul Bine Temperat - Art Deco or Well-Tempered Modernism (in Romanian and English). SIMETRIA. p. 67.

ISBN 978-973-1872-03-2 .

^ a b Criticos, Mihaela (2009).

Art Deco sau Modernismul Bine Temperat - Art Deco or Well-Tempered Modernism (in Romanian and English). SIMETRIA. p. 88.

ISBN 978-973-1872-03-2 .

^ Criticos, Mihaela (2009).

Art Deco sau Modernismul Bine Temperat - Art Deco or Well-Tempered Modernism (in Romanian and English). SIMETRIA. p. 51.

ISBN 978-973-1872-03-2 .

^ Jirousek, Charlotte (1995).

"Art, Design and Visual Thinking" .

Archived from the original on 2 December 2008 . Retrieved 7 November 2008 .

^ Duncan 1988 , p. 8-10.

^ Duncan 1988 , pp. 7–8.

^ Charles 2013 , pp. 35–104.

^ Le Corbusier, Vers une architecture , Flammarion, republished in 1995, page xix ^ Larousse Encyclopedia on-line edition (in French) [ full citation needed ] ^ Duncan 1988 , p. 8.

^ a b Fell, Charlotte; Fell, Peter (2006).

Design Handbook: Concepts, Materials and Styles (1 ed.). Taschen.

^ a b Heindorf, Anne (24 July 2006).

"Art Deco (1920s to 1930s)" . Archived from the original on 7 February 2008 . Retrieved 6 November 2008 .

^ Gaunt, Pamela (August 2005).

"The Decorative in Twentieth Century Art: A Story of Decline and Resurgence" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 December 2008.

^ Louis René Vian, Les Arts décoratifs à bord des paquebots français , Éditions Fonmare, 1992 ^ Blondel, Alain ; Lempicka, Tamara de (1999).

Tamara de Lempicka: a Catalogue Raisonné 1921–1980 . Lausanne: Editions Acatos.

ISBN 978-2-940033-28-7 .

OCLC 41928887 .

^ Balfour, Alan (1978). Rockefeller Center: Architecture as Theater. McGraw-Hill, Inc., p. 311, ISBN 978-0-070-03480-8 ^ "Archibald MacLeish Criticism" . Enotes.com . Retrieved 8 December 2011 .

^ "City College of San Francisco: Rivera Mural – San Francisco CA" .

The Living New Deal . Department of Geography, University of California, Berkeley . Retrieved 15 June 2015 .

^ Atkins, Robert (1993).

ArtSpoke: A Guide to Modern Ideas, Movements, and Buzzwords, 1848–1944 .

Abbeville Press .

ISBN 978-1-55859-388-6 .

^ "Works Progress Administration (WPA) Art Recovery Project" .

Office of the Inspector General , General Services Administration. Archived from the original on 19 September 2015 . Retrieved 13 June 2015 .

^ Arwas 1992 , pp. 165–66.

^ Weber, Eva (1985).

Art deco in America . Exeter Books. p. 32.

ISBN 0671808044 .

^ Duncan 1988 , pp. 121–141.

^ Duncan 1988 , p. 140.

^ Arwas 1992 , pp. 141–163.

^ Brian Catley, Deco and other Bronzes , pp. 203–209, ISBN 978-1851493821 ^ Kjellberg, Pierre (1994).

Bronzes of the 19th Century (First ed.). Atglen, Pennsylvania: Schiffer Publishing, Ltd. p. 551.

ISBN 0-88740-629-7 .

^ Edith Balas, 1998, Joseph Csaky: A Pioneer of Modern Sculpture , Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society ^ "Paul Iribe, Les robes de Paul Poiret , 1908" . 1908.

^ a b Duncan 1988 , pp. 148–150.

^ Poirot, Lissa.

"The Extraordinary Story of Iconic American Travel Posters" .

Far & Wide . Retrieved 6 August 2025 .

^ Poisson 2009 , pp. 299, 318.

^ Plum 2014 , p. 134.

^ Ardman 1985 , pp. 86–87.

^ a b c "Art Deco Society of Los Angeles" .

Art Deco Society of Los Angeles . Retrieved 10 January 2024 .

^ a b c "Types of Art Deco Architecture" .

Inviting Home . 30 August 2019 . Retrieved 10 January 2024 .

^ a b "Styles of Art Deco" .

508 Park . Retrieved 10 January 2024 .

^ Duncan 1988 , p. 197.

^ John Burchard and Albert Bush Brown, The Architecture of America (1966), Atlantic, Little and Brown, page 277 ^ Benton, Benton & Wood 2003 , pp. 249–258.

^ Morel 2012 , pp. 125–30.

^ Di Ionna, Mark (2 July 2019).

"Art Deco Buildings Turned Newark from Frankenstein Monster to Place of Refinement" .

tapinto.net . Tapinto . Retrieved 3 February 2025 .

^ a b Duncan 1988 , pp. 198–200.

^ Duncan 1988 , pp. 197–199.

^ "PSS / 41, avenue Montaigne" .

pss-archi.eu . Retrieved 17 September 2023 .

^ Criticos, Mihaela (2009).

Art Deco sau Modernismul Bine Temperat - Art Deco or Well-Tempered Modernism (in Romanian and English). SIMETRIA. p. 189.

ISBN 978-973-1872-03-2 .

^ Criticos, Mihaela (2009).

Art Deco sau Modernismul Bine Temperat - Art Deco or Well-Tempered Modernism (in Romanian and English). SIMETRIA. p. 192.

ISBN 978-973-1872-03-2 .

^ Criticos, Mihaela (2009).

Art Deco sau Modernismul Bine Temperat - Art Deco or Well-Tempered Modernism (in Romanian and English). SIMETRIA. p. 196.

ISBN 978-973-1872-03-2 .

^ "Art Déco" .

monument.heritage.brussels . Retrieved 24 May 2024 .

^ Criticos, Mihaela (2009).

Art Deco sau Modernismul Bine Temperat - Art Deco or Well-Tempered Modernism (in Romanian and English). SIMETRIA. p. 44.

ISBN 978-973-1872-03-2 .

^ Hardwood, Elain (2019).

Art Deco Britain - Buildings of the Interwar Years . Batsford. p. 113.

ISBN 9781849945271 .

^ a b Criticos, Mihaela (2009).

Art Deco sau Modernismul Bine Temperat - Art Deco or Well-Tempered Modernism (in Romanian and English). SIMETRIA. p. 185.

ISBN 978-973-1872-03-2 .

^ Criticos, Mihaela (2009).

Art Deco sau Modernismul Bine Temperat - Art Deco or Well-Tempered Modernism (in Romanian and English). SIMETRIA. p. 206.

ISBN 978-973-1872-03-2 .

^ Criticos, Mihaela (2009).

Art Deco sau Modernismul Bine Temperat - Art Deco or Well-Tempered Modernism (in Romanian and English). SIMETRIA. p. 79.

ISBN 978-973-1872-03-2 .

^ Explanatory text on Art Deco in the Museum of Decorative Arts, Paris.

[ full citation needed ] ^ Duncan 1988 , p. 250.

^ McCready, Karen (1997).

Art Deco and Modernist ceramics . Thames & Hudson.

ISBN 978-0500278253 .

^ Benton, Benton & Wood 2003 , pp. 91–93.

^ Arwas 1992 , p. 51.

^ Duncan 1988 , p. 15.

^ Arwas 1992 , p. 56.

^ Duncan 1988 , pp. 18–19.

^ Griffith Winton, Alexandra (October 2008).

"Design, 1925–50" . Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History. Metropolitan Museum of Art.

^ Duncan 1988 , p. 36.

^ Cooper, Dan (November 2011).

"Furniture of the Jazz Age" .

Old-House Interiors .

7 (6). William J. O'Donnell: 42.

^ Gartman, David (1994).

Auto Opium . Routledge. pp.

122– 124.

ISBN 978-0-415-10572-9 .

^ "Curves of Steel: Streamlined Automobile Design" . Phoenix Art Museum. 2007. Archived from the original on 24 June 2009 . Retrieved 1 September 2010 .

^ Armi, C. Edson (1989).

The Art of American Car Design . Pennsylvania State University Press. p. 66.

ISBN 978-0-271-00479-2 .

^ Hinckley, James (2005).

The Big Book of Car Culture: The Armchair Guide to Automotive Americana . MotorBooks/MBI Publishing. p. 239.

ISBN 978-0-7603-1965-9 .

^ De Morant, Henry, Histoire des arts décoratifs (1970), pg. 448-453 ^ a b Beltra, Rubio, Exploring Art Deco in Textile and Fashion Design , 20 December 2016, Site of Metropolitan Museum ^ a b c d "The Metropolitan Museum of Art – Special Exhibitions: Poiret: King of Fashion" .

^ Horton, Ros; Simmons, Sally (2007).

Women Who Changed the World . Quercus. p. 103.

ISBN 978-1847240262 . Retrieved 8 March 2011 .

^ Blackman, Cally (2012).

100 Years of Fashion . Laurence King. p. 12.

ISBN 978-1-78627-682-7 .

^ "Art Deco-era rings: how to buy and what to look for" .

Antique Ring Boutique . Retrieved 22 August 2023 .

^ "The Journal of Antiques and Collectibles | The Social Platform for Antiquers, Collectors, and Enthusiasts" . 15 April 2022 . Retrieved 14 April 2024 .

^ a b Arwas 1992 , pp. 121–123.

^ a b c Arwas 1992 , pp. 125.

^ "Art Deco Jewelry - Rediscovering The Joy Of Living After World War I" .

DSF Antique Jewelry . Retrieved 27 October 2024 .

^ Ebert, J. Mark (1 April 1983). "Art Deco: The Period, the Jewelry".

Gems & Gemology .

19 (1): 3– 11.

Bibcode : 1983GemG...19....3E .

doi : 10.5741/GEMS.19.1.3 .

ISSN 0016-626X .

S2CID 55653350 .

^ Hardwood, Elain (2019).

Art Deco Britain - Buildings of the Interwar Years . Batsford. p. 60.

ISBN 9781849945271 .

^ a b c d Arwas 1992 , pp. 245–250.

^ Plagnieux 2003 , p. 82.

^ Duncan 1988 , pp. 71–81.

^ "Art Deco in Animation Presentation" .

Cartoon Brew . 4 March 2008.

^ Gilchrist, Todd (20 September 2024).

" 'Transformers One' Director Josh Cooley on the Influence of Art Deco, 'Ben-Hur' and the Original 1986 Animated Film" .

Variety . Retrieved 5 April 2025 .

^ Denison, Edward (2007).

Bradt Travel Guide: Eritrea . Bradt. p. 112.

ISBN 978-1-84162-171-5 .

^ a b c Prakash, Gyan (2010).

Mumbai Fables . Princeton University Press. p. 99.

ISBN 9780691142845 .

^ Sharada., Dwivedi (1995).

Bombay : the cities within . Mehrotra, Rahul., Mulla-Feroze, Umaima. Mumbai: India Book House.

ISBN 818502880X .

OCLC 33153751 .

^ Sharada., Dwivedi (2008).

Bombay Deco . Mehrotra, Rahul., Gobhai, Noshir. Mumbai: Eminence Designs.

ISBN 978-8190382151 .

OCLC 300923025 .

^ "Inventory | Art Deco" .

www.artdecomumbai.com . 10 March 2017 . Retrieved 10 January 2018 .

^ "Napier Earthquake" . Artdeconapier.com. 3 February 1931. Archived from the original on 6 July 2010 . Retrieved 8 July 2010 .

^ "Home – Art Deco Trust" . Artdeconapier.com.

Archived from the original on 30 June 2010 . Retrieved 8 July 2010 .

^ "Art Deco heritage trail" (PDF) . wellington.gov.nz . Retrieved 22 February 2016 .

^ "Ventilatiegebouwen Maastunnel, Rotterdam" .

Amsterdamse School Platform (in Dutch). 24 November 2017 . Retrieved 4 April 2023 .

^ James, Kathleen (1997).

Erich Mendelsohn and the Architecture of German Modernism . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521571685 .

^ "Basilica of the Sacred Heart, Koekelberg" . Basilicakoekelberg.be. 8 March 2011 . Retrieved 7 December 2012 .

^ "Art Deco Buildings" . london-footprints.co.uk. 2007.

Archived from the original on 11 December 2008 . Retrieved 6 November 2008 .

^ "Art Deco in Frinton on sea" . Art Deco Classics. 2006. Archived from the original on 1 December 2008 . Retrieved 6 November 2008 .

^ "Four Programmes – Art Deco Icons" . BBC. 14 November 2009 . Retrieved 8 July 2010 .

^ "Bucharest: Modernism Art Deco" .

artdecobucharest.ro .

Archived from the original on 22 October 2019 . Retrieved 26 July 2021 .

^ "El art déco y Uruguay, un recorrido de casi un siglo" .

La Vanguardia (in Spanish). 27 August 2020 . Retrieved 23 March 2025 .

^ Criticos, Mihaela (2009).

Art Deco sau Modernismul Bine Temperat - Art Deco or Well-Tempered Modernism (in Romanian and English). SIMETRIA. p. 255.

ISBN 978-973-1872-03-2 .

^ Criticos, Mihaela (2009).

Art Deco sau Modernismul Bine Temperat - Art Deco or Well-Tempered Modernism (in Romanian and English). SIMETRIA. p. 257.

ISBN 978-973-1872-03-2 .

^ a b Barbara B. Capitman (1994).

Rediscovering Art Deco U.S.A.

Viking Studio Books. p. 52.

ISBN 0525934421 .

^ "The Smith Center for the Performing Arts" . David M. Schwarz Architects, Inc . Retrieved 24 August 2021 .

^ "Overview" . The Smith Center for the Performing Arts. Archived from the original on 24 March 2010.

^ "Frequenty Asked Questions (FAQ)" . The Smith Center for the Performing Arts. Archived from the original on 2 May 2015 . Retrieved 23 March 2013 .

^ Flamer, Keith (11 April 2019).

"Lifestyle Jersey City's 99 Hudson Soars As America's Third-Tallest Condominium" .

Forbes . Retrieved 3 February 2025 .

^ Lange, Alexandra (25 September 2023).

"Downtown Brooklyn Gets the Gotham City Treatment" .

bloomberg.com . Bloomberg . Retrieved 3 February 2025 .

^ Davies, Rachel (17 May 2022).

"Exclusive Look Inside Brooklyn's Tallest Skyscraper" .

architecturaldigest.com . Architectural Digest . Retrieved 3 February 2025 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Ardman, Harvey (1985).

Normandie, Her Life and Times . New York: Franklin Watts.

ISBN 0531097846 .

Arwas, Victor (1992).

Art Deco . Harry N. Abrams Inc.

ISBN 0-8109-1926-5 .

Bayer, Patricia (1999).

Art Deco Architecture: Design, Decoration and Detail from the Twenties and Thirties . Thames & Hudson.

ISBN 978-0-500-28149-9 .

Benton, Charlotte; Benton, Tim; Wood, Ghislaine (2003).

Art Deco: 1910–1939 . Bulfinch.

ISBN 978-0-8212-2834-0 .

Blondel, Alain ; Lempicka, Tamara de (1999).

Tamara de Lempicka: a Catalogue Raisonné 1921–1980 . Lausanne: Editions Acatos.

ISBN 978-2-940033-28-7 .

OCLC 41928887 .

Breeze, Carla (2003).

American Art Deco: Modernistic Architecture and Regionalism . W. W. Norton.

ISBN 978-0-393-01970-4 .

Cabanne, Pierre (1986).

Encyclopédie Art Deco (in French). Somogy.

ISBN 2-85056-178-9 .

Charles, Victoria (2013).

Art Déco . Parkstone International.

ISBN 978-1-84484-864-5 .

De Morant, Henry (1970).

Histoire des arts décoratifs (in French). Hachette.

Ducher, Rpbert (2014).

La charactéristique des styles (in French). Flammarion.

ISBN 978-2-0813-4383-2 .

Duncan, Alastair (1988).

Art déco . Thames & Hudson.

ISBN 2-87811-003-X .

Duncan, Alastair (2009).

Art Deco Complete: The Definitive Guide to the Decorative Arts of the 1920s and 1930s . Abrams.

ISBN 978-0-8109-8046-4 .

Gallagher, Fiona (2002).

Christie's Art Deco . Pavilion Books.

ISBN 978-1-86205-509-4 .

Hillier, Bevis (1968).

Art Deco of the 20s and 30s . Studio Vista.

ISBN 978-0-289-27788-1 .

Hope, Mike (22 July 2019).

Art Deco Architecture: The Interwar Period . The Crowood Press.

ISBN 978-1-78500-600-5 . Retrieved 18 April 2025 .

Le Corbusier (1996).

L'Art Decoratif Aujourd'hui (in French). Flammarion.

ISBN 978-2-0812-2062-1 .

Long, Christopher (2007).

Paul T. Frankl and Modern American Design . Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-12102-5 .

Lucie-Smith, Edward (1996).

Art Deco Painting . Phaidon Press.

ISBN 978-0-7148-3576-1 .

Ray, Gordon N. (2005). Tansell, G. Thomas (ed.).

The Art Deco Book in France . Bibliographical Society of The University of Virginia.

ISBN 978-1-883631-12-3 .

Lehmann, Niels (2012). Rauhut, Christoph (ed.).

Modernism London Style . Hirmer.

ISBN 978-3-7774-8031-2 .

Morel, Guillaume (2012).

Art Déco (in French). Éditions Place des Victoires.

ISBN 978-2-8099-0701-8 .

Okroyan, Mkrtich (2008–2011).

Art Deco Sculpture: From Root to Flourishing (vol.1,2) (in Russian). Russian Art Institute.

ISBN 978-5-905495-02-1 .

Plagnieux, Philippe (2003).

Cathérale Notre Dame d'Amiens (in French). Éditions du Patrimoine, Centre des Monuments Nationaux.

ISBN 978-27577-0404-2 .

Plum, Giles (2014).

Paris architectures de la Belle Epoque (in French). Parigramme.

ISBN 978-2-84096-800-9 .

Poisson, Michel (2009).

1000 Immeubles et monuments de Paris (in French). Parigramme.

ISBN 978-2-84096-539-8 .

Savage, Rebecca Binno; Kowalski, Greg (2004).

Art Deco in Detroit (Images of America) . Arcadia.

ISBN 978-0-7385-3228-8 .

Texier, Simon (2012).

Paris: Panorama de l'architecture (in French). Parigramme.

ISBN 978-2-84096-667-8 .

Texier, Simon (2019).

Art Déco . Editions Ouest-France.

ISBN 978-27373-8172-0 .

Unes, Wolney (2003).

Identidade Art Déco de Goiânia (in Portuguese). Ateliê.

ISBN 85-7480-090-2 .

Vincent, G.K. (2008).

A History of Du Cane Court: Land, Architecture, People and Politics . Woodbine Press.

ISBN 978-0-9541675-1-6 .

Ward, Mary; Ward, Neville (1978).

Home in the Twenties and Thirties . Ian Allan.

ISBN 0-7110-0785-3 .

Further reading [ edit ] Fiell, Charlotte; Fiell, Peter (2005).

Design of the 20th Century (25th anniversary ed.). Köln: Taschen. pp.

48– 53.

ISBN 9783822840788 .

OCLC 809539744 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Art Deco .

Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Art Deco architecture .

Look up art deco in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Art Deco Miami Beach Art Deco Mumbai Art Deco Montreal Art Deco Society of Washington living room interior design Art Deco Rio de Janeiro Art Deco Shanghai Art Deco Museum in Moscow Art Deco Society New York Art Deco Society of Los Angeles Archived 17 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine Art Deco Walk in Montreal v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category v t e History of architecture Architectural timeline History of construction BCE Neolithic Mesopotamian Ancient Egyptian Aegean Minoan Mycenaean Etruscan Classical Ancient Greek Ancient Roman Herodian Pre-Islamic Persian Achaemenid 1st millennium Sasanian Byzantine East Slavic Kievan Rus' Muscovite Islamic Umayyad Moorish Abbasid Fatimid Islamic Persian Medieval Scandinavian Pre-Romanesque Carolingian 1000–1500 Romanesque Galician Ottonian Norman Indian Hoysala Vijayanagara Western Chalukya Islamic Great Seljuk Anatolian Seljuk architecture Mamluk Timurid Ottoman Indo-Islamic Romano-Gothic Gothic Sondergotik Venetian Mudéjar Incan Aztec Renaissance Plateresque 1500–1750 Manueline Palladian Spanish Colonial Portuguese Colonial Mughal Sikh French Provincial 1750–1900 Baroque Andean Czech Dutch English French Italian Maltese Petrine Elizabethan Naryshkin Portuguese Siberian Ukrainian Industrial British Revivalism Byzantine Russo-Byzantine Serbo-Byzantine Colonial Egyptian Gothic Mayan Mediterranean Mission Monumentalism Baroque Rococo Neoclassical Moorish Mughal Neo-Manueline Neo-Mudéjar Pueblo Queen Anne Britain America and Australia Renaissance Romanesque Romanian Russian Spanish Colonial Territorial Tudor Venetian Gothic Revival Art Nouveau Jugendstil Liberty style Modern Style Modernisme Ukrainian Swiss chalet Carpenter Gothic 1900–1950 Rationalism Mycenaean Modern Prairie School Expressionism Cubism De Stijl Bauhaus Constructivism New Objectivity Streamline Moderne Totalitarianism Imperial Crown Rationalist-Fascist Nazi Stalinist International style Functionalism Futurism Organicism Art Deco Stripped Classicism Postconstructivism PWA Moderne Googie Mid-century modern 1950–2000 Brutalism Structuralism New Khmer Postmodern Blobitecture High-tech Arcology Critical regionalism Neo-futurism Art Deco Revival 2000–present Neo-Chinese Deconstructivism Neomodern New Classical Contemporary Regional Chinese Colonial Indian Dravidian Hindu Japanese Korean Mesoamerican Maya Newari Portuguese Russian Spanish Somali v t e Genres of modern architecture Alphabetically Art Deco Art Nouveau Bauhaus Blobitecture Brutalism Bowellism Constructivism Contemporary Critical regionalism De Stijl Deconstructivism Expressionism Functionalism Futurism Googie High-tech International style Metabolism Mid-Century modern Modernisme Monumentalism Neo-Futurism Neomodern New Classical New Khmer New Objectivity Organicism Postconstructivism Postmodernism PWA Moderne Prairie School Rationalist-Fascist Rondocubism Stalinist Streamline Moderne Stripped Classicism Structuralism Sustainable Tropical By start year / decade Modernisme (1888–1911) Art Nouveau (1890–1910) Prairie School (1890s–1920s) Expressionism (1910–) Stripped Classicism (1913–) De Stijl (1917–1931) Bauhaus (1919–1933) Constructivism (1920–1932) Rondocubism (1921–1929) New Objectivity (1922–1933) Streamline Moderne (1925–1950) Rationalist-Fascist (1920s–1930s) International style (1920s–) Functionalism (1920s–1970s) Futurism (1920s–) Organicism (1920s–) Art Deco (1910–1939) Postconstructivism (1930s) PWA Moderne (1933–1944) Stalinist (1930s–1950s) Googie (1930s–1970) Mid-century modern (1933–1969) Brutalism (1940s–late 1970s) Tropical (1958–) New Khmer (1953–1970) Structuralism (1959–) Metabolism (1959–) Postmodernism (1960s–) Blobitecture (1960s–) Neo-futurism (1960s–) High-tech (1970s–) Critical regionalism (1980s–) Deconstructivism (1980s–) Neomodern (1990s–) New Classical (1990s–) Contemporary (2000s–) Architecture portal Related articles v t e Architecture of the United States Native and indigenous Mound Builders Pueblo Colonial and post-colonial Creole First Period Colonial Georgian Dutch Colonial French Colonial German Colonial Spanish Colonial Territorial Early Republic Adam Federal Jeffersonian Neoclassical Antebellum Mid-19th century Greek Revival Italianate Gothic Revival Victorian Richardsonian Romanesque Second Empire American Renaissance Folk Stick style Queen Anne Shingle Late-19th to mid-20th century Art Deco ( Streamline Moderne ) American Craftsman American Foursquare Beaux-Arts California bungalow Chicago School Colonial Revival Dutch Colonial Revival Georgian Revival Googie International style Mayan Revival Mediterranean Revival Mission Revival Pueblo Revival Deco Prairie School Pre-war PWA Moderne Sarasota School of Architecture Rustic Spanish Colonial Revival Territorial Revival Tudor Revival Post–World War II Blobitecture Brutalist Deconstructivism Dingbat Earthship High-tech Mid-century modern Modern Neo-eclectic Neo-futurism Neomodern New Classical architecture Postmodern Ranch Shed style Tiny-house Usonian Building types and vernacular Adirondack Adobe Barabara Cape Cod Central-passage house Chickee Corn crib Cowboy church Critical regionalism Dogtrot house Earth lodge Hogan Hall and parlor house I-house Igloo Jacal Kiva Log cabin Longhouses Moki steps Plank house Platform mound Qargi Quiggly hole Ramada Saltbox Shotgun house Sipapu Skyscraper Sod house Sweat lodge Temples Tipi Town square Tupiq Wigwam Cities Atlanta Boston Buffalo Chicago Columbus Detroit Houston Jacksonville Kansas City Las Vegas Los Angeles Miami New Orleans New York City Omaha Philadelphia Portland San Antonio San Francisco Seattle Spokane St. Louis Washington, D.C.

States California Hawaii Texas Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐cdqmm
Cached time: 20250817043907
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.930 seconds
Real time usage: 3.604 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 16956/1000000
Revision size: 179005/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 469551/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 15286/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 32/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 917854/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.465/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23602288/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2976.818      1 -total
 28.76%  856.263      1 Template:Reflist
 17.90%  532.929     83 Template:Cite_book
  9.36%  278.745     53 Template:Cite_web
  7.46%  221.951     54 Template:Sfn
  5.64%  167.842      7 Template:Navbox
  3.92%  116.773     11 Template:Lang
  3.19%   94.997      1 Template:Westernart
  3.05%   90.676      1 Template:Short_description
  2.45%   73.014      1 Template:Cite_magazine Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1881:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043907 and revision id 1305728460. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Art_Deco&oldid=1305728460 " Categories : Art Deco 20th century in the arts 20th-century architectural styles Art movements Decorative arts Modern art History of jewellery Hidden categories: Articles containing French-language text CS1 Romanian-language sources (ro) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1: unfit URL CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from August 2021 CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing cleanup from June 2025 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from June 2025 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Use dmy dates from September 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2022 CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 19:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Art Deco 69 languages Add topic

