Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Orbits 2 Images 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Icy moon 19 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Հայերեն Íslenska Lëtzebuergesch 日本語 Occitan Polski Português Русский Simple English Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Natural satellite with a surface mainly composed of ice Icy moons are a class of natural satellites with surfaces composed mostly of ice . An icy moon may harbor an ocean underneath the surface, and possibly include a rocky core of silicate or metallic rocks.

[ 1 ] It is thought that they may be composed of ice II or other polymorph of water ice.

[ 2 ] The prime example of this class of object is Europa .

Icy moons warmed by tides may be the most common type of celestial body in the galaxy to have liquid water , [ 3 ] and thus the most likely type of object to possibly have water -based life .

Some icy moons exhibit cryovolcanism , as well as geysers. The best studied example is Saturn's Enceladus .

Orbits [ edit ] Most known large icy moons belong to giant planets , whose orbits lie beyond the Solar System's frost line ; the remainder (such as Charon and Dysnomia ) formed around dwarf planets such as Pluto and Eris , typically in large impacts not unlike the impact thought to have formed Earth's moon. In the case of icy gas giant satellites, an additional requirement is that a moon did not form in the inner region of a proto-satellite disk, which is too warm for ices to condense.

Europa is thought to contain 8% ice and water by mass with the remainder rock.

[ 4 ] Jupiter's outer two Galilean moons Ganymede and Callisto contain more ice since they formed further from the hot proto-Jupiter.

Saturn's moon Titan looks and behaves more like Earth than any other body in the Solar System.

[ 5 ] Titan is known to have stable pools of liquid methane on the surface.

[ 5 ] Images [ edit ] Europa is thought to have a subsurface ocean False-color image of Ganymede Callisto showing frost deposits Mimas has a density of 1.1 g/cm 3 Active plumes on Enceladus False-color image of Titan showing surface and atmospheric details Miranda has a scarred surface A potential frost deposit on Umbriel's pole A cloud over the limb of Triton See also [ edit ] Ocean planet Ice planet Tectonics on icy moons References [ edit ] ^ Soderlund, Krista M.; et al. (January 2023). "The Physical Oceanography of Ice-Covered Moons".

Annual Review of Marine Science .

16 : 25– 53.

Bibcode : 2023ARMS...16...25S .

doi : 10.1146/annurev-marine-040323-101355 .

^ Chaplin, Martin (2007-10-26).

"Ice-two structure" .

Water Structure and Science . Archived from the original on 2012-04-27 . Retrieved 2008-01-02 .

^ "Can Life Exist on an Icy Moon? NASA's Europa Clipper Aims to Find Out - NASA" . 2024-10-12 . Retrieved 2024-11-18 .

^ Canup, Robin M.

; Ward, William R.

(2008).

Origin of Europa and the Galilean Satellites . p. (page needed).

arXiv : 0812.4995 .

Bibcode : 2009euro.book...59C .

^ a b Rosaly Lopes ; Robert M. Nelson (2009-08-06).

"Surface features on Titan form like Earth's, but with a frigid twist" .

IAU . Archived from the original on 2009-09-26 . Retrieved 2009-12-21 .

v t e Natural satellites of the Solar System Planetary satellites of Earth Mars Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune Dwarf planet satellites of Orcus Pluto Haumea Quaoar Makemake Gonggong Eris Minor-planet moons Near-Earth Florence Didymos Dimorphos Moshup Squannit 1994 CC 2001 SN 263 Main belt Kalliope Linus Euphrosyne Daphne Peneius Eugenia Petit-Prince Sylvia Romulus Remus Minerva Aegis Gorgoneion Camilla Elektra Kleopatra Alexhelios Cleoselene Ida Dactyl Roxane Olympias Pulcova Balam Dinkinesh Selam Jupiter trojans Patroclus Menoetius Hektor Skamandrios Eurybates Queta TNOs Lempo Hiisi Paha 2002 UX 25 Sila–Nunam Salacia Actaea Varda Ilmarë Gǃkúnǁʼhòmdímà Gǃòʼé ǃHú Chiminigagua Ranked by size Ganymede largest : 5268 km / 0.413 Earths Titan Callisto Io Moon Europa Triton Titania Rhea Oberon Iapetus Charon Umbriel Ariel Dione Tethys Dysnomia Enceladus Miranda Vanth Proteus Mimas Ilmarë Nereid Hiʻiaka Actaea Hyperion Phoebe ...

Discovery timeline Inner moons Irregular moons List Planetary-mass moons Naming Subsatellite Regular moons Trojan moons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Icy_moon&oldid=1303519595 " Categories : Moons Water ice Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 13:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Icy moon 19 languages Add topic

