Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Public autopsies 2 References 3 See also 4 External links 5 References Toggle the table of contents Public lecture 6 languages العربية Français Bahasa Indonesia Latina 日本語 Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Spoken presentation aimed at the general public The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( February 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Michael Faraday, nineteenth century scientist and electrician, shown delivering the British Royal Institution's Christmas Lecture for Juveniles during the Institution's Christmas break in 1856.

A public lecture (also known as an open lecture ) is one means employed for educating the public.

Gresham College , in London, has been providing free public lectures since its founding in 1597 through the will of Sir Thomas Gresham .  The Royal Society held its first ever meeting at Gresham College in November 1660, after one of Christopher Wren 's lectures, and continued to meet there for the next fifty years.

[ 1 ] The Royal Institution of Great Britain has a long history of public lectures and demonstrations given by prominent experts in the field. In the 19th century, the popularity of the public lectures given by Sir Humphry Davy at the Royal Institution was so great that the volume of carriage traffic in Albemarle Street caused it to become the first one-way street in London . The Royal Institution's Christmas Lectures for young people are nowadays also shown on television .

Alexander von Humboldt delivered a series of public lectures at the University of Berlin in the winter of 1827–1828, that formed the basis for his later work Kosmos .

Public autopsies [ edit ] Besides public lectures, public autopsies have been important in promoting knowledge of medicine.  The autopsy of Dr.

Johann Gaspar Spurzheim , advocate of phrenology , was conducted in public, and his brain, skull, and heart were removed, preserved in jars of alcohol, and put on display to the public.   Public autopsies have verged on entertainment: American showman P. T. Barnum held a public autopsy of Joice Heth after her death. Heth was a woman whom Barnum had been featuring as being over 160 years old. Barnum charged 50 cents admission. The autopsy demonstrated that she was between 76 and 80 years old.

References [ edit ] Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e "Heritage" .

The Royal Institution of Great Britain . Archived from the original on 4 February 2005 . Retrieved 26 January 2005 .

"Review of 'The Showman and the Slave: Race, Death, and Memory in Barnum's America' by Benjamin Reiss" .

Gary Cross, Journal of American History . Archived from the original on 28 December 2004 . Retrieved 26 January 2005 .

"Mind Games: A look at phrenology in the 1830s" .

Tom Kelleher, Research Historian, Old Sturbridge Visitor, Fall, 1997; pp. 13–15 . Archived from the original on 24 June 2001 . Retrieved 26 January 2005 .

See also [ edit ] Collège de France Lecture List of public lecture series External links [ edit ] Online Lectures. Webcasts [ usurped ] Lecturefinder : Search academic and college grade lectures online.

platformed.org : A New York-based organization advocating public lecture attendance.

yovisto.com : An academic e-lecture search engine.

Open Lectures and Talks : Find lists of UK public lectures and talks References [ edit ] ^ "Our History | Gresham College" .

This science article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Public_lecture&oldid=1279478086 " Categories : Science stubs Teaching Public speaking Lectures Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from February 2014 All stub articles Use British English from October 2024 Use dmy dates from October 2024 This page was last edited on 8 March 2025, at 20:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Public lecture 6 languages Add topic

