Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Kim’s property-exemplification 2 Davidson 3 Lewis 4 Deleuze 5 Badiou 6 Kirkeby 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Event (philosophy) 9 languages العربية Español فارسی Français Polski Português Русский کوردی 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Occurrence of objects or instances In philosophy , events are objects in time or instantiations of properties in objects. On some views, only changes in the form of acquiring or losing a property can constitute events, like the lawn's becoming dry.

[ 1 ] According to others, there are also events that involve nothing but the retaining of a property, e.g. the lawn's staying wet.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Events are usually defined as particulars that, unlike universals , cannot repeat at different times.

[ 2 ] Processes are complex events constituted by a sequence of events.

[ 3 ] But even simple events can be conceived as complex entities involving an object, a time and the property exemplified by the object at this time.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Traditionally, metaphysicians tended to emphasize static being over dynamic events. This tendency has been opposed by so-called process philosophy or process ontology , which ascribes ontological primacy to events and processes.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Kim’s property-exemplification [ edit ] Jaegwon Kim theorized that events are structured.

They are composed of three things: object(s) [ x ] {\displaystyle [x]} , a property [ P ] {\displaystyle [P]} and time or a temporal interval [ t ] {\displaystyle [t]} .

Events are defined using the operation [ x , P , t ] {\displaystyle [x,P,t]} .

A unique event is defined by two principles: a) the existence condition and b) the identity condition.

The existence condition states “ [ x , P , t ] {\displaystyle [x,P,t]} exists if and only if object x {\displaystyle x} exemplifies the n {\displaystyle n} -adic P {\displaystyle P} at time t {\displaystyle t} .” This means a unique event exists if the above is met. The identity condition states “ [ x , P , t ] {\displaystyle [x,P,t]} is [ y , Q , t ′ ] {\displaystyle [y,Q,t']} if and only if x = y {\displaystyle x=y} , P = Q {\displaystyle P=Q} and t = t ′ {\displaystyle t=t'} .” Kim uses these to define events under five conditions: One, they are unrepeatable, unchangeable particulars that include changes and the states and conditions of that event.

Two, they have a semi-temporal location.

Three, only their constructive property creates distinct events.

Four, holding a constructive property as a generic event creates a type-token relationship between events, and events are not limited to their three requirements (i.e.

[ x , P , t ] {\displaystyle [x,P,t]} ). Critics of this theory such as Myles Brand have suggested that the theory be modified so that an event had a spatiotemporal region; consider the event of a flash of lightning. The idea is that an event must include both the span of time of the flash of lightning and the area in which it occurred.

Other problems exist within Kim's theory, as he never specified what properties were (e.g.

universals , tropes , natural classes, etc.). In addition, it is not specified if properties are few or abundant. The following is Kim's response to the above.

. . . [T]he basic generic events may be best picked out relative to a scientific theory, whether the theory is a common-sense theory of the behavior of middle-sized objects or a highly sophisticated physical theory. They are among the important properties, relative to the theory, in terms of which lawful regularities can be discovered, described, and explained. The basic parameters in terms of which the laws of the theory are formulated would, on this view, give us our basic generic events, and the usual logical, mathematical, and perhaps other types of operations on them would yield complex, defined generic events. We commonly recognize such properties as motion, colors, temperatures, weights, pushing, and breaking, as generic events and states, but we must view this against the background of our common-sense explanatory and predictive scheme of the world around us. I think it highly likely that we cannot pick out generic events completely a priori .

[ 8 ] There is also a major debate about the essentiality of a constitutive object. There are two major questions involved in this: If one event occurs, could it have occurred in the same manner if it were another person, and could it occur in the same manner if it would have occurred at a different time? Kim holds that neither are true and that different conditions (i.e. a different person or time) would lead to a separate event. However, some consider it natural to assume the opposite.

Davidson [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( February 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Donald Davidson and John Lemmon proposed a theory of events that had two major conditions, respectively: a causal criterion and a spatiotemporal criterion.

The causal criterion defines an event as two events being the same if and only if they have the same cause and effect .

The spatiotemporal criterion defines an event as two events being the same if and only if they occur in the same space at the same time . Davidson however provided this scenario; if a metal ball becomes warmer during a certain minute, and during the same minute rotates through 35 degrees, must we say that these are the same event? However, one can argue that the warming of the ball and the rotation are possibly temporally separated and are therefore separate events.

Lewis [ edit ] David Lewis theorized that events are merely spatiotemporal regions and properties (i.e.

membership of a class ). He defines an event as "e is an event only if it is a class of spatiotemporal regions, both thisworldly (assuming it occurs in the actual world) and otherworldly." [ 9 ] The only problem with this definition is it only tells us what an event could be, but does not define a unique event. This theory entails modal realism , which assumes possible worlds exist; worlds are defined as sets containing all objects that exist as a part of that set. However, this theory is controversial. Some philosophers have attempted to remove possible worlds, and reduce them to other entities . They hold that the world we exist in is the only world that actually exists, and that possible worlds are only possibilities.

Lewis’ theory is composed of four key points. Firstly, the non-duplication principle; it states that x and y are separate events if and only if there is one member of x that is not a member of y (or vice versa). Secondly, there exist regions that are subsets of possible worlds and thirdly, events are not structured by an essential time.

Deleuze [ edit ] Gilles Deleuze lectured on the concept of event on March 10, 1987. A sense of the lecture is described by James Williams.

[ 10 ] Williams also wrote, "From the point of view of the difference between two possible worlds, the event is all important".

[ 11 ] He also stated, "Every event is revolutionary due to an integration of signs, acts and structures through the whole event. Events are distinguished by the intensity of this revolution, rather than the types of freedom or chance." [ 12 ] In 1988 Deleuze published a magazine article "Signes et événements" [ 13 ] In his book Nietszche and Philosophy , he addresses the question "Which one is beautiful?" In the preface to the English translation he wrote: The one that ... does not refer to an individual, to a person, but rather to an event, that is, to the forces in their various relationships to a proposition or phenomenon, and the genetic relationship that determines these forces (power).

[ 14 ] Badiou [ edit ] In Being and Event , Alain Badiou writes that the event ( événement ) is a multiple which basically does not make sense according to the rules of the "situation," in other words existence.  Hence, the event "is not," and therefore, in order for there to be an event, there must be an "intervention" which changes the rules of the situation in order to allow that particular event to be. ("To be", meaning, to be a multiple which belongs to the multiple of the situation — these terms are drawn from or defined in reference to set theory .) In his view, there is no "one," and everything that is is a "multiple."  "One" happens when the situation "counts," or accounts for, acknowledges, or defines something: it "counts it as one."  For the event to be counted as one by the situation, or counted in the one of the situation, an intervention needs to decide its belonging to the situation.  This is because his definition of the event violates the prohibition against self-belonging (in other words, it is a set-theoretical definition which violates set theory's rules of consistency), thus does not count as extant on its own.

[ 15 ] Kirkeby [ edit ] The Danish philosopher Ole Fogh Kirkeby deserves mentioning, as he has written a comprehensive trilogy about the event, or in Danish "begivenheden". In the first work of the trilogy "Eventum tantum – begivenhedens ethos" [ 16 ] (Eventum tantum - the ethos of the event) he distinguishes between three levels of the event, inspired from Nicholas of Cusa : Eventum tantum as non aliud, the alma-event and the proto-event.

See also [ edit ] Free play (Derrida) Happening – Type of performance artwork Philosophy of space and time References [ edit ] ^ a b Honderich, Ted (2005). "events".

The Oxford Companion to Philosophy . Oxford University Press.

^ a b Kim, Jaegwon; Sosa, Ernest; Rosenkrantz, Gary S. (1994). "event theory".

A Companion to Metaphysics . Wiley-Blackwell.

^ Craig, Edward (1996). "processes".

Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Routledge.

^ Audi, Robert (1999). "event".

The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy . Cambridge University Press.

^ Schneider, Susan.

"Events" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Seibt, Johanna (2020).

"Process Philosophy" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 9 January 2021 .

^ Hustwit, J. R.

"Process Philosophy" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 9 January 2021 .

^ Jaegwon Kim (1993) Supervenience and Mind , page 37, Cambridge University Press ^ David Lewis (1986) On the Plurality of Worlds , Blackwell, page 84 ^ Charles J. Stivale (editor) (2011) Gilles Deleuze: Key Concepts , 2nd edition, chapter 6: Event, pp 80–90 ^ James Williams (2003) Gilles Deleuze’s Difference and Repetition : A Critical Introduction and Guide , page 72, Edinburgh University Press ^ Williams, James (2013).

Gilles Deleuze's Difference and Repetition: A Critical Introduction and Guide (2nd ed.). University of Edinburgh. pp. xi.

ISBN 9780748668816 .

^ Gilles Deleuze (1988) "Signes et événements", Magazine Littéraire , #257, pages 16 to 25 ^ Michael Hardt (1993) Gilles Deleuze: An apprenticeship in philosophy , page 31, University of Minnesota Press ISBN 0-8166-2160-8 ^ Alain Badiou (1988) L'Être et l'Événement ^ Ole Fogh Kirkeby (2005) Eventum tantum : Begivenhedens ethos.

København: Samfundslitteratur External links [ edit ] Roberto Casati & Achille Varzi , Events , from Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Susan Schneider , Events , from The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Byron Kaldis, Events , from Encyclopedia of Philosophy and the Social Sciences .

v t e Time Key concepts Past Present Future Eternity Measurement and standards Chronometry UTC Universal Time TAI Unit of time Orders of magnitude (time) Measurement systems Italian six-hour clock Thai six-hour clock 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Relative hour Daylight saving time Chinese Decimal Hexadecimal Hindu Metric Roman Sidereal Solar Time zone Calendars Main types Solar Lunar Lunisolar Gregorian Julian Hebrew Islamic Solar Hijri Chinese Hindu Panchang Maya List Clocks Main types astronomical astrarium atomic quantum hourglass marine sundial watch 24-hour wristwatch mechanical stopwatch water-based Cuckoo clock Digital clock Grandfather clock History Timeline Chronology History Astronomical chronology Big History Calendar era Deep time Periodization Regnal year Timeline Philosophy of time A series and B series B-theory of time Chronocentrism Duration Endurantism Eternal return Eternalism Event Moving spotlight theory Perdurantism Presentism Temporal finitism Temporal parts The Unreality of Time Religion Mythology Ages of Man Destiny Immortality Dreamtime Kāla Time and fate deities Father Time Wheel of time Kalachakra Human experience and use of time Chronemics Generation time Mental chronometry Music tempo time signature Rosy retrospection Tense–aspect–mood Time management Yesterday – Today – Tomorrow Time in science Geology Geological time age chron eon epoch era period Geochronology Geological history of Earth Physics Absolute space and time Arrow of time Chronon Coordinate time Instant Proper time Spacetime Theory of relativity Time domain Time translation symmetry Time reversal symmetry Other fields Chronological dating Chronobiology Circadian rhythms Clock reaction Glottochronology Time geography Related Leap year Memory Moment Six-hour day Space System time Tempus fugit Time capsule Time immemorial Time travel Category Commons v t e Philosophy of time Concepts in time Time A priori and a posteriori A series and B series Action Duration Eternal return Eternity Event Aevum Imaginary time Multiple time dimensions Temporal parts Temporality Theories of time A-theory of time B-theory of time Endurantism Eternalism Four-dimensionalism Fatalism Finitism Growing block universe Perdurantism Presentism Related articles Etiology Metaphysics Post hoc ergo propter hoc Teleology " The Unreality of Time " The Singular Universe and the Reality of Time An Experiment with Time v t e Gilles Deleuze – Félix Guattari Concepts and theories Affect Arborescent Assemblage Body without organs Desiring-production Deterritorialization Difference Erewhon Event Haecceity Immanent evaluation Individuation Line of flight Minority Molar configuration Multiplicity Plane of immanence Reterritorialization Rhizome Schizoanalysis Societies of control Socius Subjectification Transcendental empiricism Univocity of being Virtual Works by Deleuze and Guattari Capitalism and Schizophrenia Anti-Oedipus A Thousand Plateaus Kafka: Toward a Minor Literature Rhizome Nomadology: The War Machine What Is Philosophy?

Works by Deleuze Empiricism and Subjectivity Nietzsche and Philosophy Kant's Critical Philosophy Proust and Signs Nietzsche Bergsonism Masochism: Coldness and Cruelty Difference and Repetition Expressionism in Philosophy: Spinoza The Logic of Sense Spinoza: Practical Philosophy The Intellectuals and Power: A Discussion Between Gilles Deleuze and Michel Foucault Dialogues Superpositions Francis Bacon: The Logic of Sensation Cinema 1: The Movement Image Cinema 2: The Time-Image Foucault The Fold: Leibniz and the Baroque Périclès et Verdi: La philosophie de Francois Châtelet Negotiations Essays Critical and Clinical Bartleby, la formula della creazione Pure Immanence: Essays on a Life Desert Islands and Other Texts 1953-1974 Two Regimes of Madness Works by Guattari Psychanalyse et transversalité Molecular Revolution Desire and Revolution L'inconscient machinique. Essais de Schizoanalyse L’intervention institutionnelle Les années d'hiver Pratique de l'institutionnel et politique Communists Like Us Molecular Revolution in Brazil The Three Ecologies Cartographies schizoanalytiques Chaosmose Chaosophy Soft Subversions The Guattari Reader The Anti-Oedipus Papers Chaos and Complexity Related topics L'Abécédaire de Gilles Deleuze La Borde Clinic Deleuze and Guattari A New Philosophy of Society: Assemblage Theory and Social Complexity Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Event_(philosophy)&oldid=1300106996 " Categories : Philosophy of time Concepts in metaphysics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2015 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 09:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Event (philosophy) 9 languages Add topic

