Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ancient and medieval views 2 Realism and anti-realism 3 Absolutism and relationalism Toggle Absolutism and relationalism subsection 3.1 Leibniz and Newton 3.2 Mach 3.3 Einstein 4 Conventionalism 5 Structure of space-time Toggle Structure of space-time subsection 5.1 Relativity of simultaneity 5.2 Historical frameworks 6 Direction of time Toggle Direction of time subsection 6.1 Causation solution 6.2 Thermodynamics solution 6.3 Laws solution 7 Flow of time 8 Presentism and eternalism 9 Endurantism and perdurantism 10 See also 11 Notes 12 References 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Philosophy of space and time 21 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Чӑвашла Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Italiano Latina മലയാളം 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Română Русский Suomi Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of philosophy relating to spatiality and temporality The philosophy of space and time is a branch of philosophy concerned with ideas about knowledge and understanding within space and time . Such ideas have been central to philosophy from its inception.

The philosophy of space and time was both an inspiration for and a central aspect of early analytic philosophy . The subject focuses on a number of basic issues, including whether time and space exist independently of the mind, whether they exist independently of one another, what accounts for time's apparently unidirectional flow, whether times other than the present moment exist, and questions about the nature of identity (particularly the nature of identity over time).

Ancient and medieval views [ edit ] The earliest recorded philosophy of time was expounded by the ancient Egyptian thinker Ptahhotep (c. 2650–2600 BC), who said: Follow your desire as long as you live, and do not perform more than is ordered, do not lessen the time of the following desire, for the wasting of time is an abomination to the spirit...

— 11th maxim of Ptahhotep [ 1 ] The Vedas , the earliest texts on Indian philosophy and Hindu philosophy , dating back to the late 2nd millennium BC, describe ancient Hindu cosmology , in which the universe goes through repeated cycles of creation, destruction, and rebirth, with each cycle lasting 4,320,000,000 years.

[ 2 ] Ancient Greek philosophers , including Parmenides and Heraclitus , wrote essays on the nature of time.

[ 3 ] Incas regarded space and time as a single concept, named pacha ( Quechua : pacha , Aymara : pacha ).

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Plato , in the Timaeus , identified time with the period of motion of the heavenly bodies, and space as that in which things come to be.

Aristotle , in Book IV of his Physics , defined time as the number of changes with respect to before and after, and the place of an object as the innermost motionless boundary of that which surrounds it.

In Book 11 of St. Augustine's Confessions , he reflects on the nature of time, asking, "What then is time? If no one asks me, I know: if I wish to explain it to one who asks, I know not." He goes on to comment on the difficulty of thinking about time, pointing out the inaccuracy of common speech: "For but few things are there of which we speak properly; of most things we speak improperly, still, the things intended are understood." [ 7 ] But Augustine presented the first philosophical argument for the reality of Creation (against Aristotle) in the context of his discussion of time,  saying that knowledge of time depends on the knowledge of the movement of things,  and therefore time cannot be where there are no creatures to measure its passing ( Confessions Book XI ¶30; City of God Book XI ch.6).

In contrast to ancient Greek philosophers who believed that the universe had an infinite past with no beginning, medieval philosophers and theologians developed the concept of the universe having a finite past with a beginning, now known as temporal finitism .

John Philoponus presented early arguments, adopted by later Christian philosophers and theologians of the form "argument from the impossibility of the existence of an actual infinite", which states: [ 8 ] "An actual infinite cannot exist." "An infinite temporal regress of events is an actual infinite." "∴ An infinite temporal regress of events cannot exist." In the early 11th century, the Muslim physicist Ibn al-Haytham (Alhacen or Alhazen) discussed space perception and its epistemological implications in his Book of Optics (1021). He also rejected Aristotle's definition of topos ( Physics IV) by way of geometric demonstrations and defined place as a mathematical spatial extension.

[ 9 ] His experimental disproof of the extramission [ 10 ] hypothesis of vision led to changes in the understanding of the visual perception of space, contrary to the previous emission theory of vision supported by Euclid and Ptolemy . In "tying the visual perception of space to prior bodily experience, Alhacen unequivocally rejected the intuitiveness of spatial perception and, therefore, the autonomy of vision. Without tangible notions of distance and size for correlation, sight can tell us next to nothing about such things." [ 11 ] Realism and anti-realism [ edit ] A traditional realist position in ontology is that time and space have existence apart from the human mind.

Idealists , by contrast, deny or doubt the existence of objects independent of the mind. Some anti-realists , whose ontological position is that objects outside the mind do exist, nevertheless doubt the independent existence of time and space.

In 1781, Immanuel Kant published the Critique of Pure Reason , one of the most influential works in the history of the philosophy of space and time. He describes time as an a priori notion that, together with other a priori notions such as space , allows us to comprehend sense experience . Kant holds that neither space nor time are substance , entities in themselves, or learned by experience; he holds, rather, that both are elements of a systematic framework we use to structure our experience. Spatial measurements are used to quantify how far apart objects are, and temporal measurements are used to quantitatively compare the interval between (or duration of) events . Although space and time are held to be transcendentally ideal in this sense—that is, mind-dependent—they are also empirically real —that is, according to Kant's definitions, a priori features of experience, and therefore not simply "subjective," variable, or accidental perceptions in a given consciousness.

[ 12 ] Some idealist writers, such as J. M. E. McTaggart in The Unreality of Time , have argued that time is an illusion (see also: § Flow of time , below) .

The writers discussed here are for the most part realists in this regard; for instance, Gottfried Leibniz held that his monads existed, at least independently of the mind of the observer.

Absolutism and relationalism [ edit ] Leibniz and Newton [ edit ] The great debate between defining notions of space and time as real objects themselves (absolute), or mere orderings upon actual objects ( relational ), began between physicists Isaac Newton (via his spokesman, Samuel Clarke) and Gottfried Leibniz in the papers of the Leibniz–Clarke correspondence .

Arguing against the absolutist position, Leibniz offers a number of thought experiments with the purpose of showing that there is contradiction in assuming the existence of facts such as absolute location and velocity. These arguments trade heavily on two principles central to his philosophy: the principle of sufficient reason and the identity of indiscernibles . The principle of sufficient reason holds that for every fact, there is a reason that is sufficient to explain what and why it is the way it is and not otherwise. The identity of indiscernibles states that if there is no way of telling two entities apart, then they are one and the same thing.

The example Leibniz uses involves two proposed universes situated in absolute space. The only discernible difference between them is that the latter is positioned five feet to the left of the first. The example is only possible if such a thing as absolute space exists. Such a situation, however, is not possible, according to Leibniz, for if it were, a universe's position in absolute space would have no sufficient reason, as it might very well have been anywhere else. Therefore, it contradicts the principle of sufficient reason, and there could exist two distinct universes that were in all ways indiscernible, thus contradicting the identity of indiscernibles.

Standing out in Clarke's (and Newton's) response to Leibniz's arguments is the bucket argument : Water in a bucket, hung from a rope and set to spin, will start with a flat surface. As the water begins to spin in the bucket, the surface of the water will become concave. If the bucket is stopped, the water will continue to spin, and while the spin continues, the surface will remain concave. The concave surface is apparently not the result of the interaction of the bucket and the water, since the surface is flat when the bucket first starts to spin; the surface of the water becomes concave as the water itself, influenced by the spinning motion of the bucket, also begins to spin, and the surface remains concave as the bucket stops.

In this response, Clarke argues for the necessity of the existence of absolute space to account for phenomena like rotation and acceleration that cannot be accounted for on a purely relationalist account . Clarke argues that since the curvature of the water occurs in the rotating bucket as well as in the stationary bucket containing spinning water, it can only be explained by stating that the water is rotating in relation to the presence of some third thing—absolute space.

Leibniz describes a space that exists only as a relation between objects, and which has no existence apart from the existence of those objects. Motion exists only as a relation between those objects. Newtonian space provided the absolute frame of reference within which objects can have motion. In Newton's system, the frame of reference exists independently of the objects contained within it. These objects can be described as moving in relation to space itself. For almost two centuries, the evidence of a concave water surface held authority.

Mach [ edit ] Another important figure in this debate is 19th-century physicist Ernst Mach . While he did not deny the existence of phenomena like that seen in the bucket argument, he still denied the absolutist conclusion by offering a different answer as to what the bucket was rotating in relation to: the fixed stars .

Mach suggested that thought experiments like the bucket argument are problematic. If we were to imagine a universe that only contains a bucket, on Newton's account, this bucket could be set to spin relative to absolute space, and the water it contained would form the characteristic concave surface. But in the absence of anything else in the universe, it would be difficult to confirm that the bucket was indeed spinning. It seems equally possible that the surface of the water in the bucket would remain flat.

Mach argued that, in effect, the water experiment in an otherwise empty universe would remain flat. But if another object were introduced into this universe, perhaps a distant star, there would now be something relative to which the bucket could be seen as rotating. The water inside the bucket could possibly have a slight curve. To account for the curve that we observe, an increase in the number of objects in the universe also increases the curvature in the water. Mach argued that the momentum of an object, whether angular or linear, exists as a result of the sum of the effects of other objects in the universe ( Mach's Principle ).

Einstein [ edit ] Albert Einstein proposed that the laws of physics should be based on the principle of relativity . This principle holds that the rules of physics must be the same for all observers, regardless of the frame of reference that is used, and that light propagates at the same speed in all reference frames. This theory was motivated by Maxwell's equations , which show that electromagnetic waves propagate in a vacuum at the speed of light . However, Maxwell's equations give no indication of what this speed is relative to. Prior to Einstein, it was thought that this speed was relative to a fixed medium, called the luminiferous ether . In contrast, the theory of special relativity postulates that light propagates at the speed of light in all inertial frames, and examines the implications of this postulate.

All attempts to measure any speed relative to this ether failed, which can be seen as a confirmation of Einstein's postulate that light propagates at the same speed in all reference frames.

Special relativity is a formalization of the principle of relativity that does not contain a privileged inertial frame of reference, such as the luminiferous ether or absolute space, from which Einstein inferred that no such frame exists.

Einstein generalized relativity to frames of reference that were non-inertial. He achieved this by positing the Equivalence Principle , which states that the force felt by an observer in a given gravitational field and that felt by an observer in an accelerating frame of reference are indistinguishable. This led to the conclusion that the mass of an object warps the geometry of the space-time surrounding it, as described in Einstein's field equations .

In classical physics, an inertial reference frame is one in which an object that experiences no forces does not accelerate. In general relativity, an inertial frame of reference is one that is following a geodesic of space-time. An object that moves against a geodesic experiences a force. An object in free fall does not experience a force, because it is following a geodesic. An object standing on the earth, however, will experience a force, as it is being held against the geodesic by the surface of the planet.

Einstein partially advocates Mach's principle in that distant stars explain inertia because they provide the gravitational field against which acceleration and inertia occur. But contrary to Leibniz's account, this warped space-time is as integral a part of an object as are its other defining characteristics, such as volume and mass. If one holds, contrary to idealist beliefs, that objects exist independently of the mind, it seems that relativistics commits one to also hold the idea that space and temporality have exactly the same type of independent existence.

Conventionalism [ edit ] The position of conventionalism states that there is no fact of the matter as to the geometry of space and time, but that it is decided by convention. The first proponent of such a view, Henri Poincaré , reacting to the creation of the new non-Euclidean geometry , argued that which geometry applied to a space was decided by convention, since different geometries will describe a set of objects equally well, based on considerations from his sphere-world .

This view was developed and updated to include considerations from relativistic physics by Hans Reichenbach . Reichenbach's conventionalism, applying to space and time, focuses around the idea of coordinative definition .

Coordinative definition has two major features. The first has to do with coordinating units of length with certain physical objects. This is motivated by the fact that we can never directly apprehend length. Instead we must choose some physical object, say the Standard Metre at the Bureau International des Poids et Mesures (International Bureau of Weights and Measures), or the wavelength of cadmium to stand in as our unit of length. The second feature deals with separated objects. Although we can, presumably, directly test the equality of length of two measuring rods when they are next to one another, we can not find out as much for two rods distant from one another. Even supposing that two rods, whenever brought near to one another are seen to be equal in length, we are not justified in stating that they are always equal in length. This impossibility undermines our ability to decide the equality of length of two distant objects. Sameness of length, to the contrary, must be set by definition.

Such a use of coordinative definition is in effect, on Reichenbach's conventionalism, in the General Theory of Relativity where light is assumed, i.e. not discovered, to mark out equal distances in equal times. After this setting of coordinative definition, however, the geometry of spacetime is set.

As in the absolutism/relationalism debate, contemporary philosophy is still in disagreement as to the correctness of the conventionalist doctrine.

Structure of space-time [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( August 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Building from a mix of insights from the historical debates of absolutism and conventionalism as well as reflecting on the import of the technical apparatus of the General Theory of Relativity, details as to the structure of space-time have made up a large proportion of discussion within the philosophy of space and time, as well as the philosophy of physics . The following is a short list of topics.

Relativity of simultaneity [ edit ] According to special relativity each point in the universe can have a different set of events that compose its present instant. This has been used in the Rietdijk–Putnam argument to demonstrate that relativity predicts a block universe in which events are fixed in four dimensions.

[ citation needed ] [ further explanation needed ] Historical frameworks [ edit ] A further application of the modern mathematical methods, in league with the idea of invariance and covariance groups, is to try to interpret historical views of space and time in modern, mathematical language.

In these translations, a theory of space and time is seen as a manifold paired with vector spaces , the more vector spaces the more facts there are about objects in that theory. The historical development of spacetime theories is generally seen to start from a position where many facts about objects are incorporated in that theory, and as history progresses, more and more structure is removed.

For example, Aristotelian space and time has both absolute position and special places, such as the center of the cosmos and the circumference. Newtonian space and time has absolute position and is Galilean invariant , but does not have special positions.

Direction of time [ edit ] The problem of the direction of time arises directly from two contradictory facts. Firstly, the fundamental physical laws are time-reversal invariant ; if a cinematographic film were taken of any process describable by means of the aforementioned laws and then played backwards, it would still portray a physically possible process. Secondly, our experience of time, at the macroscopic level, is not time-reversal invariant.

[ 13 ] Glasses can fall and break, but shards of glass cannot reassemble and fly up onto tables. We have memories of the past, and none of the future. We feel we cannot change the past but can influence the future. There is no future without our past.

Causation solution [ edit ] One solution to this problem takes a metaphysical view, in which the direction of time follows from an asymmetry of causation . We know more about the past because the elements of the past are causes for the effects that compose our perception. We cannot affect the past, but we can affect the outcomes of the future.

There are two main objections to this view. First is the problem of distinguishing the cause from the effect in a non-arbitrary way. The use of causation in constructing a temporal ordering could easily become circular. The second problem with this view is its explanatory power. While the causation account, if successful, may account for some time-asymmetric phenomena like perception and action, it does not account for many others.

However, asymmetry of causation can be observed in a non-arbitrary way which is not metaphysical in the case of a human hand dropping a cup of water which smashes into fragments on a hard floor, spilling the liquid. In this order, the causes of the resultant pattern of cup fragments and water spill is easily attributable in terms of the trajectory of the cup, irregularities in its structure, angle of its impact on the floor, etc. However, applying the same event in reverse, it is difficult to explain why the various pieces of the cup should fly up into the human hand and reassemble precisely into the shape of a cup, or why the water should position itself entirely within the cup. The causes of the resultant structure and shape of the cup and the encapsulation of the water by the hand within the cup are not easily attributable, as neither hand nor floor can achieve such formations of the cup or water. This asymmetry is perceivable on account of two features: i) the relationship between the agent capacities of the human hand (i.e., what it is and is not capable of and what it is for) and non-animal agency (i.e., what floors are and are not capable of and what they are for) and ii) that the pieces of cup came to possess exactly the nature and number of those of a cup before assembling. In short, such asymmetry is attributable to the relationship between i) temporal direction and ii) the implications of form and functional capacity.

The application of these ideas of form and functional capacity only dictates temporal direction in relation to complex scenarios involving specific, non-metaphysical agency which is not merely dependent on human perception of time. However, this last observation in itself is not sufficient to invalidate the implications of the example for the progressive nature of time in general.

Thermodynamics solution [ edit ] The second major family of solutions to this problem, and by far the one that has generated the most literature, finds the existence of the direction of time as relating to the nature of thermodynamics.

The answer from classical thermodynamics states that while our basic physical theory is, in fact, time-reversal symmetric, thermodynamics is not. In particular, the second law of thermodynamics states that the net entropy of a closed system never decreases, and this explains why we often see glass breaking, but not coming back together.

But in statistical mechanics things become more complicated. On one hand, statistical mechanics is far superior to classical thermodynamics, in that thermodynamic behavior, such as glass breaking, can be explained by the fundamental laws of physics paired with a statistical postulate. But statistical mechanics, unlike classical thermodynamics, is time-reversal symmetric. The second law of thermodynamics, as it arises in statistical mechanics, merely states that it is overwhelmingly likely that net entropy will increase, but it is not an absolute law.

Current thermodynamic solutions to the problem of the direction of time aim to find some further fact, or feature of the laws of nature to account for this discrepancy.

Laws solution [ edit ] A third type of solution to the problem of the direction of time, although much less represented, argues that the laws are not time-reversal symmetric. For example, certain processes in quantum mechanics , relating to the weak nuclear force , are not time-reversible, keeping in mind that when dealing with quantum mechanics time-reversibility comprises a more complex definition. But this type of solution is insufficient because 1) the time-asymmetric phenomena in quantum mechanics are too few to account for the uniformity of macroscopic time-asymmetry and 2) it relies on the assumption that quantum mechanics is the final or correct description of physical processes.

[ citation needed ] One recent proponent of the laws solution is Tim Maudlin who argues that the fundamental laws of physics are laws of temporal evolution (see Maudlin [2007]). However, elsewhere Maudlin argues: "[the] passage of time is an intrinsic asymmetry in the temporal structure of the world... It is the asymmetry that grounds the distinction between sequences that runs from past to future and sequences which run from future to past" [ibid, 2010 edition, p. 108]. Thus it is arguably difficult to assess whether Maudlin is suggesting that the direction of time is a consequence of the laws or is itself primitive.

Flow of time [ edit ] The problem of the flow of time, as it has been treated in analytic philosophy, owes its beginning to a paper written by J. M. E. McTaggart , in which he proposes two "temporal series". The first series, which means to account for our intuitions about temporal becoming, or the moving Now, is called the A-series . The A-series orders events according to their being in the past, present or future, simpliciter and in comparison to each other. The B-series eliminates all reference to the present, and the associated temporal modalities of past and future, and orders all events by the temporal relations earlier than and later than . In many ways, the debate between proponents of these two views can be seen as a continuation of the early modern debate between the view that there is absolute time (defended by Isaac Newton ) and the view that there is only merely relative time (defended by Gottfried Leibniz ).

McTaggart, in his paper " The Unreality of Time ", argues that time is unreal since a) the A-series is inconsistent and b) the B-series alone cannot account for the nature of time as the A-series describes an essential feature of it.

Building from this framework, two camps of solution have been offered. The first, the A-theorist solution, takes becoming as the central feature of time, and tries to construct the B-series from the A-series by offering an account of how B-facts come to be out of A-facts. The second camp, the B-theorist solution, takes as decisive McTaggart's arguments against the A-series and tries to construct the A-series out of the B-series, for example, by temporal indexicals .

Presentism and eternalism [ edit ] Main articles: Presentism (philosophy of time) and Eternalism (philosophy of time) According to Presentism , time is an ordering of various realities . At a certain time, some things exist and others do not. This is the only reality we can deal with. We cannot, for example, say that Homer exists because at the present time he does not. An Eternalist , on the other hand, holds that time is a dimension of reality on a par with the three spatial dimensions, and hence that all things—past, present and future—can be said to be just as real as things in the present. According to this theory, then, Homer really does exist, though we must still use special language when talking about somebody who exists at a distant time—just as we would use special language when talking about something far away (the very words near , far , above , below , and such are directly comparable to phrases such as in the past , a minute ago , and so on).

Philosophers such as Vincent Conitzer and Caspar Hare have argued that the philosophy of time is connected to the philosophy of self . Conitzer argues that the metaphysics of the self are connected to the A-theory of time, and that arguments in favor of A-theory are more effective as arguments for the combined position of both A-theory being true and the "I" being metaphysically privileged from other perspectives .

[ 14 ] Caspar Hare has made similar arguments with the theories of egocentric presentism and perspectival realism , of which several other philosophers have written reviews.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Endurantism and perdurantism [ edit ] Main articles: Endurantism and Perdurantism The positions on the persistence of objects are somewhat similar. An endurantist holds that for an object to persist through time is for it to exist completely at different times (each instance of existence we can regard as somehow separate from previous and future instances, though still numerically identical with them). A perdurantist on the other hand holds that for a thing to exist through time is for it to exist as a continuous reality, and that when we consider the thing as a whole we must consider an aggregate of all its " temporal parts " or instances of existing. Endurantism is seen as the conventional view and flows out of our pre-philosophical ideas (when I talk to somebody I think I am talking to that person as a complete object, and not just a part of a cross-temporal being), but perdurantists such as David Lewis have attacked this position. They argue that perdurantism is the superior view for its ability to take account of change in objects.

On the whole, Presentists are also endurantists and Eternalists are also perdurantists (and vice versa), but this is not a necessary relation and it is possible to claim, for instance, that time's passage indicates a series of ordered realities, but that objects within these realities somehow exist outside of the reality as a whole, even though the realities as wholes are not related. However, such positions are rarely adopted.

See also [ edit ] Works: Being and Time Critique of Pure Reason The End of Time Process and Reality Time Reborn People: Quentin Smith Milič Čapek Topics: Arrow of time Chronometry Einstein's thought experiments Eternal return Measure problem (cosmology) Metaphysics Moving spotlight theory of time Presentism (philosophy of time) Process philosophy Spacetime Temporality Temporal parts Time geography Time travel in science and time travel in fiction Zeno's paradoxes Notes [ edit ] ^ John Bartlett - Bartlett's Familiar Quotations - (page locatable by contents) Hachette UK, 2 December 2014 ISBN 031625018X Accessed December 13th, 2017 ^ Thompson, Richard L. (2007).

The Cosmology of the Bhagavata Purana: Mysteries of the Sacred Universe .

Motilal Banarsidass . p. 225.

ISBN 978-81-208-1919-1 .

Extract of page 225 ^ Dagobert Runes, Dictionary of Philosophy , p. 318.

^ Atuq Eusebio Manga Qespi, Instituto de lingüística y Cultura Amerindia de la Universidad de Valencia.

Pacha: un concepto andino de espacio y tiempo Archived 2010-11-05 at the Wayback Machine . Revísta española de Antropología Americana, 24, pp. 155–189. Edit. Complutense, Madrid. 1994 ^ Stephen Hart, Peruvian Cultural Studies:Work in Progress ^ Paul Richard Steele, Catherine J. Allen, Handbook of Inca mythology , p. 86, ( ISBN 1-57607-354-8 ) ^ St. Augustine, Confessions , Book 11.

http://www.sacred-texts.com/chr/augconf/aug11.htm (Accessed 19/5/14).

^ Craig, William Lane (June 1979). "Whitrow and Popper on the Impossibility of an Infinite Past".

The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science .

30 (2): 165–170 [165–6].

doi : 10.1093/bjps/30.2.165 .

^ Nader El-Bizri , 'In Defence of the Sovereignty of Philosophy: al-Baghdadi's Critique of Ibn al-Haytham's Geometrisation of Place', Arabic Sciences and Philosophy 17 (2007), 57–80 ^ [6.54] And it has already been shown that forms of light and color continually generated in air and in all [other] transparent bodies, and  forms continually extend through the air, as well as through [other] transparent bodies, in various directions," ... "hence the extramission of [visual] rays is superfluous and useless".— Alhacen (11th c.) as translated by A.Mark Smith p.372 (2001) Alhacen's Theory of Visual Perception: A Critical Edition, with English Translation and Commentary, of the First Three Books of Alhacen's "De aspectibus", the Medieval Latin Version of Ibn al-Haytham's "Kitāb al-Manāẓir": Volume Two Transactions of the American Philosophical Society , New Series, Vol. 91 , No. 5 (2001), pp. 339-819 ^ Smith, A. Mark (2005). "The Alhacenian Account Of Spatial Perception And Its Epistemological Implications".

Arabic Sciences and Philosophy .

15 (2).

Cambridge University Press : 219– 40.

doi : 10.1017/S0957423905000184 .

S2CID 171003284 .

^ See Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, I ["The Elements of Transcendentalism"], Part I ["The Transcendental Aesthetic"], Sections I and II ["Of Space" and "Of Time"]) ^ Borchert, D.M. (2006) Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2nd Ed. Vol. 9. MI: Cengage Learning. P. 468.

^ Conitzer, Vincent (30 Aug 2020). "The Personalized A-Theory of Time and Perspective".

arXiv : 2008.13207v1 [ physics.hist-ph ].

^ McDaniel, Kris (January 2012).

" On Myself, and Other, Less Important Subjects by Hare, Caspar - Review" (PDF) .

Ethics .

122 (2): 403– 410.

doi : 10.1086/663578 .

^ Markosian, Ned.

"Are You Special? A Review of Caspar Hare's On Myself, and Other, Less Important Subjects " (PDF) .

The Philosophical Review . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-02-26 . Retrieved 2015-03-13 .

References [ edit ] Albert, David (2000) Time and Chance . Harvard Univ. Press.

Dainton, Barry (2010) Time and Space, Second Edition . McGill-Queens University Press.

ISBN 978-0-7735-3747-7 Earman, John (1989) World Enough and Space-Time . MIT Press.

Friedman, Michael (1983) Foundations of Space-Time Theories . Princeton Univ. Press.

Grünbaum, Adolf (1974) Philosophical Problems of Space and Time , 2nd ed. Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science. Vol XII. D. Reidel Publishing Horwich, Paul (1987) Asymmetries in Time . MIT Press.

Ialenti, Vincent (2020) Deep Time Reckoning . MIT Press.

Lookwood, Michael The Labyrinth of Time , Oxford University Press, 2005, ISBN 9780199249954.

Lucas, John Randolph , 1973.

A Treatise on Time and Space . London: Methuen.

Mellor, D.H. (1998) Real Time II . Routledge.

Laura Mersini-Houghton ; Rudy Vaas (eds.) (2012) The Arrows of Time. A Debate in Cosmology . Springer. 22 June 2012.

ISBN 978-3642232589 .

Graham Nerlich (1976/2009) The Shape of Space . Cambridge University Press.

Hans Reichenbach (1958) The Philosophy of Space and Time . Dover Hans Reichenbach (1991) The Direction of Time . University of California Press.

Rochelle, Gerald (1998) Behind Time. Ashgate.

Lawrence Sklar (1976) Space, Time, and Spacetime . University of California Press.

Turetzky, Philip (1998) Time . Routledge.

Bas van Fraassen , 1970.

An Introduction to the Philosophy of Space and Time . Random House.

Gal-Or, Benjamin "Cosmology, Physics and Philosophy". Springer-Verlag, New York, 1981, 1983, 1987 ISBN 0-387-90581-2 Ahmad, Manzoor (May 28, 1998).

"XV: The Notion of Existence" . In Naeem Ahmad; George F McClean (eds.).

Philosophy in Pakistan . Department of Philosophy, University of Punjab, Lahore, Punjab Province of Pakistan: Punjab University press. pp.

245– 250.

ISBN 1-56518-108-5 . Retrieved 4 July 2012 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Philosophy of time .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy : " Time " by Ned Markosian ; " Being and Becoming in Modern Physics " by Steven Savitt; " Absolute and Relational Theories of Space and Motion " by Nick Huggett and Carl Hoefer .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy : " Time " by Bradley Dowden.

" Persistence in Time " by Damiano Costa.

Brown, C.L., 2006, " What is Space?" A largely Wittgensteinian approach towards a dissolution of the question: "What is space?" Karpenko I.A., 2016, " What is Time in Modern Physics?

", Epistemology and Philosophy of Science, vol. 49, no, 3, pp. 105–123.

Rea, M. C., " Four Dimensionalism " in The Oxford Handbook for Metaphysics . Oxford Univ. Press. Describes presentism and four-dimensionalism .

CEITT - Time and Temporality Research Center. " Time and Temporality ".

https://web.archive.org/web/20110710211328/http://www.exactspent.com/philosophy_of_space_and_time.htm and related subjects " Gods and the Universe in Buddhist Perspective Archived 2016-03-04 at the Wayback Machine , Essays on Buddhist Cosmology" by Francis Story.

Mark P. de Munnynck (1913).

"Space" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Links to related articles v t e Time Key concepts Past Present Future Eternity Measurement and standards Chronometry UTC Universal Time TAI Unit of time Orders of magnitude (time) Measurement systems Italian six-hour clock Thai six-hour clock 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Relative hour Daylight saving time Chinese Decimal Hexadecimal Hindu Metric Roman Sidereal Solar Time zone Calendars Main types Solar Lunar Lunisolar Gregorian Julian Hebrew Islamic Solar Hijri Chinese Hindu Panchang Maya List Clocks Main types astronomical astrarium atomic quantum hourglass marine sundial watch 24-hour wristwatch mechanical stopwatch water-based Cuckoo clock Digital clock Grandfather clock History Timeline Chronology History Astronomical chronology Big History Calendar era Deep time Periodization Regnal year Timeline Philosophy of time A series and B series B-theory of time Chronocentrism Duration Endurantism Eternal return Eternalism Event Moving spotlight theory Perdurantism Presentism Temporal finitism Temporal parts The Unreality of Time Religion Mythology Ages of Man Destiny Immortality Dreamtime Kāla Time and fate deities Father Time Wheel of time Kalachakra Human experience and use of time Chronemics Generation time Mental chronometry Music tempo time signature Rosy retrospection Tense–aspect–mood Time management Yesterday – Today – Tomorrow Time in science Geology Geological time age chron eon epoch era period Geochronology Geological history of Earth Physics Absolute space and time Arrow of time Chronon Coordinate time Instant Proper time Spacetime Theory of relativity Time domain Time translation symmetry Time reversal symmetry Other fields Chronological dating Chronobiology Circadian rhythms Clock reaction Glottochronology Time geography Related Leap year Memory Moment Six-hour day Space System time Tempus fugit Time capsule Time immemorial Time travel Category Commons v t e Philosophy of time Concepts in time Time A priori and a posteriori A series and B series Action Duration Eternal return Eternity Event Aevum Imaginary time Multiple time dimensions Temporal parts Temporality Theories of time A-theory of time B-theory of time Endurantism Eternalism Four-dimensionalism Fatalism Finitism Growing block universe Perdurantism Presentism Related articles Etiology Metaphysics Post hoc ergo propter hoc Teleology " The Unreality of Time " The Singular Universe and the Reality of Time An Experiment with Time v t e Metaphysics Theories Abstract object theory Action theory Anti-realism Determinism Dualism Enactivism Essentialism Existentialism Free will Idealism Libertarianism Liberty Materialism Meaning of life Monism Naturalism Nihilism Phenomenalism Physicalism Realism Relativism Scientific realism Solipsism Spiritualism Subjectivism Substance theory Theory of forms Truthmaker theory Type theory Concepts Abstract object Anima mundi Category of being Causality Causal closure Cogito, ergo sum Concept Cosmos Embodied cognition Entity Essence Existence Experience Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Importance Information Data Insight Intelligence Intention Linguistic modality Matter Meaning Mental representation Mind Motion Nature Necessity Object Ontology Pattern Perception Physical object Principle Property Qualia Quality Reality Relation Self Soul Subject Substantial form Thought Time Truth Type–token distinction Universal Unobservable Value Metaphysicians Anscombe Aquinas Aristotle Armstrong Averroes Avicenna Baudrillard Bergson Berkeley Boethius Bolzano Carnap Collingwood Davidson Deleuze Descartes Dummett Al-Ghazali Hegel Heidegger Hume Kant Kierkegaard Al-Kindi Kripke Laozi Leibniz Lewis Locke Lotze Lucretius Malebranche Meinong Moore Mozi Newton Nietzsche Parfit Parmenides Peirce Plantinga Plato Plotinus Proclus Putnam Quine Reid Russell Ryle Sartre Schopenhauer Scotus Spinoza Strawson Suárez Whitehead Wittgenstein Wolff more ...

Notable works Sophist (c. 350 BC) Timaeus (c. 350 BC) Nyāya Sūtras (c. 200 BC) De rerum natura (c. 80 BC) Metaphysics (c. 50) Enneads (c. 270) Daneshnameh-ye Alai and Al-Nijat (c. 1000) Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) Ethics (1677) A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) Monadology (1714) Critique of Pure Reason (1781) Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (1783) The Phenomenology of Spirit (1807) The World as Will and Representation (1818) Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments (1846) Being and Time (1927) Being and Nothingness (1943) Simulacra and Simulation (1981) Related topics Axiology Cosmology Epistemology Feminist metaphysics Interpretations of quantum mechanics Mereology Meta- Phenomenology Philosophy of mind Philosophy of psychology Philosophy of self Philosophy of space and time Teleology Category Philosophy portal v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐s4l4n
Cached time: 20250816102123
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.672 seconds
Real time usage: 0.869 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3802/1000000
Revision size: 39561/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 290294/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 56705/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 101080/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.358/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 14834223/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  649.217      1 -total
 23.61%  153.300      1 Template:Navboxes
 18.84%  122.295      1 Template:Reflist
 13.76%   89.353      2 Template:Langx
 12.58%   81.646     12 Template:Navbox
 12.14%   78.790      1 Template:Time_Topics
  8.46%   54.950      1 Template:Short_description
  8.05%   52.291      4 Template:ISBN
  7.37%   47.868      1 Template:Metaphysics
  6.22%   40.372      1 Template:Commonscat Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:655002:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816102123 and revision id 1306163988. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Philosophy_of_space_and_time&oldid=1306163988 " Categories : Philosophy of time Natural philosophy Ontology Philosophy of physics Space and time Thought experiments in physics Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Quechua-language text Articles containing Aymara-language text Articles needing additional references from August 2018 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2016 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2012 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 08:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Philosophy of space and time 21 languages Add topic

