Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Research 2 Staff 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents JILA 10 languages Čeština Deutsch فارسی Français Polski Português Română Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 40°00′27″N 105°16′06″W ﻿ / ﻿ 40.00744°N 105.26839°W ﻿ / 40.00744; -105.26839 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Physics laboratory in Colorado JILA The JILA tower at the University of Colorado Parent institution University of Colorado Boulder National Institute of Standards and Technology Established 1962 ; 63 years ago ( 1962 ) Focus Physical sciences Chair Konrad Lehnert Formerly called Joint Institute for Laboratory Astrophysics Location Boulder, Colorado , U.S.

Coordinates 40°00′27″N 105°16′06″W ﻿ / ﻿ 40.00744°N 105.26839°W ﻿ / 40.00744; -105.26839 Website jila .colorado .edu JILA , formerly known as the Joint Institute for Laboratory Astrophysics , [ 1 ] is a physical science research institute in the United States.  JILA is located on the University of Colorado Boulder campus.  JILA was founded in 1962 as a joint institute of the University of Colorado Boulder and the National Institute of Standards & Technology .

Research [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( March 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) JILA is one of the nation’s leading research institutes in the physical sciences. The world's first Bose–Einstein condensate was created at JILA by Eric Cornell and Carl Wieman in 1995.

[ 2 ] The first frequency comb demonstration was led by John L. Hall at JILA. The first demonstrations of a Fermionic condensate and BEC-BCS crossover physics were done by Deborah S. Jin .

JILA’s faculty members hold appointments in a wide range of disciplines, including the Departments of Physics , Astrophysical and Planetary Science , Chemistry and Biochemistry , and Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology , as well as Engineering . Many faculty also hold joint appointments with the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).

[ 3 ] JILA’s Quantum Physics Division of NIST members hold joint faculty appointments at CU in the same departments.

Research at JILA addresses fundamental scientific questions about the limits of quantum measurements and technologies, the design of precision optical and X-ray lasers, the fundamental principles underlying the interaction of light and matter, the role of quantum physics in chemistry and biology, and the processes that have governed the evolution of the Universe for nearly 14 billion years.

Staff [ edit ] JILA's current faculty includes two Nobel laureates— Eric Cornell and John L. Hall —and two John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Fellows — Margaret Murnane and Ana Maria Rey .

David J. Wineland and Carl Wieman , both previous affiliated with NIST and JILA respectively, were also awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics , [ 4 ] [ 5 ] while Deborah Jin was previously awarded a MacArthur Fellowship .

[ 6 ] Each year, JILA scientists publish more than 200 original research papers in national and international scientific journals and conference proceedings.

[ 7 ] References [ edit ] ^ Julie Philips (July 2012).

JILA: The First Fifty Years (PDF) . Retrieved 2020-01-30 .

^ Cornell, Eric (2001).

"Nobel Prize in Physics 2001" .

NobelPrize.org . Retrieved 2025-04-05 .

^ "National Institute of Standards and Technology" .

NIST . 2025-03-26 . Retrieved 2025-04-05 .

^ Ouellette, Jennifer (2020-06-15).

"Chilling out: Physicists create exotic "fifth form of matter" on board the ISS" .

Ars Technica .

^ "Boulder's David Wineland accepts Nobel Prize for physics" .

The Denver Post . 2012-12-10.

^ Chang, Kenneth (2016-09-16).

"Deborah S. Jin Dies at 47; Physicist Studied Matter in Extreme Cold" .

The New York Times .

^ "About JILA" .

JILA Website . Retrieved 2015-06-10 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e University of Colorado Boulder Located in : Boulder, Colorado Academics College of Architecture and Planning College of Arts and Sciences College of Engineering and Applied Science College of Music Graduate School Interdisciplinary Telecommunications Program Leeds School of Business School of Education College of Media, Communication and Information University of Colorado Law School University of Colorado Engineering Management Program Research Colorado Center for Astrodynamics Research Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences ( National Snow and Ice Data Center ) Institute of Arctic and Alpine Research JILA Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics Theoretical Advanced Study Institute Campus Fiske Planetarium Norlin Quad Sommers–Bausch Observatory University of Colorado Museum of Natural History Athletics Programs Crew Men's basketball Women's basketball Cross country Football Women's lacrosse Triathlon Women's volleyball Venues Events Center Folsom Field Rivalries Rocky Mountain Showdown Rumble in the Rockies Kansas State Nebraska Culture Fight Song "Golden Buffalo" Marching Band Ralphie the Buffalo Related Pac-12 Conference Big 12 Conference Student life Residential halls ( Cheyenne Arapaho Hall ) The Hill KVCU CU Independent CU Buffoons Colorado Shakespeare Festival Mazal Holocaust Collection Society for the Advancement of Central and East European Cultures University of Colorado Student Government "Crack Baby Athletic Association" Cannibal! The Musical People Alumni Related Los Seis de Boulder Simpson v. University of Colorado Founded : 1876 Students : 32,201 Endowment : $1.09 billion Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Israel Academics CiNii Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=JILA&oldid=1305687404 " Categories : Research institutes in Colorado University of Colorado Boulder National Institute of Standards and Technology Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2025 All articles needing additional references Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 14:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents JILA 10 languages Add topic

