Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Educational philosophy Toggle Educational philosophy subsection 1.1 Classical theorists 1.1.1 Plato 1.1.2 Locke 2 Educational psychology Toggle Educational psychology subsection 2.1 Behavior analysis 2.1.1 Learning and conditioning 2.1.2 Transfer of learning 2.1.3 Techniques and benefits of transfer of learning 2.2 Cognitivism 2.2.1 Gestalt theory 2.2.2 Other cognitive theories 2.3 Constructivism 2.4 Transformative learning theory 3 Educational neuroscience Toggle Educational neuroscience subsection 3.1 Formal and mental discipline 4 Multiple intelligences 5 Multimedia learning Toggle Multimedia learning subsection 5.1 Using online games for learning 6 Other learning theories Toggle Other learning theories subsection 6.1 Learning style theories 6.2 Affective Context Model 6.3 Informal and post-modern theories 7 Educational anthropology Toggle Educational anthropology subsection 7.1 Philosophical anthropology 8 Criticism 9 See also 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Learning theory (education) 20 languages العربية Asturianu Català Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Français Galego Հայերեն Nederlands Português Shqip Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Українська 中文 Kadazandusun Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Theory that describes how students receive, process, and retain knowledge during learning Educational research Disciplines Curriculum studies Education sciences Evaluation History Philosophy Psychology ( school ) Technology International education School counseling Special education Gifted education Female education Religious education Teacher education Teaching method Curricular domains Arts Business Computing Early childhood Engineering Language Literacy Mathematics Performing arts Science Social science Technology Vocational Methods Case method Conversation analysis Discourse analysis Evidence-based Factor analysis Factorial experiment Focus group Learning theory Meta-analysis Multivariate statistics Participant observation Reform v t e Learning theory attempts to describe how students receive, process, and retain knowledge during learning . Cognitive, emotional, and environmental influences, as well as prior experience, all play a part in how understanding, or a worldview, is acquired or changed and knowledge and skills retained.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Behaviorists look at learning as an aspect of conditioning and advocating a system of rewards and targets in education. Educators who embrace cognitive theory believe that the definition of learning as a change in behaviour is too narrow, and study the learner rather than their environment—and in particular the complexities of human memory . Those who advocate constructivism believe that a learner's ability to learn relies largely on what they already know and understand, and the acquisition of knowledge should be an individually tailored process of construction.

Transformative learning theory focuses on the often-necessary change required in a learner's preconceptions and worldview. Geographical learning theory focuses on the ways that contexts and environments shape the learning process.

Outside the realm of educational psychology , techniques to directly observe the functioning of the brain during the learning process, such as event-related potential and functional magnetic resonance imaging , are used in educational neuroscience . The theory of multiple intelligences , where learning is seen as the interaction between dozens of different functional areas in the brain each with their own individual strengths and weaknesses in any particular human learner, has also been proposed, but empirical research has found the theory to be unsupported by evidence.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Educational philosophy [ edit ] Main article: Philosophy of education Classical theorists [ edit ] Plato [ edit ] Main article: Plato Plato (428 BC–347 BC) proposed the question: "How does an individual learn something new when the topic is brand new to that person?", This question may seem trivial; however, think of a human-like a computer.  The question would then become: How does a computer take in any factual information without previous programming?  Plato answered his own question by stating that knowledge is present at birth and all information learned by a person is merely a recollection of something the soul has already learned previously, [ 5 ] which is called the Theory of Recollection or Platonic epistemology .

[ 6 ] This answer could be further justified by a paradox: If a person knows something, they don't need to question it, and if a person does not know something, they don't know to question it.

[ 6 ] Plato says that if one did not previously know something, then they cannot learn it.  He describes learning as a passive process, where information and knowledge are ironed into the soul over time.  However, Plato's theory elicits even more questions about knowledge: If we can only learn something when we already had the knowledge impressed onto our souls, then how did our souls gain that knowledge in the first place?  Plato's theory can seem convoluted; however, his classical theory can still help us understand knowledge today.

[ 5 ] Locke [ edit ] Main article: John Locke John Locke (1632–1704) offered an answer to Plato's question as well.  Locke offered the "blank slate" theory where humans are born into the world with no innate knowledge and are ready to be written on and influenced by the environment.

[ 7 ] The thinker maintained that knowledge and ideas originate from two sources, which are sensation and reflection. The former provides insights regarding external objects (including their properties) while the latter provides the ideas about one's mental faculties (volition and understanding).

[ 8 ] In the theory of empiricism , these sources are direct experience and observation.

[ 9 ] Locke, like David Hume , is considered an empiricist because he locates the source of human knowledge in the empirical world.

Locke recognized that something had to be present, however.  This something, to Locke, seemed to be "mental powers".  Locke viewed these powers as a biological ability the baby is born with, similar to how a baby knows how to biologically function when born.  So as soon as the baby enters the world, it immediately has experiences with its surroundings and all of those experiences are being transcribed to the baby's "slate".  All of the experiences then eventually culminate into complex and abstract ideas.  This theory can still help teachers understand their students' learning today.

[ 5 ] Educational psychology [ edit ] Main article: Educational psychology Behavior analysis [ edit ] Main articles: Behaviorism and Applied behavior analysis The term "behaviorism" was coined by American psychologist John Watson (1878–1959). Watson believed the behaviorist view is a purely objective experimental branch of natural science with a goal to predict and control behavior.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] In an article in the Psychological Review , he stated that, "Its theoretical goal is the prediction and control of behavior. Introspection forms no essential part of its methods, nor is the scientific value of its data dependent upon the readiness with which they lend themselves to interpretation in terms of consciousness." [ 12 ] Methodological behaviorism is based on the theory of only explaining public events, or observable behavior.

B.F. Skinner introduced another type of behaviorism called radical behaviorism , or the conceptual analysis of behavior, which is based on the theory of also explaining private events; particularly, thinking and feelings. Radical behaviorism forms the conceptual piece of behavior analysis.

In behavior analysis, learning is the acquisition of a new behavior through conditioning and social learning.

Learning and conditioning [ edit ] The three main types of conditioning and learning: Classical conditioning , where the behavior becomes a reflex response to an antecedent stimulus.

Operant conditioning , where antecedent stimuli results from the consequences that follow the behavior through a reward (reinforcement) or a punishment.

Social learning theory , where an observation of behavior is followed by modeling.

Ivan Pavlov discovered classical conditioning. He observed that if dogs come to associate the delivery of food with a white lab coat or the ringing of a bell, they produce saliva, even when there is no sight or smell of food. Classical conditioning considers this form of learning the same, whether in dogs or in humans.

[ 13 ] Operant conditioning reinforces this behavior with a reward or a punishment. A reward increases the likelihood of the behavior recurring, a punishment decreases its likelihood.

[ 14 ] Social learning theory observes behavior and is followed with modeling.

These three learning theories form the basis of applied behavior analysis , the application of behavior analysis, which uses analyzed antecedents, functional analysis , replacement behavior strategies, and often data collection and reinforcement to change behavior. The old practice was called behavior modification, which only used assumed antecedents and consequences to change behavior without acknowledging the conceptual analysis; analyzing the function of behavior and teaching of new behaviors that would serve the same function was never relevant in behavior modification.

Behaviorists view the learning process as a change in behavior, and arrange the environment to elicit desired responses through such devices as behavioral objectives, Competency-based learning , and skill development and training.

[ 15 ] Educational approaches such as Early Intensive Behavioral Intervention, curriculum-based measurement , and direct instruction have emerged from this model.

[ 16 ] Transfer of learning [ edit ] Transfer of learning is the idea that what one learns in school somehow carries over to situations different from that particular time and that particular setting.

[ 17 ] Transfer was amongst the first phenomena tested in educational psychology . Edward Lee Thorndike was a pioneer in transfer research. He found that though transfer is extremely important for learning, it is a rarely occurring phenomenon. In fact, he held an experiment where he had the subjects estimate the size of a specific shape and then he would switch the shape. He found that the prior information did not help the subjects; instead it impeded their learning .

[ 17 ] One explanation of why transfer does not occur often involves surface structure and deep structure. The surface structure is the way a problem is framed. The deep structure is the steps for the solution. For example, when a math story problem changes contexts from asking how much it costs to reseed a lawn to how much it costs to varnish a table, they have different surface structures, but the steps for getting the answers are the same. However, many people are more influenced by the surface structure. In reality, the surface structure is unimportant. Nonetheless, people are concerned with it because they believe that it provides background knowledge on how to do the problem. Consequently, this interferes with their understanding of the deep structure of the problem. Even if somebody tries to concentrate on the deep structure, transfer still may be unsuccessful because the deep structure is not usually obvious. Therefore, surface structure gets in the way of people's ability to see the deep structure of the problem and transfer the knowledge they have learned to come up with a solution to a new problem.

[ 18 ] Current learning pedagogies focus on conveying rote knowledge , independent of the context that gives it meaning [ citation needed ] . Because of this, students often struggle to transfer this stand-alone information into other aspects of their education . Students need much more than abstract concepts and self-contained knowledge ; they need to be exposed to learning that is practiced in the context of authentic activity and culture .

[ 19 ] Critics of situated cognition, however, would argue that by discrediting stand-alone information, the transfer of knowledge across contextual boundaries becomes impossible.

[ 20 ] There must be a balance between situating knowledge while also grasping the deep structure of material, or the understanding of how one arrives to know such information.

[ 18 ] Some theorists argue that transfer does not even occur at all. They believe that students transform what they have learned into the new context. They say that transfer is too much of a passive notion. They believe students, instead, transform their knowledge in an active way. Students don't simply carry over knowledge from the classroom, but they construct the knowledge in a way that they can understand it themselves. The learner changes the information they have learned to make it best adapt to the changing contexts that they use the knowledge in. This transformation process can occur when a learner feels motivated to use the knowledge—however, if the student does not find the transformation necessary, it is less likely that the knowledge will ever transform.

[ 21 ] Techniques and benefits of transfer of learning [ edit ] There are many different conditions that influence transfer of learning in the classroom.

[ 22 ] These conditions include features of the task, features of the learner, features of the organization and social context of the activity.

[ 23 ] The features of the task include practicing through simulations, problem-based learning, and knowledge and skills for implementing new plans.

[ 23 ] The features of learners include their ability to reflect on past experiences, their ability to participate in group discussions, practice skills, and participate in written discussions. All the unique features contribute to a student's ability to use transfer of learning.

[ 22 ] There are structural techniques that can aid learning transfer in the classroom. These structural strategies include hugging and bridging.

[ 24 ] Hugging uses the technique of simulating an activity to encourage reflexive learning. An example of the hugging strategy is when a student practices teaching a lesson or when a student role plays with another student. These examples encourage critical thinking that engages the student and helps them understand what they are learning—one of the goals of transfer of learning [ 24 ] and desirable difficulties .

Bridging is when instruction encourages thinking abstractly by helping to identify connections between ideas and to analyze those connections. An example is when a teacher lets the student analyze their past test results and the way they got those results. This includes amount of study time and study strategies. Looking at their past study strategies can help them come up with strategies to improve performance. These are some of the ideas important to successful to hugging and bridging practices.

[ 24 ] There are many benefits of transfer of learning in the classroom. One of the main benefits is the ability to quickly learn a new task. This has many real-life applications such as language and speech processing. Transfer of learning is also very useful in teaching students to use higher cognitive thinking by applying their background knowledge to new situations.

[ 25 ] Cognitivism [ edit ] Main article: Cognitivism (psychology) Gestalt theory [ edit ] Cognitive theories grew out of Gestalt psychology . Gestalt psychology was developed in Germany in the early 1900s by Wolfgang Kohler [ 26 ] and was brought to America in the 1920s. The German word Gestalt is roughly equivalent to the English " emergence (of a form-as in the game pictionary , when all of a sudden one recognises what the person is trying to convey - the form and meaning "emerge")", configuration or organization and emphasizes the whole of human experience.

[ 27 ] Over the years, the Gestalt psychologists provided demonstrations and described principles to explain the way we organize our sensations into perceptions.

[ 28 ] Max Wertheimer, one of the founding fathers of Gestalt Theory, observed that sometimes we interpret motion when there is no motion at all.

[ 29 ] For example: a powered sign used at a convenience store to indicate that the store is open or closed might be seen as a sign with "constant light". However, the lights are actually flashing. Each light has been programmed to blink rapidly at their own individual pace. Perceived as a whole however, the sign appears fully lit without flashes. If perceived individually, the lights turn off and on at designated times. Another example of this would be a brick house: As a whole, it is viewed as a standing structure. However, it is actually composed of many smaller parts, which are individual bricks. People tend to see things from a holistic point of view rather than breaking it down into sub units.

In Gestalt theory, psychologists say that instead of obtaining knowledge from what's in front of us, we often learn by making sense of the relationship between what's new and old.

[ 29 ] Because we have a unique perspective of the world, humans have the ability to generate their own learning experiences and interpret information that may or may not be the same for someone else.

Gestalt psychologists criticize behaviorists for being too dependent on overt behavior to explain learning. They propose looking at the patterns rather than isolated events.

[ 30 ] Gestalt views of learning have been incorporated into what have come to be labeled cognitive theories . Two key assumptions underlie this cognitive approach: that the memory system is an active organized processor of information and that prior knowledge plays an important role in learning. Gestalt theorists believe that for learning to occur, prior knowledge must exist on the topic. When the learner applies their prior knowledge to the advanced topic, the learner can understand the meaning in the advanced topic, and learning can occur. Cognitive theories look beyond behavior to consider how human memory works to promote learning, and an understanding of short-term memory and long-term memory is important to educators influenced by cognitive theory. They view learning as an internal mental process (including insight , information processing, memory and perception ) where the educator focuses on building intelligence and cognitive development.

[ 15 ] The individual learner is more important than the environment.

Other cognitive theories [ edit ] Once memory theories like the Atkinson–Shiffrin memory model [ 31 ] and Baddeley's working memory model [ 32 ] were established as a theoretical framework in cognitive psychology , new cognitive frameworks of learning began to emerge during the 1970s, 80s, and 90s. Today, researchers are concentrating on topics like cognitive load and information processing theory. These theories of learning play a role in influencing instructional design .

[ 33 ] Cognitive theory is used to explain such topics as social role acquisition, intelligence and memory as related to age.

In the late twentieth century, situated cognition emerged as a theory that recognized current learning as primarily the transfer of decontextualized and formal knowledge. Bredo (1994) depicts situated cognition as "shifting the focus from individual in environment to individual and environment".

[ 34 ] In other words, individual cognition should be considered as intimately related with the context of social interactions and culturally constructed meaning. Learning through this perspective, in which knowing and doing become inseparable, becomes both applicable and whole.

Much of the education students receive is limited to the culture of schools, without consideration for authentic cultures outside of education. Curricula framed by situated cognition can bring knowledge to life by embedding the learned material within the culture students are familiar with. For example, formal and abstract syntax of math problems can be transformed by placing a traditional math problem within a practical story problem. This presents an opportunity to meet that appropriate balance between situated and transferable knowledge. Lampert (1987) successfully did this by having students explore mathematical concepts that are continuous with their background knowledge.

[ 35 ] She does so by using money, which all students are familiar with, and then develops the lesson to include more complex stories that allow for students to see various solutions as well as create their own. In this way, knowledge becomes active, evolving as students participate and negotiate their way through new situations.

[ 36 ] Constructivism [ edit ] Main article: Constructivism (learning theory) Founded by Jean Piaget , constructivism emphasizes the importance of the active involvement of learners in constructing knowledge for themselves. Students are thought to use background knowledge and concepts to assist them in their acquisition of novel information. On approaching such new information, the learner faces a loss of equilibrium with their previous understanding, and this demands a change in cognitive structure. This change effectively combines previous and novel information to form an improved cognitive schema. Constructivism can be both subjectively and contextually based. Under the theory of radical constructivism, coined by Ernst von Glasersfeld , understanding relies on one's subjective interpretation of experience as opposed to objective "reality". Similarly, William Cobern's idea of contextual constructivism encompasses the effects of culture and society on experience.

[ 37 ] Constructivism asks why students do not learn deeply by listening to a teacher, or reading from a textbook. To design effective teaching environments, it believes one needs a good understanding of what children already know when they come into the classroom.  The curriculum should be designed in a way that builds on the pupil's background knowledge and is allowed to develop with them.

[ 38 ] Begin with complex problems and teach basic skills while solving these problems.

[ 39 ] The learning theories of John Dewey , Maria Montessori , and David A. Kolb serve as the foundation of the application of constructivist learning theory in the classroom.

[ 40 ] Constructivism has many varieties such as active learning , discovery learning , and knowledge building , but all versions promote a student's free exploration within a given framework or structure.

[ 41 ] The teacher acts as a facilitator who encourages students to discover principles for themselves and to construct knowledge by working answering open-ended questions and solving real-world problems. To do this, a teacher should encourage curiosity and discussion among his/her students as well as promoting their autonomy. In scientific areas in the classroom, constructivist teachers provide raw data and physical materials for the students to work with and analyze.

[ 42 ] Transformative learning theory [ edit ] Main article: Transformative learning Transformative learning theory seeks to explain how humans revise and reinterpret meaning.

[ 43 ] Transformative learning is the cognitive process of effecting change in a frame of reference.

[ 44 ] A frame of reference defines our view of the world. The emotions are often involved.

[ 45 ] Adults have a tendency to reject any ideas that do not correspond to their particular values, associations and concepts.

[ 44 ] Our frames of reference are composed of two dimensions: habits of mind and points of view.

[ 44 ] Habits of mind, such as ethnocentrism , are harder to change than points of view. Habits of mind influence our point of view and the resulting thoughts or feelings associated with them, but points of view may change over time as a result of influences such as reflection, appropriation and feedback.

[ 44 ] Transformative learning takes place by discussing with others the "reasons presented in support of competing interpretations, by critically examining evidence, arguments, and alternative points of view".

[ 44 ] When circumstances permit, transformative learners move toward a frame of reference that is more inclusive, discriminating, self-reflective, and integrative of experience.

[ 44 ] Educational neuroscience [ edit ] Main article: Educational neuroscience American Universities such as Harvard, Johns Hopkins, and University of Southern California began offering majors and degrees dedicated to educational neuroscience or neuroeducation in the first decade of the twenty-first century. Such studies seek to link an understanding of brain processes with classroom instruction and experiences.

[ 46 ] Neuroeducation analyzes biological changes in the brain from processing new information. It looks at what environmental, emotional, and social situations best help the brain store and retain new information via the linking of neurons—and best keep the dendrites from being reabsorbed, losing the information. The 1990s were designated "The Decade of the Brain", and advances took place in neuroscience at an especially rapid pace. The three dominant methods for measuring brain activities are event-related potential , functional magnetic resonance imaging and magnetoencephalography (MEG).

[ 47 ] The integration and application to education of what we know about the brain was strengthened in 2000 when the American Federation of Teachers stated: "It is vital that we identify what science tells us about how people learn in order to improve the education curriculum." [ 48 ] What is exciting about this new field in education is that modern brain imaging techniques now make it possible, in some sense, to watch the brain as it learns, and the question then arises: can the results of neuro-scientific studies of brains as they are learning usefully inform practice in this area?

[ 49 ] The neuroscience field is young. Researchers expected that new technologies and ways of observing will produce new scientific evidence that helps refine the paradigms of what students need and how they learn best. In particular, it may bring more informed strategies for teaching students with learning disabilities.

Formal and mental discipline [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( March 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) All individuals have the ability to develop mental discipline and the skill of mindfulness, the two go hand in hand. Mental discipline is huge in shaping what people do, say, think and feel. It's critical in terms of the processing of information and involves the ability to recognize and respond appropriately to new things and information people come across, or have recently been taught. Mindfulness is important to the process of learning in many aspects. Being mindful means to be present with and engaged in whatever you are doing at a specific moment in time. Being mindful can aid in helping us to more critically think, feel and understand the new information we are in the process of absorbing.

[ 50 ] The formal discipline approach seeks to develop causation between the advancement of the mind by exercising it through exposure to abstract school subjects such as science, language and mathematics. With student's repetitive exposure to these particular subjects, some scholars feel that the acquisition of knowledge pertaining to science, language and math is of "secondary importance", and believe that the strengthening and further development of the mind that this curriculum provides holds far greater significance to the progressing learner in the long haul.

[ 5 ] D.C. Phillips and Jonas F. Soltis provide some skepticism to this notion. Their skepticism stems largely in part from feeling that the relationship between formal discipline and the overall advancement of the mind is not as strong as some would say. They illustrate their skepticism by opining that it is foolish to blindly assume that people are better off in life, or at performing certain tasks, because of taking particular, yet unrelated courses.

Multiple intelligences [ edit ] Main article: Theory of multiple intelligences The existence of multiple intelligences is proposed by psychologist Howard Gardner , who suggests that different kinds of intelligence exists in human beings.

[ 51 ] It is a theory that has been fashionable in continuous professional development (CPD) training courses for teachers. However, the theory of multiple intelligences is often cited as an example of pseudoscience because it lacks empirical evidence or falsifiability .

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] Multimedia learning [ edit ] A multimedia classroom at Islington College, in the United Kingdom Main article: Multimedia learning Multimedia learning refers to the use of visual and auditory teaching materials that may include video, computer and other information technology .

[ 54 ] Multimedia learning theory focuses on the principles that determine the effective use of multimedia in learning, with emphasis on using both the visual and auditory channels for information processing.

The auditory channel deals with information that is heard, and the visual channel processes information that is seen. The visual channel holds less information than the auditory channel.

[ 55 ] If both the visual and auditory channels are presented with information, more knowledge is retained. However, if too much information is delivered it is inadequately processed, and long-term memory is not acquired. Multimedia learning seeks to give instructors the ability to stimulate both the visual and auditory channels of the learner, resulting in better progress.

[ 56 ] Using online games for learning [ edit ] Further information: Educational game and Video games in education Many educators and researchers believe that information technology could bring innovation on traditional educational instructions.

[ 57 ] Teachers and technologists are searching for new and innovative ways to design learner-centered learning environments effectively, trying to engage learners more in the learning process. Claims have been made that online games have the potential to teach, train and educate and they are effective means for learning skills and attitudes that are not so easy to learn by rote memorization.

[ 58 ] There has been a lot of research done in identifying the learning effectiveness in game based learning. Learner characteristics and cognitive learning outcomes have been identified as the key factors in research on the implementation of games in educational settings. In the process of learning a language through an online game, there is a strong relationship between the learner's prior knowledge of that language and their cognitive learning outcomes. For the people with prior knowledge of the language, the learning effectiveness of the games is much more than those with none or less knowledge of the language.

[ 59 ] Other learning theories [ edit ] Other learning theories have also been developed for more specific purposes. For example, andragogy is the art and science to help adults learn.

Connectivism is a recent theory of networked learning , which focuses on learning as making connections. The Learning as a Network (LaaN) theory builds upon connectivism, complexity theory, and double-loop learning. It starts from the learner and views learning as the continuous creation of a personal knowledge network (PKN).

[ 60 ] Learning style theories [ edit ] Main article: Learning styles Learning style theories propose that individuals learn in different ways, that there are distinct learning styles and that knowledge of a learner's preferred learning style leads to faster and more satisfactory improvement.

[ 61 ] However, the current research has not been able to find solid scientific evidence to support the main premises of learning styles theory.

[ 62 ] Affective Context Model [ edit ] People remember how things made them feel, and use those emotional imprints to create memories on demand.

[ 63 ] Informal and post-modern theories [ edit ] In theories that make use of cognitive restructuring , an informal curriculum promotes the use of prior knowledge to help students gain a broad understanding of concepts.

[ 64 ] New knowledge cannot be told to students, it believes, but rather the students' current knowledge must be challenged. In this way, students adjust their ideas to more closely resemble actual theories or concepts.

[ 64 ] By using this method students gain the broad understanding they're taught and later are more willing to learn and keep the specifics of the concept or theory. This theory further aligns with the idea that teaching the concepts and the language of a subject should be split into multiple steps.

[ 65 ] Other informal learning theories look at the sources of motivation for learning.

Intrinsic motivation may create a more self-regulated learner, [ 66 ] yet schools undermine intrinsic motivation. Critics argue that the average student learning in isolation performs significantly less well than those learning with collaboration and mediation.

[ 67 ] Students learn through talk, discussion, and argumentation.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] Educational anthropology [ edit ] Main article: Philosophy of education Philosophical anthropology [ edit ] Main article: Philosophical anthropology According to Theodora Polito, "every well-constructed theory of education [has] at [its] center a philosophical anthropology," which is "a philosophical reflection on some basic problems of mankind." [ 70 ] [ 71 ] Philosophical anthropology is an exploration of human nature and humanity.

Aristotle , an early influence on the field, deemed human nature to be "rational animality," wherein humans are closely related to other animals but still set apart by their ability to form rational thought.

[ 72 ] Philosophical anthropology expanded upon these ideas by clarifying that rationality is, "determined by the biological and social conditions in which the lives of human beings are embedded." [ 71 ] Fully developed learning theories address some of the "basic problems of mankind" by examining these biological and social conditions to understand and manipulate the rationality of humanity in the context of learning.

[ 71 ] Philosophical anthropology is evident in behaviorism , which requires an understanding of humanity and human nature in order to assert that the similarities between humans and other animals are critical and influential to the process of learning.

[ 5 ] Situated cognition focuses on how humans interact with each other and their environments, which would be considered the "social conditions" explored within the field of philosophical anthropology.

[ 5 ] Transformative learning theories operate with the assumption that humans are rational creatures capable of examining and redefining perspectives, something that is heavily considered within philosophical anthropology.

An awareness and understanding of philosophical anthropology contributes to a greater comprehension and practice of any learning theory. In some cases, philosophy can be used to further explore and define uncertain terms within the field of education.

[ 73 ] Philosophy can also be a vehicle to explore the purpose of education, which can greatly influence an educational theory.

[ 73 ] Criticism [ edit ] Critics of learning theories that seek to displace traditional educational practices claim that there is no need for such theories; that the attempt to comprehend the process of learning through the construction of theories creates problems and inhibits personal freedom.

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] See also [ edit ] Andragogical learning theory Cognitivism (learning theory) Connectivism (learning theory) Constructivism (learning theory) Cultural-historical psychology Evidence-based education Instructional theory Instructional design Kinesthetic learning Learning by teaching Learning environment Learning space Psychology of learning Science, technology, society and environment education About accelerating the learning process Cognitive acceleration Spaced repetition Incremental reading Forward testing effect About the mechanisms of memory and learning Neural networks in the brain Sleep and learning Latent learning Memory consolidation Short-term memory versus working memory Long-term memory Desirable difficulties Declarative memory versus procedural memory The cerebellum and motor learning About learning theories related to classroom learning Contemporary Educational Psychology/Chapter 2: The Learning Process References [ edit ] ^ Illeris, Knud (2004).

The three dimensions of learning . Malabar, Fla: Krieger Pub. Co.

ISBN 9781575242583 .

^ Ormrod, Jeanne (2012).

Human learning (6th ed.). Boston: Pearson.

ISBN 9780132595186 .

^ Willingham, Daniel T.

; Hughes, Elizabeth M.; Dobolyi, David G. (July 2015). "The scientific status of learning styles theories".

Teaching of Psychology .

42 (3): 266– 271.

doi : 10.1177/0098628315589505 .

S2CID 146126992 .

^ Pashler, Harold; McDaniel, Mark ; Rohrer, Doug; Bjork, Robert A.

(December 2008).

"Learning styles: concepts and evidence" .

Psychological Science in the Public Interest .

9 (3): 105– 119.

doi : 10.1111/j.1539-6053.2009.01038.x .

PMID 26162104 .

S2CID 2112166 .

^ a b c d e f D.C. Phillips; Jonas F. Soltis (2009).

Perspectives on Learning . Thinking About Education (5th ed.). Teachers College Press.

ISBN 978-0-8077-7120-4 .

^ a b Silverman, Allan (9 June 2003).

"Plato's Middle Period Metaphysics and Epistemology" . In Edward N. Zalta (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2014 ed.).

^ Brain, Christine; Mukherji, Penny (2005).

Understanding Child Psychology . Cheltenham: Nelson Thornes. pp.

56– 57.

ISBN 0-7487-9084-5 .

^ Dearden, R. F. (2012).

Theory and Practice in Education (RLE Edu K) . Oxon: Routledge. p. 71.

ISBN 978-0-415-69722-4 .

^ Sherman, Patrice (2012).

John Locke: Philosopher of the Enlightenment . Huntington Beach, CA: Teacher Created Materials. p. 26.

ISBN 978-1-4333-5014-6 .

^ Phillips, D.C., Soltis, J.F., Perspectives on learning pg. 22 ^ Good and Brophey.

Realistic Approach . p. 155.

^ Phillips, D.C. & Soltis, J.F. (2009). Perspectives on Learning (Fifth). New York: Teachers College Press. p. 22.

^ Myers, David G.

(2008).

Exploring Psychology . New York, New York: Worth. p. 223.

^ Myers, David G. (2008).

Exploring Psychology . New York, New York: Worth. p. 222.

^ a b Smith, M.K.

"Learning Theory, the encyclopedia of informal education" . the encyclopedia of informal education . Retrieved 6 July 2011 .

^ Kim, T and Axelrod, S. (2005): "Direct Instruction: An Educators' Guide and a Plea for Action" - The Behavior Analyst Today , 6.(2), p. 111 ^ a b Kleibard, H. (2004). Scientific curriculum-making and the rise of social efficiency. In The Struggle for American Curriculum (pp. 77-105).

^ a b Willingham, D. T. (2009). Why don't students like school? San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

^ Brown, John S., Allan Collins, and Paul Duguid. "Situated Cognition and the Culture of Learning." Educational Researcher 18.1 (1989): 32-42. Web.

^ Sfard, A.

(1998, March). On two metaphors for learning and the dangers of choosing just one. Educational Researcher, 4-13.

^ Larsen-Freeman, Diane (2013).

"Transfer of Learning Transformed" .

Language Learning .

63 (s1): 107– 129.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9922.2012.00740.x .

hdl : 2027.42/96651 .

ISSN 1467-9922 .

^ a b Cormier, S.M. and Hagman, J.D. eds., 2014. Transfer of learning: Contemporary research and applications. Academic Press.

^ a b McKeough, A., 2013. Teaching for transfer: Fostering generalization in learning. Routledge.

^ a b c Harris, S., Lowery-Moore, H., & Farrow, V. (2008). Extending Transfer of Learning Theory to Transformative Learning Theory: A Model for Promoting Teacher Leadership. Theory Into Practice, 47(4), 318-326. doi:10.1080/00405840802329318 ^ Yang, L., Hanneke, S., & Carbonell, J. A Theory of Transfer Learning with Applications to Active Learning. Carnegie Mellon University.

^ Soltis, Jonas (2004).

Perspectives on Learning (Fourth ed.). New York: Teachers College Press. p. 34.

ISBN 978-0-8077-4447-5 .

^ Yount, William R. (1996).

Created to Learn . Nashville: Broadman & Holman. p. 192.

^ Myers, David G. (2008).

Exploring Psychology . New York, New York: Worth. p. 163.

^ a b Boeree, George.

"Gestalt Psychology" .

^ Merriam, Sharan B.

(2007).

Learning In Adulthood . San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

^ Atkinson, R.C. & Shiffrin, R.M. (1968). K.W. Spence and J.T. Spence (ed.).

The psychology of learning and motivation (2 ed.). New York: Academic Press. pp.

89– 125.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Baddeley, A.D.

; Hitch, G.J.L. (1974). G.A. Bower (ed.).

The psychology of learning and motivation: advances in research and theory (8 ed.). New York: Academic Press. pp.

47– 89.

^ deJong, T. (2010).

"Cognitive Load Theory, Educational Research, and Instructional Design: Some Food for Thought" .

Instructional Science .

38 (2): 38.

doi : 10.1007/s11251-009-9110-0 .

^ Bredo, E. (1994). Reconstructing educational psychology : Situated cognition and Deweyian pragmatism. Educational Psychologist, 29 (1), 23-35.

^ Lampert, M. (1986). Knowing, doing, and teaching multiplication. Cognition and Instruction, 3, 305-342.

^ Wilson, Brent G., and Karen M. Myers. "Situated Cognition in Theoretical and Practical context." Theoretical Foundations of Learning Environments(1999): n. pag. Situated Cognition. Web. 24 Mar. 2015.

^ Bodner, G., Klobuchar, M., & Geelan, D. (2001). The many forms of constructivism.

Journal of Chemical Education , 78, 1107-1134.

^ "Jerome Bruner and the process of educationp" .

infed.org . Retrieved 2024-12-12 .

^ Yount, William R. (1996).

Created to Learn . Nashville: Broadman & Holman. p. 202.

^ Lombardi, S.M. (2011).

Internet Activities for a Preschool Technology Education Program Guided by Caregivers . Doctoral dissertation, North Carolina State University. pp.

139– 40.

^ Devries, B.; Zan, B. (2003). "When children make rules".

Educational Leadership .

61 (1): 64– 7.

^ Books, Jacqueline G.; Brooks, Martin G. (1999).

In search of understanding: The case for constructivist classrooms, revised edition . Alexandria, VA: The association for supervision and curriculum development.

^ Taylor, E.W. (2008).

Transformative learning theory. New Directions for Adult and Continuing Education . Jossey-Bass. pp.

5– 15.

^ a b c d e f Mezirow, J (1997).

Transformative Learning: Theory to Practice. New Directions for Adult and Continuing Education . Jossey-bass. pp.

5– 12.

^ Ileris, K (April 2001). "Transformative Learning in the Perspective of a Comprehensive Learning Theory".

Journal of Transformative Education .

2 (2): 79– 89.

doi : 10.1177/1541344603262315 .

S2CID 145360258 .

^ Wolf, P. (2010).

Brain Matters: Translating Research into Classroom Practice (2nd ed.) . ASCD.

^ ed. by Sawyer, R. Keith (2006).

Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences . New York, New York: Cambridge University Press. p. 20.

{{ cite book }} : |last= has generic name ( help ) ^ Radin, J.P. (Fall 2009). "Brain-Compatible Teaching and Learning: Implications for Teacher Education".

Educ Horiz .

88 (1).

^ Rowland (2010). "The brain that changes itself: Stories of personal triumph from the frontiers of brain science".

Journal of Academic Language and Learning .

^ Sheahly, Cultivating Mental Discipline Archived 2015-04-07 at the Wayback Machine ^ Allen, I. E., J. Seaman, et al. (2007).

Blending In: The Extent and Promise of Blended Education in the United States . Needham, M.A., The Sloan Consortium.

^ Howard-Jones, Paul (2010).

Introducing Neuroeducational Research: Neuroscience, Education and the Brain from Contexts to Practice . Taylor & Francis. p. 35.

ISBN 978-0-415-47200-5 .

^ Gottfredson, Linda.

"Intelligence: Instant Expert 13" (PDF) .

New Scientist .

211 (2819): i–viii (a pullout).

^ Mayer, Richard E. (2009-01-12).

Multimedia Learning . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9781139475495 .

^ Digital Turn in Schools—Research, Policy, Practice . Springer. Jun 4, 2019.

ISBN 9789811373619 .

^ "Understanding multimedia learning: Integrating multimedia in the k-12 classroom." (n.d.). Retrieved from http://s4.brainpop.com/new_common_images/files/76/76426_BrainPOP_White_Paper-20090426.pdf Archived 2013-08-20 at the Wayback Machine ^ Sitzmann, Traci (27 May 2011).

"A Meta-Analytic Examination of the Instructional Effectiveness of Computer-based Simulation Games" (PDF) .

Personnel Psychology .

64 (2): 489– 528.

doi : 10.1111/j.1744-6570.2011.01190.x . Retrieved April 12, 2016 .

^ Michael, D.; Chen, S. (2006).

Serious Games: Games that educate, train and transform . Muska & Lipman/Premier-Trade.

ISBN 9781592006229 .

^ Yang, Jie Chi; Hsu, Hui Fen (2013). "Effects of prior knowledge on cognitive learning outcomes within an English learning multiplayer online role-playing game".

2013 Second IIAI International Conference on Advanced Applied Informatics . pp.

166– 171.

doi : 10.1109/IIAI-AAI.2013.10 .

ISBN 978-0-7695-5071-8 .

S2CID 3030283 .

^ "The LaaN Theory" . Retrieved 2024-12-12 .

^ "David A. Kolb on experiential learning" .

infed.org . Retrieved 2024-12-12 .

^ Coffield, Frank; Moseley, David; Hall, Elaine; Ecclestone, Kathryn (2004).

Learning styles and pedagogy in post-16 learning: a systematic and critical review (PDF) . London: Learning and Skills Research Centre.

ISBN 978-1853389184 .

OCLC 505325671 . Archived from the original on 2016-03-04.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ Shackleton-Jones, Nick (2019-05-03).

How people learn : designing effective training to improve employee performance . London, United Kingdom.

ISBN 9780749484712 .

OCLC 1098213554 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b Marzano, Robert (1991). "Fostering thinking across the curriculum through knowledge restructuring".

Journal of Reading .

34 : 518– 25.

^ Brown, B; Ryoo, K (2008). "Teaching Science as a Language: A "Content-First" Approach to Science Teaching".

Journal of Research in Science Teaching .

45 (5): 529– 53.

Bibcode : 2008JRScT..45..529B .

doi : 10.1002/tea.20255 .

S2CID 144060311 .

^ Deci, E.L. (1995).

Why We Do What We Do: The Dynamics of Personal Autonomy . New York: Putnam's Sons.

^ Wells, G. (2007). "Semiotic Mediation, Dialogue and the Construction of Knowledge".

Human Development .

50 (5): 244– 74.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.506.7763 .

doi : 10.1159/000106414 .

S2CID 15984672 .

^ Wink, J. (2002).

A vision of Vygotsky . Boston: Allyn and Bacon.

^ Vygotsky, L (1986).

Thought and language . Cambridge, Ma: MIT Press.

^ Polito, Theodora. (2005). Educational theory as theory of culture: A Vichian perspective on the educational theories of John Dewey and Kieran Egan. Educational Philosophy and Theory, 37(4).

^ a b c Padilla, G. J. (2013). Philosophical anthropology: An introduction. In Padilla, G. J. (Ed.), Aporia: Philosophical anthropology: Wittgenstein's perspective (pp. 7-14). Munchen, DEU: Walter de Gruyter.

^ Koterski, Joseph W. (2013). Anthropology, Philosophical. In New Catholic Encyclopedia Supplement 20122013. (Vol. 1, pp. 7679). Detroit: Gale.

^ a b Hirst, Paul H. (1963).

"Philosophy and Educational Theory" .

British Journal of Educational Studies .

12 (1): 51– 64.

doi : 10.2307/3118921 .

ISSN 0007-1005 .

JSTOR 3118921 .

^ Holzman, Lois (1997).

When Democratic Education is Developmental: The Sudbury Valley School Model , Schools for growth: radical alternatives to current educational models. Retrieved April 1, 2010.

^ Daniel Greenberg (1987), A New Look at Learning , The Sudbury Valley School Experience. Retrieved April 1, 2010.

76. Teaching for Transfer of Learning. Thomas, Ruth; National Center for Research in Vocational Education, Berkeley, CA.. 93 NCRVE, December 1992.

77. Perkins, D. (1992). Transfer of Learning. International Encyclopedia of Education, 2. Retrieved March 23, 2015.

Further reading [ edit ] Leonard, David (2002).

Learning theories, A to Z . Westport, Conn: Oryx Press.

ISBN 978-1573564137 .

Merriam, Sharan (2007).

Learning in adulthood a comprehensive guide (3rd ed.). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

ISBN 9780470229224 .

External links [ edit ] Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Learning Theories Social Science Research Network.

How to Become an Expert Law Teacher by Understanding the Neurobiology of Learning ERIC Digest.

How People Learn (and What Technology Might Have To Do with It) Archived 2017-03-07 at the Wayback Machine Instructional Design Learning theories Learning theories Wiki Learning theories v t e Education Overview General Glossary Index Outline By perspective Aims and objectives Learning standards Anthropology Assessment Evaluation Course evaluation Psychometrics Standards-based Standardized test Teacher quality Economics Spending Free education Tuition payments Education sciences Evidence-based History Inclusion Leadership Neuroscience Pedagogy Philosophy Policy Politics Psychology Research Rights Sociology Technology Instructional Instructional design By subject Agricultural Art Bilingual Business Chemistry Computer science Death Design Economics Engineering Environmental Euthenics Health Language Legal Mathematics Medical Military Music Nursing Peace Performing arts Philosophy Physical Physics Reading Religious Science Sex Teacher Technology Values Vocational Alternative Adult education Autodidacticism Democratic Education reform Gifted education Homeschooling Religious education Special education Concepts 21st century skills Accreditation Accreditation mill Bloom's taxonomy Board of education Cognitive load Classroom management Class arrangement Compulsory education Critical thinking Curriculum Bias Development Hidden Studies Theory Diploma mill Learning theory Desirable difficulty Spacing effect Testing effect Lesson plan Pedagogical pattern School choice School discipline Teacher look Teacher retention Teaching method Active learning Blended learning Contemplative Demonstration Dialogic learning Experiential Feedback Passive Peer instruction Personalized Phenomenon-based Problem-based Problem solving Project-based Student-centered Socratic Teaching philosophy Wikimedia Books Definitions Images Learning resources News Quotes Texts Stages Early childhood education Primary education Secondary education Tertiary education Preschool → Kindergarten → Primary school → Infant → Junior → Secondary school → Middle school → High school → Higher education Vocational Further ( Continuing ) Undergraduate → Postgraduate Portal Education by region Education in Africa Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Somaliland Dependencies and other territories Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla (Spain) Madeira (Portugal) Mayotte / Réunion (France) Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom) Education in Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal Education in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard Other entities European Union Education in  North America Sovereign states Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Dependencies and other territories Anguilla Aruba Bermuda Bonaire British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Curaçao Greenland Guadeloupe Martinique Montserrat Puerto Rico Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saba Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten Turks and Caicos Islands United States Virgin Islands Education in Oceania Sovereign states Australia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Indonesia Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Associated states of New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Dependencies and other territories American Samoa Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Easter Island French Polynesia Guam Hawaii New Caledonia Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Pitcairn Islands Tokelau Wallis and Futuna Education in South America Sovereign states Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Dependencies and other territories Falkland Islands French Guiana South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Schools portal Category WikiProject v t e Standards-based education reform Individuals Benjamin Bloom Jerome Bruner Rheta DeVries Caleb Gattegno Constance Kamii Maria Montessori Jean Piaget William Spady Marc Tucker Lev Vygotsky Theories Active learning Block scheduling Cognitive load Constructivism Developmentally appropriate practice Discovery learning Inclusion Inquiry-based learning Open-space school Outcome-based education Problem-based learning Small schools movement Values Achievement gap Educational equity Learning standards Adequate Yearly Progress Certificate of Initial Mastery Educational aims and objectives Goals 2000 National Reading Panel National Science Education Standards National Skill Standards Board No Child Left Behind Act Principles and Standards for School Mathematics Standards-based assessment Authentic assessment Criterion-referenced test Norm-referenced test Exit examination Standardized tests List of standardized tests in the United States Standardized testing and public policy Standardized curriculum Decodable text Direct instruction Grades Guided reading Lecture Phonics Rote learning Standard algorithms Tracking (education) Traditional education Traditional mathematics Whole language Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐lflb6
Cached time: 20250812014317
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.114 seconds
Real time usage: 1.268 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 28969/1000000
Revision size: 53677/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 357913/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 18248/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 31/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 239479/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.581/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8288494/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1061.416      1 -total
 38.34%  406.926      1 Template:Reflist
 30.84%  327.345      1 Template:Education
 30.62%  325.046      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 24.51%  260.178     34 Template:Cite_book
 18.68%  198.298    103 Template:Iso2country
 14.26%  151.350      6 Template:Navbox
 12.33%  130.916      1 Template:Asia_topic
  9.20%   97.690      1 Template:Europe_topic
  7.75%   82.268      1 Template:Educational_research Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:17994:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812014317 and revision id 1296352090. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Learning_theory_(education)&oldid=1296352090 " Categories : Learning theory (education) Psychological theories Education theory Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 errors: generic name Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2017 Articles needing additional references from March 2015 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 13:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Learning theory (education) 20 languages Add topic

