Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Philosophical background Toggle Philosophical background subsection 1.1 Epiphenomenalism 1.2 Animal ethics 1.3 Anthropics 2 Defining consciousness 3 Scientific approaches Toggle Scientific approaches subsection 3.1 Mirror test 3.2 Language 3.3 Pain or suffering 3.4 Cognitive bias and emotion 3.5 Neuroscience 3.5.1 Neural correlates 3.5.2 Neocortex and equivalents 3.5.3 Attention 3.5.4 Extended consciousness 3.5.5 Metacognition 3.5.6 Mirror neurons 3.6 Evolutionary psychology 3.7 Neural Darwinism 3.8 Multidimensional framework 4 Declarations on animal consciousness Toggle Declarations on animal consciousness subsection 4.1 Cambridge Declaration on Consciousness 4.2 New York Declaration on Animal Consciousness 5 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 5.1 Mammals 5.1.1 Dogs 5.2 Birds 5.2.1 Grey parrots 5.2.2 Corvids 5.3 Invertebrates 6 Shamanistic and religious views 7 Researchers 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Animal consciousness 16 languages العربية Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia עברית Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Русский தமிழ் Türkçe Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Quality or state of self-awareness within an animal "Animal sentience" redirects here. For the journal, see Animal Sentience (journal) .

According to the Cambridge Declaration on Consciousness , "near human-like levels of consciousness" have been observed in the grey parrot .

[ 1 ] Animal consciousness , or animal awareness , is the quality or state of self-awareness within an animal, or of being aware of an external object or something within itself.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] In humans, consciousness has been defined as: sentience , awareness , subjectivity , qualia , the ability to experience or to feel , wakefulness , having a sense of selfhood , and the executive control system of the mind.

[ 4 ] Despite the difficulty in definition, many philosophers believe there is a broadly shared underlying intuition about what consciousness is.

[ 5 ] The topic of animal consciousness is beset with a number of difficulties. It poses the problem of other minds in an especially severe form because animals, lacking the ability to use human language , cannot communicate their experiences.

[ 6 ] It is also difficult to reason objectively about the question because a denial that an animal is conscious is often taken to imply that they do not feel, their life has no value, and that harming them is not morally wrong.

[ 7 ] For example, the 17th-century French philosopher René Descartes is sometimes criticised for enabling animal mistreatment through his animal machine view, which claimed that only humans are conscious.

[ 8 ] Philosophers who consider subjective experience the essence of consciousness also generally believe, as a correlate, that the existence and nature of animal consciousness can never rigorously be known. The American philosopher Thomas Nagel spelled out this point of view in an influential essay titled What Is it Like to Be a Bat?

He said that an organism is conscious "if and only if there is something that it is like to be that organism—something it is like for the organism"; and he argued that no matter how much we know about an animal's brain and behavior, we can never really put ourselves into the mind of the animal and experience their world in the way they do themselves.

[ 9 ] Other thinkers, such as the cognitive scientist Douglas Hofstadter , dismiss this argument as incoherent.

[ 10 ] Several psychologists and ethologists have argued for the existence of animal consciousness by describing a range of behaviors that appear to show animals holding beliefs about things they cannot directly perceive—Walter Veit's 2023 book A Philosophy for the Science of Animal Consciousness reviews a substantial portion of the evidence.

[ 3 ] Animal consciousness has been actively researched for over one hundred years.

[ 11 ] In 1927, the American functional psychologist Harvey Carr argued that any valid measure or understanding of awareness in animals depends on "an accurate and complete knowledge of its essential conditions in man".

[ 12 ] A more recent review concluded in 1985 that "the best approach is to use experiment (especially psychophysics ) and observation to trace the dawning and ontogeny of self-consciousness, perception, communication, intention, beliefs, and reflection in normal human fetuses, infants, and children".

[ 11 ] In 2012, a group of neuroscientists signed the Cambridge Declaration on Consciousness , which "unequivocally" asserted that "humans are not unique in possessing the neurological substrates that generate consciousness. Non-human animals, including all mammals and birds, and many other creatures, including octopuses, also possess these neural substrates." [ 13 ] In 2024, the New York Declaration on Animal Consciousness was signed by over 500 academics and scientists, asserting strong scientific support for consciousness in mammals and birds, along with a realistic possibility of that in other vertebrates and many invertebrates, emphasizing an ethical responsibility to consider this in decisions affecting animals.

[ 14 ] Philosophical background [ edit ] René Descartes argued that consciousness is unique to humans and explained animal behaviour through his mechanistic account of animals .

The mind–body problem in philosophy examines the relationship between mind and matter , and in particular the relationship between consciousness and the brain. A variety of approaches have been proposed. Most are either dualist or monist . Dualism maintains a rigid distinction between the realms of mind and matter. Monism maintains that there is only one kind of stuff, and that mind and matter are both aspects of it. The problem was addressed by pre- Aristotelian philosophers, [ 15 ] [ 16 ] and was famously addressed by René Descartes in the 17th century, resulting in Cartesian dualism . Descartes believed that humans alone possess a non-physical mind, interpreting animal behaviour through a mechanistic model that denied animal consciousness .

[ 17 ] The rejection of the mind–body dichotomy is found in French Structuralism , and is a position that generally characterized post-war French philosophy .

[ 18 ] The absence of an empirically identifiable meeting point between the non-physical mind and its physical extension has proven problematic to dualism and many modern philosophers of mind maintain that the mind is not something separate from the body.

[ 19 ] These approaches have been particularly influential in the sciences, particularly in the fields of sociobiology , computer science , evolutionary psychology , and the neurosciences .

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] Epiphenomenalism [ edit ] Main article: Epiphenomenalism Epiphenomenalism is the theory in philosophy of mind that mental phenomena are caused by physical processes in the brain or that both are effects of a common cause, as opposed to mental phenomena driving the physical mechanics of the brain. The impression that thoughts, feelings, or sensations cause physical effects, is therefore to be understood as illusory to some extent. For example, it is not the feeling of fear that produces an increase in heart beat, both are symptomatic of a common physiological origin, possibly in response to a legitimate external threat.

[ 24 ] The history of epiphenomenalism goes back to the post-Cartesian attempt to solve the riddle of Cartesian dualism , i.e., of how mind and body could interact.

La Mettrie , Leibniz and Spinoza all in their own way began this way of thinking. The idea that even if the animal were conscious nothing would be added to the production of behavior, even in animals of the human type, was first voiced by La Mettrie (1745), and then by Cabanis (1802), and was further explicated by Hodgson (1870) and Huxley (1874).

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] Huxley (1874) likened mental phenomena to the whistle on a steam locomotive. However, epiphenomenalism flourished primarily as it found a niche among methodological or scientific behaviorism. In the early 1900s scientific behaviorists such as Ivan Pavlov , John B. Watson , and B. F. Skinner began the attempt to uncover laws describing the relationship between stimuli and responses, without reference to inner mental phenomena. Instead of adopting a form of eliminativism or mental fictionalism , positions that deny that inner mental phenomena exist, a behaviorist was able to adopt epiphenomenalism in order to allow for the existence of mind. However, by the 1960s, scientific behaviourism met substantial difficulties and eventually gave way to the cognitive revolution . Participants in that revolution, such as Jerry Fodor , reject epiphenomenalism and insist upon the efficacy of the mind. Fodor even speaks of "epiphobia"—fear that one is becoming an epiphenomenalist.

[ citation needed ] Thomas Henry Huxley defends in an essay titled On the Hypothesis that Animals are Automata, and its History an epiphenomenalist theory of consciousness according to which consciousness is a causally inert effect of neural activity—"as the steam-whistle which accompanies the work of a locomotive engine is without influence upon its machinery".

[ 27 ] To this William James objects in his essay Are We Automata?

by stating an evolutionary argument for mind-brain interaction implying that if the preservation and development of consciousness in the biological evolution is a result of natural selection , it is plausible that consciousness has not only been influenced by neural processes, but has had a survival value itself; and it could only have had this if it had been efficacious.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] Karl Popper develops in the book The Self and Its Brain a similar evolutionary argument.

[ 30 ] Animal ethics [ edit ] Main article: Animal ethics Bernard Rollin of Colorado State University, the principal author of two U.S. federal laws regulating pain relief for animals, writes that researchers remained unsure into the 1980s as to whether animals experience pain, and veterinarians trained in the U.S. before 1989 were simply taught to ignore animal pain. In his interactions with scientists and other veterinarians, Rollin asserts that he was regularly asked to prove animals are conscious and provide scientifically acceptable grounds for claiming they feel pain.

[ 31 ] The denial of animal consciousness by scientists has been labelled as mentophobia by Donald Griffin .

[ 32 ] Academic reviews of the topic are equivocal, noting that the argument that animals have at least simple conscious thoughts and feelings has strong support, [ 33 ] but some critics continue to question how reliably animal mental states can be determined.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] A refereed journal Animal Sentience launched in 2016 by the Institute of Science and Policy of The Humane Society of the United States is devoted to research on this and related topics.

[ 36 ] Anthropics [ edit ] The question of animal consciousness may have implications within the field of anthropics . If non-human animals are conscious, humans form only a tiny fraction of conscious observers on earth. Since this seems to imply that it is statistically extremely improbable for a given observer to happen to find themselves existing as a human rather than a non-human animal, this begs the question of why it is that we happen to find ourselves as humans . To explain this, a variant of the strong self-sampling assumption described by Nick Bostrom in Anthropic Bias has been proposed: the super-strong self sampling assumption (SSSSA). The SSSSA asserts that the probability of a conscious observer existing as a particular being is weighted toward the "size" of that being in cognitive terms, and humans therefore take up a disproportionate amount of "consciousness-space".

[ 37 ] Defining consciousness [ edit ] About forty meanings attributed to the term consciousness can be identified and categorized based on functions and experiences . The prospects for reaching any single, agreed-upon, theory-independent definition of consciousness appear remote.

[ 38 ] Consciousness is an elusive concept that presents many difficulties when attempts are made to define it.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] Its study has progressively become an interdisciplinary challenge for numerous researchers, including ethologists, neurologists, cognitive neuroscientists, philosophers, psychologists and psychiatrists.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] In 1976, Richard Dawkins wrote, "The evolution of the capacity to simulate seems to have culminated in subjective consciousness. Why this should have happened is, to me, the most profound mystery facing modern biology." [ 43 ] In 2004, eight neuroscientists felt it was still too soon for a definition. They wrote an apology in "Human Brain Function", in which they stated: [ 44 ] We have no idea how consciousness emerges from the physical activity of the brain and we do not know whether consciousness can emerge from non-biological systems, such as computers... At this point the reader will expect to find a careful and precise definition of consciousness. You will be disappointed. Consciousness has not yet become a scientific term that can be defined in this way. Currently we all use the term consciousness in many different and often ambiguous ways. Precise definitions of different aspects of consciousness will emerge ... but to make precise definitions at this stage is premature.

Consciousness is sometimes defined as the quality or state of being aware of an external object or something within oneself.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] It has been defined somewhat vaguely as: subjectivity , awareness , sentience , the ability to experience or to feel , wakefulness, having a sense of selfhood , and the executive control system of the mind.

[ 4 ] Despite the difficulty in definition, many philosophers believe that there is a broadly shared underlying intuition about what consciousness is.

[ 5 ] Max Velmans and Susan Schneider wrote in The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness : "Anything that we are aware of at a given moment forms part of our consciousness, making conscious experience at once the most familiar and most mysterious aspect of our lives." [ 47 ] Related terms, also often used in vague or ambiguous ways, are: [ citation needed ] Awareness : the state or ability to perceive, to feel, or to be conscious of events, objects , or sensory patterns . In this level of consciousness, sense data can be confirmed by an observer without necessarily implying understanding . More broadly, it is the state or quality of being aware of something. In biological psychology , awareness is defined as a human's or an animal's perception and cognitive reaction to a condition or event.

Self-awareness : the capacity for introspection and the ability to reconcile oneself as an individual separate from the environment and other individuals.

Self-consciousness : an acute sense of self-awareness. It is a preoccupation with oneself, as opposed to the philosophical state of self-awareness , which is the awareness that one exists as an individual being; although some writers use both terms interchangeably or synonymously.

[ 48 ] Sentience : the ability to be aware ( feel , perceive , or be conscious ) of one's surroundings or to have subjective experiences. Sentience is a minimalistic way of defining consciousness, which is otherwise commonly used to collectively describe sentience plus other characteristics of the mind.

Sapience : often defined as wisdom, or the ability of an organism or entity to act with appropriate judgment , a mental faculty which is a component of intelligence or alternatively may be considered an additional faculty, apart from intelligence, with its own properties.

Qualia : individual instances of subjective , conscious experience .

Sentience (the ability to feel, perceive, or to experience subjectivity) is not the same as self-awareness (being aware of oneself as an individual). The mirror test is sometimes considered to be an operational test for self-awareness, and the handful of animals that have passed it are often considered to be self-aware.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] It remains debatable whether recognition of one's mirror image can be properly construed to imply full self-awareness, [ 51 ] particularly given that robots are being constructed which appear to pass the test.

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] Much has been learned in neuroscience about correlations between brain activity and subjective, conscious experiences, and many suggest that neuroscience will ultimately explain consciousness; "...consciousness is a biological process that will eventually be explained in terms of molecular signaling pathways used by interacting populations of nerve cells...".

[ 54 ] However, this view has been criticized because consciousness has yet to be shown to be a process, [ 55 ] and the so-called "hard problem" of relating consciousness directly to brain activity remains elusive.

[ 56 ] Scientific approaches [ edit ] Since Descartes 's proposal of dualism , it became general consensus that the mind had become a matter of philosophy and that science was not able to penetrate the issue of consciousness – that consciousness was outside of space and time. However, in recent decades many scholars have begun to move toward a science of consciousness.

Antonio Damasio and Gerald Edelman are two neuroscientists who have led the move to neural correlates of the self and of consciousness. Damasio has demonstrated that emotions and their biological foundation play a critical role in high level cognition, [ 57 ] [ 58 ] and Edelman has created a framework for analyzing consciousness through a scientific outlook. The current problem consciousness researchers face involves explaining how and why consciousness arises from neural computation.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] In his research on this problem, Edelman has developed a theory of consciousness, in which he has coined the terms primary consciousness and secondary consciousness .

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] Eugene Linden , author of The Parrot's Lament suggests there are many examples of animal behavior and intelligence that surpass what people would suppose to be the boundary of animal consciousness. Linden contends that in many of these documented examples, a variety of animal species exhibit behavior that can only be attributed to emotion, and to a level of consciousness that we would normally ascribe only to our own species.

[ 63 ] Philosopher Daniel Dennett counters: Consciousness requires a certain kind of informational organization that does not seem to be 'hard-wired' in humans, but is instilled by human culture. Moreover, consciousness is not a black-or-white, all-or-nothing type of phenomenon, as is often assumed. The differences between humans and other species are so great that speculations about animal consciousness seem ungrounded. Many authors simply assume that an animal like a bat has a point of view, but there seems to be little interest in exploring the details involved.

[ 64 ] Consciousness in mammals (including humans) is an aspect of the mind generally thought to comprise qualities such as subjectivity , sentience , and the ability to perceive the relationship between oneself and one's environment . It is a subject of much research in philosophy of mind , psychology , neuroscience , and cognitive science . Some philosophers divide consciousness into phenomenal consciousness, which is subjective experience itself, and access consciousness, which refers to the global availability of information to processing systems in the brain.

[ 65 ] Phenomenal consciousness has many different experienced qualities, often referred to as qualia . Phenomenal consciousness is usually consciousness of something or about something, a property known as intentionality in philosophy of mind.

[ 65 ] In humans, there are three common methods of studying consciousness: verbal reporting, behavioural demonstrations, and neural correlation with conscious activity, though these can only be generalized to non-human taxa with varying degrees of difficulty.

[ 66 ] In a new study conducted in rhesus monkeys , Ben-Haim and his team used a process dissociation approach that predicted opposite behavioral outcomes for the two modes of perception. They found that monkeys displayed exactly the same opposite behavioral outcomes as humans when they were aware or unaware of the stimuli presented.

[ 67 ] Mirror test [ edit ] Elephants can recognize themselves in a mirror.

[ 68 ] External videos Self-recognition in apes – National Geographic Main article: Mirror test The sense in which animals (or human infants) can be said to have consciousness or a self-concept has been hotly debated; it is often referred to as the debate over animal minds. The best known research technique in this area is the mirror test devised by Gordon G. Gallup , in which the skin of an animal (or human infant) is marked, while they are asleep or sedated, with a mark that cannot be seen directly but is visible in a mirror. The animals are then allowed to see their reflection in a mirror; if the animal spontaneously directs grooming behaviour towards the mark, that is taken as an indication that they are aware of themselves.

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] Over the past 30 years, many studies have found evidence that animals recognise themselves in mirrors. Self-awareness by this criterion has been reported for: Land mammals: apes ( chimpanzees , bonobos , orangutans and gorillas ) [ 71 ] [ 72 ] [ 73 ] and elephants .

[ 68 ] Cetaceans: bottlenose dolphins , [ 74 ] [ 75 ] killer whales and possibly false killer whales .

[ 76 ] Birds: magpies and [ 70 ] [ 77 ] pigeons (can pass the mirror test after training in the prerequisite behaviors).

[ 78 ] Until recently, it was thought that self-recognition was absent in animals without a neocortex , and was restricted to mammals with large brains and well-developed social cognition. However, in 2008, a study of self-recognition in corvids reported significant results for magpies. Mammals and birds inherited the same brain components from their last common ancestor nearly 300 million years ago, and have since independently evolved and formed significantly different brain types. The results of the mirror and mark tests showed that neocortex-less magpies are capable of understanding that a mirror image belongs to their own body. The findings show that magpies respond in the mirror and mark tests in a manner similar to apes, dolphins and elephants. The magpies were chosen to study based on their empathy and lifestyle, a possible precursor to their ability to develop self-awareness.

[ 70 ] For chimpanzees, the occurrence is about 75% in young adults and considerably less in young and old individuals.

[ 79 ] For monkeys, non-primate mammals, and a number of bird species, exploration of the mirror and social displays were observed. Hints at mirror-induced self-directed behavior have been obtained.

[ 80 ] According to a 2019 study, cleaner wrasses have become the first fish ever observed to pass the mirror test.

[ 81 ] However, the test's inventor Gordon Gallup has said that the fish were most likely trying to scrape off a perceived parasite on another fish and that they did not demonstrate self-recognition. The authors of the study retorted that because the fish checked themselves in the mirror before and after the scraping, this meant that the fish had self-awareness and recognized that their reflections belonged to their own bodies.

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] [ 84 ] The mirror test has attracted controversy among some researchers because it is entirely focused on vision, the primary sense in humans, while other species rely more heavily on other senses such as the olfactory sense in dogs.

[ 85 ] [ 86 ] [ 87 ] A study in 2015 showed that the " sniff test of self-recognition (STSR) " provides evidence of self-awareness in dogs.

[ 87 ] Language [ edit ] External videos Whale song – Oceania Project This is Einstein!

– Knoxville Zoo See also: Animal language , Origin of language , Evolutionary linguistics , Talking bird , and FOXP2 Another approach to determine whether a non-human animal is conscious derives from passive speech research with a macaw (see Arielle ). Some researchers propose that by passively listening to an animal's voluntary speech, it is possible to learn about the thoughts of another creature and to determine that the speaker is conscious. This type of research was originally used to investigate a child's crib speech by Weir (1962) and in investigations of early speech in children by Greenfield and others (1976).

[ citation needed ] Zipf's law might be able to be used to indicate if a given dataset of animal communication indicate an intelligent natural language. Some researchers have used this algorithm to study bottlenose dolphin language.

[ 88 ] Pain or suffering [ edit ] See also: Pain in animals and Animal cruelty Further arguments revolve around the ability of animals to feel pain or suffering , which implies consciousness.

[ 89 ] If animals can be shown to suffer in ways comparable to humans, ethical arguments against human suffering may be extended to animals. Some scholars argue that pain can be inferred from non-purposeful or maladaptive reactions to negative stimuli.

[ 90 ] One such reaction is transmarginal inhibition , a phenomenon observed in both humans and some animals that resembles mental breakdown.

[ citation needed ] Cosmologist Carl Sagan argues that humans often deny animal suffering to justify practices such as enslavement, experimentation, and consumption. He contends that behavioral similarities between humans and other animals challenge such denials.

[ 91 ] John Webster , professor of animal husbandry, argues that suffering is not dependent on intelligence or brain size. He states that sentient animals actively seek pleasure and display behaviors indicating enjoyment, such as basking in the sun.

[ 92 ] However, there is no consensus about which organisms are capable of experiencing pain. Philosopher Justin Leiber discusses varying views: Michel de Montaigne attributes consciousness to insects and even plants, while Peter Singer and Samuel Clarke deny it in simpler organisms like sponges. Singer places the boundary somewhere between shrimp and oysters, while others speculate about insects, spiders, or tapeworms.

[ 93 ] Some critics draw comparisons to plants, questioning whether a focus on animal suffering is entirely distinct. Science writer Carol Kaesuk Yoon describes how plants, when damaged, initiate chemical defenses and repair processes, though these do not necessarily imply consciousness.

[ 94 ] Cognitive bias and emotion [ edit ] Is the glass half empty or half full?

See also: Cognitive bias in animals and Emotion in animals Cognitive bias in animals is a pattern of deviation in judgment, whereby inferences about other animals and situations may be drawn in an illogical fashion.

[ 95 ] Individuals create their own "subjective social reality" from their perception of the input.

[ 96 ] It refers to the question " Is the glass half empty or half full?

", used as an indicator of optimism or pessimism. Cognitive biases have been shown in a wide range of species including rats, dogs, rhesus macaques, sheep, chicks, starlings and honeybees.

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] [ 99 ] The neuroscientist Joseph LeDoux advocates avoiding terms derived from human subjective experience when discussing brain functions in animals.

[ 100 ] For example, the common practice of calling brain circuits that detect and respond to threats "fear circuits" implies that these circuits are responsible for feelings of fear. LeDoux argues that Pavlovian fear conditioning should be renamed Pavlovian threat conditioning to avoid the implication that "fear" is being acquired in rats or humans.

[ 101 ] Key to his theoretical change is the notion of survival functions mediated by survival circuits, the purpose of which is to keep organisms alive rather than to make emotions. For example, defensive survival circuits exist to detect and respond to threats. While all organisms can do this, only organisms that can be conscious of their own brain's activities can feel fear. Fear is a conscious experience and occurs the same way as any other kind of conscious experience: via cortical circuits that allow attention to certain forms of brain activity. LeDoux argues the only differences between an emotional and non-emotion state of consciousness are the underlying neural ingredients that contribute to the state.

[ 102 ] [ 103 ] Neuroscience [ edit ] Drawing by Santiago Ramón y Cajal (1899) of neurons in the pigeon cerebellum Neuroscience is the scientific study of the nervous system .

[ 104 ] It is a highly active interdisciplinary science that collaborates with many other fields. The scope of neuroscience has broadened recently to include molecular , cellular , developmental , structural , functional , evolutionary , computational , and medical aspects of the nervous system. Theoretical studies of neural networks are being complemented with techniques for imaging sensory and motor tasks in the brain .
According to a 2008 paper, neuroscience explanations of psychological phenomena currently have a "seductive allure", and "seem to generate more public interest" than explanations which do not contain neuroscientific information.

[ 105 ] They found that subjects who were not neuroscience experts "judged that explanations with logically irrelevant neuroscience information were more satisfying than explanations without.

[ 105 ] Neural correlates [ edit ] See also: Neural correlates of consciousness The neural correlates of consciousness constitute the minimal set of neuronal events and mechanisms sufficient for a specific conscious percept .

[ 106 ] Neuroscientists use empirical approaches to discover neural correlates of subjective phenomena.

[ 107 ] The set should be minimal because, if the brain is sufficient to give rise to any given conscious experience, the question is which of its components is necessary to produce it.

[ citation needed ] Visual sense and representation was reviewed in 1998 by Francis Crick and Christof Koch . They concluded sensory neuroscience can be used as a bottom-up approach to studying consciousness, and suggested experiments to test various hypotheses in this research stream.

[ 108 ] A feature that distinguishes humans from most animals is that we are not born with an extensive repertoire of behavioral programs that would enable us to survive on our own (" physiological prematurity "). To compensate for this, we have an unmatched ability to learn, i.e., to consciously acquire such programs by imitation or exploration. Once consciously acquired and sufficiently exercised, these programs can become automated to the extent that their execution happens beyond the realms of our awareness. Take, as an example, the incredible fine motor skills exerted in playing a Beethoven piano sonata or the sensorimotor coordination required to ride a motorcycle along a curvy mountain road. Such complex behaviors are possible only because a sufficient number of the subprograms involved can be executed with minimal or even suspended conscious control. In fact, the conscious system may actually interfere somewhat with these automated programs.

[ 109 ] The growing ability of neuroscientists to manipulate neurons using methods from molecular biology in combination with optical tools depends on the simultaneous development of appropriate behavioural assays and model organisms amenable to large-scale genomic analysis and manipulation.

[ 110 ] A combination of such fine-grained neuronal analysis in animals with ever more sensitive psychophysical and brain imaging techniques in humans, complemented by the development of a robust theoretical predictive framework, will hopefully lead to a rational understanding of consciousness.

[ citation needed ] Neocortex and equivalents [ edit ] Previously researchers had thought that patterns of neural sleep exhibited by zebra finches needed a mammalian neocortex .

[ 1 ] The neocortex is a part of the brain of mammals. It consists of the grey matter , or neuronal cell bodies and unmyelinated fibers, surrounding the deeper white matter ( myelinated axons ) in the cerebrum . The neocortex is smooth in rodents and other small mammals, whereas in primates and other larger mammals it has deep grooves and wrinkles. These folds increase the surface area of the neocortex considerably without taking up too much more volume. Also, neurons within the same wrinkle have more opportunity for connectivity, while neurons in different wrinkles have less opportunity for connectivity, leading to compartmentalization of the cortex. The neocortex is divided into frontal , parietal , occipital , and temporal lobes, which perform different functions. For example, the occipital lobe contains the primary visual cortex , and the temporal lobe contains the primary auditory cortex . Further subdivisions or areas of neocortex are responsible for more specific cognitive processes. The neocortex is the newest part of the cerebral cortex to evolve (hence the prefix "neo"); the other parts of the cerebral cortex are the paleocortex and archicortex , collectively known as the allocortex . In humans, 90% of the cerebral cortex is neocortex.

[ citation needed ] Researchers have argued that consciousness in mammals arises in the neocortex, and therefore by extension used to argue that consciousness cannot arise in animals which lack a neocortex. For example, Rose argued in 2002 that the "fishes have nervous systems that mediate effective escape and avoidance responses to noxious stimuli, but, these responses must occur without a concurrent, human-like awareness of pain, suffering or distress, which depend on separately evolved neocortex." [ 111 ] Recently that view has been challenged, and many researchers now believe that animal consciousness can arise from homologous subcortical brain networks.

[ 1 ] For instance, evidence suggests the pallium in bird brains to be functionally equivalent to the mammalian cerebral cortex as a basis of consciousness.

[ 112 ] [ 113 ] Attention [ edit ] Attention is the cognitive process of selectively concentrating on one aspect of the environment while ignoring other things. Attention has also been referred to as the allocation of processing resources.

[ 114 ] Attention also has variations amongst cultures. Voluntary attention develops in specific cultural and institutional contexts through engagement in cultural activities with more competent community members.

[ 115 ] Most experiments show that one neural correlate of attention is enhanced firing. If a neuron has a certain response to a stimulus when the animal is not attending to the stimulus, then when the animal does attend to the stimulus, the neuron's response will be enhanced even if the physical characteristics of the stimulus remain the same. In many cases attention produces changes in the EEG . Many animals, including humans, produce gamma waves (40–60 Hz) when focusing attention on a particular object or activity.

[ 116 ] Extended consciousness [ edit ] Extended consciousness is an animal's autobiographical self-perception. It is thought to arise in the brains of animals which have a substantial capacity for memory and reason. It does not necessarily require language. The perception of a historic and future self arises from a stream of information from the immediate environment and from neural structures related to memory. The concept was popularised by Antonio Damasio and is used in biological psychology . Extended consciousness is said to arise in structures in the human brain described as image spaces and dispositional spaces . Image spaces imply areas where sensory impressions of all types are processed, including the focused awareness of the core consciousness . Dispositional spaces include convergence zones, which are networks in the brain where memories are processed and recalled, and where knowledge is merged with immediate experience.

[ 117 ] [ 118 ] Metacognition [ edit ] Metacognition is defined as " cognition about cognition", or "knowing about knowing." [ 119 ] It can take many forms; it includes knowledge about when and how to use particular strategies for learning or for problem solving.

[ 119 ] It has been suggested that metacognition in some animals provides evidence for cognitive self-awareness.

[ 120 ] There are generally two components of metacognition: knowledge about cognition, and regulation of cognition.

[ 121 ] Writings on metacognition can be traced back at least as far as De Anima and the Parva Naturalia of the Greek philosopher Aristotle .

[ 122 ] Metacognologists believe that the ability to consciously think about thinking is unique to sapient species and indeed is one of the definitions of sapience.

[ citation needed ] There is evidence that rhesus monkeys and apes can make accurate judgments about the strengths of their memories of fact and monitor their own uncertainty, [ 123 ] while attempts to demonstrate metacognition in birds have been inconclusive.

[ 124 ] A 2007 study provided some evidence for metacognition in rats , [ 125 ] [ 126 ] [ 127 ] but further analysis suggested that they may have been following simple operant conditioning principles, [ 128 ] or a behavioral economic model.

[ 129 ] Mirror neurons [ edit ] Mirror neurons are neurons that fire both when an animal acts and when the animal observes the same action performed by another.

[ 130 ] [ 131 ] [ 132 ] Thus, the neuron "mirrors" the behavior of the other, as though the observer were themselves acting. Such neurons have been directly observed in primate and other species including birds . The function of the mirror system is a subject of much speculation. Many researchers in cognitive neuroscience and cognitive psychology consider that this system provides the physiological mechanism for the perception action coupling (see the common coding theory ).

[ 132 ] They argue that mirror neurons may be important for understanding the actions of other people, and for learning new skills by imitation. Some researchers also speculate that mirror systems may simulate observed actions, and thus contribute to theory of mind skills, [ 133 ] [ 134 ] while others relate mirror neurons to language abilities.

[ 135 ] Neuroscientists such as Marco Iacoboni (UCLA) have argued that mirror neuron systems in the human brain help us understand the actions and intentions of other people. In a study published in March 2005, Iacoboni and his colleagues reported that mirror neurons could discern if another person who was picking up a cup of tea planned to drink from it or clear it from the table. In addition, Iacoboni and a number of other researchers have argued that mirror neurons are the neural basis of the human capacity for emotions such as empathy .

[ 132 ] [ 136 ] Vilayanur S. Ramachandran has speculated that mirror neurons may provide the neurological basis of self-awareness.

[ 137 ] [ 138 ] Evolutionary psychology [ edit ] See also: Evolutionary psychology Consciousness is likely an evolved adaptation since it meets George Williams ' criteria of species universality, complexity, [ 139 ] and functionality, and it is a trait that apparently increases fitness .

[ 140 ] Opinions are divided as to where in biological evolution consciousness emerged and about whether or not consciousness has survival value. It has been argued that consciousness emerged (i) exclusively with the first humans , (ii) exclusively with the first mammals, (iii) independently in mammals and birds, or (iv) with the first reptiles.

[ 141 ] Donald Griffin suggests in his book Animal Minds a gradual evolution of consciousness.

[ 142 ] Each of these scenarios raises the question of the possible survival value of consciousness.

[ citation needed ] In his paper "Evolution of consciousness," John Eccles argues that special anatomical and physical adaptations of the mammalian cerebral cortex gave rise to consciousness.

[ 143 ] In contrast, others have argued that the recursive circuitry underwriting consciousness is much more primitive, having evolved initially in pre-mammalian species because it improves the capacity for interaction with both social and natural environments by providing an energy-saving "neutral" gear in an otherwise energy-expensive motor output machine.

[ 144 ] Once in place, this recursive circuitry may well have provided a basis for the subsequent development of many of the functions that consciousness facilitates in higher organisms, as outlined by Bernard J. Baars .

[ 145 ] Richard Dawkins suggested that humans evolved consciousness in order to make themselves the subjects of thought.

[ 146 ] Daniel Povinelli suggests that large, tree-climbing apes evolved consciousness to take into account one's own mass when moving safely among tree branches.

[ 146 ] Consistent with this hypothesis, Gordon Gallup found that chimpanzees and orangutans , but not little monkeys or terrestrial gorillas , demonstrated self-awareness in mirror tests.

[ 146 ] The concept of consciousness can refer to voluntary action, awareness, or wakefulness. However, even voluntary behaviour involves unconscious mechanisms. Many cognitive processes take place in the cognitive unconscious, unavailable to conscious awareness. Some behaviours are conscious when learned but then become unconscious, seemingly automatic. Learning, especially implicitly learning a skill, can take place outside of consciousness. For example, plenty of people know how to turn right when they ride a bike, but very few can accurately explain how they actually do so.

[ 146 ] Neural Darwinism [ edit ] Main article: Neural Darwinism Neural Darwinism is a large scale theory of brain function initially proposed in 1978 by the American biologist Gerald Edelman .

[ 147 ] Edelman distinguishes between what he calls primary and secondary consciousness: Primary consciousness : is the ability, found in humans and some animals, to integrate observed events with memory to create an awareness of the present and immediate past of the world around them. This form of consciousness is also sometimes called "sensory consciousness". Put another way, primary consciousness is the presence of various subjective sensory contents of consciousness such as sensations , perceptions , and mental images. For example, primary consciousness includes a person's experience of the blueness of the ocean, a bird's song, and the feeling of pain. Thus, primary consciousness refers to being mentally aware of things in the world in the present without any sense of past and future; it is composed of mental images bound to a time around the measurable present.

[ 148 ] Secondary consciousness : is an individual's accessibility to their history and plans. The concept is also loosely and commonly associated with having awareness of one's own consciousness . The ability allows its possessors to go beyond the limits of the remembered present of primary consciousness .

[ 61 ] Primary consciousness can be defined as simple awareness that includes perception and emotion . As such, it is ascribed to most animals. By contrast, secondary consciousness depends on and includes such features as self-reflective awareness, abstract thinking , volition and metacognition .

[ 61 ] [ 149 ] Edelman's theory focuses on two nervous system organizations: the brainstem and limbic systems on one side and the thalamus and cerebral cortex on the other side. The brain stem and limbic system take care of essential body functioning and survival, while the thalamocortical system receives signals from sensory receptors and sends out signals to voluntary muscles such as those of the arms and legs. The theory asserts that the connection of these two systems during evolution helped animals learn adaptive behaviors .

[ 148 ] Other scientists have argued against Edelman's theory, instead suggesting that primary consciousness might have emerged with the basic vegetative systems of the brain. That is, the evolutionary origin might have come from sensations and primal emotions arising from sensors and receptors , both internal and surface, signaling that the well-being of the creature was immediately threatened—for example, hunger for air, thirst, hunger, pain, and extreme temperature change. This is based on neurological data showing the thalamic , hippocampal , orbitofrontal , insula , and midbrain sites are the key to consciousness of thirst.

[ 150 ] These scientists also point out that the cortex might not be as important to primary consciousness as some neuroscientists have believed.

[ 150 ] Evidence of this lies in the fact that studies show that systematically disabling parts of the cortex in animals does not remove consciousness. Another study found that children born without a cortex are conscious. Instead of cortical mechanisms, these scientists emphasize brainstem mechanisms as essential to consciousness.

[ 150 ] Still, these scientists concede that higher order consciousness does involve the cortex and complex communication between different areas of the brain.

[ citation needed ] While animals with primary consciousness have long-term memory, they lack explicit narrative, and, at best, can only deal with the immediate scene in the remembered present. While they still have an advantage over animals lacking such ability, evolution has brought forth a growing complexity in consciousness, particularly in mammals. Animals with this complexity are said to have secondary consciousness. Secondary consciousness is seen in animals with semantic capabilities, such as the four great apes . It is present in its richest form in the human species, which is unique in possessing complex language made up of syntax and semantics. In considering how the neural mechanisms underlying primary consciousness arose and were maintained during evolution, it is proposed that at some time around the divergence of reptiles into mammals and then into birds , the embryological development of large numbers of new reciprocal connections allowed rich re-entrant activity to take place between the more posterior brain systems carrying out perceptual categorization and the more frontally located systems responsible for value-category memory.

[ 61 ] The ability of an animal to relate a present complex scene to their own previous history of learning conferred an adaptive evolutionary advantage. At much later evolutionary epochs, further re-entrant circuits appeared that linked semantic and linguistic performance to categorical and conceptual memory systems. This development enabled the emergence of secondary consciousness.

[ 151 ] [ 152 ] Ursula Voss of the Universität Bonn believes that the theory of protoconsciousness [ 153 ] may serve as adequate explanation for self-recognition found in birds, as they would develop secondary consciousness during REM sleep.

[ 154 ] She added that many types of birds have very sophisticated language systems. Don Kuiken of the University of Alberta finds such research interesting as well as if we continue to study consciousness with animal models (with differing types of consciousness), we would be able to separate the different forms of reflectiveness found in today's world.

[ 155 ] For the advocates of the idea of a secondary consciousness, self-recognition serves as a critical component and a key defining measure. What is most interesting then, is the evolutionary appeal that arises with the concept of self-recognition. In non-human species and in children, the mirror test (see above) has been used as an indicator of self-awareness .

[ citation needed ] Multidimensional framework [ edit ] A 2020 paper by Jonathan Birch , Alexandra K. Schnell, and Nicola S. Clayton outlined a multidimensional approach to animal consciousness, intended to account for variation in conscious experience across species. The authors propose that consciousness may not be meaningfully represented along a single continuum, and instead suggest five distinct dimensions for constructing species-specific profiles.

[ 156 ] The proposed dimensions are: [ 156 ] Perceptual richness (p-richness) : the level of sensory detail present in conscious perception, which may vary across different sensory modalities such as vision, olfaction, or touch.

Evaluative richness (e-richness) : the complexity of affective states, including positive and negative valence, and their role in guiding behaviour.

Unity : the degree to which conscious experience is integrated into a single perspective at a given moment.

Temporality : the integration of experience over time, including continuity, memory, and anticipation of future events.

Selfhood : the extent to which an animal exhibits self-related processing, from distinguishing between self and environment to more complex capacities such as mirror self-recognition.

The authors suggest that this framework could facilitate comparative studies of consciousness in different taxa, including mammals, birds, and cephalopods.

[ 156 ] Declarations on animal consciousness [ edit ] Cambridge Declaration on Consciousness [ edit ] Cambridge Declaration on Consciousness The absence of a neocortex does not appear to preclude an organism from experiencing affective states. Convergent evidence indicates that non-human animals have the neuroanatomical, neurochemical, and neurophysiological substrates of conscious states along with the capacity to exhibit intentional behaviors . Consequently, the weight of evidence indicates that humans are not unique in possessing the neurological substrates that generate consciousness. Non-human animals, including all mammals and birds, and many other creatures, including octopuses, also possess these neurological substrates.

[ 157 ] In 2012, a group of neuroscientists attending a conference on "Consciousness in Human and non-Human Animals" at the University of Cambridge in the UK, signed the Cambridge Declaration on Consciousness (see box on the right).

[ 1 ] [ 158 ] This declaration "unequivocally" asserts: [ 1 ] "The field of Consciousness research is rapidly evolving. Abundant new techniques and strategies for human and non-human animal research have been developed. Consequently, more data is becoming readily available, and this calls for a periodic reevaluation of previously held preconceptions in this field. Studies of non-human animals have shown that homologous brain circuits correlated with conscious experience and perception can be selectively facilitated and disrupted to assess whether they are in fact necessary for those experiences. Moreover, in humans, new non-invasive techniques are readily available to survey the correlates of consciousness ." [ 1 ] "The neural substrates of emotions do not appear to be confined to cortical structures. In fact, subcortical neural networks aroused during affective states in humans are also critically important for generating emotional behaviors in animals. Artificial arousal of the same brain regions generates corresponding behavior and feeling states in both humans and non-human animals. Wherever in the brain one evokes instinctual emotional behaviors in non-human animals, many of the ensuing behaviors are consistent with experienced feeling states, including those internal states that are rewarding and punishing. Deep brain stimulation of these systems in humans can also generate similar affective states. Systems associated with affect are concentrated in subcortical regions where neural homologies abound. Young human and non-human animals without neocortices retain these brain-mind functions. Furthermore, neural circuits supporting behavioral/ electrophysiological states of attentiveness, sleep and decision making appear to have arisen in evolution as early as the invertebrate radiation, being evident in insects and cephalopod mollusks (e.g., octopus)." [ 1 ] "Birds appear to offer, in their behavior, neurophysiology, and neuroanatomy a striking case of parallel evolution of consciousness. Evidence of near human-like levels of consciousness has been most dramatically observed in grey parrots . Mammalian and avian emotional networks and cognitive microcircuitries appear to be far more homologous than previously thought. Moreover, certain species of birds have been found to exhibit neural sleep patterns similar to those of mammals, including REM sleep and, as was demonstrated in zebra finches , neurophysiological patterns previously thought to require a mammalian neocortex.

Magpies in particular have been shown to exhibit striking similarities to humans, great apes, dolphins, and elephants in studies of mirror self-recognition ." [ 1 ] "In humans, the effect of certain hallucinogens appears to be associated with a disruption in cortical feedforward and feedback processing. Pharmacological interventions in non-human animals with compounds known to affect conscious behavior in humans can lead to similar perturbations in behavior in non-human animals. In humans, there is evidence to suggest that awareness is correlated with cortical activity, which does not exclude possible contributions by subcortical or early cortical processing, as in visual awareness. Evidence that human and non-human animal emotional feelings arise from homologous subcortical brain networks provide compelling evidence for evolutionarily shared primal affective qualia." [ 1 ] New York Declaration on Animal Consciousness [ edit ] In 2024, a conference on "The Emerging Science of Animal Consciousness" at New York University [ 159 ] produced The New York Declaration on Animal Consciousness .

[ 14 ] This brief declaration, signed by over 500 scientists and academics, asserts that, in addition to the strong scientific support for consciousness in mammals and birds agreed on by Cambridge, there is also empirical evidence which "indicates at least a realistic possibility of conscious experience in all vertebrates (including reptiles, amphibians, and fishes) and many invertebrates (including, at minimum, cephalopod mollusks, decapod crustaceans, and insects)." [ 14 ] [ 160 ] The declaration further asserts that "when there is a realistic possibility of conscious experience in an animal, it is irresponsible to ignore that possibility in decisions affecting that animal".

[ 14 ] Examples [ edit ] Theories of brain evolution in animals. The old scala naturae model versus the modern approach.

A common image is the scala naturae , the ladder of nature on which animals of different species occupy successively higher rungs, with humans typically at the top.

[ 161 ] A more useful approach has been to recognize that different animals may have different kinds of cognitive processes, which are better understood in terms of the ways in which they are cognitively adapted to their different ecological niches, than by positing any kind of hierarchy.

[ 162 ] [ 163 ] Mammals [ edit ] See also: Elephant cognition , Primate cognition , and Cetacean intelligence § Self-awareness Dogs [ edit ] See also: Dog intelligence Dogs were previously listed as non-self-aware animals. Traditionally, self-consciousness was evaluated via the mirror test . But dogs, and many other animals, are not (as) visually oriented.

[ 164 ] [ 165 ] A 2015 study claims that the "sniff test of self-recognition" (STSR) provides significant evidence of self-awareness in dogs, and could play a crucial role in showing that this capacity is not a specific feature of only great apes, humans and a few other animals, but it depends on the way in which researchers try to verify it. According to the biologist Roberto Cazzolla Gatti (who published the study), "the innovative approach to test the self-awareness with a smell test highlights the need to shift the paradigm of the anthropocentric idea of consciousness to a species-specific perspective".

[ 87 ] [ 166 ] This study has been confirmed by another study.

[ 167 ] Birds [ edit ] See also: Bird intelligence Grey parrots [ edit ] Research with captive grey parrots , especially Irene Pepperberg 's work with an individual named Alex , has demonstrated they possess the ability to associate simple human words with meanings, and to intelligently apply the abstract concepts of shape, colour, number, zero-sense, etc. According to Pepperberg and other scientists, they perform many cognitive tasks at the level of dolphins, chimpanzees, and even human toddlers .

[ 168 ] Another notable African grey is N'kisi , which in 2004 was said to have a vocabulary of over 950 words which she used in creative ways.

[ 169 ] For example, when Jane Goodall visited N'kisi in his New York home, he greeted her with "Got a chimp?" because he had seen pictures of her with chimpanzees in Africa.

[ 170 ] In 2011, research led by Dalila Bovet of Paris West University Nanterre La Défense , demonstrated grey parrots were able to coordinate and collaborate with each other to an extent. They were able to solve problems such as two birds having to pull strings at the same time to obtain food. In another example, one bird stood on a perch to release a food-laden tray, while the other pulled the tray out from the test apparatus. Both would then feed. The birds were observed waiting for their partners to perform the necessary actions so their behaviour could be synchronized. The parrots appeared to express individual preferences as to which of the other test birds they would work with.

[ 171 ] Corvids [ edit ] The Eurasian magpie passes the mirror test .

It was thought that self-recognition was restricted to mammals with large brains and highly evolved social cognition, but absent from animals without a neocortex . However, in 2008, an investigation of self-recognition in corvids was conducted to determine the ability of self-recognition in the magpie. Mammals and birds inherited the same brain components from their last common ancestor nearly 300 million years ago, and have since independently evolved and formed significantly different brain types. The results of the mirror test showed that although magpies do not have a neocortex, they are capable of understanding that a mirror image belongs to their own body. The findings show that magpies respond to the mirror test in a manner similar to that of apes, dolphins, killer whales, pigs and elephants.

[ 70 ] A 2020 study found that carrion crows show a neuronal response that correlates with their perception of a stimulus, which they argue to be an empirical marker of (avian) sensory consciousness – the conscious perception of sensory input – in the crows which do not have a cerebral cortex . The study thereby substantiates the theory that conscious perception does not require a cerebral cortex and that the basic foundations for it – and possibly for human-type consciousness – may have evolved before the last common ancestor >320 Mya or independently in birds.

[ 172 ] [ 112 ] A related study showed that the birds' pallium 's neuroarchitecture is reminiscent of the mammalian cortex.

[ 173 ] A 2025 review applied a five-dimensional framework of consciousness to corvids, examining sensory, evaluative, temporal, and self-related aspects of their experience. Drawing on behavioural and neurological evidence, the authors argue that corvids exhibit sophisticated cognitive capacities across all dimensions, including high perceptual acuity, emotional evaluation, episodic-like memory, future planning, and possible forms of self-awareness and theory of mind. While not claiming definitive proof of consciousness, the review supports the growing consensus that corvids are plausible sentient beings and proposes they serve as a model group for the comparative study of non-mammalian consciousness.

[ 174 ] Invertebrates [ edit ] Octopus travelling with shells collected for protection See also: Cephalopod intelligence , Insect cognition , and Pain in invertebrates This section needs expansion with: other invertebrates, such as insects. You can help by adding to it .

( February 2025 ) Octopuses are highly intelligent, possibly more so than any other order of invertebrates . The level of their intelligence and learning capability are debated, [ 175 ] [ 176 ] [ 177 ] [ 178 ] but maze and problem-solving studies show they have both short- and long-term memory . Octopus have a highly complex nervous system , only part of which is localized in their brain . Two-thirds of an octopus's neurons are found in the nerve cords of their arms. Octopus arms show a variety of complex reflex actions that persist even when they have no input from the brain.

[ 179 ] Unlike vertebrates, the complex motor skills of octopuses are not organized in their brain using an internal somatotopic map of their body, instead using a non-somatotopic system unique to large-brained invertebrates.

[ 180 ] Some octopuses, such as the mimic octopus , move their arms in ways that emulate the shape and movements of other sea creatures .

[ citation needed ] In laboratory studies, octopuses can easily be trained to distinguish between different shapes and patterns. They reportedly use observational learning , [ 181 ] although the validity of these findings is contested.

[ 175 ] [ 176 ] Octopuses have also been observed to play : repeatedly releasing bottles or toys into a circular current in their aquariums and then catching them.

[ 182 ] Octopuses often escape from their aquarium and sometimes enter others. They have boarded fishing boats and opened holds to eat crabs.

[ 177 ] At least four specimens of the veined octopus ( Amphioctopus marginatus ) have been witnessed retrieving discarded coconut shells, manipulating them, and then reassembling them to use as shelter.

[ 183 ] [ 184 ] Shamanistic and religious views [ edit ] Shamanistic and other traditional cultures and folk tales speak of animal spirits and the consciousness of animals.

[ 185 ] [ 186 ] In India, Jains consider all the jivas (living organisms, including plants, animals and insects) to be conscious.

[ citation needed ] Researchers [ edit ] See also the categories Ethologists and Consciousness researchers and theorists Some contributors to relevant research on animal consciousness include: Marc Bekoff Jonathan Birch Peter Carruthers Antonio Damasio Marian Stamp Dawkins Frans de Waal Shaun Gallagher Gordon G. Gallup Donald Griffin Nicholas Humphrey Christof Koch Thomas Nagel Irene Pepperberg Bernard Rollin Jeffrey M. Schwartz Jakob von Uexküll See also [ edit ] Animal cognition Animal communication Animal rights Animal rights by country or territory Anthropocentrism Artificial consciousness Awareness Biosemiotics Brain in a vat Cognitive ethology Consciousness Descartes' Error Emotion in animals Epiphenomenalism Explanatory gap Ethics of uncertain sentience Externalism Hard problem of consciousness Human–animal communication Internalism and externalism Meat paradox Mind–body problem Neural correlates of consciousness Philosophy of mind Plant perception (paranormal) Problem of other minds Self-awareness in animals Sentience Sentientism Sentient beings (Buddhism) Speciesism Spindle neuron Veganism Zoosemiotics References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i The Cambridge Declaration on Consciousness (Archive) 7 July 2012. Written by Philip Low and edited by Jaak Panksepp, Diana Reiss, David Edelman, Bruno Van Swinderen, Philip Low and Christof Koch. University of Cambridge.

^ "Consciousness" . Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 22 April 2014 .

^ a b Veit, Walter (2023).

A Philosophy for the Science of Animal Consciousness . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-032-34361-7 .

^ a b Farthing G (1992).

The Psychology of Consciousness . Prentice Hall.

ISBN 978-0-13-728668-3 .

^ a b John Searle (2005). "Consciousness". In Honderich T (ed.).

The Oxford companion to philosophy . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-926479-7 .

^ Colin Allen (6 February 2024). Edward N. Zalta (ed.).

Animal consciousness . Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2011 Edition).

^ Peter Carruthers (1999). "Sympathy and subjectivity".

Australasian Journal of Philosophy .

77 (4): 465– 482.

doi : 10.1080/00048409912349231 .

S2CID 49227874 .

^ Miller, Michael R. (2013). "Descartes on Animals Revisited".

Journal of Philosophical Research .

38 : 89– 114.

doi : 10.5840/jpr2013386 .

^ Thomas Nagel (1991). "Ch. 12 What is it like to be a bat?".

Mortal Questions . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-40676-5 .

^ Douglas Hofstadter (1981). "Reflections on What Is It Like to Be a Bat?

". In Douglas Hofstadter ; Daniel Dennett (eds.).

The Mind's I . Basic Books. pp.

403–414 .

ISBN 978-0-7108-0352-8 .

^ a b Burghardt, Gordon M (1985).

"Animal awareness: Current perceptions and historical perspective" (PDF) .

American Psychologist .

40 (8): 905– 919.

doi : 10.1037/0003-066X.40.8.905 .

PMID 3898938 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 September 2012.

^ Carr, H (1927). "The interpretation of the animal mind".

Psychological Review .

34 (2): 87–106 [94].

doi : 10.1037/h0072244 .

^ Andrews, K. (2014).

The Animal Mind: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Animal Cognition . Taylor & Francis. p. 51.

ISBN 978-1-317-67676-8 .

^ a b c d "The New York Declaration on Animal Consciousness" .

The New York Declaration on Animal Consciousness . 19 April 2024 . Retrieved 25 February 2025 .

^ Robert M. Young (1996).

"The mind-body problem" . In RC Olby; GN Cantor; JR Christie; MJS Hodges (eds.).

Companion to the History of Modern Science (Paperback reprint of Routledge 1990 ed.). Taylor and Francis. pp.

702– 11.

ISBN 978-0415145787 .

^ Robinson, Howard (3 November 2011).

"Dualism" . In Edward N. Zalta (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2011 Edition) .

^ Hatfield, Gary (2024), "René Descartes" , in Zalta, Edward N.; Nodelman, Uri (eds.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2024 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 24 May 2025 ^ Bryan S. Turner (2008).

The Body and Society: Explorations in Social Theory (3rd ed.). Sage Publications. p. 78.

ISBN 978-1412929875 .

...a rejection of any dualism between mind and body, and a consequent insistence on the argument that the body is never simply a physical object but always an embodiment of consciousness.

^ Kim, Jaegwan (1995).

"Emergent properties" . In Honderich, Ted (ed.).

Problems in the Philosophy of Mind. Oxford Companion to Philosophy . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p.

240 .

ISBN 9780198661320 .

^ Pinel, J. (2009).

Psychobiology (7th ed.). Pearson/Allyn and Bacon.

ISBN 978-0205548927 .

^ LeDoux, J. (2002).

The Synaptic Self: How Our Brains Become Who We Are . Viking Penguin.

ISBN 978-88-7078-795-5 .

^ Russell, S.; Norvig, P. (2010).

Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach (3rd ed.). Prentice Hall.

ISBN 978-0136042594 .

^ Dawkins, R. (2006).

The Selfish Gene (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0199291144 .

^ Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

"Epiphenomenalism" . Retrieved 27 December 2016 .

^ Huxley, T. H. (1874). "On the Hypothesis that Animals are Automata, and its History", The Fortnightly Review , n.s.16:555-580. Reprinted in Method and Results: Essays by Thomas H. Huxley (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1898) ^ Gallagher, S. 2006. "Where's the action?: Epiphenomenalism and the problem of free will". In W. Banks, S. Pockett, and S. Gallagher.

Does Consciousness Cause Behavior? An Investigation of the Nature of Intuition (109-124). Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.

^ T. H. Huxley (1874).

"On the hypothesis that animals are automata, and its history" .

The Fortnightly Review .

16 (253): 555– 580.

Bibcode : 1874Natur..10..362.

.

doi : 10.1038/010362a0 .

^ W. James (1879).

"Are we automata?" .

Mind .

4 (13): 1– 22.

doi : 10.1093/mind/os-4.13.1 .

^ B. I. B. Lindahl (1997). "Consciousness and biological evolution".

Journal of Theoretical Biology .

187 (4): 613– 629.

Bibcode : 1997JThBi.187..613L .

doi : 10.1006/jtbi.1996.0394 .

PMID 9299304 .

^ Karl R. Popper ; John C. Eccles (1977).

The Self and Its Brain . Springer International.

ISBN 978-0-387-08307-0 .

^ Rollin, Bernard.

The Unheeded Cry: Animal Consciousness, Animal Pain, and Science . New York: Oxford University Press, 1989, pp. xii, 117-118, cited in Carbone 2004, p. 150.

^ Ricard, Matthieu (2016).

A Plea for the Animals: The Moral, Philosophical, and Evolutionary Imperative to Treat All Beings with Compassion (First English ed.). Boulder: Shambhala. p. 132.

ISBN 978-0-8348-4054-6 .

OCLC 960042213 .

^ Griffin, DR ; Speck, GB (2004).

"New evidence of animal consciousness" (PDF) .

Animal Cognition .

7 (1): 5– 18.

doi : 10.1007/s10071-003-0203-x .

PMID 14658059 .

S2CID 8650837 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 January 2013 . Retrieved 29 November 2013 .

^ The Ethics of research involving animals Archived 25 June 2008 at the Wayback Machine Nuffield Council on Bioethics, Accessed 27 February 2008 ^ Allen, C (1998).

"Assessing animal cognition: ethological and philosophical perspectives" .

J. Anim. Sci .

76 (1): 42– 7.

doi : 10.2527/1998.76142x .

PMID 9464883 . Archived from the original on 21 January 2016 . Retrieved 5 October 2015 .

^ "Animal Sentience: An Interdisciplinary Journal on Animal Feeling" .

WellBeing International . Retrieved 25 February 2025 .

^ Pereira, Toby (2017).

"An Anthropic Argument against the Future Existence of Superintelligent Artificial Intelligence" .

doi : 10.48550/arXiv.1705.03078 .

^ Vimal, RLP; Sansthana, DA (2010).

"On the Quest of Defining Consciousness" (PDF) .

Mind and Matter .

8 (1): 93– 121.

^ Hirstein, William (January 2013).

"Conscious States: where are they in the brain and what are their necessary ingredients?" .

Mens Sana Monographs .

11 (1): 230– 238.

doi : 10.4103/0973-1229.109343 (inactive 11 July 2025).

PMC 3653223 .

PMID 23678244 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ Dulany, Donelson E. (January 2014).

"What explains consciousness? Or…What consciousness explains?" .

Mens Sana Monographs .

12 (1): 11– 34.

doi : 10.4103/0973-1229.130283 (inactive 11 July 2025).

PMC 4037891 .

PMID 24891796 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ De Sousa, Avinash (January 2013).

"Towards an integrative theory of consciousness: part 1 (neurobiological and cognitive models)" .

Mens Sana Monographs .

11 (1): 100– 150.

doi : 10.4103/0973-1229.109335 (inactive 11 July 2025).

PMC 3653219 .

PMID 23678241 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ Pereira, Alfredo (January 2013).

"A Commentary On De Sousa's 'Towards An Integrative Theory Of Consciousness' " .

Mens Sana Monographs .

11 (1): 210– 229.

doi : 10.4103/0973-1229.104495 (inactive 11 July 2025).

PMC 3653222 .

PMID 23678243 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ Richard Dawkins , The Selfish Gene .

[ page needed ] ^ Human Brain Function , by Richard Frackowiak and 7 other neuroscientists, page 269 in chapter 16 "The Neural Correlates of Consciousness" (consisting of 32 pages), published 2004 ^ Douglas Hofstadter (1981). "Reflections on What Is It Like to Be a Bat?

". In Douglas Hofstadter ; Daniel Dennett (eds.).

The Mind's I . Basic Books. pp.

403–414 .

ISBN 978-0-7108-0352-8 .

^ "consciousness" . Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 4 June 2012 .

^ Schneider, Susan & Velmans, Max (2008). "Introduction". In Max Velmans & Susan Schneider (eds.).

The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness . Wiley.

ISBN 978-0-470-75145-9 .

^ Richard P. Lipka/Thomas M. Brinthaupt Self-perspectives Across the Life Span , p. 228, SUNY Press, 1992 ISBN 978-0-7914-1003-5 ^ Gallup Jr GG; Anderson JR; Shillito DJ (2002).

"The mirror test" (PDF) . In Bekoff M; Allen C; Burghardt GM (eds.).

The cognitive animal: Empirical and Theoretical perspectives on animal cognition . University of Chicago Press. pp.

325– 333. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 October 2014.

^ Haikonen POA (2007) "Reflections of consciousness: The mirror test" Proceedings of the 2007 AAAI Fall Symposium on Consciousness , pp. 67–71.

^ Asendorpf, J. B.; Warkentin, V.; Baudonniere, P.-M. (1996). "Self-Awareness and Other Awareness II: Mirror Self-Recognition, Social Contingency Awareness, and Synchronic Imitation".

Developmental Psychology .

32 (2): 313– 321.

doi : 10.1037/0012-1649.32.2.313 .

S2CID 21762291 .

^ The World First Self-Aware Robot and the Success of Mirror Image Cognition Archived 3 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine (Lecture at the Karlsruhe University and the Munich University, Germany), 8 November 2006.

^ Moreno, Raúl Arrabales (8 January 2008).

"Can a robot pass the mirror test?" .

Conscious Robots . Archived from the original on 5 January 2013.

^ Eric R. Kandel (2007).

In Search of Memory: The Emergence of a New Science of Mind . WW Norton. p. 9.

ISBN 978-0393329377 .

^ Oswald Hanfling (2002).

Wittgenstein and the Human Form of Life . Psychology Press. pp.

108– 109.

ISBN 978-0415256452 .

^ A term attributed to David Chalmers by Eugene O Mills (1999).

"Giving up on the hard problem of consciousness" . In Jonathan Shear (ed.).

Explaining Consciousness: The Hard Problem . MIT Press. p. 109.

ISBN 978-0262692212 .

^ Damasio, A. (1999).

The Feeling of What Happens: Body, Emotion and the Making of Consciousness . Harcourt Brace, 1999.

[ page needed ] ^ Damasio, Antonio (October 2003). "Feelings of Emotion and the Self".

Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences .

1001 (1): 253– 261.

Bibcode : 2003NYASA1001..253D .

doi : 10.1196/annals.1279.014 .

PMID 14625365 .

^ Chalmers, D.J. (March 1995).

"Facing up to the problem of consciousness" .

Journal of Consciousness Studies .

2 (3): 200– 219.

^ Chalmers D J, The conscious mind: In search of a fundamental theory (Oxford University Press, New York) 1996.

[ page needed ] ^ a b c d Edelman, G. M. (2003).

"Naturalizing consciousness: a theoretical framework" .

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A .

100 (9): 5520– 5524.

Bibcode : 2003PNAS..100.5520E .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.0931349100 .

PMC 154377 .

PMID 12702758 .

^ Edelman, G. M., Tononi, G. (2000). A Universe of Consciousness: How Matter Becomes Imagination. New York: Basic Books ^ Linden, Eugene (2000).

The parrot's lament: and other true tales of animal intrigue, intelligence, and ingenuity . Thorndike, Me.: G.K. Hall.

ISBN 978-0-7838-9031-9 .

^ Animal consciousness: what matters and why Daniel Dennett ^ a b Block, Ned (June 1995). "On a confusion about a function of consciousness".

Behavioral and Brain Sciences .

18 (2): 227– 247.

doi : 10.1017/s0140525x00038188 .

^ Barron, A.B.; Klein, C. (2016).

"What insects can tell us about the origins of consciousness" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

113 (18): 4900– 4908.

Bibcode : 2016PNAS..113.4900B .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1520084113 .

PMC 4983823 .

PMID 27091981 .

^ Ben-Haim, Moshe Shay; Dal Monte, Olga; Fagan, Nicholas A.; Dunham, Yarrow; Hassin, Ran R.; Chang, Steve W. C.; Santos, Laurie R. (13 April 2021).

"Disentangling perceptual awareness from nonconscious processing in rhesus monkeys ( Macaca mulatta )" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

118 (15).

Bibcode : 2021PNAS..11817543B .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.2017543118 .

PMC 8053918 .

PMID 33785543 .

^ a b Plotnik, JM; de Waal, FBM; Reiss, D (2006).

"Self-recognition in an Asian elephant" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

103 (45): 17053– 17057.

Bibcode : 2006PNAS..10317053P .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.0608062103 .

PMC 1636577 .

PMID 17075063 .

^ Bischof-Köhler, D. (1991). The development of empathy in infants. In M.E. Lamb & H. Keller (eds.), Infant Development. Perspectives from German speaking countries (245-273).

^ a b c d Prior, H; Schwarz, A; Gunturkun, O (2008).

"Mirror-induced behavior in the magpie (Pica pica): Evidence of self-recognition" .

PLOS Biology .

6 (8): 1642– 1650.

doi : 10.1371/journal.pbio.0060202 .

PMC 2517622 .

PMID 18715117 .

^ Gallup, GG Jr (1970). "Chimpanzees: self-recognition".

Science .

167 (3914): 86– 87.

Bibcode : 1970Sci...167...86G .

doi : 10.1126/science.167.3914.86 .

PMID 4982211 .

S2CID 145295899 .

^ Walraven, V; van Elsacker, L; Verheyen, R (1995). "Reactions of a group of pygmy chimpanzees (Pan paniscus) to their mirror images: evidence of self-recognition".

Primates .

36 : 145– 150.

doi : 10.1007/bf02381922 .

S2CID 38985498 .

^ Patterson FGP, Cohn RH (1994) Self-recognition and self-awareness in lowland gorillas. In: Parker ST, Mitchell RW, editors. Self-awareness in animals and humans: developmental perspectives. New York (New York): Cambridge University Press. pp. 273–290.

^ Marten, K.; Psarakos, S. (1995).

"Evidence of self-awareness in the bottlenose dolphin ( Tursiops truncatus )" . In Parker, S.T.; Mitchell, R.; Boccia, M. (eds.).

Self-awareness in Animals and Humans: Developmental Perspectives . Cambridge University Press. pp.

361– 379. Archived from the original on 13 October 2008.

^ Reiss, D.; Marino, L. (2001).

"Mirror self-recognition in the bottlenose dolphin: A case of cognitive convergence" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

98 (10): 5937– 5942.

Bibcode : 2001PNAS...98.5937R .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.101086398 .

PMC 33317 .

PMID 11331768 .

^ Delfour, F.; Marten, K. (2001). "Mirror image processing in three marine mammal species: Killer whales ( Orcinus orca ), false killer whales ( Pseudorca crassidens ) and California sea lions ( Zalophus californianus )".

Behavioural Processes .

53 (3): 181– 190.

doi : 10.1016/s0376-6357(01)00134-6 .

PMID 11334706 .

S2CID 31124804 .

^ Prior, Helmut; Schwarz, A; Güntürkün, O; De Waal, Frans (2008). De Waal, Frans (ed.).

"Mirror-Induced Behavior in the Magpie (Pica pica): Evidence of Self-Recognition" .

PLOS Biology .

6 (8): e202.

doi : 10.1371/journal.pbio.0060202 .

PMC 2517622 .

PMID 18715117 .

^ Uchino, Emiko; Watanabe, Shigeru (November 2014). "Self-recognition in pigeons revisited".

Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior .

102 (3): 327– 334.

doi : 10.1002/jeab.112 .

PMID 25307108 .

S2CID 31499014 .

^ Povinelli, DJ; Rulf, AB; Landau, KR; Bierschwale, DT (1993). "Self-recognition in chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes): distribution, ontogeny, and patterns of emergence".

J Comp Psychol .

107 (4): 347– 372.

doi : 10.1037/0735-7036.107.4.347 .

PMID 8112048 .

^ Hyatt, CW (1998). "Responses of gibbons (Hylobates lar) to their mirror images".

Am J Primatol .

45 (3): 307– 311.

doi : 10.1002/(SICI)1098-2345(1998)45:3<307::AID-AJP7>3.0.CO;2-# .

PMID 9651653 .

S2CID 196596255 .

^ Ye, Yvaine.

"A species of fish has passed the mirror test for the first time" .

New Scientist .

^ "This tiny fish can recognize itself in a mirror. Is it self-aware?" .

Animals . 7 February 2019. Archived from the original on 17 September 2018 . Retrieved 11 May 2020 .

^ Ye, Yvaine.

"A species of fish has passed the mirror test for the first time" .

New Scientist . Retrieved 11 May 2020 .

^ Kohda, Masanori; Takashi, Hatta; Takeyama, Tmohiro; Awata, Satoshi; Tanaka, Hirokazu; Asai, Jun-ya; Jordan, Alex (21 August 2018).

"Cleaner wrasse pass the mark test. What are the implications for consciousness and self-awareness testing in animals?" .

bioRxiv : 397067.

doi : 10.1101/397067 .

^ Lea SEG (2010) Concept learning in nonprimate mammals: In search of evidence In D Mareschal, PC Quinn and SEG Lea, The Making of Human Concepts , pp. 173–199. Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199549221 .

^ The Superior Human?

– Documentary. Transcription on the official website ^ a b c Cazzolla Gatti, Roberto (13 November 2015). "Self-consciousness: beyond the looking-glass and what dogs found there".

Ethology Ecology & Evolution : 1– 9.

doi : 10.1080/03949370.2015.1102777 .

S2CID 217507938 .

^ Suzuki, Ryuji; Buck, John R.; Tyack, Peter L. (January 2005). "The use of Zipf's law in animal communication analysis".

Animal Behaviour .

69 (1): F9 – F17 .

doi : 10.1016/j.anbehav.2004.08.004 .

^ Krywko, Jacek (June 2025).

"The secret to animal consciousness" .

Scientific American .

2025 (June): 81– 82.

^ Carter, Alan (2005). "Animals, Pain and Morality".

Journal of Applied Philosophy .

22 (1): 17– 22.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-5930.2005.00289.x .

^ Sagan, Carl; Druyan, Ann (1993).

Shadows of Forgotten Ancestors . Ballantine Books.

ISBN 978-0-345-38472-0 .

^ Webster, John (27 February 2005).

"The secret life of moody cows" .

The Times .

^ Leiber, Justin (December 1988). "Cartesian Linguistics?".

Philosophia .

18 (4): 309– 346.

doi : 10.1007/BF02380646 .

S2CID 189835510 .

^ Yoon, Carol Kaesuk (14 March 2011).

"No Face, but Plants Like Life Too" .

The New York Times .

^ Haselton, M. G.; Nettle, D. & Andrews, P. W. (2005). "The evolution of cognitive bias.". In D.M. Buss (ed.).

The Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology . Hoboken, NJ, US: John Wiley & Sons Inc. pp.

724– 746.

^ Bless, H.; Fiedler, K. & Strack, F. (2004).

Social cognition: How individuals construct social reality . Hove and New York: Psychology Press. p. 2.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Mendl, M.; Burman, O.H.P.; Parker, R.M.A. & Paul, E.S. (2009). "Cognitive bias as an indicator of animal emotion and welfare: emerging evidence and underlying mechanisms".

Applied Animal Behaviour Science .

118 ( 3– 4): 161– 181.

doi : 10.1016/j.applanim.2009.02.023 .

^ Harding, EJ; Paul, ES; Mendl, M (2004).

"Animal behaviour: cognitive bias and affective state" .

Nature .

427 (6972): 312.

Bibcode : 2004Natur.427..312H .

doi : 10.1038/427312a .

PMID 14737158 .

S2CID 4411418 .

^ Rygula, R; Pluta, H; P, Popik (2012).

"Laughing rats are optimistic" .

PLOS ONE .

7 (12): e51959.

Bibcode : 2012PLoSO...751959R .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0051959 .

PMC 3530570 .

PMID 23300582 .

^ LeDoux, J (2012).

"Rethinking the emotional brain" .

Neuron .

73 (4): 653– 676.

doi : 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.02.004 .

PMC 3625946 .

PMID 22365542 .

^ LeDoux, JE (2014).

"Coming to terms with fear" .

Proc Natl Acad Sci USA .

111 (8): 2871– 2878.

Bibcode : 2014PNAS..111.2871L .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1400335111 .

PMC 3939902 .

PMID 24501122 .

^ LeDoux, JE (2015).

"Feelings: What are they & how does the brain make them?" (PDF) .

Daedalus .

144 (1): 96– 111.

doi : 10.1162/DAED_a_00319 .

S2CID 57561276 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 May 2015 . Retrieved 5 October 2015 .

^ LeDoux JE (2015) Anxious: Using the Brain to Understand and Treat Fear and Anxiety , Penguin Publishing Group.

ISBN 9781101619940 .

^ "Neuroscience" .

Merriam-Webster Medical Dictionary . 31 March 2025.

^ a b Weisberg, DS; Keil, FC; Goodstein, J; Rawson, E; Gray, JR (2008).

"The seductive allure of neuroscience explanations" .

Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience .

20 (3): 470– 477.

doi : 10.1162/jocn.2008.20040 .

PMC 2778755 .

PMID 18004955 .

^ Koch, Christof (2004).

The quest for consciousness: a neurobiological approach . Englewood, US-CO: Roberts & Company Publishers. p. 304.

ISBN 978-0-9747077-0-9 .

^ See here Archived 13 March 2013 at the Wayback Machine for a glossary of related terms.

^ Crick, F.; Koch, C. (1998).

"Consciousness and neuroscience" (PDF) .

Cereb Cortex .

8 (2): 97– 107.

doi : 10.1093/cercor/8.2.97 .

PMID 9542889 .

Full text .

^ Sian Beilock , Carr T.H., MacMahon C. and Starkes J.L. (2002) When paying attention becomes counterproductive: impact of divided versus skill-focused attention on novice and experienced performance of sensorimotor skills . J. Exp. Psychol. Appl. 8: 6–16.

^ Adamantidis, Antoine R.; Zhang, Feng; Aravanis, Alexander M.; Deisseroth, Karl; de Lecea, Luis (15 November 2007).

"Neural substrates of awakening probed with optogenetic control of hypocretin neurons" .

Nature .

450 (7168): 420– 424.

Bibcode : 2007Natur.450..420A .

doi : 10.1038/nature06310 .

PMC 6744371 .

PMID 17943086 .

^ Rose, James D. (January 2002). "The Neurobehavioral Nature of Fishes and the Question of Awareness and Pain".

Reviews in Fisheries Science .

10 (1): 1– 38.

Bibcode : 2002RvFS...10....1R .

doi : 10.1080/20026491051668 .

^ a b Nieder, Andreas; Wagener, Lysann; Rinnert, Paul (25 September 2020). "A neural correlate of sensory consciousness in a corvid bird".

Science .

369 (6511): 1626– 1629.

Bibcode : 2020Sci...369.1626N .

doi : 10.1126/science.abb1447 .

PMID 32973028 .

^ Herculano-Houzel, Suzana (25 September 2020). "Birds do have a brain cortex—and think".

Science .

369 (6511): 1567– 1568.

Bibcode : 2020Sci...369.1567H .

doi : 10.1126/science.abe0536 .

PMID 32973020 .

^ Anderson, John R.

(2004).

Cognitive psychology and its implications (6th ed.). Worth Publishers. p. 519.

ISBN 978-0-7167-0110-1 .

^ Chavajay, Pablo; Barbara Rogoff (1999). "Cultural variation in management of attention by children and their caregivers".

Developmental Psychology .

35 (4): 1079– 1090.

doi : 10.1037/0012-1649.35.4.1079 .

PMID 10442876 .

^ Kaiser J, Lutzenberger W (2003). "Induced gamma-band activity and human brain function".

Neuroscientist .

9 (6): 475– 84.

doi : 10.1177/1073858403259137 .

PMID 14678580 .

S2CID 23574844 .

^ 'Layers' or 'levels' of consciousness?

Archived 10 April 2013 at the Wayback Machine ^ Nash, J. Madeleine (18 October 1999).

"Mystery Of Consciousness" .

Time . Vol. 154, no. 16. Archived from the original on 11 February 2001.

^ a b Metcalfe, J., & Shimamura, A. P. (1994). Metacognition: knowing about knowing. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.

[ page needed ] ^ Couchman, Justin J.; Coutinho, M. V. C.; Beran, M. J.; Smith, J. D. (2010).

"Beyond Stimulus Cues and Reinforcement Signals: A New Approach to Animal Metacognition" (PDF) .

Journal of Comparative Psychology .

124 (4): 356– 368.

doi : 10.1037/a0020129 .

PMC 2991470 .

PMID 20836592 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 March 2012.

^ Schraw, Gregory (1998). "Promoting general metacognitive awareness".

Instructional Science .

26 (1/2): 113– 125.

doi : 10.1023/A:1003044231033 .

S2CID 15715418 .

^ Oxford Psychology Dictionary ; metacognition [ full citation needed ] ^ Couchman, Justin J.; Coutinho, Mariana V. C.; Beran, Michael J.; Smith, J. David (2010).

"Beyond stimulus cues and reinforcement signals: A new approach to animal metacognition" .

Journal of Comparative Psychology .

124 (4): 356– 368.

doi : 10.1037/a0020129 .

PMC 2991470 .

PMID 20836592 .

^ "Metacognition: Known unknowns" . Issue 2582 of New Scientist magazine, subscribers only.

^ "Rats Capable Of Reflecting On Mental Processes" .

ScienceDaily . 9 March 2007.

^ Foote, AL; Crystal, JD (March 2007).

"Metacognition in the rat" .

Curr. Biol .

17 (6): 551– 5.

Bibcode : 2007CBio...17..551F .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2007.01.061 .

PMC 1861845 .

PMID 17346969 .

^ Foote, Allison L.; Crystal, J. D. (20 March 2007).

"Metacognition in the Rat" .

Current Biology .

17 (6): 551– 555.

Bibcode : 2007CBio...17..551F .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2007.01.061 .

PMC 1861845 .

PMID 17346969 . Archived from the original on 3 July 2012.

^ Smith, J. David; Beran, M. J.; Couchman, J. J.; Coutinho, M. V. C. (2008).

"The Comparative Study of Metacognition: Sharper Paradigms, Safer Inferences" .

Psychonomic Bulletin & Review .

15 (4): 679– 691.

doi : 10.3758/pbr.15.4.679 .

PMC 4607312 .

PMID 18792496 .

^ Jozefowiez, J.; Staddon, J. E. R.; Cerutti, D. T. (2009).

"Metacognition in animals: how do we know that they know?" .

Comparative Cognition & Behavior Reviews .

4 : 29– 39.

doi : 10.3819/ccbr.2009.40003 .

^ Rizzolatti, Giacomo; Craighero, Laila (2004).

"The mirror-neuron system" (PDF) .

Annual Review of Neuroscience .

27 : 169– 192.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.neuro.27.070203.144230 .

PMID 15217330 .

S2CID 1729870 .

^ Keysers, Christian (2010).

"Mirror Neurons" (PDF) .

Current Biology .

19 (21): R971–973.

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2009.08.026 .

PMID 19922849 .

S2CID 12668046 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 January 2013.

^ a b c Keysers, Christian (23 June 2011).

The Empathic Brain . Kindle.

^ Keysers, Christian; Gazzola, Valeria (2006). "Towards a unifying neural theory of social cognition".

Understanding Emotions . Progress in Brain Research. Vol. 156. pp.

379– 401.

doi : 10.1016/S0079-6123(06)56021-2 .

ISBN 978-0-444-52182-8 .

PMID 17015092 .

^ Michael Arbib, The Mirror System Hypothesis. Linking Language to Theory of Mind Archived 29 March 2009 at the Wayback Machine , 2005, retrieved 17 February 2006 ^ Théoret, Hugo; Pascual-Leone, Alvaro (2002).

"Language Acquisition: Do as You Hear" .

Current Biology .

12 (21): R736–7.

Bibcode : 2002CBio...12.R736T .

doi : 10.1016/S0960-9822(02)01251-4 .

PMID 12419204 .

S2CID 12867585 .

^ Blakeslee, Sandra (10 January 2006).

"Cells That Read Minds" .

The New York Times . Science.

^ Oberman, L.; Ramachandran, V.S. (2009). "Reflections on the Mirror Neuron System: Their Evolutionary Functions Beyond Motor Representation". In Pineda, J.A. (ed.).

Mirror Neuron Systems: The Role of Mirroring Processes in Social Cognition . Humana Press. pp.

39– 62.

ISBN 978-1-934115-34-3 .

^ Ramachandran, V.S. (1 January 2009).

"Self Awareness: The Last Frontier, Edge Foundation web essay" . Retrieved 26 July 2011 .

^ Nichols, Shaun; Grantham, Todd (December 2000). "Adaptive Complexity and Phenomenal Consciousness".

Philosophy of Science .

67 (4): 648– 670.

doi : 10.1086/392859 .

^ Freeman and Herron.

Evolutionary Analysis . 2007. Pearson Education, NJ.

^ Århem, Peter; Lindahl, B.I.B.; Manger, Paul R.; Butler, Ann B. (2007). "On the Origin of Consciousness — Some Amniote Scenarios".

Consciousness Transitions . pp.

77– 96.

doi : 10.1016/B978-044452977-0/50005-X .

ISBN 978-0-444-52977-0 .

^ Donald Griffin (2001).

Animal Minds: Beyond Cognition to Consciousness . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-30865-4 .

^ Eccles, J. C. (1992).

"Evolution of consciousness" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

89 (16): 7320– 7324.

Bibcode : 1992PNAS...89.7320E .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.89.16.7320 .

JSTOR 2360081 .

PMC 49701 .

PMID 1502142 .

^ Peters, Frederic "Consciousness as Recursive, Spatiotemporal Self-Location" ^ Baars, Bernard J.

A Cognitive Theory of Consciousness.

1993. Cambridge University Press.

^ a b c d Gaulin, Steven J. C. and Donald H. McBurney (2003) Evolutionary psychology . Prentice Hall, pp. 101–121.

ISBN 978-0-13-111529-3 ^ Seth, A.K.; Baars, B.J. (2005). "Neural Darwinism and consciousness".

Consciousness and Cognition .

14 (1): 140– 168.

doi : 10.1016/j.concog.2004.08.008 .

PMID 15766895 .

S2CID 6262356 .

^ a b Edelman, G. (2004).

Wider than the sky: The phenomenal gift of consciousness : Yale Univ Pr.

^ Edelman, G. M. (1992). Bright Air, Brilliant Fire: On the Matter of the Mind. Basic Books, New York.

^ a b c Merker, B (2007). "Consciousness without a cerebral cortex: A challenge for neuroscience and medicine".

Behavioral and Brain Sciences .

30 (1): 63– 81.

doi : 10.1017/s0140525x07000891 .

PMID 17475053 .

S2CID 16994436 .

^ Edelman, G. M. (2004). Wider than the sky: a revolutionary view of consciousness. Penguin Press Science, London, UK.

^ Edelman, G. M. (200). Second Nature:Brain Science and Human Knowledge. Yale University Press, New Haven, CT.

^ Hobson, J. A. (2009).

"REM sleep and dreaming: towards a theory of protoconsciousness" (PDF) .

Nature Reviews Neuroscience .

10 (11): 803– 862.

doi : 10.1038/nrn2716 .

PMID 19794431 .

S2CID 205505278 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Voss, Ursula (2010). "Changes in EEG pre and post awakening".

Science of Awakening . International Review of Neurobiology. Vol. 93. pp.

23– 56.

doi : 10.1016/S0074-7742(10)93002-X .

ISBN 9780123813244 .

PMID 20970000 .

^ Kuiken, Don (2010).

"Primary and secondary consciousness during dreaming" .

International Journal of Dream Research .

3 (1): 21– 25.

^ a b c Birch, Jonathan ; Schnell, Alexandra K.; Clayton, Nicola S. (October 2020).

"Dimensions of Animal Consciousness" .

Trends in Cognitive Sciences .

24 (10): 789– 801.

doi : 10.1016/j.tics.2020.07.007 .

PMC 7116194 .

PMID 32830051 .

^ Low, Philip et al.

(2012) The Cambridge Declaration on Consciousness Publicly proclaimed in Cambridge, UK, on 7 July 2012, at the Francis Crick Memorial Conference on Consciousness in Human and non-Human Animals.

^ "Consciousness in Human and non-Human Animals" Francis Crick Memorial Conference, 7 July 2012, Cambridge, UK.

^ "The New York Declaration on Animal Consciousness - Launch Event" .

The New York Declaration on Animal Consciousness . Retrieved 25 February 2025 .

^ "Background" .

The New York Declaration on Animal Consciousness . Retrieved 25 February 2025 .

^ Campbell, C.B.G.; Hodos, W. (1991). "The Scala Naturae revisited: Evolutionary scales and anagenesis in comparative psychology".

J. Comp. Psychol .

105 (3): 211– 221.

doi : 10.1037/0735-7036.105.3.211 .

PMID 1935002 .

^ Shettleworth (1998).

[ full citation needed ] ^ Reznikova (2007).

[ full citation needed ] ^ Crew, Bec (10 December 2015).

"Dogs Show Signs of Self-Consciousness in New 'Sniff Test' " .

ScienceAlert .

^ Coren, Stanley (2008).

How Dogs Think . Simon and Schuster.

ISBN 9781847397065 . Retrieved 8 July 2018 .

The important thing to remember is that dogs are not as visually oriented as humans ^ "Dogs (and probably many other animals) have a conscience too!" .

en.tsu.ru . Retrieved 5 December 2016 .

^ "Dogs have self-awareness. It was confirmed by STSR tests" .

en.tsu.ru . Tomsk State University . Retrieved 8 July 2018 .

^ PEPPERBERG, Irene M. (30 June 2009).

The Alex Studies: cognitive and communicative abilities of grey parrots . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 9780674041998 .

^ "Nkisi Audio Text 1" .

www.sheldrake.org .

^ Maria Armental (8 May 2008).

"Jane Goodall attends opening of bird sanctuary" .

www.projo.com . Archived from the original on 29 June 2011.

^ Péron F, Rat-Fischer L, Bovet D (2011).

"Cooperative problem solving in African grey parrots (Psittacus erithacus)" .

Animal Cognition .

14 (4): 545– 553.

doi : 10.1007/s10071-011-0389-2 .

PMID 21384141 .

S2CID 5616569 .

^ "Researchers show conscious processes in birds' brains for the first time" .

phys.org . Retrieved 9 October 2020 .

^ Stacho, Martin; Herold, Christina; Rook, Noemi; Wagner, Hermann; Axer, Markus; Amunts, Katrin; Güntürkün, Onur (25 September 2020). "A cortex-like canonical circuit in the avian forebrain".

Science .

369 (6511).

doi : 10.1126/science.abc5534 .

PMID 32973004 .

^ Veit, Walter; Browning, Heather; Garcia-Pelegrin, Elias; Davies, James R.; DuBois, Jamie G.; Clayton, Nicola S. (2 May 2025).

"Dimensions of corvid consciousness" .

Animal Cognition .

28 (1): 35.

doi : 10.1007/s10071-025-01949-y .

ISSN 1435-9456 .

PMC 12048460 .

PMID 40316871 .

^ a b What is this octopus thinking?

Archived 7 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine . By Garry Hamilton.

^ a b NFW.org?

Archived 15 December 2009 at the Wayback Machine , Is the octopus really the invertebrate intellect of the sea, by Doug Stewart. In: National Wildlife. Feb/Mar 1997, vol.35 no.2.

^ a b "Giant Octopus—Mighty but Secretive Denizen of the Deep" .

National Zoo . Archived from the original on 2 January 2008.

^ Slate.com , How Smart is the Octopus?

^ Yekutieli, Yoram; Sagiv-Zohar, Roni; Aharonov, Ranit; Enge, Yaakov; Hochner, Binyamin; Flash, Tamar (2005). "Dynamic Model of the Octopus Arm. I. Biomechanics of the Octopus Reaching Movement".

J. Neurophysiol .

94 (2): 1443– 1458.

doi : 10.1152/jn.00684.2004 .

PMID 15829594 .

S2CID 14711055 .

^ Zullo, L; Sumbre, G; Agnisola, C; Flash, T ; Hochner, B (2009).

"Nonsomatotopic organization of the higher motor centers in octopus" .

Curr. Biol .

19 (19): 1632– 6.

Bibcode : 2009CBio...19.1632Z .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2009.07.067 .

PMID 19765993 .

S2CID 15852956 .

^ "Octopus twists for shrimps" . 25 February 2003 – via news.bbc.co.uk.

^ What behavior can we expect of octopuses?

. By Dr. Jennifer Mather, Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of Lethbridge and Roland C. Anderson, The Seattle Aquarium .

^ "Octopus snatches coconut and runs" .

BBC News . 14 December 2009 . Retrieved 20 May 2010 .

^ "Coconut shelter: Evidence of tool use by octopuses | EduTube Educational Videos" . Archived from the original on 24 October 2013 . Retrieved 21 December 2012 .

^ Stone-Miller, Rebecca (2004). "Human-Animal Imagery, Shamanic Visions, and Ancient American Aesthetics".

Res: Anthropology and Aesthetics .

45 (45): 47– 68.

doi : 10.1086/RESv45n1ms20167621 .

JSTOR 20167621 .

S2CID 193758322 .

^ Metzner, Ralf (1987) "Transformation Process in Shamanism, Alchemy, and Yoga" . In: Nicholson, S.

Shamanism , pp. 233–252, Quest Books.

ISBN 9780835631266 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bayn T, Cleeremans A and Wilken P (2009) The Oxford companion to consciousness pp. 43f, Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-856951-0 .

Bekoff, Marc (2013) Why Dogs Hump and Bees Get Depressed New World Library.

ISBN 978-1-60868-220-1 .

Bekoff, Marc; Jane Goodall (2007).

The Emotional Lives of Animals . New World Library.

ISBN 978-1-57731-502-5 .

Bekoff, Marc (2003).

"Consciousness and Self in Animals: Some Reflections" (PDF) .

Zygon .

38 (2): 229– 245.

doi : 10.1111/1467-9744.00497 .

[ permanent dead link ] Brown, Jason W (2010) Neuropsychological Foundations of Conscious Experience pp. 200–210, Les Editions Chromatika.

ISBN 978-2-930517-07-0 .

Cartmill, Matt (December 2000). "Animal Consciousness: Some Philosophical, Methodological, and Evolutionary Problems1".

American Zoologist .

40 (6): 835– 846.

doi : 10.1668/0003-1569(2000)040[0835:acspma]2.0.co;2 .

Dawkins, Marian Stamp (2012) Why animals matter: Animal consciousness, animal welfare, and human well-being Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-958782-7 .

Dawkins, Marian Stamp (1998) Through our eyes only? The search for animal consciousness Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-850320-0 .

Dol, Marcel (1997) Animal consciousness and animal ethics: perspectives from the Netherlands Uitgeverij Van Gorcum.

ISBN 978-90-232-3215-5 .

Griffin, Donald Redfield (1976) The Question of Animal Awareness Rockefeller Univ. Press.

Griffin, Donald Redfield (2001) Animal minds: beyond cognition to consciousness University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-30865-4 .

Huxley, TH (1874).

"On the hypothesis that animals are automata, and its history" (PDF) .

Nature .

10 (253): 362– 366.

Bibcode : 1874Natur..10..362.

.

doi : 10.1038/010362a0 .

S2CID 4113131 .

Kunkel HO (2000) Human issues in animal agriculture pp. 213–214. Texas A&M University Press.

ISBN 978-0-89096-927-4 .

Lurz, Robert "Animal Minds" Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Phillips, Clive (2009) The Welfare of Animals: The Silent Majority Springer.

ISBN 978-1-4020-9218-3 .

Reznikova, Zh. I. (2007) Animal Intelligence: From Individual to Social Cognition . Cambridge University Press Samorini, Giorgio (2002) Animals and Psychedelics: The Natural World and the Instinct to Alter Consciousness Inner Traditions/Bear.

ISBN 978-0-89281-986-7 .

Review Schönfeld, Martin (2006). "Animal Consciousness: Paradigm Change in the Life Sciences".

Perspectives on Science .

14 (3): 354– 381.

doi : 10.1162/posc.2006.14.3.354 .

S2CID 145128785 .

Shettleworth, S. J. (1998) (2010,2nd ed) Cognition, evolution and behavior . New York: Oxford University Press.

Smith, J. D., Beran, M. J., Couchman, J. J., Coutinho, M. V. C., & Boomer, J. B. (2009).

Animal metacognition: Problems and prospects, [1] Comparative Cognition and Behavior Reviews, 4, 40–53.

Steiner, Gary (2008) Animals and the moral community: mental life, moral status, and kinship pp. 11–12, Columbia University Press.

ISBN 978-0-231-14234-2 .

Stenholm, Stig (2011) The Quest for Reality: Bohr and Wittgenstein: Two Complementary Views pp. 88–92, Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-960358-9 .

Van Riel, Gerd (2009) Ancient perspectives on Aristotle's De anima Leuven University Press.

ISBN 978-90-5867-772-3 .

Walker, Stephen (1983) Animal thought p. 98, Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-7100-9037-9 .

Invertebrates Smith, J. A. (1991). "A Question of Pain in Invertebrates".

ILAR Journal .

33 ( 1– 2): 25– 31.

doi : 10.1093/ilar.33.1-2.25 .

Sømme, Lauritz S. (2005) "Sentience and pain in invertebrates" [ permanent dead link ] Report to Norwegian Scientific Committee for Food Safety.

Consciousness in a Cockroach Discover , 10 January 2007.

Do insects Feel pain?

External links [ edit ] Animal consciousness at the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Bekoff, Marc 2012 Animals are conscious and should be treated as such New Scientist , 24 September 2012.

Koch, Christof , " Consciousness Is Everywhere ", Huffington Post , 15 August 2012.

" Octopuses Gain Consciousness (According to Scientists' Declaration) ", by Katherine Harmon Courage, Scientific American , 21 August 2012.

" "The absence of a neocortex does not appear to preclude an organism from experiencing affective states" " by Richard Marsden, The Business of Emotions, 4 September 2012.

Animals are as with it as humans, scientists say , Discovery News , 24 August 2012, by George Dvorsky, io9.com.

" Human exceptionalism is for the birds " by Michael Cook, 7 September 2012, BioEdge How do octopuses think?

ABC interview with Peter Godfrey-Smith .

Do animals demonstrate consciousness?

HowStuffWorks . Accessed 30 January 2012.

I, cockroach Archived 14 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine Aeon , 19 November 2013.

One of Us Essay by John Jeremiah Sullivan in Lapham's Quarterly , 25 March 2014.

Elephants mourn. Dogs love. Why do we deny the feelings of other species?

The Guardian . 11 October 2017.

v t e Animal cognition Cognition Animal communication Animal consciousness Animal culture Animal language Great ape language Talking animal Talking bird Animal-made art Animal navigation Cognitive bias Cognitive ethology Comparative cognition Emotion Insect Mirror test Neuroethology Number sense Observational learning Primate archaeology Theory of mind Tool use sea otters Vocal learning Intelligence Bird Pigeon Cat Cephalopod Cetacean Dog Elephant Fish g factor in non-humans Primate Hominid Swarm Pain Pain in amphibians Pain in animals Pain in cephalopods Pain in crustaceans Pain in fish Pain in invertebrates Relation to brain Brain size Brain-to-body mass ratio Encephalization quotient Neuroscience and intelligence Number of neurons Category v t e Animal rights Topics (overviews, concepts, issues, cases) Overviews Movement History ( Ancient world ) Timeline Europe United States By country or territory Argentina Australia Austria Azerbaijan Brazil Canada China Denmark Ethiopia France Germany Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Israel Italy Japan Malaysia Mexico Netherlands Russia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom United States Anarchism Punk subculture Religion Christianity Indian religions Islam Women Concepts Abolitionism Ahimsa Animal cognition Animal consciousness Animal–industrial complex Animal law Animal machine Animal protectionism Animal trial Animal welfare Animal-free agriculture Anthropocentrism Argument from marginal cases Cambridge Declaration on Consciousness New York Declaration on Animal Consciousness Carnism Equal consideration of interests Emotion in animals Ethics of eating meat Ethics of uncertain sentience Holocaust analogy Insects in ethics Intrinsic value Meat paradox Mentophobia Moral circle expansion Nonviolence Nonkilling Open rescue Opposition to hunting Painism Personism Replaceability argument Sentientism Speciesism Total liberation Veganism Vegaphobia Vegetarianism Issues Animal husbandry Animal product Animal husbandry Battery cage Bile bear Chick culling Crocodiles CAFOs Cow-calf separation Feedback Fish Foam depopulation Fur Fur trade Insects Intensive Pigs Livestock Live export Poultry Wildlife Slaughter Slaughterhouse Ventilation shutdown Blood sport Badger-baiting Bear-baiting Boar-baiting Bull-baiting Donkey-baiting Duck-baiting Hog-baiting Human-baiting Hyena-baiting Lion-baiting Monkey-baiting Rat-baiting Wolf-baiting Cruelty Pest control ( Varmint hunting ) Sacrifice Working animal Animal testing History Alternatives Regulations Countries banning non-human ape experimentation Non-human primates Cosmetics Model organism Vivisection ( Anti-vivisection movement ) Organizations Huntingdon Life Sciences Nafovanny Green Scare ( Operation Backfire ) Animal welfare Abandoned pets Captivity Euthanasia ( insects ) Farmed insects Killing of animals Live food Pain Amphibians Cephalopods Crustaceans Fish Invertebrates Laboratory animals Sports Fishing Bait Commercial Farming Recreational Wild animals Culling Farming Hunting Techniques Coursing Spotlighting Trail hunting Trapping Treeing Trophy hunting Upland hunting Animals Alligators Bats Bears Birds Bison Boar Raccoons Deer Dolphins Foxes Hares Jackals Lions Mink Petrels Quail Rabbit Rooks Seals Squirrels Tigers Turtles Waterfowl Wild birds Whales Wolves Management Predation problem Suffering Trade Primates Ivory Welfare Cases Brown Dog affair Cambridge University primates McLibel case Monkey selfie copyright dispute Pit of despair SHAC Silver Spring monkeys University of California, Riverside 1985 laboratory raid Unnecessary Fuss War of the currents Studies Animal ethics Anthrozoology Critical animal studies Ethology Vegan studies Methodologies Direct Action Everywhere Hunt sabotage Observances World Animal Day World Day for Farmed Animals World Day for the End of Speciesism World Day for Laboratory Animals World Day for the End of Fishing World Vegan Day World Vegetarian Day Advocates (academics, writers, activists) Academics and writers Contemporary Carol J. Adams Aysha Akhtar Kristin Andrews Marc Bekoff Steven Best Paola Cavalieri Stephen R. L. Clark Alasdair Cochrane J. M. Coetzee Alice Crary David DeGrazia Daniel Dombrowski Sue Donaldson Josephine Donovan Joan Dunayer Mylan Engel Catia Faria Lawrence Finsen Michael W. Fox Gary L. Francione Robert Garner Valéry Giroux Lori Gruen John Hadley Oscar Horta Christine Korsgaard Dale Jamieson Kyle Johannsen Melanie Joy Hilda Kean Will Kymlicka Renan Larue Thomas Lepeltier Andrew Linzey Clair Linzey Dan Lyons David Nibert Martha Nussbaum Clare Palmer Charles Patterson David Pearce Jessica Pierce Evelyn Pluhar Mark Rowlands Richard D. Ryder Steve F. Sapontzis Jeff Sebo Jérôme Segal Peter Singer Gary Steiner Cass Sunstein David Sztybel Michael Tye Tatjana Višak Paul Waldau Corey Lee Wrenn Historical Tom Beauchamp Jeremy Bentham David Renaud Boullier Stephen St. C. Bostock Brigid Brophy Peter Buchan Mona Caird Priscilla Cohn Sherry Colb Henry Crowe Herman Daggett Richard Dean Wilhelm Dietler William Hamilton Drummond Edward Payson Evans T. Forster John Galsworthy Thomas G. Gentry V. A. Holmes-Gore Arthur Helps John Hildrop John Zephaniah Holwell Francis Hutcheson Soame Jenyns Marie Jungius Karl Christian Friedrich Krause John Lawrence Charles R. Magel Jean Meslier Mary Midgley J. Howard Moore José Ferrater Mora Robert Morris Leonard Nelson Edward Nicholson Siobhan O'Sullivan John Oswald Rod Preece Humphrey Primatt James Rachels Tom Regan Joseph Ritson Nathaniel Peabody Rogers Bernard Rollin Henry Stephens Salt Arthur Schopenhauer Laurids Smith John Styles Thomas Tryon Gary Varner Johann Friedrich Ludwig Volckmann Mary Anne Warren Adam Gottlieb Weigen Johann Heinrich Winckler Steven M. Wise Jon Wynne-Tyson Voltaire Thomas Young Activists Contemporary James Aspey Greg Avery Matt Ball Martin Balluch Carole Baskin Barbi Twins Brigitte Bardot Gene Baur Yves Bonnardel Joey Carbstrong Aymeric Caron Jake Conroy Rod Coronado Karen Dawn Chris DeRose John Feldmann Bruce Friedrich Juliet Gellatley Tal Gilboa Antoine Goetschel Mark Gold Brigitte Gothière Alex Hershaft Wayne Hsiung Charlotte Laws Ronnie Lee Howard Lyman Evanna Lynch Bill Maher Keith Mann Jim Mason Dan Mathews Joaquin Phoenix Jo-Anne McArthur Luísa Mell Virginia McKenna Morrissey Ingrid Newkirk Heather Nicholson Jack Norris Ric O'Barry David Olivier Alex Pacheco Craig Rosebraugh Jasmin Singer Kim Stallwood Lynda Stoner Marianne Thieme Darren Thurston Christine Townend Wendy Turner-Webster Jerry Vlasak Louise Wallis Ed Winters Gary Yourofsky That Vegan Teacher Historical Cleveland Amory Henry B. Amos Bob Barker Ernest Bell William Brown Edith Carrington Joseph Collinson Frances Power Cobbe Joan Court Karen Davis Royal Dixon Muriel Dowding Elizabeth Farians Emarel Freshel André Géraud Lewis Gompertz James Granger Barry Horne Marie Huot Lizzy Lind af Hageby Jessie Mackay Alfred Mansfield Mitchell J. Isaac Pengelly Norm Phelps Jill Phipps Maud Ingersoll Probasco Hans Ruesch Magnus Schwantje Nell Shipman Henry Spira Joseph Stratton Andrew Tyler Gretchen Wyler Movement (groups, parties) Groups Contemporary American Anti-Vivisection Society Animal Aid Animal Ethics Animal Justice Animal Justice Project Animal Legal Defense Fund Animal Liberation Animal Liberation Front Animal Liberation Press Office Animal Liberation Victoria Animal Rights Militia Animal Rising AnimaNaturalis Anti-Vivisection Coalition Anonymous for the Voiceless Beauty Without Cruelty Born Free Foundation Centre for Animals and Social Justice Chinese Animal Protection Network Cruelty Free International Direct Action Everywhere Doctors Against Animal Experiments Equanimal Every Animal Farm Animal Rights Movement Faunalytics Great Ape Project Hunt Saboteurs Association In Defense of Animals Korea Animal Rights Advocates L214 Last Chance for Animals Massachusetts Animal Rights Coalition Mercy for Animals Oxford Centre for Animal Ethics People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Revolutionary Cells – Animal Liberation Brigade Rise for Animals Sentience Politics Uncaged Campaigns United Activists for Animal Rights United Poultry Concerns UPF-Centre for Animal Ethics Viva!

Voice for Animals Humane Society Voiceless Historical Canadian Anti-Vivisection Society Humanitarian League (1891–1919) Millennium Guild Order of the Golden Age Oxford Group Parties Animal Justice Party (Australia) Animal Politics EU (Europe) Animal Protection Party of Canada (Canada) Animal Justice Party of Finland (Finland) Animals' Party (Sweden) Animalist Movement (Italy) Animalist Party with the Environment (Spain) DierAnimal (Belgium) Human Environment Animal Protection Party (Germany) Italian Animalist Party (Italy) Party for the Animals (Netherlands) People Animals Nature (Portugal) V-Partei³ (Germany) Activism Animal Rights National Conference Media (books, films, periodicals, albums) Books On Abstinence from Eating Animals (3rd century) A Reasonable Plea for the Animal Creation (1746) A System of Moral Philosophy, in Three Books (1755) The Cry of Nature (1791) An Essay on Humanity to Animals (1798) An Essay on Abstinence from Animal Food, as a Moral Duty (1802) Moral Inquiries on the Situation of Man and of Brutes (1824) The Rights of Animals (1838) The Ethics of Diet (1883) A Plea for Vegetarianism and Other Essays (1886) Animals' Rights: Considered in Relation to Social Progress (1892) Evolutional Ethics and Animal Psychology (1897) Better-World Philosophy (1899) The Logic of Vegetarianism (1899) The Universal Kinship (1906) The New Ethics (1907) Animals, Men and Morals (1971) Animal Liberation (1975) The Case for Animal Rights (1983) Morals, Reason, and Animals (1987) Zoos and Animal Rights (1993) Animals, Property, and the Law (1995) The Lives of Animals (1999) Eternal Treblinka (2001) Do Animals Have Rights?

(2005) Striking at the Roots (2008) An American Trilogy (2009) An Introduction to Animals and Political Theory (2010) Animal Rights Without Liberation (2012) Political Animals and Animal Politics (2014) Animal (De)liberation (2016) Beating Hearts: Abortion and Animal Rights (2016) Sentientist Politics (2018) Wild Animal Ethics (2020) Animal Ethics in the Wild (2022) Making a Stand for Animals (2022) Animal Rights Law (2023) The Moral Circle (2025) Films The Animals Film (1981) A Cow at My Table (1998) Shores of Silence (2000) The Witness (2000) Meet Your Meat (2002) Legally Blonde 2 (2003) The Meatrix (2003) Peaceable Kingdom (2004) Earthlings (2005) Behind the Mask (2006) Your Mommy Kills Animals (2007) Food, Inc.

(2009) The Cove (2009) Peaceable Kingdom: The Journey Home (2009) Forks Over Knives (2011) Vegucated (2011) An Apology to Elephants (2013) Speciesism: The Movie (2013) The Ghosts in Our Machine (2013) Unlocking the Cage (2016) Land of Hope and Glory (2017) Carnage (2017) Okja (2017) Dominion (2018) Seaspiracy (2021) Periodicals Journals Animal Sentience Between the Species Cahiers antispécistes Etica & Animali Journal of Animal Ethics Relations. Beyond Anthropocentrism The Animals' Defender Magazines Arkangel Bite Back Muutoksen kevät No Compromise Satya Albums Animal Liberation (1987) Tame Yourself (1991) Manifesto (2008) Salvation of Innocents (2014) Onward to Freedom (2014) Fairs and exhibitions Holocaust on your Plate (2003) Category ( 138 ) v t e Consciousness Figures Philosophy Alfred North Whitehead Arthur Schopenhauer Baruch Spinoza Bertrand Russell Brian O'Shaughnessy Charles Augustus Strong Christopher Peacocke Colin McGinn Daniel Dennett David Chalmers David Hume David Papineau David Pearce Donald Davidson Douglas Hofstadter Edmund Husserl Frank Jackson Fred Dretske Galen Strawson George Berkeley George Henry Lewes Georges Rey Gottfried Leibniz Immanuel Kant John Eccles John Locke John Polkinghorne John Searle Joseph Levine Karl Popper Keith Frankish Kenneth M. Sayre Maurice Merleau-Ponty Max Velmans Michael Tye Martin Heidegger Ned Block Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Philip Goff René Descartes Thomas Metzinger Thomas Nagel William Kingdon Clifford William Lycan William Seager Psychology Carl Gustav Jung Donald D. Hoffman Franz Brentano Gustav Fechner Julian Jaynes Kurt Koffka Max Wertheimer Sigmund Freud Wilhelm Wundt William James Wolfgang Köhler Neuroscience Anil Seth Antonio Damasio Benjamin Libet Bernard Baars Christof Koch Francis Crick Francisco Varela Gerald Edelman Giulio Tononi Karl Pribram Lawrence Weiskrantz Michael Gazzaniga Michael Graziano Patrick Wilken Roger Sperry Stanislas Dehaene Steven Laureys Stuart Hameroff Wolf Singer Others Annaka Harris David Bohm Eugene Wigner Erwin Schrödinger Marvin Minsky Max Planck Roger Penrose Susan Blackmore Victor J. Stenger Wolfgang Pauli Theories Philosophy of mind Anomalous monism Computationalism Double-aspect theory Eliminative materialism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Idealism Interactionism Materialism Mind–body dualism Monism Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Panpsychism Parallelism Physicalism Property dualism Reflexive monism Revisionary materialism Solipsism Type physicalism (reductive materialism, identity theory) Science Attention schema theory Consciousness causes collapse Dynamic core hypothesis Damasio's theory of consciousness Electromagnetic theories of consciousness Global workspace theory Higher-order theories of consciousness Holonomic brain theory Integrated information theory Lamme's recurrent feedback hypothesis Multiple drafts model Orchestrated objective reduction Topics Agnosia Altered state of consciousness Animal consciousness Artificial consciousness Attention Attentional control Awareness Binding problem Binocular rivalry Blindsight Brain Cartesian theater Consciousness after death Disorders of consciousness Divided consciousness Dual consciousness (split-brain) Experience Explanatory gap Free will Flash suppression Hallucination Hard problem of consciousness Heterophenomenology Higher consciousness Illusion Introspection illusion Knowledge argument Locked-in syndrome Mind Mind–body problem Minimally conscious state Neural correlates of consciousness Neurophenomenology Ontology Phenomenology Philosophical zombie Philosophy of mind Primary consciousness Problem of other minds Qualia Quantum mind Reentry Sakshi Purusha Secondary consciousness Sentience Sentientism Sociology of human consciousness Soul Stream of consciousness Subconscious Subjective character of experience Subjectivity and objectivity Unconscious mind Unconsciousness Upanishads Visual masking Consciousness causes collapse Yogachara Works A Universe of Consciousness Association for the Scientific Study of Consciousness Consciousness and Cognition Consciousness Explained Cosmic Consciousness How the Self Controls Its Brain Journal of Consciousness Studies Online Consciousness Conference Psyche The Astonishing Hypothesis The Conscious Mind The Emperor's New Mind The Science of Consciousness Understanding Consciousness " What Is It Like to Be a Bat?

" Wider than the Sky Category Commons v t e Ethology Branches Animal cognition Animal communication Animal consciousness Animal culture Animal sexual behaviour Animal welfare science Anthrozoology Bee learning and communication Behavioural ecology Behavioral endocrinology Behavioural genetics Breed Cognitive ethology Comfort behaviour Grooming Comparative psychology Emotion in animals Ethogram Evolutionary neuroscience Feeding Hover Human ethology Instinct Learning Neuroethology Pain in animals Philosophical ethology Sociobiology Species-typical behavior Stereotypy Structures Hive Honeycomb Nest Instinct Swarm Tool use by non-humans Zoosemiotics Zoomusicology Ethologists Patrick Bateson Marc Bekoff Donald Broom John B. Calhoun Charles Darwin Marian Dawkins Richard Dawkins Irenäus Eibl-Eibesfeldt Dian Fossey Karl von Frisch Jane Goodall Heini Hediger Julian Huxley Konrad Lorenz Desmond Morris Thomas Sebeok William Homan Thorpe Nikolaas Tinbergen Jakob von Uexküll Wolfgang Wickler E. O. Wilson Solly Zuckerman Societies Association for the Study of Animal Behaviour International Society for Applied Ethology Journals Animal Behaviour Animal Cognition Animal Welfare Behavioral Ecology Behaviour Category v t e Evolutionary psychology History Evolutionary thought Theoretical foundations Adaptationism Cognitive revolution Cognitivism Gene selection theory Modern synthesis Criticism Evolutionary processes Adaptations Altruism Cheating Hamiltonian spite Reciprocal Baldwin effect By-products Evolutionarily stable strategy Exaptation Fitness Inclusive Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mismatch Natural selection Sexual selection Costly signaling Male / female intrasexual competition Mate choice Sexual dimorphism Social selection Species-typical behavior Areas Cognition / Emotion Affect Display Display rules Facial expression Behavioral modernity Cognitive module / modularity of mind Adaptive unconscious / Unconscious cognition Automatic and controlled processes Cognitive specialization Computational theory of mind Domain generality Domain specificity / learning Dual process theory Cognitive tradeoff hypothesis Evolution of the brain Evolution of nervous systems Fight-or-flight response Arachnophobia Basophobia Ophidiophobia Folk biology / taxonomy Folk psychology / theory of mind Intelligence Flynn effect Wason selection task Motor control / skill Multitasking Numerical cognition Number sense Approximate number system Parallel individuation system Sleep Visual perception Color vision Eye Naïve physics Culture Aesthetics Literary criticism Musicology Anthropology Biological Crime Language Origin Psychology Speech Morality Moral foundations Religion Origin Universals Development Attachment Bonding Affectional / maternal / paternal bond Caregiver deprivation Childhood attachment Cinderella effect Cognitive development Education Language acquisition Personality development Socialization Human factors / Mental health Cognitive ergonomics Computer-mediated communication Engineering psychology Human–computer interaction Media naturalness theory Neuroergonomics Depression Digital media use and mental health Hypophobia Imprinted brain hypothesis Mind-blindness Psychological effects of Internet use Rank theory of depression Schizophrenia Screen time Smartphones and pedestrian safety Social aspects of television Societal effects of cars Distracted driving Lead–crime hypothesis Mobile phones and driving safety Texting while driving Sex Activity Adult attachment Age disparity Arousal Concealed ovulation Coolidge effect Desire Fantasy Hormonal motivation Incest taboo Westermarck effect Jealousy Mate guarding Mating preferences Mating strategies Orientation Ovulatory shift hypothesis Pair bond Physical / Sexual attraction Sexuality / male / female Sexy son hypothesis Sex differences Aggression Autism Cognition Crime Division of labour Emotional intelligence Empathising–systemising theory Gender role Intelligence Memory Mental health Narcissism Neuroscience Schizophrenia Substance abuse Suicide Variability hypothesis Related subjects Academic disciplines Behavioral / evolutionary economics Behavioral epigenetics / genetics Affective / behavioral / cognitive / evolutionary neuroscience Biocultural anthropology Biolinguistics Biological psychiatry Cognitive ethology Cognitive psychology Cognitive science Comparative psychology Cross-cultural psychology Ethology Evolutionary biology Evolutionary medicine Functional psychology Neuropsychology Philosophy of mind Population genetics Primatology Sociobiology Research topics Animal / comparative cognition Animal communication Animal consciousness Animal culture Animal language Animal navigation Animal training Animal-made art Cognitive bias Emotion g factor in non-humans Great ape language Human–animal communication Number sense Primate cognition Theory of mind Tool use Cultural evolution Evolutionary epistemology Missing heritability problem Unit of selection Coevolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Fisher's principle Group selection Hologenome theory Lamarckism / acquired characteristics Population Punctuated equilibrium Recent human evolution Species Species complex Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Trivers–Willard hypothesis Theoretical positions Cultural selection theory Determinism / indeterminism Biological determinism Connectionism Cultural determinism Environmental determinism Nature versus nurture Psychological nativism Social constructionism Social determinism Standard social science model Functionalism Memetics Multilineal evolution Neo-Darwinism Neoevolutionism Sociocultural evolution Unilineal evolution Evolutionary psychologists Evolutionary psychology Psychology portal Evolutionary biology portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5667c77bf8‐rb45l
Cached time: 20250818151559
Cache expiry: 3600
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.525 seconds
Real time usage: 2.796 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 16425/1000000
Revision size: 130920/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 687877/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 18983/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 35/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 678048/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.531/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7818253/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2294.024      1 -total
 62.87% 1442.262      1 Template:Reflist
 28.11%  644.955     80 Template:Cite_journal
 12.15%  278.738     38 Template:Cite_book
  9.12%  209.226     23 Template:Cite_web
  8.91%  204.484     17 Template:Navbox
  8.38%  192.273     23 Template:Fix
  5.51%  126.439     13 Template:Citation_needed
  4.22%   96.695      1 Template:Animal_cognition
  3.70%   84.969      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:13001588:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818151559 and revision id 1306564119. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Animal_consciousness&oldid=1306564119 " Categories : Animal cognition Animal emotions Animal rights Animal welfare Consciousness Cognitive neuroscience Zoosemiotics Issues in animal ethics Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2024 CS1 maint: publisher location All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from September 2023 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with incomplete citations from July 2024 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2010 Articles to be expanded from February 2025 All articles to be expanded This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 12:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Animal consciousness 16 languages Add topic

