Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Pre-industrial 2.2 Industrial 2.3 Factory electrification 2.4 Buildings 2.5 Fabrics and Materials 3 The use of assembly lines 4 Vertical integration 5 Advantages and disadvantages 6 Socioeconomic impacts 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Mass production 48 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia High volume production of standardized products This article is about large-scale production. For the creation of matter, see mass generation . For other uses, see Mass Production (disambiguation) .

This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( January 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series of articles on Machine industry Manufacturing methods Batch production Job production Flow production Lean manufacturing Agile manufacturing Industrial technologies PLM RCM TPM VDM QRM TOC Six Sigma OEE TQM ZD Information and communication ISA-88 ISA-95 ERP IEC 62264 B2MML Process control PLC DCS SCADA v t e A modern automobile assembly line Mass production , also known as series production , series manufacture , or continuous production , is the production of substantial amounts of standardized products in a constant flow, including and especially on assembly lines . Together with job production and batch production , it is one of the three main production methods.

[ 1 ] The term mass production was popularized by a 1926 article in the Encyclopædia Britannica supplement that was written based on correspondence with Ford Motor Company .

The New York Times used the term in the title of an article that appeared before the publication of the Britannica article.

[ 2 ] The idea of mass production is applied to many kinds of products: from fluids and particulates handled in bulk ( food , fuel , chemicals and mined minerals ), to clothing, textiles, parts and assemblies of parts ( household appliances and automobiles ).

Some mass production techniques, such as standardized sizes and production lines, predate the Industrial Revolution by many centuries; however, it was not until the introduction of machine tools and techniques to produce interchangeable parts were developed in the mid-19th century that modern mass production was possible.

[ 2 ] Overview [ edit ] Mass production involves making many copies of products, very quickly, using assembly line techniques to send partially complete products to workers who each work on an individual step, rather than having a worker work on a whole product from start to finish. The emergence of mass production allowed supply to outstrip demand in many markets, forcing companies to seek new ways to become more competitive . Mass production ties into the idea of overconsumption and the idea that we as humans consume too much.

Mass production of fluid matter typically involves piping with centrifugal pumps or screw conveyors (augers) to transfer raw materials or partially complete products between vessels. Fluid flow processes such as oil refining and bulk materials such as wood chips and pulp are automated using a system of process control which uses various instruments to measure variables such as temperature, pressure, volumetric and level, providing feedback.

Bulk materials such as coal, ores, grains and wood chips are handled by belt, chain, slat, pneumatic or screw conveyors, bucket elevators and mobile equipment such as front-end loaders . Materials on pallets are handled with forklifts. Also used for handling heavy items like reels of paper, steel or machinery are electric overhead cranes , sometimes called bridge cranes because they span large factory bays.

Mass production is capital-intensive and energy-intensive, for it uses a high proportion of machinery and energy in relation to workers. It is also usually automated while total expenditure per unit of product is decreased. However, the machinery that is needed to set up a mass production line (such as robots and machine presses ) is so expensive that in order to attain profits there must be some assurance that the product will be successful.

One of the descriptions of mass production is that "the skill is built into the tool" [ citation needed ] , which means that the worker using the tool may not need the skill. For example, in the 19th or early 20th century, this could be expressed as "the craftsmanship is in the workbench itself" (not the training of the worker). Rather than having a skilled worker measure every dimension of each part of the product against the plans or the other parts as it is being formed, there were jigs ready at hand to ensure that the part was made to fit this set-up. It had already been checked that the finished part would be to specifications to fit all the other finished parts—and it would be made more quickly, with no time spent on finishing the parts to fit one another. Later, once computerized control came about (for example, CNC ), jigs were obviated, but it remained true that the skill (or knowledge) was built into the tool (or process, or documentation) rather than residing in the worker's head. This is the specialized capital required for mass production; each workbench and set of tools (or each CNC cell, or each fractionating column ) is different (fine-tuned to its task).

History [ edit ] Pre-industrial [ edit ] Sometimes production in series has obvious benefits, as is the case with this 5-sickle casting mould from the Bronze Age on show at a museum in Yekaterinburg, Russia .

This woodcut from 1568 shows the left printer removing a page from the press while the one at the right inks the text blocks. Such a duo could reach 14,000 hand movements per working day, printing around 3,600 pages in the process.

[ 3 ] Standardized parts and sizes and factory production techniques were developed in pre-industrial times; before the invention of machine tools the manufacture of precision parts, especially metal ones, was highly labour-intensive.

Crossbows made with bronze parts were produced in China during the Warring States period . The Qin Emperor unified China at least in part by equipping large armies with these weapons, which were fitted with a sophisticated trigger mechanism made of interchangeable parts.

[ 4 ] The Terracotta Army guarding the Emperor's tomb is also believed to have been created through the use of standardized molds on an assembly line .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] In ancient Carthage , ships of war were mass-produced on a large scale at a moderate cost, allowing them to efficiently maintain their control of the Mediterranean .

[ 7 ] Many centuries later, the Republic of Venice would follow Carthage in producing ships with prefabricated parts on an assembly line: the Venetian Arsenal produced nearly one ship every day in what was effectively the world's first factory , which at its height employed 16,000 people.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] The invention of movable type has allowed for documents such as books to be mass produced. The first movable type system was invented in China by Bi Sheng , [ 10 ] during the reign of the Song dynasty , where it was used to, among other things, issue paper money .

[ 11 ] The oldest extant book produced using metal type is Jikji , printed in Korea in the year 1377.

[ 12 ] Johannes Gutenberg , through his invention of the printing press and production of the Gutenberg Bible , introduced movable type to Europe. Through this introduction, mass production in the European publishing industry was made commonplace, leading to a democratization of knowledge , increased literacy and education, and the beginnings of modern science .

[ 13 ] French artillery engineer Jean-Baptiste de Gribeauval introduced the standardization of cannon design in the late 18th century. He streamlined production and management of cannonballs and cannons by limiting them to only three calibers, and he improved their effectiveness by requiring more spherical ammunition. Redesigning these weapons to use interchangeable wheels, screws, and axles simplified mass production and repair.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Industrial [ edit ] In the Industrial Revolution , simple mass production techniques were used at the Portsmouth Block Mills in England to make ships' pulley blocks for the Royal Navy in the Napoleonic Wars . It was achieved in 1803 by Marc Isambard Brunel in cooperation with Henry Maudslay under the management of Sir Samuel Bentham .

[ 16 ] The first unmistakable examples of manufacturing operations carefully designed to reduce production costs by specialized labour and the use of machines appeared in the 18th century in England.

[ 17 ] A pulley block for rigging on a sailing ship. By 1808, annual production in Portsmouth reached 130,000 blocks.

The Navy was in a state of expansion that required 100,000 pulley blocks to be manufactured a year. Bentham had already achieved remarkable efficiency at the docks by introducing power-driven machinery and reorganising the dockyard system. Brunel, a pioneering engineer, and Maudslay, a pioneer of machine tool technology who had developed the first industrially practical screw-cutting lathe in 1800 which standardized screw thread sizes for the first time which in turn allowed the application of interchangeable parts , collaborated on plans to manufacture block-making machinery. By 1805, the dockyard had been fully updated with the revolutionary, purpose-built machinery at a time when products were still built individually with different components.

[ 16 ] A total of 45 machines were required to perform 22 processes on the blocks, which could be made into one of three possible sizes.

[ 16 ] The machines were almost entirely made of metal thus improving their accuracy and durability. The machines would make markings and indentations on the blocks to ensure alignment throughout the process. One of the many advantages of this new method was the increase in labour productivity due to the less labour-intensive requirements of managing the machinery. Richard Beamish, assistant to Brunel's son and engineer, Isambard Kingdom Brunel , wrote: So that ten men, by the aid of this machinery, can accomplish with uniformity, celerity and ease, what formerly required the uncertain labour of one hundred and ten.

[ 16 ] CNT-FAI worker cooperative in Barcelona producing wood and steel products By 1808, annual production from the 45 machines had reached 130,000 blocks and some of the equipment was still in operation as late as the mid-twentieth century.

[ 16 ] [ 18 ] Mass production techniques were also used to rather limited extent to make clocks and watches, and to make small arms, though parts were usually non-interchangeable.

[ 2 ] Though produced on a very small scale, Crimean War gunboat engines designed and assembled by John Penn of Greenwich are recorded as the first instance of the application of mass production techniques (though not necessarily the assembly-line method) to marine engineering.

[ 19 ] In filling an Admiralty order for 90 sets to his high-pressure and high-revolution horizontal trunk engine design, Penn produced them all in 90 days. He also used Whitworth Standard threads throughout.

[ 20 ] Prerequisites for the wide use of mass production were interchangeable parts , machine tools and power , especially in the form of electricity .

Some of the organizational management concepts needed to create 20th-century mass production, such as scientific management , had been pioneered by other engineers (most of whom are not famous, but Frederick Winslow Taylor is one of the well-known ones), whose work would later be synthesized into fields such as industrial engineering , manufacturing engineering , operations research , and management consultancy . Although after leaving the Henry Ford Company which was rebranded as Cadillac and later was awarded the Dewar Trophy in 1908 for creating interchangeable mass-produced precision engine parts, Henry Ford downplayed the role of Taylorism in the development of mass production at his company. However, Ford management performed time studies and experiments to mechanize their factory processes, focusing on minimizing worker movements. The difference is that while Taylor focused mostly on efficiency of the worker, Ford also substituted for labor by using machines, thoughtfully arranged, wherever possible.

In 1807, Eli Terry was hired to produce 4,000 wooden movement clocks in the Porter Contract. At this time, the annual yield for wooden clocks did not exceed a few dozen on average. Terry developed a milling machine in 1795, in which he perfected Interchangeable parts . In 1807, Terry developed a spindle cutting machine, which could produce multiple parts at the same time. Terry hired Silas Hoadley and Seth Thomas to work the Assembly line at the facilities. The Porter Contract was the first contract which called for mass production of clock movements in history. In 1815, Terry began mass-producing the first shelf clock.

Chauncey Jerome , an apprentice of Eli Terry mass-produced up to 20,000 brass clocks annually in 1840 when he invented the cheap 30-hour OG clock.

[ 21 ] The United States Department of War sponsored the development of interchangeable parts for guns produced at the arsenals at Springfield, Massachusetts and Harpers Ferry , Virginia (now West Virginia) in the early decades of the 19th century, finally achieving reliable interchangeability by about 1850.

[ 2 ] This period coincided with the development of machine tools , with the armories designing and building many of their own. Some of the methods employed were a system of gauges for checking dimensions of the various parts and jigs and fixtures for guiding the machine tools and properly holding and aligning the work pieces. This system came to be known as armory practice or the American system of manufacturing , which spread throughout New England aided by skilled mechanics from the armories who were instrumental in transferring the technology to the sewing machines manufacturers and other industries such as machine tools, harvesting machines and bicycles.

Singer Manufacturing Co.

, at one time the largest sewing machine manufacturer, did not achieve interchangeable parts until the late 1880s, around the same time Cyrus McCormick adopted modern manufacturing practices in making harvesting machines .

[ 2 ] Mass production of Consolidated B-32 Dominator airplanes at Consolidated Aircraft Plant No. 4, near Fort Worth, Texas, during World War II During World War II , The United States mass-produced many vehicles and weapons , such as ships (i.e.

Liberty Ships , Higgins boats ), aircraft (i.e.

North American P-51 Mustang , Consolidated B-24 Liberator , Boeing B-29 Superfortress ), jeeps (i.e.

Willys MB ), trucks, tanks (i.e.

M4 Sherman ) and M2 Browning and M1919 Browning machine guns . Many vehicles, transported by ships have been shipped in parts and later assembled on-site.

[ 22 ] For the ongoing energy transition , many wind turbine components and solar panels are being mass-produced.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] Wind turbines and solar panels are being used in respectively wind farms and solar farms .

In addition, in the ongoing climate change mitigation , large-scale carbon sequestration (through reforestation , blue carbon restoration , etc) has been proposed. Some projects (such as the Trillion Tree Campaign ) involve planting a very large amount of trees. In order to speed up such efforts, fast propagation of trees may be useful. Some automated machines have been produced to allow for fast (vegetative) plant propagation .

[ 26 ] Also, for some plants that help to sequester carbon (such as seagrass ), techniques have been developed to help speed up the process .

[ 27 ] Mass production benefited from the development of materials such as inexpensive steel, high strength steel and plastics. Machining of metals was greatly enhanced with high-speed steel and later very hard materials such as tungsten carbide for cutting edges.

[ 28 ] Fabrication using steel components was aided by the development of electric welding and stamped steel parts, both which appeared in industry in about 1890. Plastics such as polyethylene , polystyrene and polyvinyl chloride (PVC) can be easily formed into shapes by extrusion , blow molding or injection molding , resulting in very low cost manufacture of consumer products, plastic piping, containers and parts.

An influential article that helped to frame and popularize the 20th century's definition of mass production appeared in a 1926 Encyclopædia Britannica supplement. The article was written based on correspondence with Ford Motor Company and is sometimes credited as the first use of the term.

[ 2 ] Factory electrification [ edit ] Electrification of factories began very gradually in the 1890s after the introduction of a practical DC motor by Frank J. Sprague and accelerated after the AC motor was developed by Galileo Ferraris , Nikola Tesla and Westinghouse , Mikhail Dolivo-Dobrovolsky and others. Electrification of factories was fastest between 1900 and 1930, aided by the establishment of electric utilities with central stations and the lowering of electricity prices from 1914 to 1917.

[ 29 ] Electric motors were several times more efficient than small steam engines because central station generation were more efficient than small steam engines and because line shafts and belts had high friction losses.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] Electric motors also allowed more flexibility in manufacturing and required less maintenance than line shafts and belts. Many factories saw a 30% increase in output simply from changing over to electric motors.

Electrification enabled modern mass production, as with Thomas Edison's iron ore processing plant (about 1893) that could process 20,000 tons of ore per day with two shifts, each of five men. At that time it was still common to handle bulk materials with shovels, wheelbarrows and small narrow-gauge rail cars, and for comparison, a canal digger in previous decades typically handled five tons per 12-hour day.

The biggest impact of early mass production was in manufacturing everyday items, such as at the Ball Brothers Glass Manufacturing Company , which electrified its mason jar plant in Muncie, Indiana , U.S., around 1900. The new automated process used glass-blowing machines to replace 210 craftsman glass blowers and helpers. A small electric truck was used to handle 150 dozen bottles at a time where previously a hand truck would carry six dozen. Electric mixers replaced men with shovels handling sand and other ingredients that were fed into the glass furnace. An electric overhead crane replaced 36 day laborers for moving heavy loads across the factory.

[ 32 ] According to Henry Ford : [ 33 ] The provision of a whole new system of electric generation emancipated industry from the leather belt and line shaft , for it eventually became possible to provide each tool with its own electric motor. This may seem only a detail of minor importance. In fact, modern industry could not be carried out with the belt and line shaft for a number of reasons. The motor enabled machinery to be arranged in the order of the work, and that alone has probably doubled the efficiency of industry, for it has cut out a tremendous amount of useless handling and hauling. The belt and line shaft were also tremendously wasteful – so wasteful indeed that no factory could be really large, for even the longest line shaft was small according to modern requirements. Also high speed tools were impossible under the old conditions – neither the pulleys nor the belts could stand modern speeds. Without high speed tools and the finer steels which they brought about, there could be nothing of what we call modern industry.

The assembly plant of the Bell Aircraft Corporation in 1944. Note parts of overhead crane at both sides of photo near top.

Mass production was popularized in the late 1910s and 1920s by Henry Ford's Ford Motor Company , [ 34 ] which introduced electric motors to the then-well-known technique of chain or sequential production. Ford also bought or designed and built special purpose machine tools and fixtures such as multiple spindle drill presses that could drill every hole on one side of an engine block in one operation and a multiple head milling machine that could simultaneously machine 15 engine blocks held on a single fixture. All of these machine tools were arranged systematically in the production flow and some had special carriages for rolling heavy items into machining position. Production of the Ford Model T used 32,000 machine tools.

[ 35 ] Buildings [ edit ] The process of prefabrication, wherein parts are created separately from the finished product, is at the core of all mass-produced construction. Early examples include movable structures reportedly utilized by Akbar the Great , [ 36 ] and the chattel houses built by emancipated slaves on Barbados .

[ 37 ] The Nissen hut , first used by the British during World War I , married prefabrication and mass production in a way that suited the needs of the military. The simple structures, which cost little and could be erected in just a couple of hours, were highly successful: over 100,000 Nissen huts were produced during World War I alone, and they would go on to serve in other conflicts and inspire a number of similar designs.

[ 38 ] Following World War II, in the United States, William Levitt pioneered the building of standardized tract houses in 56 different locations around the country. These communities were dubbed Levittowns , and they were able to be constructed quickly and cheaply through the leveraging of economies of scale , as well as the specialization of construction tasks in a process akin to an assembly line.

[ 39 ] This era also saw the invention of the mobile home , a small prefabricated house that can be transported cheaply on a truck bed.

In the modern industrialization of construction, mass production is often used for prefabrication of house components.

[ 40 ] Fabrics and Materials [ edit ] Mass production has significantly impacted the fashion industry, particularly in the realm of fibers and materials. The advent of synthetic fibers, such as polyester and nylon, revolutionized textile manufacturing by providing cost-effective alternatives to natural fibers. This shift enabled the rapid production of inexpensive clothing, contributing to the rise of fast fashion. This reliance on mass production has raised concerns about environmental sustainability and labor conditions, spurring the need for greater ethical and sustainable practices within the fashion industry.

[ 41 ] The use of assembly lines [ edit ] Ford assembly line, 1913. The magneto assembly line was the first.

Mass production systems for items made of numerous parts are usually organized into assembly lines . The assemblies pass by on a conveyor, or if they are heavy, hung from an overhead crane or monorail.

In a factory for a complex product, rather than one assembly line, there may be many auxiliary assembly lines feeding sub-assemblies (i.e. car engines or seats) to a backbone "main" assembly line. A diagram of a typical mass-production factory looks more like the skeleton of a fish than a single line.

Vertical integration [ edit ] Vertical integration is a business practice that involves gaining complete control over a product's production, from raw materials to final assembly.

In the age of mass production, this caused shipping and trade problems in that shipping systems were unable to transport huge volumes of finished automobiles (in Henry Ford's case) without causing damage, and also government policies imposed trade barriers on finished units.

[ 42 ] Ford built the Ford River Rouge Complex with the idea of making the company's own iron and steel in the same large factory site where parts and car assembly took place. River Rouge also generated its own electricity.

Upstream vertical integration, such as to raw materials, is away from leading technology toward mature, low-return industries. Most companies chose to focus on their core business rather than vertical integration. This included buying parts from outside suppliers, who could often produce them as cheaply or cheaper.

Standard Oil , the major oil company in the 19th century, was vertically integrated partly because there was no demand for unrefined crude oil, but kerosene and some other products were in great demand. The other reason was that Standard Oil monopolized the oil industry. The major oil companies were, and many still are, vertically integrated, from production to refining and with their own retail stations, although some sold off their retail operations. Some oil companies also have chemical divisions.

Lumber and paper companies at one time owned most of their timber lands and sold some finished products such as corrugated boxes. The tendency has been to divest of timber lands to raise cash and to avoid property taxes.

Advantages and disadvantages [ edit ] The economies of mass production come from several sources. The primary cause is a reduction of non-productive effort of all types. In craft production , the craftsman must bustle about a shop, getting parts and assembling them. He must locate and use many tools many times for varying tasks. In mass production, each worker repeats one or a few related tasks that use the same tool to perform identical or near-identical operations on a stream of products. The exact tool and parts are always at hand, having been moved down the assembly line consecutively. The worker spends little or no time retrieving and/or preparing materials and tools, and so the time taken to manufacture a product using mass production is shorter than when using traditional methods.

The probability of human error and variation is also reduced, as tasks are predominantly carried out by machinery; error in operating such machinery has more far-reaching consequences. A reduction in labour costs, as well as an increased rate of production, enables a company to produce a larger quantity of one product at a lower cost than using traditional, non-linear methods.

However, mass production is inflexible because it is difficult to alter a design or production process after a production line is implemented. Also, all products produced on one production line will be identical or very similar, and introducing variety to satisfy individual tastes is not easy. However, some variety can be achieved by applying different finishes and decorations at the end of the production line if necessary. The starter cost for the machinery can be expensive so the producer must be sure it sells or the producers will lose a lot of money.

The Ford Model T produced tremendous affordable output but was not very good at responding to demand for variety, customization , or design changes. As a consequence Ford eventually lost market share to General Motors , who introduced annual model changes, more accessories and a choice of colors.

[ 2 ] With each passing decade, engineers have found ways to increase the flexibility of mass production systems, driving down the lead times on new product development and allowing greater customization and variety of products.

Compared with other production methods, mass production can create new occupational hazards for workers. This is partly due to the need for workers to operate heavy machinery while also working close together with many other workers. Preventative safety measures, such as fire drills, as well as special training is therefore necessary to minimise the occurrence of industrial accidents .

Socioeconomic impacts [ edit ] In the 1830s, French political thinker and historian Alexis de Tocqueville identified one of the key characteristics of America that would later make it so amenable to the development of mass production: the homogeneous consumer base. De Tocqueville wrote in his Democracy in America (1835) that "The absence in the United States of those vast accumulations of wealth which favor the expenditures of large sums on articles of mere luxury ... impact to the productions of American industry a character distinct from that of other countries' industries. [Production is geared toward] articles suited to the wants of the whole people".

Mass production improved productivity , which was a contributing factor to economic growth and the decline in work week hours, alongside other factors such as transportation infrastructures (canals, railroads and highways) and agricultural mechanization. These factors caused the typical work week to decline from 70 hours in the early 19th century to 60 hours late in the century, then to 50 hours in the early 20th century and finally to 40 hours in the mid-1930s.

Mass production permitted great increases in total production. Using a European crafts system into the late 19th century it was difficult to meet demand for products such as sewing machines and animal powered mechanical harvesters .

[ 2 ] By the late 1920s many previously scarce goods were in good supply. One economist has argued that this constituted "overproduction" and contributed to high unemployment during the Great Depression .

[ 43 ] Say's law denies the possibility of general overproduction and for this reason classical economists deny that it had any role in the Great Depression.

Mass production allowed the evolution of consumerism by lowering the unit cost of many goods used.

Mass production has been linked to the Fast Fashion Industry , often leaving the consumer with lower quality garments for a lower cost. Most fast-fashion clothing is mass-produced, which means it is typically made of cheap fabrics, such as polyester , and constructed poorly in order to keep short turnaround times to meet the demands of consumers and shifting trends.

See also [ edit ] Companies portal Business and economics portal Batch production – Method of manufacturing where the products are made as specified groups or amounts Craft production – Factory where products are hand-made Continuous production – Production method without interruption Culture industry – Expression suggesting that popular culture is used to manipulate mass society into passivity Fast-moving consumer goods – Products that are sold quickly and at a relatively low cost Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Fordism – Ford's assembly-line mass production and consumption manufacturing system Ford Model T – American car (1908–1927) Great Divergence – Period/event in European history Industrial engineering – Branch of engineering which deals with the optimization of complex processes or systems Industrialisation – Period of social and economic change from agrarian to industrial society Industrial Revolution – 1760–1840 agrarian to industrial era shift Additive manufacturing – Additive process used to make a 3D object Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Job production – Type of production Just-in-time (business) – Methodology used to improve production Licensed production – Production under license of technology developed elsewhere Manufacturing – Industrial activity producing goods for sale using labor and machines Mass customization – Technology that allows bespoke aspects in mass production Mass market – Market for goods produced on a large scale for a significant number of end consumers Mechanization – Process of changing from working by hand or with animals to work with machinery Modular construction systems – Construction technique: identical components are easier to mass-produce Operations management – In business operations, controlling the process of production of goods Outline of industrial organization – Overview of and topical guide to industrial organization Pilot plant – Pre-commercial production system Cost-of-production theory of value – Economic theory that determines value based on production costs Ready-made garment – Mass-produced clothing in standard sizes Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Scientific management – Theory of management Second Industrial Revolution – 1870–1914 electrical and chemical era Technological revolution – Period of rapid technological change Technological unemployment – Unemployment caused by technological change References [ edit ] ^ Production Methods Archived 14 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine , BBC GCSE Bitesize, retrieved 26 October 2012.

^ a b c d e f g h Hounshell, David A.

(1984), From the American System to Mass Production, 1800–1932: The Development of Manufacturing Technology in the United States , Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press , ISBN 978-0-8018-2975-8 , LCCN 83016269 , OCLC 1104810110 ^ Wolf, Hans Jürgen (1974).

Geschichte der Druckpressen . p. 67f.

: From old price tables it can be deduced that the capacity of a printing press around 1600, assuming a fifteen-hour workday, was between 3,200 and 3,600 impressions per day.

^ Williams, David (October 2008).

"Mass-Produced Pre-Han Chinese Bronze Crossbow Triggers: Unparalleled Manufacturing Technology in the Ancient World" .

Arms & Armour . Vol. 5, no. 2. pp. 142-153(12). Archived from the original on 11 December 2013.

^ The Terra Cotta Warriors . p. 27.

Archived from the original on 29 March 2023 . Retrieved 7 December 2021 .

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) ^ Portal, Jane (2007).

The First Emperor: China's Terracotta Army .

Harvard University Press . p. 170.

ISBN 978-0-674-02697-1 .

Archived from the original on 16 October 2023 . Retrieved 7 December 2021 .

^ Trawinski, Allan (25 June 2017).

The Clash of Civilizations . Page Publishing Inc.

ISBN 9781635687125 .

Archived from the original on 16 October 2023 . Retrieved 7 December 2021 .

^ Cameron, Rondo; Neal, Larry (2003).

A Concise Economic History of the World: From Paleolithic Times to the Present . Oxford University Press. p. 161.

^ Hanson, Victor Davis (18 December 2007).

Carnage and Culture: Landmark Battles in the Rise to Western Power . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group.

ISBN 978-0-307-42518-8 .

Archived from the original on 16 October 2023 . Retrieved 7 December 2021 .

^ Needham, Joseph (1994).

The Shorter Science and Civilisation in China, Volume 4 .

Cambridge University Press . p. 14.

ISBN 9780521329958 .

Bi Sheng... who first devised, about 1045, the art of printing with movable type ^ 吉星, 潘.

中國金屬活字印刷技術史 . pp.

41– 54.

^ Memory of the World Archived 19 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine , unesco.org, accessed December 2021 ^ "Johann Gutenberg" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . 1912.

Archived from the original on 14 April 2008 . Retrieved 14 April 2021 .

^ "Jean-Baptiste Vaquette de Gribeauval: French officer and engineer" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . 20 July 1998 . Retrieved 23 June 2024 .

^ Berkowitz, Heloise; Dumez, Herve (September 2016).

"The Gribeauval system, or the issue of standardization in the 18th century" (PDF) .

Gérer & Comprendre .

2 : 1– 8 . Retrieved 23 June 2024 .

^ a b c d e "The Portsmouth blockmaking machinery" Archived 5 April 2017 at the UK Government Web Archive . makingthemodernworld.org ^ Brumcarrier ^ "Portsmouth Royal Dockyard Historical Trust: History 1690 - 1840" Archived 26 February 2020 at the Wayback Machine . portsmouthdockyard.org.

^ Osborn, G.A. (1965). "The Crimean War gunboats, part 1".

The Mariner's Mirror .

51 (2): 103– 116.

doi : 10.1080/00253359.1965.10657815 .

^ The Times . 24 January 1887.

{{ cite news }} : Missing or empty |title= ( help ) ^ Roberts, Kenneth D., and Snowden Taylor. Eli Terry and the Connecticut Shelf Clock. Ken Roberts Publishing, 1994.

^ National Geographic Channel "War factories" documentary episodes ^ "Can Mass Production of Components Slash the Cost of Offshore Wind Turbine Foundations?" .

Archived from the original on 28 January 2021 . Retrieved 22 January 2021 .

^ "Mass-produced European solar panels on the horizon" .

Archived from the original on 30 January 2021 . Retrieved 22 January 2021 .

^ "Record-breaking solar cells get ready for mass production" .

Horizon: the EU Research & Innovation magazine .

Archived from the original on 22 January 2021 . Retrieved 22 January 2021 .

^ "Example of automated vegetative plant propagation machine" .

Visser Horti Systems .

Archived from the original on 3 February 2021 . Retrieved 29 January 2021 .

^ "Restoration Methods" .

Archived from the original on 19 February 2020 . Retrieved 29 January 2021 .

^ Ayres, Robert (1989).

"Technological Transformations and Long Waves" (PDF) : 36.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 March 2012 . Retrieved 18 August 2011 Fig. 12, Machining speed for steel axle {{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) CS1 maint: postscript ( link ) ^ Jerome, Harry (1934).

Mechanization in Industry . National Bureau of Economic Research. p. xxviii.

^ Devine, Warren D. Jr. (1983).

"From Shafts to Wires: Historical Perspective on Electrification, Journal of Economic History, Vol. 43, Issue 2" (PDF) : 355. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 April 2019 . Retrieved 3 July 2011 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Smil, Vaclav (2005).

Creating the Twentieth Century: Technical Innovations of 1867-1914 and Their Lasting Impact . Oxford / New York City: Oxford University Press .

^ Nye, David E. (1990).

Electrifying America: Social Meanings of a New Technology . Cambridge, MA / London: MIT Press . pp. 14, 15.

^ Ford, Henry ; Crowther, Samuel (1930).

Edison as I Know Him . New York: Cosmopolitan Book Company. p. 15 (on line edition).

Archived from the original on 17 July 2014 . Retrieved 7 June 2014 .

^ Hounshell 1984 ^ Hounshell 1984 , p. 288 ^ Irfan Habib (1992), "Akbar and Technology", Social Scientist 20 (9-10): 3-15 [3-4] ^ Ali, Arif (1996).

Barbados: Just Beyond Your Imagination . Hansib Caribbean.

Hansib .

ISBN 1-870518-54-3 .

^ McCosh, F. (1997).

Nissen of the Huts: A biography of Lt Col. Peter Nissen, DSO . Bourne End: B D Publishing. p. 82-108.

^ Custer, Jack (August 1988).

Orange Coast Magazine: Customizing your tract home . Emmis Communications. p. 160.

Archived from the original on 16 October 2023 . Retrieved 7 December 2021 .

^ "Prefabrication and Industrialized Construction Could be the Solution to the Future of Infrastructure" .

interestingengineering.com . 7 March 2020.

Archived from the original on 2 June 2021 . Retrieved 2 June 2021 .

^ "Style that's sustainable: A new fast-fashion formula | McKinsey" .

www.mckinsey.com .

Archived from the original on 20 June 2023 . Retrieved 18 June 2023 .

^ Womack, Jones, Roos; The Machine That Changed The World, Rawson & Associates, New York. Published by Simon & Schuster, 1990.

^ Beaudreau, Bernard C. (1996).

Mass Production, the Stock Market Crash and the Great Depression: The Macroeconomics of Electrification . New York / Lincoln / Shanghai: Authors Choice Press.

Further reading [ edit ] Beaudreau, Bernard C. (1996).

Mass Production, the Stock Market Crash and the Great Depression . New York / Lincoln / Shanghai: Authors Choice Press.

Borth, Christy.

Masters of Mass Production , Bobbs-Merrill Company, Indianapolis, IN, 1945.

Herman, Arthur.

Freedom's Forge: How American Business Produced Victory in World War II , Random House, New York, NY, 2012.

ISBN 978-1-4000-6964-4 .

External links [ edit ] Quotations related to Mass production at Wikiquote Media related to Mass production at Wikimedia Commons v t e Industrial and technological revolution Proto First Second Third Fourth Potential future Themes Coal Coal mining Coke Cotton Industry/Manufacturing Invention Iron Machinery Metallurgy Sociology Steam power Steel Technology Textiles Water power Workforce Economies of agglomeration Economies of density Economies of scale People/ groups Richard Arkwright Thomas Boulsover Matthew Boulton James Brindley Isambard Kingdom Brunel Edmund Cartwright Henry Cort Thomas and George Cranege Samuel Crompton Abraham Darby I Abraham Darby II Abraham Darby III Francis Egerton, 3rd Duke of Bridgewater William Fairbairn James Hargreaves Hawks family Thomas Highs Eaton Hodgkinson Benjamin Huntsman Joseph Marie Jacquard John Kay (flying shuttle) John Kay (spinning frame) Francis Cabot Lowell Lunar Society Thomas Newcomen Robert Owen Lewis Paul William Radcliffe Richard Roberts Thomas Savery Samuel Slater John Smeaton George Stephenson Robert Stephenson Thomas Telford Richard Trevithick James Watt John Wilkinson John Wyatt Places Abbeydale Industrial Hamlet Allentown Bethlehem Bridgewater Canal Broseley Coalbrookdale Cromford Derwent Valley Mills Ironbridge New Lanark Portsmouth Block Mills Quarry Bank Mill Soho Foundry Stockton and Darlington Railway Invention/ technology Blast furnace Canal Cotton mill Crucible steel Factory Flying shuttle Newcomen steam engine Power loom Railway Reverberatory furnace Sheffield plate Spinning frame Spinning jenny Steam engine Stephenson's Rocket Water frame Watt steam engine Social impact Bourgeoisie Child labour History of the cooperative Movement Cottage industry Factory Acts Great Divergence Industrial unrest Luddite Proletariat Rochdale Pioneers Urbanization Industrial warfare Reference History of technology History of the British canal system Industrial archaeology List of United Kingdom-related topics Timeline of clothing and textiles technology Timeline of invention Timeline of materials technology Timeline of steam power Category Commons v t e History of technology History of technology cultures Prehistoric technology Neolithic Urban revolution Ancient Egypt Mayan Inca Ancient Greek Roman Chinese Indian Byzantine Medieval Islam Medieval Europe Renaissance Ottoman Great Divergence Industrial Revolution Modern History of technology domains History of biotechnology History of communication History of computing History of computing hardware History of electrical engineering History of materials science History of measurement History of medicine History of nuclear technology History of transport v t e Production approaches Make to order (MTO) Make to stock (MTS) Assemble-to-order system (ATO) Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other NARA Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mass_production&oldid=1300466978 " Categories : Mass production History of science and technology in the United States Industrial processes Business economics Types of production Economic development Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: periodical ignored Webarchive template other archives CS1 errors: missing title CS1 errors: missing periodical CS1 maint: postscript Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from January 2021 All articles lacking in-text citations Use dmy dates from January 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 July 2025, at 13:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mass production 48 languages Add topic

