Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Swiss chronicles 2 Early modern period 3 Modern historiography Toggle Modern historiography subsection 3.1 Enlightenment and Napoleonic era 3.2 Popularization of history 3.3 Late 19th to early 20th centuries 3.4 Later 20th century 4 Contemporary works 5 References Toggle the table of contents Historiography of Switzerland 2 languages Español Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of the history of Switzerland Part of a series on the History of Switzerland Early history Prehistory Roman era (200 BC – AD 411) Alemannia · Burgundy (411–888) Swabia · Upper Burgundy · Burgundy (Arles) (888–1300) Old Swiss Confederacy Growth (1291–1516) Reformation (1516–1648) Ancien Régime (1648–1798) Transitional period Napoleonic era (1798–1814) Restoration (1814–1830) Regeneration (1830–1847) Modern history Federal state (1848) World Wars (1914–1945) Timeline Topical Immigration Swiss Jews LGBT history Military history Territorial development Historiography Switzerland portal v t e The historiography of Switzerland is the study of the history of Switzerland .

Early accounts of the history of the Old Swiss Confederacy are found in the numerous Swiss chronicles of the 14th to 16th centuries.
As elsewhere in Europe, these late medieval and early modern works  were subjected to critical treatment with the emergence of modern historiography in the later 18th century.

Swiss historiographical scholarship of the postmodern era (late 20th century) also followed international trends in its emphasis on topical history, such as economic history , legal history and social history and Switzerland's conduct during World War II .

[ 1 ] The first comprehensive historiography was Gottlieb Emanuel Haller 's six-volume Bibliothek der Schweizergeschichte (1785–88), published still before the collapse of the Old Swiss Confederacy in the wake of the French Revolution . 
Later comprehensive treatments include Johannes von Müller 's Geschichten Schweizerischer Eidgenossenschaft (1786–1806), Johannes Dierauer 's Geschichte der Schweizerischen Eidgenossenschaft (1887–1917, with extensions up until 1974), the Handbuch der Schweizer Geschichte , (1972–77) and the Historical Dictionary of Switzerland (2002–2014).

Swiss chronicles [ edit ] Main article: Swiss chronicles The Swiss loot the camp of Charles the Bold after the Battle of Grandson of 2 March 1476 ( Berner Schilling , 1480s).

The earliest works of Swiss history are the battle songs and folk songs in which the earliest Confederates celebrated their deeds, as well as the Swiss chronicles written mostly in the 15th and 16th centuries, especially the illustrated chronicles produced in the late 15th and early 16th centuries on behalf of the authorities of the city-states of Bern and Lucerne .

[ 2 ] While these chronicles were written from the point of view of the individual states , even the earliest did address issues of all-Swiss significance in some detail.

[ 2 ] With the introduction of movable type in Europe, chroniclers could reach a wider audience and begin to write about Swiss history as a whole. The 1507 Chronicle of the Swiss Confederation by Petermann Etterlin exerted great influence on later writers because, as a printed work, it was the first to be generally available.

[ 2 ] Early modern period [ edit ] Humanist scholars such as Johannes Stumpf and Aegidius Tschudi connected the history of their time with the Roman era of Switzerland and to the accounts of the Helvetii , [ 3 ] giving a greater depth to the emerging discipline of history in Switzerland.

This development came to a close with Josias Simler 's 1576 De Helvetiorum republica libri duo , a sober account of the Confederacy's constitutional status and historical background. The work remained the definitive account of Swiss political history for centuries – it saw some 30 editions up until the 18th century, and was immediately translated into German and French.

[ 3 ] The rest of the world learnt of Swiss history essentially through Simler's treatise.

[ 3 ] Title page of Merian's Topographia Helvetiae, Rhaetiae et Valesiae (1642, reprinted 1654).

As the Swiss city-states grew more stratified and oligarchical, and as confessional, social and political barriers became more pronounced, the 17th century saw a shift of focus in historical writing from the affairs of the Confederacy to that of the individual state.

[ 3 ] The continuation of the last great work of Swiss humanist historiography, Franz Guilliman 's De rebus Helvetiorum sive antiquitatum , was thwarted by partisan politics. The baroque appetite for curiosa was allayed by Matthäus Merian 's great engravings.

[ 3 ] Historical research bloomed again in the time of the Enlightenment , when as early as with Johann Jakob Wagner 's 1680 Historia naturalis Helvetiae curiosa , the spirit of critical inquiry took hold in Swiss scholarship.

[ 3 ] Conditions were not optimal – state archives remained mostly closed to private researchers and the zeitgeist favoured a heroic interpretation of history in a less than heroic present.

[ 4 ] Still, the early 18th century saw the first critical editions of ancient sources (by Johann Jakob Bodmer in 1735) and the publication of the first Swiss historical journals ( Helvetische Bibliothek , also by Bodmer, and Mercure Helvétique , both in 1735).

[ 4 ] The century's most significant work of historiography was the country's first historical dictionary, the 20-volume Allgemeines helvetisches eidgenössisches Lexikon in 20 volumes (1743–63), written by scholars from all cantons and edited by Johann Jakob Leu .

[ 4 ] The need for a historical overview was met by François-Joseph-Nicolas d'Alt de Tieffenthal 's very patriotic Histoire des Hélvetiens (1749–53), Alexander Ludwig von Wattenwyl 's prelude to Swiss criticism Histoire de la Confédération hélvetique (1754) and Vinzenz Bernhard Tscharner 's Historie der Eidgenossen (1756–71).

[ 4 ] These works were complemented by treatises on the early history of Switzerland , the Reformation in Switzerland or Swiss military service abroad, as well as an increasing number of reports by foreign travelers in Switzerland.

[ 5 ] These works, in general, hewed closely to the received account of the foundation of the Old Swiss Confederacy as described in the Swiss chronicles of the 15th and 16th centuries.

[ 5 ] Modern historiography [ edit ] Enlightenment and Napoleonic era [ edit ] Title page of the first volume of von Haller's Bibliothek der Schweizer-Geschichte (1785).

When Bernese historians Gottlieb Emanuel Haller and Uriel Freudenberger first publicly questioned the historicity of William Tell , they triggered a political scandal and caused tensions between Bern and Tell's traditional home state, Uri.

[ 5 ] Their 1760 book Der Wilhelm Tell. Ein dänisches Mährgen , in which they showed the Tell saga to be an adaptation of a Danish legend, was banned and burnt in public.

[ 5 ] The first comprehensive historiography was Gottlieb Emanuel Haller 's six-volume Bibliothek der Schweizergeschichte (1785–88).

The 19th century's most influential work of historiography was Johannes von Müller 's epic and lively five-volume Geschichten Schweizerischer Eidgenossenschaft (1786–1806).

[ 5 ] It helped Switzerland, thrown into turmoil by Napoleon's violent overthrow of the Ancien Régime and the establishment of the short-lived Helvetic Republic , to find a sense of national identity and to refound the Confederation after Napoleon's fall.

[ 6 ] The work, which did not go beyond the Swabian War of 1499 – Switzerland's war of independence – was soon continued in the works of an entire generation of historians.

Robert Glutz von Blotzheim and Johann Jakob Hottinger in the German-speaking part of Switzerland as well as Louis Vuillemin and Charles Monnard in the Romandie translated and extended Müller's work, providing the new federal state founded in 1848 with a reasonably coherent common national history.

[ 6 ] Popularization of history [ edit ] Further information: Swiss identity In the period of historicism , learning from this national history became a general preoccupation, and dozens of works of popular history – notably by the educator Heinrich Zschokke and by the liberal historian André Daguet – were published to meet this demand.

[ 6 ] The democratic reforms of the 18th century caused a broadening of public education and the publication of innumerable historical textbooks.

[ 6 ] Cantonal archives along with the new Federal Archives were opened to researchers, and chairs of Swiss history were established in Swiss universities.

[ 6 ] The first historical society in Switzerland was founded in 1841.

[ 6 ] As the rationalist Enlightenment gave way to the more emotional period of Romanticism , the questioning of popular heroes grew more unpopular still, [ 5 ] and the traditional account of Tell was reestablished for generations by Friedrich Schiller 's play William Tell of 1804.

Late 19th to early 20th centuries [ edit ] Von Müller's work was eventually supplanted by Johannes Dierauer 's seminal Geschichte der Schweizerischen Eidgenossenschaft (1887–1917, with extensions up until 1974), which remains indispensable to modern research thanks to its thorough critical apparatus.

[ 7 ] An important foundation for later research was laid in the later 19th century through the edition and publication of official documents, including those of the Old Confederacy and the Helvetic Republic, in voluminous series whose publication was not completed until 1966.

[ 8 ] This tradition is being continued in the ongoing publication of Swiss diplomatic archives by several Swiss universities starting in 1979.

[ 8 ] With the 17th and 18th century seen by later 19th-century historians as uninteresting periods of stagnation, [ 8 ] academic interest focused on the early history of Switzerland , whose discovery was aided by new archaeological methods, and, following European trends, on the medieval period and the Reformation.

[ 8 ] The conservative Roman Catholic cantons – who had been defeated in the 1847 Sonderbund war – also received little attention from scholars situated in the liberal Protestant mainstream of the time.

[ 8 ] The early 20th century saw the publication of great topical histories of Switzerland, including Eugen Huber 's legal history ( Geschichte und System des schweizerischen Privatrechts , 1893), Andreas Heusler 's constitutional history ( Schweizer Verfassungsgeschichte , 1920; supplanted by Hans Conrad Peyer 's Verfassungsgeschichte of 1978) and Paul Schweizer 's diplomatic history ( Geschichte der schweizerischen Neutralität , 1895; continued by Edgar Bonjour from 1946 on).

[ 7 ] Later 20th century [ edit ] On the whole, Swiss historiography up until the early 20th century was focused on the political and military history of Switzerland. The liberal , Radical intellectual mainstream, which viewed Swiss history as a steady progression of liberty culminating in the founding of the 1848 federal state, was dominant.

[ 9 ] Some academic attention also shifted to the economic and social history of Switzerland, which began to be treated in substantial monographs by William Rappard and Eduard Fueter in the 1910s.

[ 7 ] These developments, inspired by Anglo-American historiographical trends, were however cut short by the World Wars.

[ 9 ] Attempts by non-historians including Robert Grimm to write a Socialist history of Switzerland had no impact.

[ 9 ] On the other hand, apologists of the Ancien Régime such as Gonzague de Reynold , who praised the perceived enlighted authoritarianism of the Old Confederacy, left an imprint on the generally conservative historiography of the post- World War II generation.

[ 9 ] One historian, Karl Meyer , even attempted to rehabilitate the historicity of the national founding legends in a 1933 work.

[ 10 ] The early Cold War period's emphasis on geistige Landesverteidigung – "intellectual defense of the country" – did also not encourage a re-thinking of Swiss history.

[ 10 ] It was only with the societal upheavals associated with the year 1968, which in Switzerland as elsewhere in the West began to move the mainstream of academic thought to the political Left, that the approach of Swiss historians began to shift again. Picking up where Rappard and Fueter had left off, historians of the 1960s and 1970s published large treatises on the social and economic history of Switzerland.

[ 1 ] Adapting the newer methods of historical research in the United States, the United Kingdom and France, researchers used disciplines such as historical demographics and ecology to support their work. Inspired by the Annales School , the postulate of "total history" – a comprehensive view of history aiming to understand long-term structures instead of explaining the current state of affairs – is now well-established in Swiss historiography.

[ 1 ] Contemporary works [ edit ] The first three volumes of the Historical Dictionary in each language.

Dierauer's seminal work of 1887–1917 was eventually supplanted as the leading work of Swiss historiography by the Handbuch der Schweizer Geschichte , a collaborative work of 1972–77, which remains largely rooted in the conservative mainstream of the early 1960s.

[ 10 ] A historians' "committee for a new history of Switzerland", avowedly following the new "total history" approach, published its three-volume Nouvelle histoire de la Suisse et des Suisses in 1982/83; a condensed one-volume edition ( Geschichte der Schweiz und der Schweizer , last reprinted 2006) is currently the standard university textbook of Swiss history.

The principal ongoing project of Swiss historiography is the Historical Dictionary of Switzerland . It is also accessible online, as are more and more topical historical dictionaries, including SIKART (a biographical dictionary of Swiss artists) and the Culinary Heritage of Switzerland project (a historical encyclopedia of Swiss food ).

References [ edit ] ^ a b c Im Hof, Ulrich (2006). "Von den Chroniken der alten Eidgenossenschaft bis zur neuen «Geschichte der Schweiz – und der Schweizer»".

Geschichte der Schweiz und der Schweizer (in German) (4 ed.). Schwabe. p. 22.

ISBN 3-7965-2067-7 .

^ a b c Im Hof, p. 13.

^ a b c d e f Im Hof, p. 14.

^ a b c d Im Hof, p. 15.

^ a b c d e f Im Hof, p. 16.

^ a b c d e f Im Hof, p. 17.

^ a b c Im Hof, p. 19.

^ a b c d e Im Hof, p. 18.

^ a b c d Im Hof, p. 20.

^ a b c Im Hof, p. 21.

Oliver Zimmer, A Contested Nation: History, Memory and Nationalism in Switzerland, 1761-1891 , Cambridge University Press (2003).

Marco Jorio: Geistige Landesverteidigung in German , French and Italian in the online Historical Dictionary of Switzerland , 2006.

Ernst Tremp, François Walter: Geschichte in German , French and Italian in the online Historical Dictionary of Switzerland , 2015.

Bertrand Müller: Historismus in German , French and Italian in the online Historical Dictionary of Switzerland , 2015.

Georg Kreis: Nation in German , French and Italian in the online Historical Dictionary of Switzerland , 2011.

v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia v t e Switzerland articles Major topics History Timeline Enlargement Early history Roman era Old Confederacy Federal Charter Rütli Oath Growth Reformation Early Modern era Napoleonic era Restoration Federal state World wars Modern history Military history list of wars Historiography Geography Physiographic areas Swiss Alps Swiss Plateau Jura Mountains Subdivisions Cantons AI AG AR BE BL BS FR GE GL GR JU LU NE NW OW SG SH SO SZ TG TI UR VD VS ZG ZH Districts Municipalities list of cities and towns Statistical regions Central Switzerland Eastern Switzerland Espace Mittelland Lake Geneva Northwestern Switzerland Zurich Language regions German-speaking part Romandy By topic Climate Earthquakes Extreme points Fauna Forests Glaciers Hydrology Islands Lakes Mountain passes Mountains Parks Rivers Waterfalls Politics Administrative divisions Constitution Courts Supreme Court Elections Foreign relations Government Federal Council President of the Confederation Federal administration Human rights LGBT Landsgemeinde Law Law enforcement Military National Redoubt Neutrality Parliament National Council Council of States Political parties Popular initiative Voting Federal decree Economy Economic history Agriculture Banking Central bank Private banks Companies Data codes Energy Franc (currency) Pharmaceutical industry Science and technology Stock exchange Swiss made Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Trade unions Transport Air Bike Rail Road Waste management Society Abortion Capital punishment Conscription Corruption Crime Demographics Education List of universities Euthanasia Firearms regulation Health Healthcare Homelessness Human trafficking Immigration Pensions Prisons Poverty Prostitution Social security Swiss people Welfare Women Culture Anthem Architecture Cinema Coat of arms Cuisine Flag Folklore Helvetia Languages German French Italian Romansh Röstigraben Literature Media Museums Music Public holidays National Day Religion Sport Symbols Cultural Property of National Significance World Heritage Sites Outline Index Category Portal v t e Historiography of Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard Portals : History Switzerland NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐759fc646c5‐7lfnf
Cached time: 20250812151031
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.775 seconds
Real time usage: 1.023 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 17956/1000000
Revision size: 16147/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 409344/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 33993/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 67/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 61822/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.318/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7755006/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  751.848      1 -total
 27.67%  208.051      1 Template:Historiography
 27.27%  205.043      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 27.20%  204.520     17 Template:Navbox
 16.23%  122.023      1 Template:Europe_topic
 14.32%  107.638     36 Template:Ill
 13.53%  101.740     49 Template:Iso2country
 12.69%   95.380      1 Template:History_of_Switzerland
 12.40%   93.235      1 Template:Sidebar
 11.76%   88.390      1 Template:Reflist Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:20824606:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812151031 and revision id 1302638738. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Historiography_of_Switzerland&oldid=1302638738 " Category : Historiography of Switzerland Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata HDS not on Wikidata This page was last edited on 26 July 2025, at 17:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Historiography of Switzerland 2 languages Add topic

