Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 "Discovery" of polarization 2 Selected works 3 Work 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Étienne-Louis Malus 37 languages العربية تۆرکجه বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Hrvatski Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Latina Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Piemontèis Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French officer, engineer, physicist and mathematician Étienne-Louis Malus Portrait by Louis-Léopold Boilly , 1810 Born 23 July 1775 Paris, France Died 24 February 1812 ( 1812-02-25 ) (aged 36) Paris, France Nationality French Known for Malus's law Plane of polarization Polarization of light Malus-Dupin theorem Awards Rumford Medal (1810) Scientific career Fields Physics Étienne-Louis Malus ( / ˈ ɛ t .

i .

ɛ n ˈ l uː .

i m ə ˈ l uː s / ; French: [e.tjɛn.lwi ma.lys] ; 23 July 1775 – 23 February 1812) was a French officer , engineer , physicist , and mathematician .

Malus was born in Paris , France and  studied at the military engineering school at Mezires where he was taught by Gaspard Monge .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] He participated in Napoleon's expedition into Egypt (1798 to 1801).

[ 3 ] He was also a member of the mathematics section of the Institut d'Égypte . Malus became a member of the Académie des Sciences in 1810. In 1810 the Royal Society of London awarded him the Rumford Medal .

[ 1 ] His mathematical work was almost entirely concerned with the study of light .

[ 3 ] He studied geometric systems called ray systems , closely connected to Julius Plücker 's line geometry . He conducted experiments to verify Christiaan Huygens 's theories of light and rewrote the theory in analytical form. His discovery of the polarization of light by reflection was published in 1809 and his theory of double refraction of light in crystals , in 1810.

[ 2 ] Malus attempted to identify the relationship between the polarising angle of reflection that he had discovered, and the refractive index of the reflecting material. While he deduced the correct relation for water , he was unable to do so for glasses due to the low quality of materials available to him (the refractive index of most glasses available at that time varied between the surface and the interior of the glass). It was not until 1815 that Sir David Brewster was able to experiment with higher quality glasses and correctly formulate what is known as Brewster's law . This law was later explained theoretically by Augustin Fresnel , as a special case of his Fresnel equations .

Malus is probably best remembered for Malus's law , giving the resultant intensity, when a polariser is placed in the path of an incident beam. A follower of Laplace , both his statement of the Malus's law and his earlier works on polarisation and birefringence were formulated using the corpuscular theory of light .

[ 4 ] His name is one of the 72 names inscribed on the Eiffel tower .

[ 5 ] "Discovery" of polarization [ edit ] In 1810, Malus, while engaged on the theory of double refraction, casually examined through a doubly refracting prism of quartz the sunlight reflected from the windows of the Luxembourg palace . He was surprised to find that the two rays alternately disappeared as the prism was rotated through successive right angles, in other words, that the reflected light had acquired properties exactly corresponding to those of the rays transmitted through Iceland spar.

He named this phenomenon polarization, and thought it could not be explained by wave theory of light. Instead, he explained it by stating that light- corpuscules have polarity (like magnetic poles).

[ 6 ] Selected works [ edit ] Mémoire sur la mesure du pouvoir réfringent des corps opaques . in Nouveau bulletin des sciences de la Société philomathique de Paris, 1 (1807), 77–81 Mémoire sur de nouveaux phénomènes d’optique . ibid., 2 (1811), 291–295 Traité d’optique . in Mémoires présentés à l’Institut des sciences par divers savants, 2 (1811), 214–302 Théorie de la double réfraction de la lumière dans les substances cristallines . ibid., 303–508 Work [ edit ] Malus mathematically analyzed the properties of a system of continuous light rays in three dimensions. He found the equation of caustic surfaces and the Malus theorem : Rays of light that are emitted from a point source, after which they have been reflected on a surface, are all normal to a common surface, but after the second refraction they no longer have this property. If the perpendicular surface is identified with a wave front, it is obvious that this result is false, which Malus did not realize because he adhered to Newton's theory of light emission. Malus's theorem was not proved until 1824 by W. R. Hamilton, [ 7 ] [ 8 ] with Adolphe Quetelet and Joseph Diez Gergonne giving a separate proof in 1825.

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Polarimeter Total internal reflection References [ edit ] ^ a b University of St Andrews website, Étienne-Louis Malus ^ a b Cambridge University Press website, Pioneers in Optics: Leonhard Euler and Étienne-Louis Malus , article by Michael W. Davidson ^ a b Britannica website, Étienne-Louis Malus ^ Iwan Rhys Morus (2005).

When Physics Became King . The University of Chicago Press. p. 29.

ISBN 0-226-54202-5 .

^ La Tour Eiffel website, Eiffel Tower and Science ^ 9th edition of Encyclopædia Britannica, Volume 14, page 611, entry "Light".

^ Encyclopedia website, ‘ Étienne-Louis Malus ^ Physics World website, William Rowan Hamilton: mathematical genius , article dated 3 August 2005 ^ Hal Science website, A direct proof of Malus’ theorem using the symplectic structure of the set of oriented straight lines ’, by Charle-Michel Marle. 2014. hal-01059542 (page 4) Kahr, Bart; Claborn, Kacey (2008), "The lives of Malus and his bicentennial law.", ChemPhysChem , vol. 9, no. 1 (published Jan 11, 2008), pp.

43– 58, doi : 10.1002/cphc.200700173 , PMID 17680582 External links [ edit ] Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Malus, Étienne Louis ".

O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Étienne-Louis Malus" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews English translation of his paper "Optique" Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Netherlands Norway Greece People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Étienne-Louis_Malus&oldid=1272619913 " Categories : 1775 births 1812 deaths École Polytechnique alumni French mathematicians French physicists Members of the French Academy of Sciences Burials at Père Lachaise Cemetery Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages with French IPA This page was last edited on 29 January 2025, at 15:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Étienne-Louis Malus 37 languages Add topic

