Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Motivation 3 Nash equilibrium Toggle Nash equilibrium subsection 3.1 Examples of differences between Nash equilibria and ESSes 4 Vs. evolutionarily stable state 5 Stochastic ESS 6 Prisoner's dilemma 7 Human behavior 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Evolutionarily stable strategy 20 languages العربية অসমীয়া বাংলা Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia עברית 日本語 Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Solution concept in game theory Evolutionarily stable strategy Solution concept in game theory Relationship Subset of Nash equilibrium Superset of Stochastically stable equilibrium , Stable Strong Nash equilibrium Intersects with Subgame perfect equilibrium , Trembling hand perfect equilibrium , Perfect Bayesian equilibrium Significance Proposed by John Maynard Smith and George R. Price Used for Biological modeling and Evolutionary game theory Example Hawk-dove "Evolutionary strategy" redirects here; not to be confused with Evolution strategy .

An evolutionarily stable strategy ( ESS ) is a strategy (or set of strategies) that is impermeable when adopted by a population in adaptation to a specific environment, that is to say it cannot be displaced by an alternative strategy (or set of strategies) which may be novel or initially rare. Introduced by John Maynard Smith and George R. Price in 1972/3, [ 1 ] [ 2 ] it is an important concept in behavioural ecology , evolutionary psychology , mathematical game theory and economics , with applications in other fields such as anthropology , philosophy and political science .

In game-theoretical terms, an ESS is an equilibrium refinement of the Nash equilibrium , being a Nash equilibrium that is also "evolutionarily stable ." Thus, once fixed in a population, natural selection alone is sufficient to prevent alternative ( mutant ) strategies from replacing it (although this does not preclude the possibility that a better strategy, or set of strategies, will emerge in response to selective pressures resulting from environmental change).

History [ edit ] Evolutionarily stable strategies were defined and introduced by John Maynard Smith and George R. Price in a 1973 Nature paper.

[ 2 ] Such was the time taken in peer-reviewing the paper for Nature that this was preceded by a 1972 essay by Maynard Smith in a book of essays titled On Evolution .

[ 1 ] The 1972 essay is sometimes cited instead of the 1973 paper, but university libraries are much more likely to have copies of Nature . Papers in Nature are usually short; in 1974, Maynard Smith published a longer paper in the Journal of Theoretical Biology .

[ 3 ] Maynard Smith explains further in his 1982 book Evolution and the Theory of Games .

[ 4 ] Sometimes these are cited instead. In fact, the ESS has become so central to game theory that often no citation is given, as the reader is assumed to be familiar with it.

Maynard Smith mathematically formalised a verbal argument made by Price, which he read while peer-reviewing Price's paper. When Maynard Smith realized that the somewhat disorganised Price was not ready to revise his article for publication, he offered to add Price as co-author.

The concept was derived from R. H. MacArthur [ 5 ] and W. D. Hamilton 's [ 6 ] work on sex ratios , derived from Fisher's principle , especially Hamilton's (1967) concept of an unbeatable strategy .  Maynard Smith was jointly awarded the 1999 Crafoord Prize for his development of the concept of evolutionarily stable strategies and the application of game theory to the evolution of behaviour.

[ 7 ] Uses of ESS: The ESS was a major element used to analyze evolution in Richard Dawkins ' bestselling 1976 book The Selfish Gene .

The ESS was first used in the social sciences by Robert Axelrod in his 1984 book The Evolution of Cooperation .  Since then, it has been widely used in the social sciences, including anthropology , economics , philosophy , and political science .

In the social sciences, the primary interest is not in an ESS as the end of biological evolution, but as an end point in cultural evolution or individual learning.

[ 8 ] In evolutionary psychology , ESS is used primarily as a model for human biological evolution .

Motivation [ edit ] The Nash equilibrium is the traditional solution concept in game theory . It depends on the cognitive abilities of the players. It is assumed that players are aware of the structure of the game and consciously try to predict the moves of their opponents and to maximize their own payoffs . In addition, it is presumed that all the players know this (see common knowledge ).  These assumptions are then used to explain why players choose Nash equilibrium strategies.

Evolutionarily stable strategies are motivated entirely differently.  Here, it is presumed that the players' strategies are biologically encoded and heritable .  Individuals have no control over their strategy and need not be aware of the game.  They reproduce and are subject to the forces of natural selection , with the payoffs of the game representing reproductive success (biological fitness ). It is imagined that alternative strategies of the game occasionally occur, via a process like mutation . To be an ESS, a strategy must be resistant to these alternatives.

Given the radically different motivating assumptions, it may come as a surprise that ESSes and Nash equilibria often coincide. In fact, every ESS corresponds to a Nash equilibrium, but some Nash equilibria are not ESSes.

Nash equilibrium [ edit ] An ESS is a refined or modified form of a Nash equilibrium . (See the next section for examples which contrast the two.) In a Nash equilibrium, if all players adopt their respective parts, no player can benefit by switching to any alternative strategy. In a two player game, it is a strategy pair. Let E( S , T ) represent the payoff for playing strategy S against strategy T .  The strategy pair ( S , S ) is a Nash equilibrium in a two player game if and only if for both players, for any strategy T : E( S , S ) ≥ E( T , S ) In this definition, a strategy T ≠ S can be a neutral alternative to S (scoring equally well, but not better). 
A Nash equilibrium is presumed to be stable even if T scores equally, on the assumption that there is no long-term incentive for players to adopt T instead of S .  This fact represents the point of departure of the ESS.

Maynard Smith and Price [ 2 ] specify two conditions for a strategy S to be an ESS.  For all T ≠ S , either E( S , S ) > E( T , S ), or E( S , S ) = E( T , S ) and E( S , T ) > E( T , T ) The first condition is sometimes called a strict Nash equilibrium.

[ 9 ] The second is sometimes called "Maynard Smith's second condition". The second condition means that although strategy T is neutral with respect to the payoff against strategy S , the population of players who continue to play strategy S has an advantage when playing against T .

There is also an alternative, stronger definition of ESS, due to Thomas.

[ 10 ] This places a different emphasis on the role of the Nash equilibrium concept in the ESS concept.  Following the terminology given in the first definition above, this definition requires that for all T ≠ S E( S , S ) ≥ E( T , S ), and E( S , T ) > E( T , T ) In this formulation, the first condition specifies that the strategy is a Nash equilibrium, and the second specifies that Maynard Smith's second condition is met. Note that the two definitions are not precisely equivalent: for example, each pure strategy in the coordination game below is an ESS by the first definition but not the second.

In words, this definition looks like this: The payoff of the first player when both players play strategy S is higher than (or equal to) the payoff of the first player when he changes to another strategy T and the second player keeps his strategy S and the payoff of the first player when only his opponent changes his strategy to T is higher than his payoff in case that both of players change their strategies to T.

This formulation more clearly highlights the role of the Nash equilibrium condition in the ESS. It also allows for a natural definition of related concepts such as a weak ESS or an evolutionarily stable set .

[ 10 ] Examples of differences between Nash equilibria and ESSes [ edit ] Cooperate Defect Cooperate 3, 3 1, 4 Defect 4, 1 2, 2 Prisoner's Dilemma A B A 2, 2 1, 2 B 2, 1 2, 2 Harm thy neighbor In most simple games, the ESSes and Nash equilibria coincide perfectly.  For instance, in the prisoner's dilemma there is only one Nash equilibrium, and its strategy ( Defect ) is also an ESS.

Some games may have Nash equilibria that are not ESSes. For example, in harm thy neighbor (whose payoff matrix is shown here) both ( A , A ) and ( B , B ) are Nash equilibria, since players cannot do better by switching away from either.  However, only B is an ESS (and a strong Nash).

A is not an ESS, so B can neutrally invade a population of A strategists and predominate, because B scores higher against B than A does against B .  This dynamic is captured by Maynard Smith's second condition, since E( A , A ) = E( B , A ), but it is not the case that E( A , B ) > E( B , B ).

C D C 2, 2 1, 2 D 2, 1 0, 0 Harm everyone Swerve Stay Swerve 0,0 −1,+1 Stay +1,−1 −20,−20 Chicken Nash equilibria with equally scoring alternatives can be ESSes.  For example, in the game Harm everyone , C is an ESS because it satisfies Maynard Smith's second condition.

D strategists may temporarily invade a population of C strategists by scoring equally well against C , but they pay a price when they begin to play against each other; C scores better against D than does D .  So here although E( C , C ) = E( D , C ), it is also the case that E( C , D ) > E( D , D ).  As a result, C is an ESS.

Even if a game has pure strategy Nash equilibria, it might be that none of those pure strategies are ESS. Consider the Game of chicken .  There are two pure strategy Nash equilibria in this game ( Swerve , Stay ) and ( Stay , Swerve ). However, in the absence of an uncorrelated asymmetry , neither Swerve nor Stay are ESSes. There is a third Nash equilibrium, a mixed strategy which is an ESS for this game (see Hawk-dove game and Best response for explanation).

This last example points to an important difference between Nash equilibria and ESS.  Nash equilibria are defined on strategy sets (a specification of a strategy for each player), while ESS are defined in terms of strategies themselves.  The equilibria defined by ESS must always be symmetric , and thus have fewer equilibrium points.

Vs. evolutionarily stable state [ edit ] In population biology, the two concepts of an evolutionarily stable strategy (ESS) and an evolutionarily stable state are closely linked but describe different situations.

In an evolutionarily stable strategy, if all the members of a population adopt it, no mutant strategy can invade.

[ 4 ] Once virtually all members of the population use this strategy, there is no 'rational' alternative. ESS is part of classical game theory .

In an evolutionarily stable state, a population's genetic composition is restored by selection after a disturbance, if the disturbance is not too large. An evolutionarily stable state is a dynamic property of a population that returns to using a strategy, or mix of strategies, if it is perturbed from that initial state. It is part of population genetics , dynamical system , or evolutionary game theory . This is now called convergent stability.

[ 11 ] B. Thomas (1984) applies the term ESS to an individual strategy which may be mixed, and evolutionarily stable population state to a population mixture of pure strategies which may be formally equivalent to the mixed ESS.

[ 12 ] Whether a population is evolutionarily stable does not relate to its genetic diversity: it can be genetically monomorphic or polymorphic .

[ 4 ] Stochastic ESS [ edit ] In the classic definition of an ESS, no mutant strategy can invade. In finite populations, any mutant could in principle invade, albeit at low probability, implying that no ESS can exist. In an infinite population, an ESS can instead be defined as a strategy which, should it become invaded by a new mutant strategy with probability p, would be able to counterinvade from a single starting individual with probability >p, as illustrated by the evolution of bet-hedging .

[ 13 ] Prisoner's dilemma [ edit ] Cooperate Defect Cooperate 3, 3 1, 4 Defect 4, 1 2, 2 Prisoner's Dilemma A common model of altruism and social cooperation is the Prisoner's dilemma .  Here a group of players would collectively be better off if they could play Cooperate , but since Defect fares better each individual player has an incentive to play Defect .  One solution to this problem is to introduce the possibility of retaliation by having individuals play the game repeatedly against the same player.  In the so-called iterated Prisoner's dilemma, the same two individuals play the prisoner's dilemma over and over.  While the Prisoner's dilemma has only two strategies ( Cooperate and Defect ), the iterated Prisoner's dilemma has a huge number of possible strategies.  Since an individual can have different contingency plan for each history and the game may be repeated an indefinite number of times, there may in fact be an infinite number of such contingency plans.

Three simple contingency plans which have received substantial attention are Always Defect , Always Cooperate , and Tit for Tat .  The first two strategies do the same thing regardless of the other player's actions, while the latter responds on the next round by doing what was done to it on the previous round—it responds to Cooperate with Cooperate and Defect with Defect .

If the entire population plays Tit-for-Tat and a mutant arises who plays Always Defect , Tit-for-Tat will outperform Always Defect .  If the population of the mutant becomes too large — the percentage of the mutant will be kept small.

Tit for Tat is therefore an ESS, with respect to only these two strategies .  On the other hand, an island of Always Defect players will be stable against the invasion of a few Tit-for-Tat players, but not against a large number of them.

[ 14 ] If we introduce Always Cooperate , a population of Tit-for-Tat is no longer an ESS.  Since a population of Tit-for-Tat players always cooperates, the strategy Always Cooperate behaves identically in this population.  As a result, a mutant who plays Always Cooperate will not be eliminated. However, even though a population of Always Cooperate and Tit-for-Tat can coexist, if there is a small percentage of the population that is Always Defect , the selective pressure is against Always Cooperate , and in favour of Tit-for-Tat . This is due to the lower payoffs of cooperating than those of defecting in case the opponent defects.

This demonstrates the difficulties in applying the formal definition of an ESS to games with large strategy spaces, and has motivated some to consider alternatives.

Human behavior [ edit ] The fields of sociobiology and evolutionary psychology attempt to explain animal and human behavior and social structures, largely in terms of evolutionarily stable strategies.

Sociopathy (chronic antisocial or criminal behavior) may be a result of a combination of two such strategies.

[ 15 ] Evolutionarily stable strategies were originally considered for biological evolution, but they can apply to other contexts. In fact, there are stable states for a large class of adaptive dynamics . As a result, they can be used to explain human behaviours that lack any genetic influences.

See also [ edit ] Antipredator adaptation Behavioral ecology Evolutionary psychology Fitness landscape Hawk–dove game Koinophilia Sociobiology War of attrition (game) Farsightedness (game theory) References [ edit ] ^ a b Maynard Smith, J.

(1972). "Game Theory and The Evolution of Fighting".

On Evolution . Edinburgh University Press.

ISBN 0-85224-223-9 .

^ a b c Maynard Smith, J.

; Price, G.R.

(1973). "The logic of animal conflict".

Nature .

246 (5427): 15– 8.

Bibcode : 1973Natur.246...15S .

doi : 10.1038/246015a0 .

^ Maynard Smith, J. (1974).

"The Theory of Games and the Evolution of Animal Conflicts" (PDF) .

Journal of Theoretical Biology .

47 (1): 209– 21.

Bibcode : 1974JThBi..47..209M .

doi : 10.1016/0022-5193(74)90110-6 .

PMID 4459582 .

^ a b c Maynard Smith, John (1982).

Evolution and the Theory of Games . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-28884-3 .

^ MacArthur, R. H.

(1965). Waterman T.; Horowitz H. (eds.).

Theoretical and mathematical biology . New York: Blaisdell.

^ Hamilton, W.D.

(1967). "Extraordinary sex ratios".

Science .

156 (3774): 477– 88.

Bibcode : 1967Sci...156..477H .

doi : 10.1126/science.156.3774.477 .

JSTOR 1721222 .

PMID 6021675 .

^ Press release Archived 2016-03-03 at the Wayback Machine for the 1999 Crafoord Prize ^ Alexander, Jason McKenzie (23 May 2003).

"Evolutionary Game Theory" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 31 August 2007 .

^ Harsanyi, J (1973). "Oddness of the number of equilibrium points: a new proof".

Int. J. Game Theory .

2 (1): 235– 50.

doi : 10.1007/BF01737572 .

^ a b Thomas, B. (1985). "On evolutionarily stable sets".

J. Math. Biology .

22 : 105– 115.

doi : 10.1007/bf00276549 .

^ Apaloo, J.; Brown, J. S.; Vincent, T. L. (2009).

"Evolutionary game theory: ESS, convergence stability, and NIS" .

Evolutionary Ecology Research .

11 : 489– 515. Archived from the original on 2017-08-09 . Retrieved 2018-01-10 .

^ Thomas, B. (1984). "Evolutionary stability: states and strategies".

Theor. Popul. Biol .

26 (1): 49– 67.

Bibcode : 1984TPBio..26...49T .

doi : 10.1016/0040-5809(84)90023-6 .

^ King, Oliver D.; Masel, Joanna (1 December 2007).

"The evolution of bet-hedging adaptations to rare scenarios" .

Theoretical Population Biology .

72 (4): 560– 575.

Bibcode : 2007TPBio..72..560K .

doi : 10.1016/j.tpb.2007.08.006 .

PMC 2118055 .

PMID 17915273 .

^ Axelrod, Robert (1984).

The Evolution of Cooperation . Basic Books.

ISBN 0-465-02121-2 .

^ Mealey, L. (1995). "The sociobiology of sociopathy: An integrated evolutionary model".

Behavioral and Brain Sciences .

18 (3): 523– 99.

doi : 10.1017/S0140525X00039595 .

Further reading [ edit ] Weibull, Jörgen (1997).

Evolutionary game theory .

MIT Press .

ISBN 978-0-262-73121-8 .

Classic reference textbook.

Hines, W. G. S. (1987). "Evolutionary stable strategies: a review of basic theory".

Theoretical Population Biology .

31 (2): 195– 272.

Bibcode : 1987TPBio..31..195H .

doi : 10.1016/0040-5809(87)90029-3 .

PMID 3296292 .

Leyton-Brown, Kevin; Shoham, Yoav (2008).

Essentials of Game Theory: A Concise, Multidisciplinary Introduction . San Rafael, CA: Morgan & Claypool Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-59829-593-1 .

. An 88-page mathematical introduction; see Section 3.8.

Free online Archived 2000-08-15 at the Wayback Machine at many universities.

Parker, G. A.

(1984) Evolutionary stable strategies. In Behavioural Ecology: an Evolutionary Approach (2nd ed) Krebs, J. R.

& Davies N.B., eds. pp 30–61. Blackwell, Oxford.

Shoham, Yoav; Leyton-Brown, Kevin (2009).

Multiagent Systems: Algorithmic, Game-Theoretic, and Logical Foundations . New York: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-89943-7 . Archived from the original on 2011-05-01 . Retrieved 2008-12-17 .

. A comprehensive reference from a computational perspective; see Section 7.7.

Downloadable free online .

Maynard Smith, John . (1982) Evolution and the Theory of Games .

ISBN 0-521-28884-3 . Classic reference.

External links [ edit ] Evolutionarily Stable Strategies at Animal Behavior: An Online Textbook by Michael D. Breed.

Game Theory and Evolutionarily Stable Strategies , Kenneth N. Prestwich's site at College of the Holy Cross.

Evolutionarily stable strategies knol Archived: https://web.archive.org/web/20091005015811/http://knol.google.com/k/klaus-rohde/evolutionarily-stable-strategies-and/xk923bc3gp4/50# v t e Game theory Glossary Game theorists Games Traditional game theory Definitions Asynchrony Bayesian regret Best response Bounded rationality Cheap talk Coalition Complete contract Complete information Complete mixing Confrontation analysis Conjectural variation Contingent cooperator Coopetition Cooperative game theory Dynamic inconsistency Escalation of commitment Farsightedness Game semantics Hierarchy of beliefs Imperfect information Incomplete information Information set Move by nature Mutual knowledge Non-cooperative game theory Non-credible threat Outcome Perfect information Perfect recall Ply Preference Rationality Sequential game Simultaneous action selection Spite Strategic complements Strategic dominance Strategic form Strategic interaction Strategic move Strategy Subgame Succinct game Topological game Tragedy of the commons Uncorrelated asymmetry Equilibrium concepts Backward induction Bayes correlated equilibrium Bayesian efficiency Bayesian game Bayesian Nash equilibrium Berge equilibrium Bertrand–Edgeworth model Coalition-proof Nash equilibrium Core Correlated equilibrium Cursed equilibrium Edgeworth price cycle Epsilon-equilibrium Gibbs equilibrium Incomplete contracts Inequity aversion Individual rationality Iterated elimination of dominated strategies Markov perfect equilibrium Mertens-stable equilibrium Nash equilibrium Open-loop model Pareto efficiency Payoff dominance Perfect Bayesian equilibrium Price of anarchy Program equilibrium Proper equilibrium Quantal response equilibrium Quasi-perfect equilibrium Rational agent Rationalizability Rationalizable strategy Satisfaction equilibrium Self-confirming equilibrium Sequential equilibrium Shapley value Strong Nash equilibrium Subgame perfect equilibrium Trembling hand equilibrium Strategies Appeasement Bid shading Cheap talk Collusion Commitment device De-escalation Deterrence Escalation Fictitious play Focal point Grim trigger Hobbesian trap Markov strategy Max-dominated strategy Mixed strategy Pure strategy Tit for tat Win–stay, lose–switch Games All-pay auction Battle of the sexes Nash bargaining game Bertrand competition Blotto game Centipede game Coordination game Cournot competition Deadlock Dictator game Trust game Diner's dilemma Dollar auction El Farol Bar problem Electronic mail game Gift-exchange game Guess 2/3 of the average Keynesian beauty contest Kuhn poker Lewis signaling game Matching pennies Obligationes Optional prisoner's dilemma Pirate game Prisoner's dilemma Public goods game Rendezvous problem Rock paper scissors Stackelberg competition Stag hunt Traveler's dilemma Ultimatum game Volunteer's dilemma War of attrition Theorems Arrow's impossibility theorem Aumann's agreement theorem Brouwer fixed-point theorem Competitive altruism Folk theorem Gibbard–Satterthwaite theorem Gibbs lemma Glicksberg's theorem Kakutani fixed-point theorem Kuhn's theorem One-shot deviation principle Prim–Read theory Rational ignorance Rational irrationality Sperner's lemma Zermelo's theorem Subfields Algorithmic game theory Behavioral game theory Behavioral strategy Compositional game theory Contract theory Drama theory Graphical game theory Heresthetic Mean-field game theory Negotiation theory Quantum game theory Social software Key people Albert W. Tucker Alvin E. Roth Amos Tversky Antoine Augustin Cournot Ariel Rubinstein David Gale David K. Levine David M. Kreps Donald B. Gillies Drew Fudenberg Eric Maskin Harold W. Kuhn Herbert Simon Herbert Scarf Hervé Moulin Jean Tirole Jean-François Mertens Jennifer Tour Chayes Ken Binmore Kenneth Arrow Leonid Hurwicz Lloyd Shapley Martin Shubik Melvin Dresher Merrill M. Flood Olga Bondareva Oskar Morgenstern Paul Milgrom Peyton Young Reinhard Selten Robert Aumann Robert Axelrod Robert B. Wilson Roger Myerson Samuel Bowles Suzanne Scotchmer Thomas Schelling William Vickrey Combinatorial game theory Core concepts Combinatorial explosion Determinacy Disjunctive sum First-player and second-player win Game complexity Game tree Impartial game Misère Partisan game Solved game Sprague–Grundy theorem Strategy-stealing argument Zugzwang Games Chess Chomp Clobber Cram Domineering Hackenbush Nim Notakto Subtract a square Sylver coinage Toads and Frogs Mathematical tools Mex Nimber On Numbers and Games Star Surreal number Winning Ways for Your Mathematical Plays Search algorithms Alpha–beta pruning Expectiminimax Minimax Monte Carlo tree search Negamax Paranoid algorithm Principal variation search Key people Claude Shannon John Conway John von Neumann Evolutionary game theory Core concepts Bishop–Cannings theorem Evolution and the Theory of Games Evolutionarily stable set Evolutionarily stable state Evolutionarily stable strategy Replicator equation Risk dominance Stochastically stable equilibrium Weak evolutionarily stable strategy Games Chicken Stag hunt Applications Cultural group selection Fisher's principle Mobbing Terminal investment hypothesis Key people John Maynard Smith Robert Axelrod Mechanism design Core concepts Algorithmic mechanism design Bayesian-optimal mechanism Incentive compatibility Market design Monotonicity Participation constraint Revelation principle Strategyproofness Vickrey–Clarke–Groves mechanism Theorems Myerson–Satterthwaite theorem Revenue equivalence Applications Digital goods auction Knapsack auction Truthful cake-cutting Other topics Bertrand paradox Chainstore paradox Computational complexity of games Helly metric Multi-agent system PPAD-complete Mathematics portal Commons WikiProject Category v t e Evolutionary biology Introduction Outline Timeline of evolution History of life Index Evolution Abiogenesis Adaptation Adaptive radiation Altruism Cheating Reciprocal Baldwin effect Cladistics Coevolution Mutualism Common descent Convergence Divergence Earliest known life forms Evidence of evolution Evolutionary arms race Evolutionary pressure Exaptation Extinction Event Homology Last universal common ancestor Macroevolution Microevolution Mismatch Non-adaptive radiation Origin of life Panspermia Parallel evolution Signalling theory Handicap principle Speciation Species Species complex Taxonomy Unit of selection Gene-centered view of evolution Population genetics Artificial selection Biodiversity Evolutionarily stable strategy Fisher's principle Fitness Inclusive Gene flow Genetic drift Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mutation Population Natural selection Sexual dimorphism Sexual selection Flowering plants Fungi Mate choice Social selection Trivers–Willard hypothesis Variation Development Canalisation Evolutionary developmental biology Genetic assimilation Inversion Modularity Phenotypic plasticity Of taxa Bacteria Birds origin Brachiopods Molluscs Cephalopods Dinosaurs Fish Fungi Insects butterflies Life Mammals cats canids wolves dogs hyenas dolphins and whales horses Kangaroos primates humans lemurs sea cows Plants pollinator-mediated Reptiles Spiders Tetrapods Viruses Of organs Cell DNA Flagella Eukaryotes symbiogenesis chromosome endomembrane system mitochondria nucleus plastids In animals eye hair auditory ossicle nervous system brain Of processes Aging Death Programmed cell death Avian flight Biological complexity Cooperation Color vision in primates Emotion Empathy Ethics Eusociality Immune system Metabolism Monogamy Morality Mosaic evolution Multicellularity Sexual reproduction Gamete differentiation/sexes Life cycles/nuclear phases Mating types Meiosis Sex-determination Snake venom Tempo and modes Gradualism / Punctuated equilibrium / Saltationism Micromutation / Macromutation Uniformitarianism / Catastrophism Speciation Allopatric Anagenesis Catagenesis Cladogenesis Cospeciation Ecological Hybrid Non-ecological Parapatric Peripatric Reinforcement Sympatric History Renaissance and Enlightenment Transmutation of species David Hume Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion Charles Darwin On the Origin of Species History of paleontology Transitional fossil Blending inheritance Mendelian inheritance The eclipse of Darwinism Neo-Darwinism Modern synthesis History of molecular evolution Extended evolutionary synthesis Philosophy Darwinism Alternatives Catastrophism Lamarckism Orthogenesis Mutationism Saltationism Structuralism Spandrel Theistic Vitalism Teleology in biology Related Biogeography Ecological genetics Evolutionary medicine Group selection Cultural evolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Hologenome theory of evolution Missing heritability problem Molecular evolution Astrobiology Phylogenetics Tree Polymorphism Protocell Systematics Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Category Portal v t e Evolutionary psychology History Evolutionary thought Theoretical foundations Adaptationism Cognitive revolution Cognitivism Gene selection theory Modern synthesis Criticism Evolutionary processes Adaptations Altruism Cheating Hamiltonian spite Reciprocal Baldwin effect By-products Evolutionarily stable strategy Exaptation Fitness Inclusive Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mismatch Natural selection Sexual selection Costly signaling Male / female intrasexual competition Mate choice Sexual dimorphism Social selection Species-typical behavior Areas Cognition / Emotion Affect Display Display rules Facial expression Behavioral modernity Cognitive module / modularity of mind Adaptive unconscious / Unconscious cognition Automatic and controlled processes Cognitive specialization Computational theory of mind Domain generality Domain specificity / learning Dual process theory Cognitive tradeoff hypothesis Evolution of the brain Evolution of nervous systems Fight-or-flight response Arachnophobia Basophobia Ophidiophobia Folk biology / taxonomy Folk psychology / theory of mind Intelligence Flynn effect Wason selection task Motor control / skill Multitasking Numerical cognition Number sense Approximate number system Parallel individuation system Sleep Visual perception Color vision Eye Naïve physics Culture Aesthetics Literary criticism Musicology Anthropology Biological Crime Language Origin Psychology Speech Morality Moral foundations Religion Origin Universals Development Attachment Bonding Affectional / maternal / paternal bond Caregiver deprivation Childhood attachment Cinderella effect Cognitive development Education Language acquisition Personality development Socialization Human factors / Mental health Cognitive ergonomics Computer-mediated communication Engineering psychology Human–computer interaction Media naturalness theory Neuroergonomics Depression Digital media use and mental health Hypophobia Imprinted brain hypothesis Mind-blindness Psychological effects of Internet use Rank theory of depression Schizophrenia Screen time Smartphones and pedestrian safety Social aspects of television Societal effects of cars Distracted driving Lead–crime hypothesis Mobile phones and driving safety Texting while driving Sex Activity Adult attachment Age disparity Arousal Concealed ovulation Coolidge effect Desire Fantasy Hormonal motivation Incest taboo Westermarck effect Jealousy Mate guarding Mating preferences Mating strategies Orientation Ovulatory shift hypothesis Pair bond Physical / Sexual attraction Sexuality / male / female Sexy son hypothesis Sex differences Aggression Autism Cognition Crime Division of labour Emotional intelligence Empathising–systemising theory Gender role Intelligence Memory Mental health Narcissism Neuroscience Schizophrenia Substance abuse Suicide Variability hypothesis Related subjects Academic disciplines Behavioral / evolutionary economics Behavioral epigenetics / genetics Affective / behavioral / cognitive / evolutionary neuroscience Biocultural anthropology Biolinguistics Biological psychiatry Cognitive ethology Cognitive psychology Cognitive science Comparative psychology Cross-cultural psychology Ethology Evolutionary biology Evolutionary medicine Functional psychology Neuropsychology Philosophy of mind Population genetics Primatology Sociobiology Research topics Animal / comparative cognition Animal communication Animal consciousness Animal culture Animal language Animal navigation Animal training Animal-made art Cognitive bias Emotion g factor in non-humans Great ape language Human–animal communication Number sense Primate cognition Theory of mind Tool use Cultural evolution Evolutionary epistemology Missing heritability problem Unit of selection Coevolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Fisher's principle Group selection Hologenome theory Lamarckism / acquired characteristics Population Punctuated equilibrium Recent human evolution Species Species complex Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Trivers–Willard hypothesis Theoretical positions Cultural selection theory Determinism / indeterminism Biological determinism Connectionism Cultural determinism Environmental determinism Nature versus nurture Psychological nativism Social constructionism Social determinism Standard social science model Functionalism Memetics Multilineal evolution Neo-Darwinism Neoevolutionism Sociocultural evolution Unilineal evolution Evolutionary psychologists Evolutionary psychology Psychology portal Evolutionary biology portal Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Evolutionarily_stable_strategy&oldid=1287803004 " Categories : Game theory equilibrium concepts Evolutionary game theory Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 April 2025, at 15:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Evolutionarily stable strategy 20 languages Add topic

