Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Founding 1.2 Obama administration 1.3 2016 presidential campaign 1.4 First Trump administration 1.5 Biden administration 2 Heritage Action congressional scorecard 3 Funding 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Heritage Action 3 languages Español Français 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American conservative policy advocacy organization Heritage Action Heritage Action's logo Formation 2010 ; 15 years ago ( 2010 ) Type 501(c)4 organization Tax ID no.

27-2244700 Purpose Lobbying and advocacy Headquarters Washington, D.C.

, U.S.

President Kevin Roberts Executive Vice President Tiffany Justice Affiliations The Heritage Foundation Revenue $20.9M (2022) [ 1 ] Website heritageaction .com This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Heritage Action , founded in 2010 as Heritage Action for America , is a conservative advocacy organization.

[ 2 ] Heritage Action, which has affiliates throughout the United States, [ 3 ] [ 4 ] is a sister organization of the Heritage Foundation , a Washington, D.C.

-based conservative think tank founded in 1973.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] History [ edit ] Further information: The Heritage Foundation Founding [ edit ] In April 2010, Edwin Feulner , then president of the Heritage Foundation , announced the founding of Heritage Action as a sister organization of the Heritage Foundation, saying its purpose would be to harness "grassroots energy to increase the pressure on Members of Congress to embrace the Heritage Foundation’s policy recommendations". He also said Heritage Action would not be involved in election campaigns.

[ 6 ] Heritage Action's goal was to expand the political reach of the Heritage Foundation and advance the policies recommended by its researchers.

[ 7 ] The organization was launched primarily as a response to the Heritage Foundation's growing membership, and the fact that the Heritage Foundation is not allowed to back legislation due to its 501(c)(3) tax-exempt status. Heritage Action fulfills this role and provides a link between the think tank and grassroots conservative activists.

[ 8 ] Heritage Action began with a staff of ten, including original chief executive officer Michael Needham.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Obama administration [ edit ] In July 2010, Heritage Action launched its first advocacy campaign, opposing the Affordable Care Act (ACA), also known as Obamacare, a health care reform law supported by then president Barack Obama .

[ 8 ] By August 2010, the organization had helped to secure 170 Republican co-sponsors for a petition by U.S. Representative Steve King (R-NY) to force a vote on repealing the ACA.

[ 11 ] In September 2010, the group began a 10-day television and web campaign to persuade Democrats to sign onto a repeal of the ACA.

[ 12 ] In January 2011, the group opened its first state-based operations in two states, North Carolina and Pennsylvania , where the organization focused on mobilizing voters in opposing the ACA.

[ 13 ] In August 2013, Heritage Action launched a campaign to defund or restrict the ACA by linking it to votes on the federal government 's debt limit .

[ 14 ] In October 2013, as part of this campaign, the organization was instrumental in the government shutdown , which ultimately did not defund or limit the ACA and proved politically unpopular.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] During the shutdown, Heritage Action continued to urge lawmakers not to negotiate a measure to fully fund the government without dismantling the ACA.

[ 14 ] Heritage Action's strategy in tying the ACA to the shutdown was to make President Obama "feel pain" because of the shutdown, the organization's leader Michael Needham said.

[ 17 ] U.S. Senator Orrin Hatch , a Republican from Utah , criticized Heritage Action for warning legislators not to vote for the Senate budget compromise during the government shutdown.

[ 18 ] In October 2013, Heritage Action was labeled a "powerhouse in a new generation of conservative groups" [ 19 ] by HuffPost and "perhaps now the most influential lobby group among Congressional Republicans" by The New York Times .

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] 2016 presidential campaign [ edit ] After Donald Trump announced his candidacy for the 2016 Republican presidential nomination , Michael Needham , then leader of Heritage Action, said, "Donald Trump's a clown. He needs to be out of the race." [ 22 ] First Trump administration [ edit ] In May 2018, Timothy Chapman succeeded Needham as executive director, following Needham's departure.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] Chapman previously served as Heritage Action's chief operating officer and as chief of staff to Heritage Foundation President Edwin Feulner. In March 2020, Chapman left the organization.

In 2020, Jessica Anderson, who joined Heritage Action as grassroots director in 2010, began leading the organization. Anderson served for a year in 2017 in the Office of Management and Budget during the Trump administration .

[ 25 ] She returned to Heritage Action as vice president in 2018, and was named executive director in 2020.

[ 26 ] [ 21 ] In July 2024, Anderson took a leave of absence in July 2023 and Ryan Walker was named Acting Executive Director, [ 27 ] serving in that role until Heritage Foundation president Kevin Roberts was named president of Heritage Action in September 2023.

[ 28 ] Roberts serves Heritage Action and The Heritage Foundation in a joint role.

[ 28 ] Walker served as executive vice president of Heritage Action until June 2025.

[ 29 ] On July 28, 2025, Tiffany Justice, co-founder of Moms for Liberty , was named executive vice president of Heritage Action.

[ 30 ] In April 2020, the organization says it conducted grassroots work, including door-to-door issue canvassing in Iowa , North Carolina , Pennsylvania , and Wisconsin .

[ 31 ] Due to the COVID-19 pandemic , some of these efforts were replaced for a time by phone calls.

In August 2020, Heritage Action launched a pro-police pledge "for citizens, lawmakers and candidates to stand with [the] nation's law enforcement officers".

[ 32 ] Over 100 members of Congress signed the pledge.

[ 33 ] The pledge was accompanied by pro-police billboards by the group in New York City, Dallas, and Atlanta.

[ 33 ] Biden administration [ edit ] Following the 2020 presidential election , Heritage Action drafted and lobbied in favor of new election legislation as part of Republican efforts to tighten election laws . In May 2021, in a leaked video of a presentation to donors, Jessica Anderson, the organization's executive director at the time, citing Iowa as an example, saying, "we did it quickly and we did it quietly...Little fanfare. Honestly, nobody even noticed. My team looked at each other and we're like, 'It can't be that easy'." [ 34 ] As part of the organization's efforts on tightening election laws, it maintains a database, which includes 1,322 "proven instances of voter fraud," dating back to the mid-1980s, 
but includes only one case from the 2020 election. Some of the cases in the database are also fraudulent voter registration incidents, rather than voter fraud.

[ 35 ] In 2021, according to an internal Heritage Action document, a "two-year effort" was planned to work with like-minded groups to "produce model legislation for state legislatures to adopt" and hire lobbyists in "crucial states". The same year, Heritage Action published a report in which it listed its objectives as limiting who can vote by mail, preventing ballot collection, banning drop boxes, enacting stricter voter identification laws, restricting early voting, and providing greater access to partisan election observers.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] Heritage Action congressional scorecard [ edit ] Heritage Action issues a congressional scorecard, which ranks members of Congress on "votes, co-sponsorships and other legislative activity".

[ 38 ] It also has established a grassroots presence outside of Washington, D.C., with professional grassroots coordinators who recruit and train conservative "Sentinel" activists.

[ 39 ] Funding [ edit ] As of 2022, Heritage Action had annual revenue of $20.9 million, according to its filing with the Internal Revenue Service , reported by ProPublica .

[ 40 ] References [ edit ] ^ Heritage Action For America – Nonprofit Explorer – ProPublica ^ "Heritage Action for America" .

Library of Congress . Retrieved April 14, 2020 .

^ Woodruff, Betsy (June 27, 2013).

"Heritage Action vs. the Immigration Bill" .

National Review . Retrieved June 4, 2018 .

^ a b Rob Christensen (January 11, 2011).

"Heritage Foundation sinks its roots in N.C." The News & Observer . Archived from the original on October 14, 2013 . Retrieved October 11, 2013 .

^ Weber, Joseph (August 24, 2010).

"Hybrid groups using freedom, cash clout; Conservatives purchase ads, start petitions" .

The Washington Times . Retrieved February 23, 2017 .

^ Ed Feulner (April 9, 2010).

"Morning Bell: Heritage Action for America" .

Morning Bell . The Heritage Foundation. Archived from the original on April 11, 2010 . Retrieved January 20, 2011 .

^ Suzy Khimm (January 25, 2013).

"Heritage Action's Distinct Lobbying Plan" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on July 14, 2014 . Retrieved May 23, 2014 .

^ a b Smithwick, Benjamin (July 5, 2010).

"The Fight to Repeal Obamacare" .

Human Events.com . Archived from the original on December 31, 2010 . Retrieved January 17, 2011 .

^ "Heritage Launches Grassroots Advocacy Group" .

States News Service . April 8, 2010. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014 . Retrieved May 23, 2014 .

^ bsmithwick (July 5, 2010).

"The Fight to Repeal Obamacare" .

Human Events . The Human Events Group. Archived from the original on October 16, 2013 . Retrieved May 23, 2014 .

^ Gizzi, John (August 27, 2010).

"Sen. Chuck Hagel Strikes Again" .

Human Events.com . Archived from the original on November 1, 2010 . Retrieved January 17, 2011 .

^ Arsenault, Mark (September 11, 2010).

"GOP focus is jobs, not health care; Candidates mostly avoid issue party pledged to hammer" .

The Boston Globe . Retrieved February 24, 2017 .

^ Budoff-Brown, Carrie (January 7, 2011).

"Anti-Reform Dems Cool to Repeal Vote" .

The News & Observer . Retrieved February 24, 2017 .

^ a b Moody, Chris (October 9, 2013).

"Meet one of the conservative advocacy groups behind the GOP's government shutdown strategy" . Yahoo! News.

^ Joseph, Cameron (October 9, 2013).

"Heritage Action leader: Paul Ryan's shutdown offer off-target" .

The Hill .

^ Miller, Zeke J (September 30, 2013).

"Hidden Hand: How Heritage Action Drove DC To Shut Down" .

Time .

^ McCormack, John (October 9, 2013).

"Heritage Action's Shutdown Strategy" .

The Weekly Standard . Archived from the original on October 14, 2013.

^ Taylor, Jessica (October 17, 2013).

"GOP senator: Heritage in danger of not amounting to 'anything anymore' " .

MSNBC .

^ Fineman, Howard (October 9, 2013).

"Heritage Action Bails On Debt Ceiling Fight" .

The Huffington Post .

^ Martin, Jonathan; Rutenberg, Jim; Peters, Jeremy W. (October 19, 2013).

"Fiscal Crisis Sounds the Charge in G.O.P.'s 'Civil War' " .

The New York Times .

^ a b "Jessica Anderson Named Executive Director of Heritage Action for…" .

Heritage Action For America . Retrieved August 17, 2020 .

^ McMurry, Evan (July 19, 2015).

"Fox Panel Dines Out on Trump's Comments: 'Despicable,' 'Clown' " .

Mediaite . Archived from the original on August 29, 2023.

^ https://heritageaction.com/press/heritage-action-names-tim-chapman-executive-director Executive Director ^ "Rubio Announces Mike Needham as New Chief of Staff" .

U.S. Senator for Florida, Marco Rubio . April 17, 2018.

^ "Heritage Action Staff" .

Heritage Action For America . Retrieved October 4, 2020 .

^ "Heritage Action Announces New Vice President" .

Heritage Action For America .

^ "Heritage Action Executive Director Announces Leave of Absence for…" .

Heritage Action For America . Retrieved May 22, 2024 .

^ a b "Kevin D. Roberts, PhD" .

The Heritage Foundation . Archived from the original on May 18, 2023 . Retrieved May 22, 2024 .

^ "Heritage Action Staff" .

Heritage Action For America . Retrieved May 22, 2024 .

^ Nichols, Hans (July 28, 2025).

"Scoop: Heritage Action hires Tiffany Justice from Moms for Liberty" .

Axios . Retrieved July 29, 2025 .

^ "PoliticsPA" . April 7, 2020 . Retrieved October 5, 2020 .

^ "Heritage Action Launches Police Pledge; New Poll Shows 4 out of 5…" .

Heritage Action For America . Retrieved October 5, 2020 .

^ a b Bowden, John (September 14, 2020).

"Conservative group Heritage Action launches pro-police billboards in three cities" .

TheHill . Retrieved October 5, 2020 .

^ Berman, Ari; Surgey, Nick.

"Leaked Video: Dark Money Group Brags About Writing GOP Voter Suppression Bills Across the Country" . Mother Jones . Retrieved May 14, 2021 .

^ Bump, Philip (May 14, 2021).

"Group that can't find systemic voter fraud eager to help combat systemic voter fraud" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on June 19, 2021.

^ Corasaniti, Nick; Epstein, Reid J. (March 23, 2021) [Updated 7 April 2021].

"G.O.P. and Allies Draft 'Best Practices' for Restricting Voting" .

The New York Times .

^ The Heritage Foundation (February 1, 2021).

"The Facts About Election Integrity and the Need for States to Fix Their Election Systems" . The Heritage Foundation. Archived from the original on March 23, 2021.

^ "Dave Brat: Meet the Candidate Who Beat Eric Cantor" .

ABC News . Retrieved October 5, 2020 .

^ Baigert, Laura (June 22, 2017).

"Heritage Action Sentinels, An Active Force To Be Reckoned With in Middle Tennessee, Expanding" .

Tennessee Star . Retrieved October 5, 2020 .

^ Heritage Action , ProPublica External links [ edit ] Official website "Heritage Action" . Internal Revenue Service filings.

ProPublica Nonprofit Explorer .

Heritage Action for America at Ballotpedia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Heritage_Action&oldid=1303084273 " Categories : 501(c)(4) nonprofit organizations 2010 establishments in the United States Conservative organizations in the United States Organizations established in 2010 Political advocacy groups in the United States The Heritage Foundation Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from February 2017 This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 01:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Heritage Action 3 languages Add topic

