Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Australia 2 Canada 3 Civil law jurisdictions 4 European Union 5 Hong Kong 6 United Kingdom Toggle United Kingdom subsection 6.1 Primary legislation 6.2 Secondary legislation 6.3 EU tertiary legislation 7 United States Toggle United States subsection 7.1 Constitution 7.2 Act of Congress 7.3 Regulations "with the force of law" 7.4 Executive Orders and Memos 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Primary and secondary legislation 3 languages Hausa Монгол Simple English Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Two forms of law in democracies This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Primary and secondary legislation" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Administrative law General principles Administrative court Delegated legislation Exhaustion of remedies Justiciability Judicial interpretation Ministerial act Ouster clause Prerogative writ Certiorari Habeas corpus Mandamus Prohibition Quo warranto Rulemaking Ultra vires Grounds for judicial review Fettering of discretion Legitimate expectation Nondelegation doctrine Procedural justice Natural justice Due process Abuse Fundamental justice Speedy trial Proportionality Unreasonableness Wednesbury Patent unreasonableness Administrative law in common law jurisdictions Australia Canada Singapore South Africa United Kingdom Scotland United States Administrative law in civil law jurisdictions China Mongolia Ukraine Related topics Constitutional law v t e Primary legislation and secondary legislation (the latter also called delegated legislation or subordinate legislation [ 1 ] ) are two forms of law , created respectively by the legislative and executive branches of governments in representative democracies . Primary legislation generally consists of statutes , also known as ' acts ', that set out broad  principles and rules, but may delegate specific authority to an executive branch to make more specific laws under the aegis of the principal act. The executive branch can then issue secondary legislation (often by order-in-council in parliamentary systems , or by regulatory agencies in presidential systems ), creating legally enforceable regulations and the procedures for implementing them.

[ 2 ] Australia [ edit ] In Australian law , primary legislation includes acts of the Commonwealth Parliament and state or territory parliaments. Secondary legislation, formally called legislative instruments, are regulations made according to law by the executive or judiciary or other specified bodies which have the effect of law.

[ 3 ] Secondary legislation amounts to about half of Commonwealth law by volume.

[ 3 ] Although it is made by the executive, secondary legislation is still scrutinised by parliament and can be disallowed by a resolution of either house of parliament.

[ 3 ] Canada [ edit ] In Canadian law , primary legislation (also called statute law) consists of acts of the Parliament of Canada and the legislatures of the provinces.  Secondary legislation (also called regulation) includes laws made by federal or provincial Order in Council by virtue of an empowering statute previously made by the parliament or legislature.

Civil law jurisdictions [ edit ] In civil law systems , a parliament issues primary legislation, with lesser bodies granted powers to issue delegated legislation. Action for judicial review of the validity of secondary legislation may be brought before a court—e.g., the constitutional court .

[ a ] For example in Finland, [ 5 ] the practice is to delegate the making of secondary legislation ("decree", Finnish : asetus ) mainly to the Finnish Government (the cabinet) as a whole, to individual ministries (made by the minister; e.g., where the change of legal position of persons is limited and technical), or to the President of the Republic (e.g., where implementing international treaty obligations do not require legislation). Delegation to government agencies is exceptional (e.g., when the need for regulation is technical and may change rapidly) and done with extra caution.

In Spain the primary legislation is composed of laws and organic laws . Organic laws are those which expand upon constitutionally-delegated matters, for instance electoral law. The government can also create laws, called decree-law ( Decreto-Ley ), for urgent matters and are restricted on what they can do. Decree-laws must be approved within a month by the Cortes Generales . The secondary legislation is called a legislative decree ( Decreto legislativo ); it can only delegate on the government for a given topic, within a time limit and only once.

[ 6 ] European Union [ edit ] Each member state of the European Union (EU) has its own laws, but EU law takes primacy in certain circumstances. The EU Treaties are the EU's primary legislation.

[ 7 ] These include the founding treaty, the 1957 Treaty of Rome , and all subsequent treaties, such as the Maastricht Treaty , Nice Treaty , and Lisbon Treaty . Secondary legislation is enacted under the treaties, [ 8 ] taking various forms and can be either legislative or non-legislative.

The forms include binding regulations, directives, decisions, and non-binding recommendations and opinions: A regulation [ 9 ] is a law which is binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States without needing national implementation. EU citizens may have standing to pursue breaches of regulations and treaties, as in Van Gend en Loos v Nederlandse Administratie der Belastingen .

A directive [ 9 ] is addressed to the Member States as a framework for their legislation. It is "binding as to the result to be achieved", but Member States can choose their own form of implementation. EU citizens may have standing to challenge failures to implement, as in Francovich v Italy .

A decision [ 9 ] is a law that addresses a specific issue. Addressees may challenge a decision via judicial review .

Legislative acts are enacted via the legislative procedure , initiated by the Commission , and ultimately adopted by the Council and European Parliament acting in concert, which may also involve consultation with the European Economic and Social Committee and the European Committee of the Regions .

Non-legislative acts include implementing and delegated acts , such as those adopted by the Commission in pursuance of policy, which may involve so-called comitology committees. The Commission may act quasi-judicially in matters of EU competition law, a power defined in Article 101 and Article 102 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .

Privileged parties, such as Member States, EU institutions , and those with specific standing, may initiate litigation to challenge the validity of secondary legislation under the treaties.

Hong Kong [ edit ] Main article: Subsidiary legislation in Hong Kong In Hong Kong, primary legislation includes ordinances of the domestic Legislative Council , and Nationwide Laws of the People's Republic of China extended to Hong Kong by the National People's Congress . Subsidiary legislation in Hong Kong is made by the Executive Council or officials with delegated powers.

United Kingdom [ edit ] Primary legislation [ edit ] In the United Kingdom , primary legislation can take a number of different forms: [ 10 ] An Act of Parliament .

An Act of the Scottish Parliament , Measure or Act of the Senedd or Act of the Northern Ireland Assembly An Order in Council made under the Royal Prerogative Church of England Measures – the instruments by which changes are made to legislation relating to the administration and organisation of the Church.

Secondary legislation [ edit ] Main article: Delegated legislation in the United Kingdom In the United Kingdom, secondary legislation (also referred to as delegated legislation or subordinate legislation ) is law made by an executive authority under powers delegated by an enactment of primary legislation, which grants the executive agency power to implement and administer the requirements of that primary legislation.

[ 11 ] Forms of secondary legislation in the United Kingdom include: [ 12 ] Statutory instruments made by the UK government in a variety of forms, most commonly Orders in Council , regulations, rules and orders. The form to be adopted is usually set out in the enabling act.

Statutory rules and orders, for instruments similar to statutory instruments prior to 1948 Church instruments, for instruments of the Archbishops of Canterbury and York under the authority of Church Measures Scottish statutory instruments made under the authority of legislation from the Scottish Parliament Welsh statutory instruments made under the authority of legislation from the Senedd , the National Assembly of Wales or the UK Parliament Statutory Rules of Northern Ireland made under the authority of legislation from the Northern Ireland Assembly EU tertiary legislation [ edit ] See also: § European Union The European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018 defines EU tertiary legislation [ 13 ] in retained EU law after Brexit to mean: [ 14 ] (a) any provision made under— (i) an EU regulation, (ii) a decision within the meaning of Article 288 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, or (iii) an EU directive, by virtue of Article 290 or 291(2) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union or former Article 202 of the Treaty establishing the European Community, or (b) any measure adopted in accordance with former Article 34(2)(c) of the Treaty on European Union to implement decisions under former Article 34(2)(c), but does not include any such provision or measure which is an EU directive[.] According to the explanatory notes accompanying the Act, this is meant to cover delegated and implementing acts [ 15 ] that were not enacted via the European Union legislative procedure .

United States [ edit ] Main article: United States administrative law § Rulemaking The British English terminology of primary and secondary legislation is not used in American English , due to the American dislike of the British constitutional concept of the fusion of powers as inherently incompatible with due process and the rule of law (one of the great divergences between American and British political philosophy which led to the American Revolution ).  In contrast, the United States Constitution imposes a strict separation of powers . Therefore, the word legislation is typically used to refer only to acts of the legislative branch, and rarely the executive or the judicial branches. A similar relationship exists in state legal systems between laws, which are enacted by state legislatures, and regulations and policies, which are established by governmental bodies at the state and local levels.

[ 16 ] In a 2013 majority opinion of the US Supreme Court , Associate Justice Antonin Scalia explained: [ 17 ] [Legislative power] is vested exclusively in Congress [and judicial power] in the "one supreme Court" and "such inferior Courts as the Congress may from time to time ordain and establish" ... Agencies make rules ... and conduct adjudications ... and have done so since the beginning of the Republic. These activities take "legislative" and "judicial" forms, but they are exercises of—indeed, under our constitutional structure they must be exercises of—the "executive Power".

Constitution [ edit ] Main article: Constitution of the United States The Constitution, which refers to itself as the supreme law of the land is the equivalent to the British concept of primary legislation. Legislation similar to the British Constitutional Reform Act 2005 would require a constitutional amendment in the United States, which imposes a significant higher barrier to passage.

Act of Congress [ edit ] Main article: Act of Congress See also: United States Code See also: United States Statutes at Large In the United States, an Act of Congress at the federal level is the equivalent to the British concept of secondary legislation. A statute that delegates authority to promulgate regulations to an agency is called an authorizing statute or delegation of rulemaking authority . All Acts of Congress are recorded in the United States Statutes at Large , and the permanent active ones are reorganized and codified into the United States Code .

Regulations "with the force of law" [ edit ] Main article: United States administrative law See also: Code of Federal Regulations See also: Administrative Procedure Act In the United States, a rule or regulation is a directive promulgated by an executive branch agency of the US federal government pursuant to authority delegated by an Act of Congress—often with the qualifier that it is a rule given "the force of law" by the authorizing statute. Most regulations are codified into the Code of Federal Regulations . These are equivalent to tertiary legislation .

The body of law that governs agencies' exercise of rulemaking powers is called " administrative law ", which derives primarily from the Administrative Procedure Act (APA) and decisions interpreting it. In addition to controlling "quasi-legislative" agency action, the APA also controls "quasi-judicial" actions in which an agency acts analogously to a court , rather than a legislature.

The APA also mandates a 60-day comment and review period before new rules or regulations can come into effect. In addition, regulations have to be issued by a Senate-confirmed executive branch officer (which excludes the President).

Executive Orders and Memos [ edit ] Presidential executive orders and memos would constitute a fourth-level of legislation, below tertiary legislation (i.e. the rules and regulations issued in accordance with the APA by a Senate-confirmed executive branch officer). Memos issued by executive branch officers often have the full force of law. Memos sometimes constitute interpretive guidance of statutes or regulations, and this can have a significant impact on how a law is interpreted and implemented. Memos, unlike regulations, do not go through the 60-day APA process of comment and review, and usually go into effect immediately. Executive orders are issued in a manner similar to memos. The scope and authority of Presidential executive orders under Article Two of the United States Constitution is currently being debated.

[ 18 ] See also [ edit ] Executive order (United States) – Federal administrative instruction issued by the U.S. president Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Rulemaking – Process by which executive branch agencies create regulations Evidence-based legislation – Legislative approach utilizing empirical evidence to draft laws Notes [ edit ] ^ In 2015, Italy's Constitutional Court for the first time involved itself in the core of parliamentary procedure, issuing a judgment (n. 32/2014) protecting the balance of power from the combined effects of maxi-amendments and confidence being asked of it by the government.

[ clarification needed ] [ 4 ] References [ edit ] ^ "What is subordinate legislation?" . Queensland Government . Retrieved 2017-01-24 .

^ "What is secondary legislation?" .

^ a b c Australian Senate. "15. Delegated legislation, scrutiny and disallowance".

Odger's Australian Senate Practice .

^ Buonomo, Giampiero (2015).

"Negoziazione politica e Parlamento... Non solo risate" .

Avanti Online (in Italian). Archived from the original on 2012-08-01 . Retrieved 2016-04-13 .

^ Tuori, Kaarlo (2000).

Julkisoikeuden perusteet (The basics of public law) . Forum Iuris (in Finnish). Helsinki: Helsingin yliopiston oikeustieteellinen tiedekunta (Law Faculty of the University of Helsinki). 5.3 Lainsäädäntövallan delegoiminen (delegation of legislative power), pages 57–59.

ISBN 951-45-9227-1 .

ISSN 1456-842X .

^ "Part III, Chapter II" (PDF) .

Constitución Española (in Spanish). boe.es. 1978 . Retrieved 6 September 2020 .

^ "Sources of European Union law" .

Europa (Web portal) . 28 August 2010.

^ "Types of EU law" .

European Commission - European Commission .

^ a b c European Union (26 October 2012).

"Consolidated version of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, PART SIX - INSTITUTIONAL AND FINANCIAL PROVISIONS, TITLE I - INSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS, Chapter 2 - Legal acts of the Union, adoption procedures and other provisions, Section 1 - The legal acts of the Union, Article 288" .

EUR-Lex . Retrieved 9 February 2016 .

^ "Understanding legislation" .

Government of the United Kingdom . Retrieved 2024-04-02 .

^ "Delegated Legislation" .

Law Teacher . Archived from the original on Nov 24, 2012 . Retrieved 18 September 2012 .

^ "Understanding legislation" .

Legislation.gov.uk . Retrieved 24 March 2025 .

^ Goldsmith, Paul (2017-11-12).

"Why You Should Care How Tertiary Legislation Is Hidden Within The EU Withdrawal Bill" .

HuffPost UK . Retrieved 2022-07-15 .

^ "European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018, General and final provision, Section 20" .

Legislation.gov.uk .

Archived from the original on Oct 27, 2022.

^ "European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018,  Explanatory Notes, EU laws and legislation" .

legislation.gov.uk .

Archived from the original on Jul 30, 2023.

^ Understanding Administrative Law , from Pepperdine University School of Law ^ City of Arlington v. FCC , 569 U.S. 290, 305 n.4 (2013) (emphasis in original).

^ "The Meaning of Article II and 'Executive Power' to Trump" .

This article incorporates text published under the British Open Government Licence : Parliament of the United Kingdom .

"Secondary Legislation" . Retrieved 31 October 2015 .

External links [ edit ] Public general Acts of the Parliament of the United Kingdom Secondary legislation at the Parliament of the United Kingdom NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐lkkcp
Cached time: 20250814221301
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.450 seconds
Real time usage: 0.587 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2284/1000000
Revision size: 20602/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 58387/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4314/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 78422/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.315/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18505540/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  530.108      1 -total
 28.26%  149.816      2 Template:Reflist
 22.65%  120.082     14 Template:Cite_web
 14.57%   77.246      1 Template:Langx
 13.35%   70.777      1 Template:Administrative_law
 10.85%   57.543      1 Template:Short_description
  9.82%   52.031      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  8.99%   47.674      1 Template:Ambox
  6.01%   31.849      2 Template:Pagetype
  4.25%   22.515      3 Template:Annotated_link Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:48423549:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814221301 and revision id 1292722537. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Primary_and_secondary_legislation&oldid=1292722537 " Category : Law by type Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2016 CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 Finnish-language sources (fi) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2015 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Finnish-language text Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Open Government Licence attribution This page was last edited on 28 May 2025, at 13:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Primary and secondary legislation 3 languages Add topic

