Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Differences between percentages and percentage points 2 Related units 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Percentage point 34 languages العربية Català Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Unit for the arithmetic difference of two percentages "Percent point" redirects here; not to be confused with Percent point function .

A percentage point or percent point is the unit for the arithmetic difference between two percentages . For example, moving up from 40 percent to 44 percent is an increase of 4 percentage points (although it is a 10-percent increase in the quantity being measured, if the total amount remains the same).

[ 1 ] In written text, the unit (the percentage point) is usually either written out, [ 2 ] or abbreviated as pp , p.p.

, or %pt.

to avoid confusion with percentage increase or decrease in the actual quantity. After the first occurrence, some writers abbreviate by using just "point" or "points".

Differences between percentages and percentage points [ edit ] Consider the following hypothetical example: In 1980, 50 percent of the population smoked, and in 1990 only 40 percent of the population smoked. One can thus say that from 1980 to 1990, the prevalence of smoking decreased by 10 percentage points (or by 10 percent of the population) or by 20 percent when talking about smokers only – percentages indicate proportionate part of a total.

Percentage-point differences are one way to express a risk or probability . Consider a drug that cures a given disease in 70 percent of all cases, while without the drug, the disease heals spontaneously in only 50 percent of cases. The drug reduces absolute risk by 20 percentage points. Alternatives may be more meaningful to consumers of statistics, such as the reciprocal , also known as the number needed to treat (NNT). In this case, the reciprocal transform of the percentage-point difference would be 1/(20pp) = 1/0.20 = 5. Thus if 5 patients are treated with the drug, one could expect to cure one more patient than would have gotten well without receiving the treatment.

For measurements involving percentages as a unit, such as, growth, yield , or ejection fraction , statistical deviations and related descriptive statistics , including the standard deviation and root-mean-square error , the result should be expressed in units of percentage points instead of percentage.

[ citation needed ] Mistakenly using percentage as the unit for the standard deviation is confusing, since percentage is also used as a unit for the relative standard deviation , i.e. standard deviation divided by average value ( coefficient of variation ).

Related units [ edit ] Percentage (%) 1 part in 100 Per mille (‰) 1 part in 1,000 Permyriad (‱) 1 part in 10,000 Basis point (bp) difference of 1 part in 10,000 Per cent mille (pcm) 1 part in 100,000 Parts-per notation parts per million (ppm) etc.

See also [ edit ] Baker percentage – Mathematical notation in cooking Parts-per notation – Set of units to describe small values Percent point function – Statistical function that defines the quantiles of a probability distribution Per-unit system – In power systems, expression of system quantities as fractions Relative change , also known as relative difference – Comparisons in quantitative sciences References [ edit ] ^ Brechner, Robert (2008).

Contemporary Mathematics for Business and Consumers, Brief Edition . Cengage Learning. p. 190.

ISBN 9781111805500 .

Archived from the original on 18 May 2015 . Retrieved 7 May 2015 .

^ Wickham, Kathleen (2003).

Math Tools for Journalists . Cengage Learning. p. 30.

ISBN 9780972993746 .

Archived from the original on 18 May 2015 . Retrieved 7 May 2015 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Percentage_point&oldid=1299305649 " Categories : Mathematical terminology Probability assessment Units of measurement Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2019 This page was last edited on 7 July 2025, at 16:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Percentage point 34 languages Add topic

