Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Nordic Iron Age 1.2 Classical antiquity 1.3 17th century 1.3.1 Finland 1.3.2 North American colonies 1.4 18th–19th century 1.4.1 Sweden 2 Chemical composition 3 Uses Toggle Uses subsection 3.1 As a wood preservative 3.2 Weatherproofing rope 3.3 Baseball 3.4 Medical 4 In Popular Media 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Pine tar 11 languages Afrikaans Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Norsk bokmål Polski Svenska Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Pine tar Names Other names Pine tar oil, Wood tar oil Identifiers CAS Number 8011-48-1 ChemSpider none ECHA InfoCard 100.029.429 EC Number 232-374-8 KEGG D04807 PubChem CID 17398176 UNII YFH4WC535J Y CompTox Dashboard ( EPA ) DTXSID60897317 Properties Appearance Blackish-brown viscous liquid Density 1.01–1.06 Boiling point 150 to 400 °C (302 to 752 °F; 423 to 673 K) Solubility in water Slightly Solubility alc, chloroform, ether, acetone, glacial acetic acid, fixed/volatile oils, solutions of caustic alkalies Pharmacology Routes of administration Topical Hazards GHS labelling : Pictograms Signal word Warning Hazard statements H317 , H412 NFPA 704 (fire diamond) 1 0 0 Flash point 90 °C (194 °F; 363 K) Except where otherwise noted, data are given for materials in their standard state (at 25 °C [77 °F], 100 kPa).

Infobox references Chemical compound Pine tar is a form of wood tar produced by the high temperature carbonization of pine wood in anoxic conditions (dry distillation or destructive distillation ). The wood is rapidly decomposed by applying heat and pressure in a closed container; the primary resulting products are charcoal and pine tar .

Pine tar consists primarily of aromatic hydrocarbons , tar acids, and tar bases. Components of tar vary according to the pyrolytic process (e.g. method, duration, temperature) and origin of the wood (e.g. age of pine trees, type of soil, and moisture conditions during tree growth). The choice of wood, design of kiln , burning, and collection of the tar can vary. Only pine stumps and roots are used in the traditional production of pine tar.

[ citation needed ] Pine tar has a long history as a wood preservative, as a wood sealant for maritime use, in roofing construction and maintenance, in soaps , and in the treatment of carbuncles and skin diseases , such as psoriasis , eczema , and rosacea . It is used in baseball to enhance the grip of a hitter's bat; it is also sometimes used by pitchers to improve their grip on the ball, in violation of the rules.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] Nordic Iron Age [ edit ] Based on chemical analysis of organic residues, there are strong indications that cone-shaped pits discovered north of Uppsala, Sweden, have been used for pine tar production. Three of the pits have been radiocarbon dated . The oldest dates back to 540–380 BCE, which would make it the world's oldest known, still existing tar production facility. The other dates from 230–390 CE.

[ 2 ] Classical antiquity [ edit ] In his encyclopedic work Natural History ( Latin : Naturalis Historia ) the Roman naturalist and author Pliny the Elder (23/24–79 CE) describes how, in Europe, tar is produced through the destructive distillation of pine wood. The wood was chopped into small pieces (billets) and heated in a furnace. The tar was used "for coating ships and for many other useful purposes." [ 3 ] 17th century [ edit ] Finland [ edit ] Pine tar has long been used in Nordic nations as a preservative for wood which may be exposed to harsh conditions, including outdoor furniture and ship decking and rigging . Tar demand surged in the 17th century as European nations began constructing naval and merchant fleets that required tar and pitch for ship waterproofing and caulking . In Finland, then a part of Sweden, large-scale tar production began in the early 17th century. By the late 17th century, tar was Sweden's third most valuable export commodity.

North American colonies [ edit ] Tar and pitch for maritime use was in such demand that it became an important export for the American colonies, which had extensive pine forests. North Carolinians became known as " Tar Heels ." [ citation needed ] 18th–19th century [ edit ] Sweden [ edit ] In present-day Sweden, large-scale tar production started around 1700. Swedish pine tar was often called "Stockholm tar" [ 4 ] since, for many years, a single company held a royal monopoly on its export out of Stockholm, Sweden .

[ 5 ] It was also known as " Archangel Tar".

[ 6 ] Stockholm tar became synonymous with top-quality tar. Tar production peaked around the mid-1850s and gradually declined thereafter, largely due to new shipbuilding materials reducing the need for tar as a waterproofing agent, and to the decreasing use of hemp rope as sailing ships were phased out.

Chemical composition [ edit ] According to the research paper titled "From Nature to Healing: Development and Evaluation of Topical Cream Loaded with Pine Tar for Cutaneous Wound Repair", the comprehensive GC-MS analysis of pine tar derived from Pinus nigra identified 32 major compounds, accounting for 95.5% of the total composition, and their respective percentages are: [ 7 ] Methyl dehydroabietate : 22.44% Dehydroabietic acid : 14.59% Retene (7-isopropyl-1-methylphenanthrene): 10.08% Isopimaral : 6.18% Pimaral : 4.71% Abietic acid : 4.23% Pimaric acid : 3.59% 18-Norabieta-8,11,13-triene : 3.50% 2,3,5-Trimethylphenanthrene : 1.72% Levoglucosan : 1.44% These compounds primarily consist of resin acids and their derivatives, along with phenanthrene-based hydrocarbons. Such constituents contribute to pine tar's characteristic properties, including its antiseptic and preservative qualities.

Uses [ edit ] Pine tar was used as a preservative on the bottoms of traditional Nordic-style skis until modern synthetic materials replaced wood in their construction. It also helped waxes adhere, which aided such skis’ grip and glide.

Pine tar is widely used as a veterinary care product, [ 8 ] particularly as an antiseptic and hoof care treatment for horses and cattle.

[ 8 ] It also has been used when chickens start pecking the low hen .

[ 9 ] Applying a smear of pine tar on the hens' wound acts as a natural germicidal/antibacterial agent that discourages continued attacks on the affected hen due to its foreign texture.

[ 9 ] Pine tar is used as a softening solvent in the rubber industry, for treating and fabricating construction materials, and in special paints.

As a wood preservative [ edit ] Pine tar is combined with gum turpentine and boiled linseed oil to create a wood preservative. First, a thin coat is applied using a mixture with a greater proportion of turpentine. This allows it to permeate deeper into the oakum and fibre of the wood and lets the tar seep into any pinholes and larger gaps that might be in the planks. The tar weeps out to the exterior and indicates where the boat needs the most attention.

[ how?

] This is followed with a thicker standard mix. Such treatments, while effective, must be continually reapplied.

Weatherproofing rope [ edit ] Traditionally, hemp and other natural fibers were the norm for rope production. Such rope would quickly rot when exposed to rain, and was typically tarred to preserve it. The tar would stain the hands of ship's crews, and British Navy seamen became known as "tars." Baseball [ edit ] George Brett 's pine tar bat at left, from a 2006 exhibit at The Henry Ford in Dearborn, Michigan Pine tar is applied to the handles of baseball bats to improve a batter's grip.

Rule 1.10(c) of the 2002 Official rules of Major League Baseball restricts application to the lower 18 inches of a bat. The most famous example of the rule being applied is the Pine Tar Incident , which occurred during the July 24, 1983 game between the Kansas City Royals and New York Yankees which resulted in a George Brett go-ahead home run in the ninth inning being nullified and the game being protested.

Pine tar is also sometimes used illegally by pitchers to improve their grip on the ball in cold weather. This is not allowed due to a regulation prohibiting the application of any foreign substance to a ball (except grip-improving baseball rubbing mud applied by the umpires).

Medical [ edit ] Pine tar has historically been used for treating skin conditions, usually as an additive in cold process solid soap or lotions.

[ 10 ] Due to the high presence of phenol in the early manufacturing of pine tar, it was deemed carcinogenic. However, now much of the phenol has been removed. Pine tar was banned by the FDA along with many other ingredients categorized as over the counter drugs, due to a lack of evidence of safety and effectiveness for the specific uses named.

[ 11 ] However, clinical tests in Australia in 2017 demonstrated that the greatest risk comes from acute sensitivity for those with severe dermatological conditions, and if it comes in contact with the eyes.

[ 10 ] The number of positive reactions for wood tars was not significantly greater than those for other common allergens. In addition, the concentration of pine tar in topical products available in Australia is up to 2.3%, which is up to four times less than that tested in these studies.

Pine tar has been used to cover peck wounds in captive bird flocks such as chickens, to prevent continued pecking on a wound and cannibalism.

[ 12 ] Pine tar is also used in veterinary medicine as an expectorant and an antiseptic in chronic skin conditions.

[ 13 ] In Popular Media [ edit ] In the award-winning television series Ten Pound Poms depicting immigration from Britain to Australia in the 1950's, a newly betrothed young British man uses pine tar to lighten the skin of his British fiancee's illegitimate mixed-race baby, so that he may pass off the baby as his own (series 2, episode 2).

See also [ edit ] Coal tar Creosote Tarpaulin Tarring and feathering (punishment) References [ edit ] ^ Matthews, Wallace (April 24, 2014).

"Michael Pineda suspended 10 games" .

ESPN.com . Retrieved June 12, 2021 .

^ Björck, Niclas; Appelgren, Katarina (2005).

Boplats och gravar från äldre järnålder i Fyrisåns dalgång [ Settlements and graves from the early Iron Age in the Fyris valley ]. UV GAL, Rapport 2005:5 (in Swedish). Riksantikvarieämbetet, Avdelningen för arkeologiska undersökningar. pp. 16, 26.

^ Pliny the Elder (1855) [Pliny published the first 10 books in 77 CE. The rest was published posthumously by Pliny the Younger].

"XVI.21(11)" .

The Natural History of Pliny: Translated, with Copious Notes and Illustrations . Vol. III. Translated by Bostock, John; Riley, Henry Thomas. Henry G. Bohn.

^ "Stockholm Tar" . MedicAnimal.com. Archived from the original on 19 April 2014 . Retrieved 23 September 2012 .

^ Theodore P. Kaye.

"Pine Tar; History And Uses" . San Francisco Maritime Park Association . Retrieved 2010-08-01 .

^ Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Tar" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 26 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 414: see second para.

Wood Tar.—Wood tar, known also as Stockholm and as Archangel tar, is....." ^ Petrovic, Branislav; Petrovic, Anica; Bijelic, Katarina; Stanisic, Dragana; Mitrovic, Slobodanka; Jakovljevic, Vladimir; Bolevich, Sergej; Glisovic Jovanovic, Ivana; Bradic, Jovana (2024-06-26).

"From Nature to Healing: Development and Evaluation of Topical Cream Loaded with Pine Tar for Cutaneous Wound Repair" .

Pharmaceutics .

16 (7). MDPI AG: 859.

doi : 10.3390/pharmaceutics16070859 .

ISSN 1999-4923 .

PMC 11279966 .

^ a b Wickstrom, Mark.

"Phenols and Related Compounds" .

The Merck Veterinary Manual . Merck Manuals . Retrieved 16 April 2015 .

^ a b Laura Bryant.

Chickens: A Step-by-Step Guide to Raising and Keeping Hens . Cedar Fort, Inc.

ISBN 9781462103409 . Retrieved 2018-02-26 .

^ a b Barnes, Tanya M.; Greive, Kerryn A. (2017).

"Topical pine tar: History, properties and use as a treatment for common skin conditions" .

Australasian Journal of Dermatology .

58 (2): 80– 85.

doi : 10.1111/ajd.12427 .

ISSN 1440-0960 .

PMC 5434829 .

PMID 26790564 .

^ Drug products containing certain active ingredients offered over-the-counter (OTC) for certain uses. 14CFR310.545 ^ Gail Damerow (1 January 2010).

Guide to Raising Chickens . Storey Publishing, LLC. p.

121 .

ISBN 978-1-60342-469-1 .

^ Merck Index , 11th Edition, 7417 . p. 1182 "C&L Inventory" .

echa.europa.eu .

External links [ edit ] Look up pine tar in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

History of Pine Tar v t e Non-timber forest products Animal products Furs Honey pine Wild game Berries / tree fruit Banana Bilberry Binukaw Blackberry Blueberry Breadfruit Cocoa bean Coconut Durian Gambooge Huckleberry Jackfruit Juniper berry Lingonberry Raspberry Strawberry Tamarind Woodland strawberry Edible plants / roots Betel Fiddlehead ferns Heart of palm Mahuwa flowers Sago palm queen Sassafras filé powder root beer Saw palmetto Wild ginseng Wild onions Bear garlic Canada onion Crow garlic Twincrest onion Pacific mountain onion Ramps Mushrooms Bare-toothed russula Bay bolete Birch bolete Cep Chanterelle Honey mushroom Lingzhi (reishi) Matsutake Meadow mushroom Morel Oyster mushroom Parasol mushroom Red cap Saffron milk cap Slippery jack Truffle Yellow knight Nuts spices Allspice Areca nut Bay leaf Black pepper Brazil nut Cinnamon Clove Hazelnut Malva nut Nutmeg Pine nut Vanilla Oil waxes Allanblackia Babassu Bacuri Candlenut Capuacu Carnauba Chaulmoogra ( Hydnocarpus wightiana ) Cocoa butter Eucalyptol Eucalyptus Illipe Japan wax Kokum Kombo Kpangnan Kusum Mafura Mahua Mango butter Murumuru Nagkesar Palm ( kernel ) Phulwara Pilu Pongamia Sal-seed ( Shorea robusta ) Sandalwood Shea butter Tamanu Tea-seed Tea-tree Tucuma Ucuuba Vateria indica Resins Benzoin Birch tar Camphor Creosote Frankincense Gamboge Kauri Lacquer Mastic Myrrh Pine tar Pitch Rosin Turpentine Varnish Sap / gum / etc.

Birch syrup Chicle chewing gum Coconut sugar Date sugar Fruit syrup Gum arabic Gutta-percha Kino Latex Maple sugar Maple syrup Palm sugar Palm wine akpeteshie ogogoro Rubber Spruce gum Other Amadou Bamboo edible musical instruments textiles Birch bark Birch beer Cork Ferns Forage Gambier Moss Natural dyes henna Peat Quinine Rattan Shellac Tanbark tannin Tendu leaves Thatching Vegetable ivory Willow bark Related Dehesa (Iberian agroforestry) Forest farming / gardening Honey hunting Indian forest produce Mushroom hunting Naval stores Resin extraction Rubber tapping Wildcrafting Category Commons v t e Wood products Lumber / timber Batten Beam Bressummer CLS Cruck Flitch beam Flooring Joist Lath Log building Log cabin Log house Molding Panelling Plank Plate Post Purlin Rafter Railroad ties Reclaimed Shingle Siding Sill Stud Timber truss Treenail Truss Utility pole Engineered wood Cross-laminated timber Glued laminated timber veneer LVL parallel strand I-joist Fiberboard hardboard Masonite MDF Oriented strand board Oriented structural straw board Particle board Plywood Structural insulated panel Wood–plastic composite lumber Fuelwood Charcoal biochar Firelog Firewood Pellet fuel Wood fuel Fibers Cardboard Corrugated fiberboard Paper Paperboard Pulp Pulpwood Rayon Derivatives Birch-tar Cellulose nano Hemicellulose Cellulosic ethanol Dyes Lignin Liquid smoke Lye Methanol Pyroligneous acid Pine tar Pitch Sandalwood oil Tannin Wood gas By-products Barkdust Black liquor Ramial chipped wood Sawdust Tall oil Wood flour Wood wool Woodchips Historical Axe ties Bavin (wood) Billet (wood) Clapboard Dugout canoe Potash Sawdust brandy Split-rail fence Tanbark Timber framing Wooden masts See also Biomass Certified wood Destructive distillation Dry distillation Engineered bamboo Forestry Green building and wood List of woods Mulch Non-timber forest products Natural building Papermaking Reclaimed lumber Timber recycling Wood drying Wood preservation Wood processing Woodworking Yakisugi Category Commons WikiProject Forestry Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pine_tar&oldid=1297043050 " Categories : Wood products Food additives Non-timber forest products Baseball bats Maritime culture Hidden categories: CS1 Swedish-language sources (sv) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Chemicals that do not have a ChemSpider ID assigned Articles without InChI source Articles without EBI source ECHA InfoCard ID from Wikidata Chembox having GHS data Articles containing unverified chemical infoboxes Chembox image size set Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2018 Articles containing Latin-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2021 This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 21:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pine tar 11 languages Add topic

