Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition Toggle Definition subsection 1.1 Measurement of accumulation 2 Demand-led growth models 3 Marxist concept 4 Effects 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Capital accumulation 26 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Català Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 لۊری شومالی Latina Nederlands 日本語 پښتو Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dynamic that motivates pursuit of profit, central tenet of capitalism "Accumulation of capital" redirects here. For the book by Rosa Luxemburg, see The Accumulation of Capital .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( August 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( December 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of the behavioral sciences Economics Outline Index Glossary Economists Principles of Economics Tools and methodology Economic theory Mathematical modeling Game theory Rational choice Cognitive science ( Behavioral ) Economic equilibrium Empirical methods Experimental National accounts Econometrics Time series Spatial Prescriptive and policy Welfare analysis Social choice theory Rational choice theory Cost–benefit analysis Branches and subfields Applied Econometrics International Heterodox Micro Macro Mainstream Mathematical Mech. design Methodology Political Industrial org.

Market design Applications Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Economics portal Society portal v t e Capital accumulation is the dynamic that motivates the pursuit of profit , involving the investment of money or any financial asset with the goal of increasing the initial monetary value of said asset as a financial return whether in the form of profit , rent , interest , royalties or capital gains . The goal of accumulation of capital is to create new fixed capital and working capital , broaden and modernize the existing ones, grow the material basis of social-cultural activities, as well as constituting the necessary resource for reserve and insurance.

[ 1 ] The process of capital accumulation forms the basis of capitalism , and is one of the defining characteristics of a capitalist economic system .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Definition [ edit ] Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e In economics and accounting , capital accumulation is often equated with investment of profit income or savings, especially in real capital goods . The concentration and centralisation of capital are two of the results of such accumulation (see below).

Capital accumulation refers ordinarily to: Real investment in tangible means of production, such as acquisitions, research and development, etc. that can increase the capital flow.

Investment in financial assets represented on paper, yielding profit, interest, rent, royalties , fees or capital gains .

Investment in non-productive physical assets such as residential real estate or works of art that appreciate in value.

and by extension to: Human capital , i.e., new education and training increasing the skills of the (potential) labour force which can increase earnings from work.

Social capital , i.e. the wealth and productive capacity that the people in a society hold in common, rather than as individuals or corporations.

Both non-financial and financial capital accumulation is usually needed for economic growth , since additional production usually requires additional funds to enlarge the scale of production. Smarter and more productive organization of production can also increase production without increased capital. Capital can be created without increased investment by inventions or improved organization that increase productivity, discoveries of new assets (oil, gold, minerals, etc.), the sale of property, etc.

In modern macroeconomics and econometrics the term capital formation is often used in preference to "accumulation", though the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) refers nowadays to "accumulation". The term is occasionally used in national accounts .

Measurement of accumulation [ edit ] Accumulation can be measured as the monetary value of investments, the amount of income that is reinvested, or as the change in the value of assets owned (the increase in the value of the capital stock). Using company balance sheets , tax data and direct surveys as a basis, government statisticians estimate total investments and assets for the purpose of national accounts , national balance of payments and flow of funds statistics. Usually, the reserve banks and the Treasury provide interpretations and analysis of this data . Standard indicators include capital formation , gross fixed capital formation , fixed capital , household asset wealth, and foreign direct investment .

Demand-led growth models [ edit ] In macroeconomics , following the Harrod–Domar model , the savings ratio ( s {\displaystyle s} ) and the capital coefficient ( k {\displaystyle k} ) are regarded as critical factors for accumulation and growth, assuming that all saving is used to finance fixed investment . The rate of growth of the real stock of fixed capital ( K {\displaystyle K} ) is: Δ Δ K K = Δ Δ K Y K Y = s k {\displaystyle {{\Delta K} \over K}={{{\Delta K} \over Y} \over {K \over Y}}={s \over k}} where Y {\displaystyle Y} is the real national income. If the capital- output ratio or capital coefficient ( k = K Y {\displaystyle k={K \over Y}} ) is constant, the rate of growth of Y {\displaystyle Y} is equal to the rate of growth of K {\displaystyle K} . This is determined by s {\displaystyle s} (the ratio of net fixed investment or saving to Y {\displaystyle Y} ) and k {\displaystyle k} .

A country might, for example, save and invest 12% of its national income , and then if the capital coefficient is 4:1 (i.e. $4 billion must be invested to increase the national income by 1 billion) the rate of growth of the national income might be 3% annually. However, as Keynesian economics points out, savings do not automatically mean investment (as liquid funds may be hoarded for example). Investment may also not be investment in fixed capital (see above).

Assuming that the turnover of total production capital invested remains constant, the proportion of total investment which just maintains the stock of total capital, rather than enlarging it, will typically increase as the total stock increases. The growth rate of incomes and net new investments must then also increase, in order to accelerate the growth of the capital stock. Simply put, the bigger capital grows, the more capital it takes to keep it growing and the more markets must expand.

The Harrodian model has a problem of unstable static equilibrium, since if the growth rate is not equal to the Harrodian warranted rate, the production will tend to extreme points (infinite or zero production).

[ 4 ] The Neo-Kaleckians models do not suffer from the Harrodian instability but fails to deliver a convergence dynamic of the effective capacity utilization to the planned capacity utilization.

[ 5 ] For its turn, the model of the Sraffian Supermultiplier grants a static stable equilibrium and a convergence to the planned capacity utilization.

[ 6 ] The Sraffian Supermultiplier model diverges from the Harrodian model since it takes the investment as induced and not as autonomous. The autonomous components in this model are the Autonomous Non-Capacity Creating Expenditures, such as exports, credit led consumption and public spending. The growth rate of these expenditures determines the long run rate of capital accumulation and product growth.

Marxist concept [ edit ] See also: Marxian economics Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Karl Marx borrowed the idea of capital accumulation or the concentration of capital from early socialist writers such as Charles Fourier , Louis Blanc , Victor Considerant , and Constantin Pecqueur .

[ 7 ] In Marx's critique of political economy , capital accumulation is the operation whereby profits are reinvested into the economy, increasing the total quantity of capital. Capital was understood by Marx to be expanding value, that is, in other terms, as a sum of capital, usually expressed in money , that is transformed through human labor into a larger value and extracted as profits. Here, capital is defined essentially as economic or commercial asset value that is used by capitalists to obtain additional value ( surplus-value ). This requires property relations which enable objects of value to be appropriated and owned , and trading rights to be established. Marx argued that capital has the tendency for concentration and centralization in the hands of richest capitalists [ 8 ] According to Marxism during periods of stagnation in capitalism, the accumulation process is increasingly oriented towards investment on military and security forces, real estate, financial speculation, and luxury consumption. In that case, income from value-adding production will decline in favour of interest, rent and tax income, with as a corollary an increase in the level of permanent unemployment. Capital accumulation of the means of production in Marxist thought leads to the formation of the bourgeoisie .

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] "Accumulation of capital" sometimes also refers in Marxist writings to the reproduction of capitalist social relations (institutions) on a larger scale over time, i.e., the expansion of the size of the proletariat and of the wealth owned by the bourgeoisie. In the first volume of Das Kapital Marx had illustrated this idea with reference to Edward Gibbon Wakefield 's theory of colonisation, [ 12 ] and further refers to the "fetishism of capital" reaching its highest point with interest-bearing capital , because of how capital appeared to grow almost of its own accord.

[ 13 ] The Marxist analysis of capital accumulation and the development of capitalism identifies systemic issues with the process that arise with expansion of the productive forces . A crisis of overaccumulation of capital occurs when the rate of profit is greater than the rate of new profitable investment outlets in the economy, arising from increasing productivity from a rising organic composition of capital (higher capital input to labor input ratio). This depresses the wage bill, leading to stagnant wages and high rates of unemployment for the working class while excess profits search for new profitable investment opportunities. Marx believed that this cyclical process would be the fundamental cause for the dissolution of capitalism and its replacement by socialism , which would operate according to a different economic dynamic.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Anarchists hold that the state always maintains a form of capital accumulation to the elite, even in self proclaimed socialist states and that for true equality the state should be abolished.

[ 16 ] Effects [ edit ] The effects of wealth accumulation results in increased savings for the individual. If economic growth is shared unevenly between different groups of the population wealth inequality emerges. Extreme wealth inequality leads to and economical power by the working class lowering, which can result in oligarchy , in which super rich individuals hold most power and money in society.

[ 17 ] See also [ edit ] Business cycle Capitalist mode of production (Marxist theory) Charity (practice) Commodity fetishism Constant purchasing power accounting Culture of capitalism Dual-sector model History of capitalist theory Internal contradictions of capital accumulation Investment-specific technological progress Matthew effect Organic crisis Preferential attachment Prices of production Primitive socialist accumulation Productive and unproductive labour Proletarianization Property income Relations of production Return on capital Simple commodity production Social reproduction Surplus value The rich get richer and the poor get poorer Unearned income Unequal exchange Value investing References [ edit ] ^ Caves, R. W. (2004).

Encyclopedia of the City . Routledge. p. 65.

^ Unbounded Organization and the Future of Socialism , by Howard Richards. 2013. Education as Change, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 229-242: "Capital accumulation is both a dynamic and a logic. It is a dynamic that motivates human action, namely the pursuit of profit. It is a logic that defines rational decision-making, namely optimizing profits by maximizing revenue from sales while minimizing costs...The case is better understood if one takes into account that accumulation is the mainspring (according to Marx, the invariable accompaniment and virtually the definition) of capitalism." ^ Capital , Encyclopedia on Marxists.org: http://marxists.org/glossary/terms/c/a.htm#capital ^ Serrano, F., Freitas, F., & Bhering, G. The Trouble with Harrod: the fundamental instability of the warranted rate in the light of the Sraffian Supermultiplier.

^ Fagundes, L., & Freitas, F. (2017). The Role of Autonomous Non-Capacity Creating Expenditures in Recent Kaleckian Growth Models: An Assessment from the Perspective of the Sraffian Supermultiplier Model.

^ Serrano, F (1995).

"Long period effective demand and the Sraffian supermultiplier" .

Contributions to Political Economy .

14 (1): 67– 90.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordjournals.cpe.a035642 .

^ William James Blake (1939).

An American Looks at Karl Marx . Cordon Company. p. 622.

^ "Economic Manuscripts: Capital Vol. I - Chapter Twenty-Five" .

www.marxists.org .

^ "A capital question: How did Marx identify accumulation of capital?" . October 31, 2023.

^ Wright, Erik Olin (October 11, 1975). "Alternative Perspectives in Marxist Theory of Accumulation and Crisis".

Insurgent Sociologist .

6 (1): 5– 39.

doi : 10.1177/089692057500600102 .

S2CID 143970546 .

^ Bonefeld, Werner (2023).

"Capitalist accumulation and its historical foundation and logical premise: On primitive accumulation" .

Critique .

51 : 197– 215.

doi : 10.1080/03017605.2023.2267281 .

^ Marx, Karl (1867).

"The Modern Theory of Colonisation" .

Das Kapital . Vol. I.

^ Marx, Karl (1894).

"Externalization of the Relations of Capital in the Form of Interest-Bearing Capital" .

Das Kapital . Vol. III.

^ Yunker, James (1977). "The Social Dividend Under Market Socialism".

Annals of Public and Cooperative Economics .

48 (1): 93– 133.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-8292.1977.tb01728.x .

Nevertheless, while Marx employed the surplus labor value theory to undermine the moral foundations of capitalism, it was, in his view, neither to be the instrumentality of capitalist collapse, nor was it the primary reason for the desirability of the abrogation of capitalism...Surplus value was seen as providing the fuel for the cyclical engine and therefore as the fundamental cause of the impending dissolution of capitalism.

^ Nikolaos, Chatzarakis; Tsaliki, Persefoni (2021-06-01).

"The dynamics of capital accumulation in Marx and Solow" .

Structural Change and Economic Dynamics .

57 : 148– 158.

doi : 10.1016/j.strueco.2021.03.003 .

ISSN 0954-349X .

^ Clarke, Simon (January 13, 2010).

"The Global Accumulation of Capital and the Periodisation of the Capitalist State Form" .

S2CID 195060852 – via Semantic Scholar.

^ "American oligarchs: Report details how the wealthiest US dynasties hoard their fortunes – and accelerate inequality - ICIJ" . July 6, 2021.

IPS, a think tank focused on foreign and domestic policy, human rights and economics, notes numerous negative consequences of dynastic wealth accumulation. Firstly, dynasties wield serious political and philanthropic power that can be used to pursue their own agendas. Additionally, the IPS report contends that these dynasties do more than hoard wealth across generations; they grow it. For example, ISP cites the cases of the Mars candy and Estée Lauder cosmetics dynasties, whose wealth multiplied by billions between 1983 and 2020. The staggering rate of wealth growth for the country's top dynastic families only accelerated during the coronavirus pandemic, IPS found.

Further reading [ edit ] Michel Aglietta , A Theory of Capitalist Regulation .

Elmar Altvater , Gesellschaftliche Produktion und ökonomische Rationalität; Externe Effekte und zentrale Planung im Wirtschaftssystem des Sozialismus .

Samir Amin , Accumulation on a World Scale .

Philip Armstrong, Andrew Glyn and John Harrison, Capitalism since World War II .

Das Kapital : Vol. 1 , Part 7 and Vol. 2 , Part 3.'s Environmental Crisis: An Inquiry into the Limits of National Development . Armonk: M.E. Sharpe, 1992.

Hernando de Soto , The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails Everywhere Else .

Manuel G. Velasquez, Business Ethics: Concepts and Cases.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Capital accumulation .

Growth, Accumulation, Crisis: With New Macroeconomic Data for Sweden 1800-2000 by Rodney Edvinsson David Harvey , Reading Marx's Capital , Reading Marx’s Capital - Class 11, Chapter 25, The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation (video lecture) v t e Globalization Journals Outline Studies Aspects Alter-globalization Anti-globalization movement Cultural globalization Deglobalization Democratic globalization Economic globalization Economic integration Complete Environmental globalization Financial integration Fiscal union Global citizenship education Global financial system Global governance Global health Global migration Global politics Global workforce Globality Harmonisation of law History of archaic early modern Military globalization Political globalization Trade bloc Trade globalization Issues Global Balance of trade Capital outflow Capital flight Climate change Climate justice Criticisms Disease COVID-19 pandemic Digital divide Labor arbitrage Monetary sovereignty Multilingualism Population Tariff engineering Tax havens Offshore financial centres Tax inversions Water crisis Other Brain drain reverse Care drain Development aid Economic inequality Endangered languages Fair trade Forced displacement Human rights Illicit financial flows Imperialism academic cultural linguistic media scientific social Invasive species Investor-state disputes McDonaldization New international division of labour North–South divide Offshoring Race to the bottom pollution havens Reverse discrimination Transnational crime Westernization World war Theories Capital accumulation Dependency Development Earth system Fiscal localism Modernization ecological history of Primitive accumulation Social change World history World-systems Notable scholars Economics David Autor Richard Baldwin Ravi Batra Jagdish Bhagwati Robert Brenner Jayati Ghosh Michael Hudson Branko Milanović Kevin O'Rourke Thomas Piketty Dani Rodrik Jeffrey Sachs Amartya Sen Joseph Stiglitz Political economy Samir Amin Giovanni Arrighi Robert W. Cox Andre Gunder Frank Stephen Gill Barry K. Gills Peter Gowan David Harvey Ronen Palan Susan Strange Robert Wade Politics/ sociology Arjun Appadurai Daniele Archibugi K. Anthony Appiah Ulrich Beck Walden Bello Jean Baudrillard Zygmunt Bauman Manuel Castells Christopher Chase-Dunn Alfred Crosby Nancy Fraser Susan George Anthony Giddens Michael Hardt David Held Paul Hirst L. H. M. Ling Antonio Negri George Ritzer Saskia Sassen John Urry Immanuel Wallerstein Non–academic Noam Chomsky Thomas Friedman Naomi Klein John R. Saul Vandana Shiva Category Business portal v t e High wealth Concepts Capital accumulation Overaccumulation Economic inequality Wealth distribution Income distribution Consumption distribution History of economic inequality International inequality Elite Oligarchy Overclass Plutocracy Plutonomy Broligarchy Primitive accumulation of capital Upper class Nouveau riche (new money) Vieux riche (old money) Luxury goods Veblen goods Conspicuous consumption Conspicuous leisure Luxury beliefs People Billionaire Captain of industry High-net-worth individual Magnate Business Millionaire Oligarch Business Russian Ukrainian Robber baron Wealth Concentration Distribution Effect Geography Inheritance Dynastic Estate planning Management National Paper Religion Tax Lists People Forbes list of billionaires List of centibillionaires Female billionaires Richest royals Wealthiest Americans Wealthiest families Organizations Largest companies by revenue Largest corporate profits and losses Largest corporations by market capitalization Largest financial services companies by revenue Largest manufacturing companies by revenue Largest software companies by revenue Largest technology companies by revenue Religious organizations Charities Philanthropists Universities Endowment size Number of billionaire alumni Other Cities by number of billionaires Countries by number of billionaires Countries by total wealth Countries by wealth inequality Wealth inequality in the United States Income inequality in the United States Most expensive items by category Wealthiest animals Related Diseases of affluence Affluenza Acquired situational narcissism Argumentum ad crumenam Prosperity theology Philanthropy Gospel of Wealth The Giving Pledge Philanthrocapitalism Venture philanthropy Sayings The rich get richer and the poor get poorer Socialism for the rich and capitalism for the poor Too big to fail Media Das Kapital Plutus Greek god of wealth Superclass List The Theory of the Leisure Class Wealth The Wealth of Nations Category by country Authority control databases National United States Japan Czech Republic Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐744bd5f668‐bf6wt
Cached time: 20250812123854
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.692 seconds
Real time usage: 0.946 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2918/1000000
Revision size: 18927/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 247280/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 14293/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 128778/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.382/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7811213/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  619.371      1 -total
 26.84%  166.255      3 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 26.38%  163.361      1 Template:Reflist
 21.09%  130.612      1 Template:Economics_sidebar
 14.21%   88.003      4 Template:Cite_book
 10.59%   65.611      7 Template:Navbox
 10.06%   62.304      1 Template:Short_description
  9.75%   60.377      1 Template:Multiple_issues
  8.78%   54.364      2 Template:Hlist
  7.63%   47.271      1 Template:Globalization Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:845928:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812123854 and revision id 1295101151. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Capital_accumulation&oldid=1295101151 " Categories : Capital (economics) Economic growth Marxian economics Capitalism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from August 2017 All articles that may contain original research Wikipedia introduction cleanup from December 2017 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from December 2017 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 11 June 2025, at 18:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Capital accumulation 26 languages Add topic

