Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Motivation 3 Examples 4 Relationship to prime models 5 Notes 6 References Toggle the table of contents Saturated model 2 languages Deutsch 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Model for mathematical theories This article is about the use in mathematics. For the use in statistics, see structural equation modeling .

This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( January 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In mathematical logic , and particularly in its subfield model theory , a saturated model M is one that realizes as many complete types as may be "reasonably expected" given its size.  For example, an ultrapower model of the hyperreals is ℵ ℵ 1 {\displaystyle \aleph _{1}} -saturated, meaning that every descending nested sequence of internal sets has a nonempty intersection.

[ 1 ] Definition [ edit ] Let κ be a finite or infinite cardinal number and M a model in some first-order language .  Then M is called κ -saturated if  for all subsets A ⊆ M of cardinality strictly less than κ , the model M realizes all complete types over A . The model M is called saturated if  it is | M |-saturated where | M | denotes the cardinality of M . That is, it realizes all complete types over sets of parameters of size less than | M |. According to some authors, a model M is called countably saturated if  it is ℵ ℵ 1 {\displaystyle \aleph _{1}} -saturated; that is, it realizes all complete types over countable sets of parameters.

[ 2 ] According to others, it is countably saturated if it is countable and saturated.

[ 3 ] Motivation [ edit ] The seemingly more intuitive notion—that all complete types of the language are realized—turns out to be too weak (and is appropriately named weak saturation , which is the same as 1-saturation).  The difference lies in the fact that many structures contain elements that are not definable (for example, any transcendental element of R is, by definition of the word, not definable in the language of fields ).  However, they still form a part of the structure, so we need types to describe relationships with them.  Thus we allow sets of parameters from the structure in our definition of types.  This argument allows us to discuss specific features of the model that we may otherwise miss—for example, a bound on a specific increasing sequence c n can be expressed as realizing the type { x ≥ c n : n ∈ ω}, which uses countably many parameters.  If the sequence is not definable, this fact about the structure cannot be described using the base language, so a weakly saturated structure may not bound the sequence, while an ℵ 1 -saturated structure will.

The reason we only require parameter sets that are strictly smaller than the model is trivial: without this restriction, no infinite model is saturated.  Consider a model M , and the type { x ≠ m : m ∈ M }.

Each finite subset of this type is realized in the (infinite) model M , so by compactness it is consistent with M , but is trivially not realized.  Any definition that is universally unsatisfied is useless; hence the restriction.

Examples [ edit ] Saturated models exist for certain theories and cardinalities: ( Q , <)—the set of rational numbers with their usual ordering—is saturated.  Intuitively, this is because any type consistent with the theory is implied by the order type; that is, the order the variables come in tells you everything there is to know about their role in the structure.

( R , <)—the set of real numbers with their usual ordering—is not saturated.  For example, take the type (in one variable x ) that contains the formula x > − − 1 n {\displaystyle \textstyle {x>-{\frac {1}{n}}}} for every natural number n , as well as the formula x < 0 {\displaystyle \textstyle {x<0}} .  This type uses ω different parameters from R .  Every finite subset of the type is realized on R by some real x , so by compactness the type is consistent with the structure, but it is not realized, as that would imply an upper bound to the sequence −1/ n that is less than 0 (its least upper bound).  Thus ( R ,<) is not ω 1 -saturated, and not saturated.  However, it is ω-saturated, for essentially the same reason as Q —every finite type is given by the order type, which if consistent, is always realized, because of the density of the order.

A dense totally ordered set without endpoints is a η α set if and only if it is ℵ α -saturated.

The countable random graph , with the only non-logical symbol being the edge existence relation, is also saturated, because any complete type is isolated (implied) by the finite subgraph consisting of the variables and parameters used to define the type.

Both the theory of Q and the theory of the countable random graph can be shown to be ω-categorical through the back-and-forth method .  This can be generalized as follows: the unique model of cardinality κ of a countable κ -categorical theory is saturated.

However, the statement that every model has a saturated elementary extension is not provable in ZFC .  In fact, this statement is equivalent to [ citation needed ] the existence of a proper class of cardinals κ such that κ < κ = κ .  The latter identity is equivalent to κ = λ + = 2 λ for some λ , or κ is strongly inaccessible .

Relationship to prime models [ edit ] The notion of saturated model is dual to the notion of prime model in the following way: let T be a countable theory in a first-order language (that is, a set of mutually consistent sentences in that language) and let P be a prime model of T . Then P admits an elementary embedding into any other model of T . The equivalent notion for saturated models is that any "reasonably small" model of T is elementarily embedded in a saturated model, where "reasonably small" means cardinality no larger than that of the model in which it is to be embedded.  Any saturated model is also homogeneous .  However, while for countable theories there is a unique prime model, saturated models are necessarily specific to a particular cardinality.  Given certain set-theoretic assumptions, saturated models (albeit of very large cardinality) exist for arbitrary theories.  For λ - stable theories, saturated models of cardinality λ exist.

Notes [ edit ] ^ Goldblatt 1998 ^ Morley, Michael (1963).

"On theories categorical in uncountable powers" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

49 (2): 213– 216.

Bibcode : 1963PNAS...49..213M .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.49.2.213 .

PMC 299780 .

PMID 16591050 .

^ Chang and Keisler 1990 References [ edit ] Chang, C. C.

; Keisler, H. J.

Model theory. Third edition. Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, 73. North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam, 1990. xvi+650 pp.

ISBN 0-444-88054-2 R. Goldblatt (1998). Lectures on the hyperreals. An introduction to nonstandard analysis. Springer.

Marker, David (2002).

Model Theory: An Introduction .  New York: Springer-Verlag.

ISBN 0-387-98760-6 Poizat, Bruno; (translation: Klein, Moses) (2000), A Course in Model Theory , New York: Springer-Verlag.

ISBN 0-387-98655-3 Sacks, Gerald E.

(1972), Saturated model theory , W. A. Benjamin, Inc., Reading, Mass., MR 0398817 v t e Mathematical logic General Axiom list Cardinality First-order logic Formal proof Formal semantics Foundations of mathematics Information theory Lemma Logical consequence Model Theorem Theory Type theory Theorems ( list ) and paradoxes Gödel's completeness and incompleteness theorems Tarski's undefinability Banach–Tarski paradox Cantor's theorem, paradox and diagonal argument Compactness Halting problem Lindström's Löwenheim–Skolem Russell's paradox Logics Traditional Classical logic Logical truth Tautology Proposition Inference Logical equivalence Consistency Equiconsistency Argument Soundness Validity Syllogism Square of opposition Venn diagram Propositional Boolean algebra Boolean functions Logical connectives Propositional calculus Propositional formula Truth tables Many-valued logic 3 finite ∞ Predicate First-order list Second-order Monadic Higher-order Fixed-point Free Quantifiers Predicate Monadic predicate calculus Set theory Set hereditary Class ( Ur- ) Element Ordinal number Extensionality Forcing Relation equivalence partition Set operations: intersection union complement Cartesian product power set identities Types of sets Countable Uncountable Empty Inhabited Singleton Finite Infinite Transitive Ultrafilter Recursive Fuzzy Universal Universe constructible Grothendieck Von Neumann Maps and cardinality Function / Map domain codomain image In / Sur / Bi -jection Schröder–Bernstein theorem Isomorphism Gödel numbering Enumeration Large cardinal inaccessible Aleph number Operation binary Set theories Zermelo–Fraenkel axiom of choice continuum hypothesis General Kripke–Platek Morse–Kelley Naive New Foundations Tarski–Grothendieck Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Ackermann Constructive Formal systems ( list ), language and syntax Alphabet Arity Automata Axiom schema Expression ground Extension by definition conservative Relation Formation rule Grammar Formula atomic closed ground open Free/bound variable Language Metalanguage Logical connective ¬ ∨ ∧ → ↔ = Predicate functional variable propositional variable Proof Quantifier ∃ !

∀ rank Sentence atomic spectrum Signature String Substitution Symbol function logical/constant non-logical variable Term Theory list Example axiomatic systems ( list ) of arithmetic : Peano second-order elementary function primitive recursive Robinson Skolem of the real numbers Tarski's axiomatization of Boolean algebras canonical minimal axioms of geometry : Euclidean : Elements Hilbert's Tarski's non-Euclidean Principia Mathematica Proof theory Formal proof Natural deduction Logical consequence Rule of inference Sequent calculus Theorem Systems axiomatic deductive Hilbert list Complete theory Independence ( from ZFC ) Proof of impossibility Ordinal analysis Reverse mathematics Self-verifying theories Model theory Interpretation function of models Model equivalence finite saturated spectrum submodel Non-standard model of arithmetic Diagram elementary Categorical theory Model complete theory Satisfiability Semantics of logic Strength Theories of truth semantic Tarski's Kripke's T-schema Transfer principle Truth predicate Truth value Type Ultraproduct Validity Computability theory Church encoding Church–Turing thesis Computably enumerable Computable function Computable set Decision problem decidable undecidable P NP P versus NP problem Kolmogorov complexity Lambda calculus Primitive recursive function Recursion Recursive set Turing machine Type theory Related Abstract logic Algebraic logic Automated theorem proving Category theory Concrete / Abstract category Category of sets History of logic History of mathematical logic timeline Logicism Mathematical object Philosophy of mathematics Supertask Mathematics portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Saturated_model&oldid=1296887545 " Categories : Mathematical logic Model theory Nonstandard analysis Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from January 2010 All articles lacking in-text citations All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2018 This page was last edited on 22 June 2025, at 23:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Saturated model 2 languages Add topic

