Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works 3 Philosophy 4 Notes 5 References Toggle the table of contents Aristocles of Messene 11 languages Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Íslenska Italiano Magyar Русский Suomi 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1st-century AD Greek philosopher Aristocles of Messene Born c.

1st century AD Messene Philosophical work Era Ancient Roman philosophy School Peripatetic Main interests Philosophy of history Notable works A history of philosophy, in 10 books Notable ideas Five historical meanings of wisdom Aristocles of Messene ( / ə ˈ r ɪ s t ə ˌ k l iː z / ; Ancient Greek : Ἀριστοκλῆς ὁ Μεσσήνιος ), in Sicily , [ 1 ] was a Peripatetic philosopher, who probably lived in the 1st century AD.

[ 2 ] Life [ edit ] Little is known about the life of Aristocles. He came from Messene in Sicily (Messana, now Messina), not from the then far better known city of Messene in the Peloponnese. There are some indications that he stayed in Alexandria .

[ 3 ] In earlier research he was wrongly considered to be the teacher of the famous Peripatetic Alexander of Aphrodisias .

[ 4 ] It was erroneously believed that the philosopher Aristotle of Mytilene whom Alexander mentions as his teacher was actually Aristocles and that the name "Aristotle" was a misspelling. This assumption led to a late dating of Aristocles' lifetime (second half of the 2nd century). In more recent research however, it is assumed that he lived around the turn of the millennium. This is supported both by linguistic evidence and by the fact that he refers to the work of the philosopher Aenesidemus , dating to the first half of the 1st century B.C. in a way the suggests that that work had been published recently.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Works [ edit ] According to the Suda [ 1 ] and Eudokia , Aristocles wrote several works: Πότερον σπουδαιότερος Ὅμηρος ἢ Πλάτων – Whether Homer or Plato is more Worthy .

Τέχναι ῥητορικαί – Arts of Rhetoric .

A work on the god Serapis .

A work on Ethics, in nine books.

A work on Philosophy, in ten books.

The last of these works appears to have been a history of philosophy in which he wrote about the philosophers, their schools, and doctrines. Although it has been lost, several fragments of it are preserved in Eusebius ' work Praeparatio Evangelica .

[ 7 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Aristocles proves to be a faithful follower of Aristotle, whose teachings he intended to promote.

Asclepius of Tralles and John Philoponus , in their commentaries on Nicomachus of Gerasa 's Introduction to Arithmetic , reproduce five meanings of the word "wise" that were set out in the treatise On Philosophy . Aristocles connected the five uses of the word with a theory of five levels of human culture. According to this teaching, the survivors of natural disasters (plagues and especially great floods like that of the time of Deucalion ) were forced to rediscover inventions such as agriculture because of the lack of food. Such devising was considered "wisdom" at the time. In the second phase of development, they devised arts that were no longer just for survival, but also for aesthetic purposes, such as architecture. Such inventions were then considered a sign of wisdom. In the third epoch, people turned to political affairs and introduced laws and rules that served to organize coexistence in cities. Such was the activity of the seven sages who discovered political science . The fourth epoch brought the understanding of bodies (natural things) and the nature ( physis ) that produces them; this was called contemplation of nature. Those who deal with it are called sages in the field of natural things ( natural philosophy ). At the fifth level of culture there was a turning to the divine, transcendental and completely unchangeable beings; knowledge of this realm was called wisdom in the highest sense ( metaphysics ). The research considers the hypothesis that this philosophy of history put forward by Aristocles, with its concept of gradual progress, is at least partly based on a lost writing by the young Aristotle such as his dialogue "On Philosophy" and his Protrepticus .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Aristocles also opposes criticisms of Aristotle and strives to prove them nonsensical. While he shows great respect for Plato , he polemicized against other philosophical tendencies, whose teachings he cleverly tried to refute with the means of an Aristotelian argument, which makes him a valuable doxographical source on other philosophical doctrines in the history of philosophy, especially Pyrrhonism , with which he deals extensively.  However, his descriptions of other philosophical doctrines are sometimes marred by his polemical attitude or a lack of expertise. His account contains information not only about the views of the early Pyrrhonean skeptics, Pyrrho of Elis and Timon of Phlius , but also about later Pyrrhonists including Aenesidemus. He criticizes the tenets of the skeptics and, moreover, tries to show that it is impossible to live consistently according to their principles; through the renunciation of judgments and the resultant abolition of moral concepts, respect for the law is destroyed and the floodgates are wide open to crime. A life according to skeptical principles is contrary to nature; it is impossible for man to have no opinion. Aristocles formulates his arguments polemically, prefers to use rhetorical questions and does not mention important counter-arguments of the skeptics; it is unclear whether he did not know exactly the opponent's position or whether he deliberately withheld counter-arguments.

[ 10 ] His confrontation with the views of the Epicureans , about which he was apparently better informed, is on a much higher level. On the one hand he opposes the sensualism and subjective character of experience of the perception based theories of the Epicureans, and on the other hand also against the opposite position, according to which only a cognition of reason that is not dependent on perception deserves trust ( Eleatics and, according to Aristocles' understanding, the Megarian school . However, he reproduces the epistemology of the Cyrenaics in a polemically distorted form.

[ 10 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Suda, Aristokles ^ Karamanolis, G., (2006), Plato and Aristotle in Agreement?: Platonists on Aristotle from Antiochus to Porphyry , page 37. Oxford University Press.

^ Chiesara 2004 , pp. xix–xx.

^ Cyrill. c. Jul. ii.

^ Moraux 1973 , pp. 83–89.

^ Chiesara 2004 , pp. xvi–xix.

^ Eusebius, Praeparatio Evangelica , xiv, xv.

^ Moraux 1973 , pp. 92–123.

^ Chiesara 2004 , p. 55-60.

^ a b Döring 1988 , p. 11-27.

References [ edit ] Chiesara, Maria Lorenza (2004).

Aristocles of Messene: testimonia and fragments (Reprint ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199241545 .

Döring, Klaus (1988).

Der Sokratesschüler Aristipp und die Kyrenaiker (in German). Steiner.

ISBN 978-3-515-05139-2 . Retrieved 5 August 2023 .

Moraux, Paul (1973).

Der Aristotelismus bei den Griechen: Von Andronikos bis Alexander von Aphrodisias (in German). Walter de Gruyter . Retrieved 5 August 2023 .

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Smith, William , ed. (1870). "Aristocles".

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology .

v t e Peripatetic philosophers Greek era Aristotle Eudemus Theophrastus Aristoxenus Chamaeleon Echecratides Phaenias Praxiphanes Neleus of Scepsis Dicaearchus Nicomachus Demetrius of Phalerum Strato of Lampsacus Clearchus Archestratus (music theorist) Hieronymus of Rhodes Lyco of Troas Aristo of Ceos Satyrus Critolaus Calliphon Diodorus of Tyre Erymneus Roman era Xenarchus of Seleucia Cratippus Apellicon of Teos Andronicus of Rhodes Aristo of Alexandria Boethus of Sidon Athenaeus Mechanicus Ammonius of Athens Alexander of Aegae Aristocles of Messene Aristocles of Pergamon Aristoxenus of Cyrene Aspasius Aristotle of Mytilene Adrastus Herminus Sosigenes Alexander of Aphrodisias Ptolemy-el-Garib Themistius v t e Messina History of Messina Timeline 1908 Messina earthquake Battle of the Strait of Messina Fortifications of Messina Messina Conference Senate of Messina Mategriffon Real Cittadella Vara di Messina Siege of Messina (1848) Monuments and places Church of Catalani Chiesa del Carmine Forte del Santissimo Salvatore Forte Gonzaga Messina astronomical clock Duomo di Messina Monument to John of Austria Palace of Culture Palazzo del Monte di Pietà Palazzo Trabia Port of Messina Pylons of Messina Orto Botanico Strait of Messina LaFenice Personalities Actors Adolfo Celi Tano Cimarosa Maria Grazia Cucinotta Nino Frassica Massimo Mollica Artists and designers Girolamo Alibrandi Anna Maria Arduino Antonio Barbalonga Francesco Comande Antonello da Messina Giuseppe Migneco Giovanni Quagliata Filippo Juvarra Mariano Riccio Alonzo Rodriguez Giovanni Tuccari Politicians, civil service, military Giuseppe La Farina Gaetano Martino Giuseppe Natoli Luigi Rizzo Musicians, composers Lucia Aliberti Mario Aspa Filippo Bonaffino Gens Religion Eustochia Smeralda Calafato Annibale Maria Di Francia Sports Silvia Bosurgi Tony Cairoli Vincenzo Nibali Valerio Vermiglio Researchers, academics Aristocles of Messene Dicaearchus Caio Domenico Gallo Francesco Maurolico Agostino Scilla Giuseppe Seguenza Giuseppe Sergi Parks & nature reserves Argimusco Alcantara River Park Isola Bella nature reserve Laghetti di Marinello nature reserve Nebrodi Park Natural Reserve The Mountains of Ferns and Leeks Sport events 10 Hours of Messina Baseball World Cup 1998 Baseball World Cup 2009 EuroBasket Women 1968 International Rally of Messina International Tennis Tournament of Messina Messina Grand Prix Transportation & infrastructure Messina Centrale railway station Messina Marittima railway station Category Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Norway Greece Poland 2 Vatican Israel Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aristocles_of_Messene&oldid=1260061521 " Categories : 1st-century Greek philosophers Roman-era Peripatetic philosophers Philosophers of Roman Italy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text CS1 German-language sources (de) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM without a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the DGRBM This page was last edited on 28 November 2024, at 16:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aristocles of Messene 11 languages Add topic

