Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Australia 2 China 3 Germany 4 Indonesia 5 Iran 6 Italy 7 Netherlands and Belgium 8 Russia 9 South Korea 10 Spanish-speaking countries 11 United Kingdom 12 United States 13 See also 14 References 15 External links Toggle the table of contents Town square 74 languages العربية Aragonés Asturianu Aymar aru Azərbaycanca Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Қазақша Коми Ladin Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lombard Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Napulitano Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Open public spaces in cities or towns, usually rectilinear, surrounded by buildings Several terms  redirect here. For other uses, see Plaza (disambiguation) , Town square (disambiguation) , City square (disambiguation) , Public square (disambiguation) , and Piazza (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Town square" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Piazza della Signoria , in Florence , Italy, a historic example of a traditional public square Announcement of the establishment of the State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs on Congress Square in 1918 The Saint Peter's Square is the heart of the Greek city of Argos .

A town square (or public square , urban square , city square or simply square ), also called a plaza or piazza , is an open public space commonly found in the heart of a traditional town or city , and which is used for community gatherings. Related concepts are the civic center , the market square and the village green .

Most squares are hardscapes suitable for open markets , concerts , political rallies, and other events that require firm ground. They are not necessarily a true geometric square .

Being centrally located, town squares are usually surrounded by small shops such as bakeries , meat markets, cheese stores, and clothing stores. At their center is often a well , monument , statue or other feature. Those with fountains are sometimes called fountain squares.

The term "town square" (especially via the term "public square") is synonymous with the politics of many cultures, and the names of a certain town squares, such as the Euromaidan or Red Square , have become symbolic of specific political events throughout history.

Australia [ edit ] Many cities in Australia's eastern states, such as Melbourne and Sydney , did not have a central town square in their design, due to a fear of rebellion.

New South Wales Governors Richard Bourke and George Gipps notably ordered surveyors to not include a town square in city designs, including Melbourne, to prevent the spirit of democracy from arising.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The city centre of Adelaide and the adjacent suburb of North Adelaide , in South Australia , were planned by Colonel William Light in 1837. The city streets were laid out in a grid plan , with the city centre including a central public square, Victoria Square , and four public squares in the centre of each quarter of the city. North Adelaide has two public squares. The city was also designed to be surrounded by park lands , and all of these features still exist today, with the squares maintained as mostly green spaces.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] China [ edit ] Fountain in People's Square in Shanghai , China In China, People's Square is a common designation for the central town square of modern Chinese cities, established as part of urban modernization within the last few decades. These squares are the site of government buildings, museums, and other public buildings. One such square, Tiananmen Square , is a famous site in Chinese history due to it being the site of the May Fourth Movement , the Proclamation of the People's Republic of China , the 1976 Tiananmen Incident , the 1989 Tiananmen Square Protests , and all Chinese National Day Parades .

Germany [ edit ] Schlossplatz in Stuttgart , Germany The German word for square is Platz , which also means "Place", and is a common term for central squares in German-speaking countries. These have been focal points of public life in towns and cities from the Middle Ages to today. Squares located opposite a Palace or Castle ( German : Schloss ) are commonly named Schlossplatz . Prominent Plätze include the Alexanderplatz , Pariser Platz and Potsdamer Platz in Berlin, Heldenplatz in Vienna, and the Königsplatz in Munich.

Indonesia [ edit ] Alun-Alun Purbalingga , Indonesia A large open square common in villages, towns and cities of Indonesia is known as alun-alun . It is a Javanese term which in modern-day Indonesia refers to the two large open squares of kraton compounds. It is typically located adjacent a mosque or a palace. It is a place for public spectacles, court celebrations and general non-court entertainments.

[ citation needed ] Iran [ edit ] Azadi Square in Tehran , Iran In traditional Persian architecture, town squares are known as maydan or meydan. A maydan is considered one of the essential features in urban planning and they are often adjacent to bazaars, large mosques and other public buildings.

Naqsh-e Jahan Square in Isfahan and Azadi Square in Tehran are examples of classic and modern squares. Several countries use the term "maidan" across Eastern Europe and Central Asia, including Ukraine, in which the term became well-known globally during the Euromaidan .

Italy [ edit ] "Piazza" redirects here. For other uses, see Piazza (disambiguation) .

Piazza Navona and the Fontana del Moro in Rome , Italy. The fountain in the foreground is Fontana dei Quattro Fiumi A piazza ( Italian pronunciation: [ˈpjattsa] ) is a city square in Italy , Malta , along the Dalmatian coast and in surrounding regions. Possibly influenced by the centrality of the Forum (Roman) to ancient Mediterranean culture, the piazze of Italy are central to most towns and cities. Shops, businesses, metro stations, and bus stops are commonly found on piazzas , and in multiple locations also feature Roman Catholic Churches , such as in places known as the Piazza del Duomo , with the most famous perhaps being at Duomo di Milan , or government buildings, such as the Piazza del Quirinale adjacent from the Quirinal Palace of the Italian president.

The Piazza San Marco in Venice and Piazza del Popolo in Rome are among the world's best known. The Italian piazzas historically played a major role in the political developments of Italy in both the Italian Medieval Era and the Italian Renaissance.

[ 5 ] For example, the Piazza della Signoria in Florence remains synonymous with the return of the Medici from their exile in 1530 as well as the burning at the stake of Savonarola during the Italian Inquisition .

[ 6 ] Naples ' main square is Piazza del Plebiscito .

The Italian term is roughly equivalent to the Spanish plaza , French term place , Portuguese praça , and German Platz . Not to be confused, other countries use the phrase to refer to an unrelated feature of architectural or urban design, such as the "piazza" at King's Cross station in London or piazza as used by some in the United States, to refer to a verandah or front porch of a house or apartment, [ 7 ] such as at George Washington's historic home Mount Vernon .

[ 8 ] Several countries, especially around the Mediterranean Sea, feature Italian-style town squares. In Gibraltar, one such town square just off Gibraltar 's Main Street , between the Parliament Building and the City Hall officially named John Mackintosh Square is referred to as The Piazza .

Netherlands and Belgium [ edit ] Grand-Place in Brussels , Belgium In the Low Countries , squares are often called "markets" because of their usage as marketplaces . Most towns and cities in Belgium and the southern part of the Netherlands have in their historical centre a Grote Markt (literally "Big Market") in Dutch or Grand-Place (literally "Grand Square") in French [ 9 ] [ 10 ] (for example the Grand-Place in Brussels and the Grote Markt in Antwerp ). The Grote Markt or Grand-Place is often the location of the town hall , hence also the political centre of the town. The Dutch word for square is plein , which is another common name for squares in Dutch-speaking regions (for example Het Plein in The Hague ).

In the 17th and 18th centuries, another type of square emerged, the so-called royal square (French: Place royale , Dutch: Koningsplein ). Such squares did not serve as a marketplace but were built in front of large palaces or public buildings to emphasise their grandeur, as well as to accommodate military parades and ceremonies, among others (for example the Place Royale in Brussels and the Koningsplein in Amsterdam ). Palace squares are usually more symmetrical than their older market counterparts.

[ 11 ] Russia [ edit ] Red Square in Moscow , Russia, a view from the northwest, showing historic St. Basil's Cathedral and the Spasskaya Tower or "Saviour Tower" In Russia, central square ( Russian : центра́льная пло́щадь , romanised : tsentráĺnaya plóshchad́ ) is a common term for an open area in the heart of the town .

[ citation needed ] In a number of cities, the square has no individual name and is officially designated Central Square , for example Central Square (Tolyatti) .

[ citation needed ] The most famous central square is the monumentally-proportioned Red Square which became a synecdoche for the Soviet Union during the 20th century; nevertheless, the association with "red communism" is a back formation, since krásnaja (the term for "red") also means "beautiful" in archaic and poetic Russian, with many cities and towns throughout the region having locations with the name "Red Square." [ citation needed ] South Korea [ edit ] Gwanghwamun Square, Seoul , South Korea Gwanghwamun Plaza ( Korean : 광화문광장) also known as Gwanghwamun Square) is a public open space on Sejongno , Jongno-gu, Seoul, South Korea. It's opposite the background of A Gwanghwamun Gate (Korean: 광화문).

[ 12 ] In 2009, Restoration of Gwanghwamun Gate  made the gate's front space as a public plaza. The square has been renovated to modern style has new waterways & rest Areas, exhibition Hall for Excavated Cultural Assets in August 2022.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Spanish-speaking countries [ edit ] Plaza Mayor , Madrid, Spain The Spanish-language term for a public square is plaza ( [ˈplasa] or [ˈplaθa] depending on the dialectal variety). It comes from Latin platea , with the meaning of 'broad street' or 'public square'.

[ 15 ] Ultimately coming from Greek πλατεῖα (ὁδός) plateia (hodos) , it is a cognate of Italian piazza and French place (which has also been borrowed into English).

[ 16 ] The term is used across Spanish-speaking territories in Spain and the Americas, as well as in the Philippines . In addition to smaller plazas, the Plaza Mayor (sometimes called in the Americas as Plaza de Armas , "armament square" where troops could be mustered) of each center of administration held three closely related institutions: the cathedral , the cantabile or administrative center, which might be incorporated in a wing of a governor's palace , and the audiencia or law court. The plaza might be large enough to serve as a military parade ground. At times of crisis or fiestas , it serves as the gathering space for large crowds.

[ citation needed ] Argentina's Buenos Aires ' main square's name is Plaza de Mayo .

Diminutives of plaza include plazuela and the latter's double diminutive plazoleta , which can be occasionally used as a particle in a proper noun.

[ 17 ] Like the Italian piazza and the Portuguese praça , the plaza remains a center of community life that is only equaled by the market-place. A plaza de toros is a bullring .

Shopping centers may incorporate 'plaza' into their names, and plaza comercial is used in some countries as a synonym for centro comercial i.e. "shopping center".

[ 18 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] In the United Kingdom , and especially in London and Edinburgh , a "square" has a wider meaning. There are public squares of the type described above but the term is also used for formal open spaces surrounded by houses with private gardens at the centre, sometimes known as garden squares . Most of these were built in the 18th and 19th centuries. In some cases the gardens are now open to the public. See the Squares in London category. Additionally, many public squares were created in towns and cities across the UK as part of urban redevelopment following the Blitz . Squares can also be quite small and resemble courtyards, especially in the City of London .

United States [ edit ] Los Angeles Music Center Plaza In some cities (in the United States ), especially in New England , the term "square" (as its Spanish equivalent, plaza ) is applied to a commercial area (like Central Square in Cambridge, Massachusetts ), usually formed around the intersection of three or more streets, and which originally consisted of some open area (many of which have been filled in with traffic islands and other traffic calming features). Many of these intersections are irregular rather than square.

[ 19 ] The placita (Spanish for "little plaza"), as it is known in the Southwestern United States , is a common feature within the boundaries of the former provincial kingdom of Santa Fe de Nuevo México . They are a blend of Hispano and Pueblo design styles, several of which continue to be hubs for cities and towns in New Mexico , including Santa Fe Plaza , Old Town Albuquerque , Acoma Pueblo 's plaza, Taos Downtown Historic District , Mesilla Plaza , Mora , and Las Vegas Plaza .

In U.S. English , a plaza can mean one of several things: [ 20 ] a town square, as in the Spanish usage "any open area usually located near urban buildings and often featuring walkways, trees and shrubs, places to sit, and sometimes shops" [ citation needed ] a shopping center of any size a toll plaza , where traffic must temporarily stop to pay tolls an area adjacent to an expressway that has service facilities (such as restaurants, gas stations, and restrooms) Today's metropolitan landscapes often incorporate the plaza as a design element, or as an outcome of zoning regulations, building budgetary constraints, and the like. Sociologist William H. Whyte conducted an extensive study of plazas in New York City : his study humanized the way modern urban plazas are conceptualized, and helped usher in significant design changes in the making of plazas. They can be used to open spaces for low-income neighborhoods, and can also the overall aesthetic of the surrounding area boosting economic vitality, pedestrian mobility and safety for pedestrians.

[ 21 ] Most plazas are created out of a collaboration between local non-profit applicants and city officials which requires approval from the city.

[ 22 ] Throughout North America, words like place , square , or plaza frequently appear in the names of commercial developments such as shopping centers and hotels.

See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Urban squares .

Cathedral Square List of city squares List of city squares by size Urban vitality References [ edit ] ^ Magro, Aaron (18 May 2017).

"Australians don't loiter in public space – the legacy of colonial control by design" .

The Conversation . Retrieved 1 July 2025 .

^ Gray, FK (2015).

The misanthropes, larrikins and mallrats of market square: an enduring public space dilemma in central Geelong . Deakin University.

ISBN 978-0-646-94298-8 . Retrieved 1 July 2025 .

^ The Adelaide Park Lands and City Layout (PDF) . Australian Heritage Database: Places for Decision: Class: Historic. For consideration for National Heritage List. Australian Government. Dept for the Environment, Water, Heritage & the Arts. 9 July 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 October 2019 . Retrieved 29 November 2019 .

{{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ Anderson, Margaret (31 December 2013).

"Light's Plan of Adelaide 1837" .

Adelaidia . Retrieved 29 November 2019 .

^ Jones II, Philip J.

(1997).

"The Italian City-State: From Commune to Signoria" . Oxford University Press. pp.

212– 213.

ISBN 0191590304 .

^ "Piazza Della Signoria, Visit Florence" .

Visit Florence . Retrieved 18 December 2023 .

^ "Piazza".

Oxford American Dictionary . 2001.

^ "Mount Vernon, Piazza" .

Mount Vernon . Retrieved 18 December 2023 .

^ Grevisse, Maurice; Goosse, André (2008).

"543 Le type grand-mère." .

le bon usage: Grammaire française (in French) (14 ed.). Bruxelles: De Boeck & Larcier. p. 703.

ISBN 978-2-8011-1404-9 .

Grand accompagne (avec trait d'union H2) des noms féminins dans quelques expressions figées : grand-croix, grand-maman, grand-mère [..].

En outre, des expressions cantonnées dans des vocabulaires spéciaux, grand-chambre, grand-garde, grand-hune, grand-salle, grand-voile ; – des emplois régionaux, comme grand-place , surtout courant dans le Nord de la France et en Belgique.

H2 543 Historique   On a longtemps écrit grand'mère, etc. avec une apostrophe parce que l'on croyait qu'un e final avait disparu comme dans l'élision. C'est en 1932 que l'Ac. a remplacé par un trait d'union cette apostrophe injustifiée.

^ Morris, Michèle R. (1988).

"4.5.2 Cas d'élision" .

Mieux écrire en français: Manuel de composition et guide pratique à l'usage des étudiants anglophones (in French) (2nd ed.). Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press. p. 29.

ISBN 9780878402250 .

Le e de grande s'élide dans certains noms composés comme :   grand-mère   grand-tante   grand-maman   grand-duc   grand-messe   grand-rue   grand-route   grand-chose   à grand-peine   Observez que dans les noms précedent on utilise le trait d'union et non l'apostrophe (orthographe vieillie).

^ Florian Prouteau, Comment repenser nos places, centralités historiques remises en cause ?

(in French), Sciences agricoles, 2013 ^ "Ever-evolving Gwanghwamun to be altered anew" .

koreajoongangdaily.joins.com . 11 August 2015 . Retrieved 3 January 2023 .

^ "광화문광장" .

gwanghwamun.seoul.go.kr (in Korean) . Retrieved 3 January 2023 .

^ "A bigger and better Gwanghwamun Square Reopens!" .

Visit Seoul . Retrieved 3 January 2023 .

^ Lodares Marrodán, Juan Ramón (2005).

"Aventuras y desventuras etimológicas de Cerdá en torno a su "indicador urbano" de la urbanización" .

Ciudad y Territorio: Estudios Territoriales .

37 (144). Madrid: Ministerio de Fomento : 583.

ISSN 1133-4762 .

^ "Plaza" .

Reference.com .

plaza .

"plaza" .

Reference.com .

πλατεῖα .

Liddell, Henry George ; Scott, Robert ; A Greek–English Lexicon at the Perseus Project .

^ Regúnaga, Alejandra (2005).

"Morfología derivativa: consideraciones en torno al uso de diminutivos en la ciudad de Santa Rosa (La Pampa-Argentina)" (PDF) .

Anclajes .

9 . Santa Rosa: Universidad Nacional de La Pampa : 261.

ISSN 1851-4669 .

^ "plaza comercial" .

Linguee . Retrieved 22 February 2022 .

^ Woodruff, Andy (16 June 2010).

"Boston Squared" .

Andy Woodruff . Retrieved 30 July 2013 .

^ "Plaza" .

Merriam-Webster Dictionary . 27 May 2024.

^ "Public Plazas" .

New York City DOT . Archived from the original on 7 September 2015 . Retrieved 30 August 2015 .

^ Bloomekatz, Ari (11 March 2012).

"Silver Lake Gets an Unusual New Park Space" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved 10 October 2015 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Urban squares .

Pitlane Magazine: "The Hidden Origin of the Town Square" [ usurped ] BBC: "The Violent History of Public Squares" v t e Architecture of the United States Native and indigenous Mound Builders Pueblo Colonial and post-colonial Creole First Period Colonial Georgian Dutch Colonial French Colonial German Colonial Spanish Colonial Territorial Early Republic Adam Federal Jeffersonian Neoclassical Antebellum Mid-19th century Greek Revival Italianate Gothic Revival Victorian Richardsonian Romanesque Second Empire American Renaissance Folk Stick style Queen Anne Shingle Late-19th to mid-20th century Art Deco ( Streamline Moderne ) American Craftsman American Foursquare Beaux-Arts California bungalow Chicago School Colonial Revival Dutch Colonial Revival Georgian Revival Googie International style Mayan Revival Mediterranean Revival Mission Revival Pueblo Revival Deco Prairie School Pre-war PWA Moderne Sarasota School of Architecture Rustic Spanish Colonial Revival Territorial Revival Tudor Revival Post–World War II Blobitecture Brutalist Deconstructivism Dingbat Earthship High-tech Mid-century modern Modern Neo-eclectic Neo-futurism Neomodern New Classical architecture Postmodern Ranch Shed style Tiny-house Usonian Building types and vernacular Adirondack Adobe Barabara Cape Cod Central-passage house Chickee Corn crib Cowboy church Critical regionalism Dogtrot house Earth lodge Hogan Hall and parlor house I-house Igloo Jacal Kiva Log cabin Longhouses Moki steps Plank house Platform mound Qargi Quiggly hole Ramada Saltbox Shotgun house Sipapu Skyscraper Sod house Sweat lodge Temples Tipi Town square Tupiq Wigwam Cities Atlanta Boston Buffalo Chicago Columbus Detroit Houston Jacksonville Kansas City Las Vegas Los Angeles Miami New Orleans New York City Omaha Philadelphia Portland San Antonio San Francisco Seattle Spokane St. Louis Washington, D.C.

States California Hawaii Texas Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.canary‐5777f5b8f9‐m8n25
Cached time: 20250814215508
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.637 seconds
Real time usage: 0.769 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3717/1000000
Revision size: 25168/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 113511/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6109/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 99557/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.430/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16976249/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  653.895      1 -total
 27.97%  182.919      1 Template:Reflist
 16.36%  106.982     27 Template:Lang
 14.21%   92.939      9 Template:Cite_web
  9.75%   63.744      1 Template:Architecture_in_the_United_States
  9.51%   62.172      1 Template:Navbox
  7.63%   49.867      1 Template:Short_description
  6.97%   45.582      7 Template:Fix
  6.93%   45.347      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  6.78%   44.330      2 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:328838:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215508 and revision id 1304180414. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Town_square&oldid=1304180414 " Categories : Town squares Parks Town Urban public parks Landscape architecture Protected areas Road infrastructure Subnational parks Urban design Urban studies and planning terminology Hidden categories: CS1 maint: others CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 Korean-language sources (ko) Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2021 Articles needing additional references from September 2010 All articles needing additional references Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 Articles containing Italian-language text Pages with Italian IPA Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Portuguese-language text Articles containing Dutch-language text Articles containing Russian-language text Articles with unsourced statements from May 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 Pages with Spanish IPA Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with unsourced statements from April 2022 Commons link is locally defined Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 13:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Town square 74 languages Add topic

