Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Campus 3 Academics Toggle Academics subsection 3.1 Institutes 4 Student activities Toggle Student activities subsection 4.1 Athletics 4.2 Sports sponsored 4.2.1 Football 4.2.2 Men's ice hockey 4.2.3 Men's and women's rowing 4.2.4 Intramural sports 4.3 Fraternities and sororities 5 Notable alumni 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Adrian College 1 language فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 41°53′56″N 84°03′30″W ﻿ / ﻿ 41.898951°N 84.058424°W ﻿ / 41.898951; -84.058424 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Private liberal arts college in Adrian, Michigan, US Adrian College Type Private liberal arts college Established 1859 ; 166 years ago ( 1859 ) Religious affiliation United Methodist Endowment $60 million President Jeffrey Docking Academic staff 95 Students 1,865 (undergraduate); 90 (graduate) Location Adrian , Michigan , United States 41°53′56″N 84°03′30″W ﻿ / ﻿ 41.898951°N 84.058424°W ﻿ / 41.898951; -84.058424 Campus Small town, 100 acres (0.4 km²) Colors Black and Gold Nickname Bulldogs Mascot Bruiser Website adrian.edu Adrian College is a private United Methodist liberal arts college in Adrian, Michigan .  The college offers bachelor's degrees in 92 academic majors and programs.

[ 1 ] The 100 acre (0.40 km 2 ) campus contains newly constructed facilities along with historic buildings. Adrian College is affiliated with the United Methodist Church and is accredited by the Higher Learning Commission . The spring 2020–21 enrollment was 1,677 students.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] The college has its origin as a theological institute founded by Wesleyan Methodists at Leoni, Michigan , in 1845. This institution merged with Leoni Seminary , another Methodist school, in 1855 to form Michigan Union College . In 1859, that institution closed and its assets were transferred to Adrian "through the efforts of the antislavery leader and educator, Rev.

Asa Mahan , who was elected first president of the new Adrian College".

[ 3 ] The college was chartered by the Michigan Legislature on March 28, 1859. In the early stages of the Civil War the college volunteered itself as a base for the formation of Michigan regiments for the Union side.  The current Valade Hall building sits on the site of the former base camp for these soldiers.

[ 4 ] A marker designating the college as a Michigan Historic Site was erected by the Michigan Historical Commission .

[ 5 ] The inscription reads: Chartered on March 28, 1859, Adrian College traces its origins back to a Wesleyan Methodist theological institute founded at Leoni, Michigan in 1845. This institution later became Michigan Union College. Strongly antislavery in its sentiments, the school was moved to Adrian in 1859 through the efforts of the antislavery leader and educator, Rev. Asa Mahan, who was elected first president of the new Adrian College. The college was transferred to the Methodist Protestant Church in 1868, and here for 71 years, leaders of this denomination were trained. In 1939 a denominational union of American Methodism resulted in the establishment of the Methodist Church. Adrian College is affiliated with this great church body.

An additional marker commemorating Camp Williams and the Fourth Michigan Volunteer Infantry as a Michigan Historic Site was erected by the  Michigan Historical Commission.

[ 6 ] The inscriptions read: Camp Williams At the outbreak of the Civil War in early 1861, the trustees of Adrian College offered the use of campus buildings and grounds to the Fourth Michigan Volunteer Infantry for training. This became known as Camp Williams. The city of Adrian donated money to build a mess and dining hall. By early June ten companies of the Fourth had arrived and started their training. The 1,025 soldiers came from Adrian, Ann Arbor, Dexter, Jonesville, Hudson, Sturgis, Monroe, Hillsdale, Tecumseh, and Trenton. On June 21 nearly 30,000 people came to town to see the Fourth depart for Washington. The ladies of Adrian presented Colonel Dwight Woodbury with the regimental flag. Sewn into the flag was "The Ladies of Adrian to the Fourth regiment Defend It." Fourth Michigan Volunteer Infantry In spring 1861 the Fourth Michigan Volunteer Infantry departed Adrians' Camp Williams for service in the Civil War. The regiment was assigned to the Army of the Potomac and saw action in forty-one engagements, including Gaines Mills, Fredericksburg, Chancellorsville, and Petersburg. The Fourth was one of the few regiments to lose more men in battle than from disease. Out of 1,399 men, 307 died from May 1862 through June 1864. Three colonels died in battle defending their regimental flag: Dwight Woodbury, at Malvern Hill, Virginia; Harrison Jeffords in The Wheatfield at Gettysburg; and George Lumbard at The Wilderness, Virginia. In 1864 the reorganized Fourth trained here, at Camp Williams, once more.

Campus [ edit ] Herrick Tower The original campus was built in the mid-19th century. It would be almost a century later that President John Dawson began a major construction phase of the campus, including most of the residence halls, academic buildings, a student union, and the administration building. More recently, current President Jeff Docking has introduced many plans to revitalize Adrian College and its campus, including the construction of new buildings, renovation of old ones, and programs related to athletics.

[ 7 ] The college is making renovations and expansions to the Science, Business, Visual Arts, and Performing Arts departments.

[ 8 ] Herrick Chapel Shipman Library Valade Hall Academics [ edit ] Adrian College offers over 90 majors and pre-professional programs.

[ 9 ] It also offers six graduate programs using a unique 4+1 structure for current students.  Graduate programs exist in: Accounting, Athletic Training, Criminal Justice,  Industrial Chemistry, Teacher Education, and Sports Administration and Leadership. Its most popular majors, as of 2021 graduates, were: [ 10 ] Marketing/Marketing Management (35) Sports & Fitness Administration/Management (30) Biology/Biological Sciences (27) Exercise Science & Kinesiology (25) Business Administration & Management (23) Over the past several years eight of the nine academic buildings were renovated, and fundraising is currently being undertaken on the final building, Mahan Hall for Art and Interior Design.  The following renovations have taken place since 2008: Rush Hall for Communication Arts, Goldsmith Hall for Modern Languages and Cultures, Spencer Hall for Music, Herrick Chapel, Jones Hall for Business and Humanities, Peelle Hall for Mathematics and Natural Science, Valade Hall for social sciences and humanities, and a historic renovation of the oldest building on campus, Downs Hall for theatre, built in 1860.

Institutes [ edit ] Institutes are thematic centers focusing on areas of interest supporting the mission of Adrian College.  As of 2015 [update] , there are eight institutes including Career Planning, Creativity, Entrepreneurial Studies, Ethics, Health Studies, Romney Institute for Law and Public Policy, Study Abroad, Sports Medicine, and Teacher Education.  Each institute provides programming to students, faculty, staff, and wider community.

[ 11 ] Student activities [ edit ] Athletics [ edit ] Adrian Bulldogs wordmark Adrian College athletic teams, nicknamed the "Bulldogs", are part of the Michigan Intercollegiate Athletic Association and the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division III.  The men's NCAA Division III hockey team is a member of the Northern Collegiate Hockey Association . The men's volleyball team joined the Midwest Collegiate Volleyball League . Adrian College is the third college or university to offer women's hockey as a varsity sport in Michigan.  In 2011, the college reached an agreement with the federal Department of Education's Office of Civil Rights, resolving complaints that the college had violated Title IX. The college was found guilty of eleven violations of the law that governs gender equality, and agreed to make several changes to its athletic programs.

[ 12 ] Adrian College offers the following varsity sports: Sports sponsored [ edit ] Adrian expanded its athletic programs in the 2007–2008 academic year to add NCAA Division III men's and women's ice hockey and men's Division I ACHA hockey along with synchronized skating and NCAA Division III men's and women's lacrosse. The Bulldog's lacrosse program is the first varsity program in MI since the induction of Title IX. Women's bowling was added for the 2008-2009 year. Later, it added men's and women's rowing in 2018.

Men's sports Women's sports Baseball Acrobatics and tumbling Basketball Basketball Bass fishing Bowling Bowling Cross country Cross country Equestrian Football Figure skating Golf Golf Ice hockey Ice hockey Lacrosse Lacrosse Rowing Rowing Rugby Rugby Soccer Soccer Tennis Softball Track and field Synchronized skating Volleyball Tennis Wrestling Track and field Volleyball Wrestling Football [ edit ] Main article: Adrian Bulldogs football College football has been a part of the history of Adrian college since 1892, when Hillsdale College defeated Adrian by a score of 56–0.

[ 13 ] The first head football coach on record was E. E. Tarr in 1903.

[ 14 ] Since then, the program has won 16 conference championships, the first in 1911 and the most recent in 2012 and 2014.

[ 15 ] The head coach is Joe Palka who took over in 2024.

Men's ice hockey [ edit ] The men's Division III team received national attention on the eve of Selection Sunday of the 2007–08 season on ESPN's "The Sports Reporters" as Mitch Albom , columnist from the Detroit Free Press , used his closing remarks to highlight the remarkable ride of the hockey team's season (their first at the NCAA level).  The team finished 26-3 and did not make the NCAA Division III Tournament. They would qualify for the NCAA National Tournament nine times before winning their first NCAA Div. III National Championship on March 26, 2022, in Lake Placid, New York.

Men's and women's rowing [ edit ] Men's and women's rowing were added in 2017. In 2018, Adrian College's rowing programs joined the Mid-Atlantic Rowing Conference (MARC). In 2018, the program welcomed an inaugural freshman class of 25 rowers.

[ citation needed ] Intramural sports [ edit ] Intramurals are part of Adrian College and the athletic department. Some of the intramural teams include Flag Football, 5-on-5 Basketball, Coed Volleyball League, Broomball, 7-on-7 Soccer, and 3-on-3 Basketball.

[ 16 ] Fraternities and sororities [ edit ] Greek life on campus includes several fraternities and sororities.

[ 17 ] Notable alumni [ edit ] Lucien Baker , United States Senator from Kansas (1866) Virgil Bernero , mayor of Lansing and the 2010 Democratic nominee for governor in Michigan (1986) John E. Bird , member of the Michigan Supreme Court (1892) Rube Kisinger , pitcher for the Detroit Tigers James Laird , former Republican U.S. Representative of Nebraska's 2nd congressional district Mike Lewis , defensive end for the Iowa Barnstormers of the Arena Football League (2006).

John Maulbetsch , College Football Hall of Fame member (1911) Bessie Leach Priddy , educator, social reformer, clubwoman, and leader of the Delta Delta Delta women's fraternity (1891) Mike Rogers , former Republican U.S. Representative of Michigan's 8th congressional district (1985) Henry C. Smith , former Republican U.S. Representative of Michigan's 2nd congressional district (1878) References [ edit ] ^ Adrian College (2022) 2022-2023 Undergraduate Academic Catalog (pp. 58-61 and 69-71) http://adrian.edu/uploads/files/2022-2023_Adrian_College_Undergraduate_Catalog_FINAL_10.3.2022.pdf Archived 2022-12-07 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Adrian College: Michigan Postsecondary Handbook Profile Page" (PDF) .

Michigan.gov . Retrieved June 4, 2015 .

^ "A Modern Liberal Arts Education" . Adrian College . Retrieved November 3, 2019 .

^ " Adrian College History (Adrian College)" . Archived from the original on March 4, 2010 . Retrieved March 28, 2010 .

^ "Michigan Historical Markers - Adrian College" .

www.hmdb.org . Historical Marker Data Base . Retrieved August 4, 2022 .

^ "Michigan Historical Markers - Camp Williams/Fourth Michigan Volunteer Infantry" .

www.hmdb.org . Historical Marker Data Base . Retrieved August 4, 2022 .

^ Adrian College (April 1, 2006).

"President Outlines Adrian's Future During Inaugural Weekend" .

Archived from the original on April 4, 2007 . Retrieved March 26, 2007 .

^ Renaissance II, Adrian College Archived September 5, 2010, at the Wayback Machine ^ Adrian College (2022) 2022-2023 Undergraduate Academic Catalog (pp. 58-61 and 69-71) http://adrian.edu/uploads/files/2022-2023_Adrian_College_Undergraduate_Catalog_FINAL_10.3.2022.pdf Archived 2022-12-07 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Adrian College" .

nces.ed.gov . U.S. Dept of Education . Retrieved January 21, 2023 .

^ Adrian College (2013).

"Adrian College Institutes" . Retrieved August 2, 2013 .

^ Gable, Eric.

"Adrian College, government reach agreement in gender equity case" .

Daily Telegram . Archived from the original on December 3, 2011 . Retrieved November 11, 2011 .

^ DeLassus, David.

"Adrian game by game results" .

College Football Data Warehouse . Archived from the original on 21 November 2010 . Retrieved 15 November 2010 .

^ DeLassus, David.

"Adrian Coaching Records" .

College Football Data Warehouse . Archived from the original on November 21, 2010 . Retrieved November 15, 2010 .

^ DeLassus, David.

"Adrian Composite Championship Listing" .

College Football Data Warehouse . Archived from the original on November 21, 2010 . Retrieved November 16, 2010 .

^ Intramural Sports, Adrian College ^ Greek Life, Adrian College Archived September 25, 2010, at the Wayback Machine External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Adrian College .

Official website Athletics website Articles related to Adrian College v t e Colleges and universities in Michigan Public Central Eastern Ferris Grand Valley Lake Superior Michigan Ann Arbor Dearborn Flint Michigan State Technological Northern Oakland Saginaw Valley Wayne Western Private Adrian Albion Alma Andrews Aquinas Calvin Cleary Creative Studies Concordia Cornerstone Davenport Detroit Mercy Grace Christian Great Lakes Christian Hillsdale Hope Kalamazoo Kettering Kuyper Lawrence Tech Madonna Northwood Olivet Rochester Christian Saint Mary's Siena Heights Spring Arbor Walsh Community Alpena Bay de Noc Bay Mills Delta Glen Oaks Gogebic Grand Rapids Henry Ford Jackson Kalamazoo Valley Kellogg Keweenaw Bay Kirtland Lake Michigan Lansing Macomb Mid Michigan Monroe County Montcalm C. S. Mott Muskegon North Central Michigan Northwestern Michigan Oakland Saginaw Chippewa St. Clair County Schoolcraft Southwestern Michigan Washtenaw West Shore Defunct Finlandia Marygrove Robert B. Miller William Tyndale v t e International Association of Methodist-related Schools, Colleges, and Universities Adrian Alaska Pacific Albion Albright Allegheny American Andrew Baker Baldwin Wallace Bennett Bethune–Cookman Boston University Brevard Centenary (Louisiana) Centenary University Central Methodist Claflin Clark Atlanta Columbia (South Carolina) Cornell College Dakota Wesleyan Denver DePauw Dickinson College Dillard Drew Duke Emory Emory & Henry Evansville Ferrum Florida Southern Greensboro Hamline Hendrix High Point Huntingdon Huston-Tillotson Illinois Wesleyan Indianapolis Kansas Wesleyan Kendall Kentucky Wesleyan LaGrange Lebanon Valley Lindsey Wilson Lon Morris Louisburg Lycoming McKendree McMurry Meharry Medical Methodist Millsaps Morningside Mount Union Nebraska Methodist Nebraska Wesleyan North Carolina Wesleyan North Central Northwestern University Ohio Northern Ohio Wesleyan Oklahoma City Otterbein Oxford of Emory Pacific Paine Pfeiffer Puget Sound Philander Smith Randolph Randolph-Macon Reinhardt Rocky Mountain Rust Shenandoah Simpson College Southern Methodist Southwestern College (Kansas) Southwestern University Spartanburg Methodist Syracuse Tennessee Wesleyan Texas Wesleyan Union Commonwealth Virginia Wesleyan Wesleyan College West Virginia Wesleyan Wiley Willamette Wofford Young Harris v t e Michigan Intercollegiate Athletic Association Adrian Bulldogs Albion Britons Alma Scots Calvin Knights Hope Flying Dutch Kalamazoo Hornets Olivet Comets Saint Mary's Belles Trine Thunder v t e Midwest Collegiate Volleyball League Members Adrian Benedictine (IL) Carthage Dominican (IL) Fontbonne Greenville Lakeland (WI) Loras Marian (WI) Mount St. Joseph MSOE North Central Olivet Wittenberg v t e Northern Collegiate Hockey Association Teams Adrian Aurora Concordia (WI) Dubuque Lake Forest Lawrence Marian Milwaukee School of Engineering St. Norbert Trine Arenas Arrington Ice Arena (Adrian) Fox Valley Ice Arena (Aurora) Ozaukee Ice Center (Concordia) Mystique Ice Center (Dubuque) Alumni Memorial Fieldhouse (Lake Forest) Appleton Family Ice Center (Lawrence) Blue Line Family Ice Center (Marian) Kern Center (MSOE) Cornerstone Community Center (St. Norbert) Thunder Ice Arena (Trine) Championships and Awards NCHA Men's Tournament Harris Cup v t e Great Lakes Collegiate Hockey League Adrian ( Arrington Ice Arena ) Davenport (Patterson Ice Center) Eastern Michigan ( Taylor Sportsplex ) Kent State ( Kent State University Ice Arena ) Michigan–Dearborn ( UMD Fieldhouse ) Oakland (Onyx Rochester Ice Arena) Western Michigan ( Wings West Arena ) ACHA v t e National Intercollegiate Rugby Association Division 1 Army Black Knights Brown Bears Dartmouth Big Green Harvard Crimson Long Island Sharks Mount St. Mary's Mountaineers Navy Midshipmen Princeton Tigers Quinnipiac Bobcats Sacred Heart Pioneers Division 2 American International Yellow Jackets Molloy Lions New Haven Chargers Notre Dame College Falcons Post Eagles Queens Royals West Chester Golden Rams Division 3 Bowdoin Polar Bears Colby–Sawyer Chargers Guilford Quakers Manhattanville Valiants New England College Pilgrims Norwich Cadets University of New England Nor'easters Vermont State Castleton Spartans Future teams Adrian Bulldogs Authority control databases ISNI Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Adrian_College&oldid=1303267233 " Categories : Adrian College Liberal arts colleges in Michigan Adrian, Michigan Education in Lenawee County, Michigan Universities and colleges established in 1859 Buildings and structures in Lenawee County, Michigan Tourist attractions in Lenawee County, Michigan 1859 establishments in Michigan Private universities and colleges in Michigan Michigan State Historic Sites in Lenawee County Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from July 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from September 2024 Coordinates on Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2015 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 Commons category link from Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 00:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Adrian College 1 language Add topic

