Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Nazi propaganda 3 Spanish Falangism 4 Policies of Nazi Germany Toggle Policies of Nazi Germany subsection 4.1 Eastern Europe 5 Sub-human types 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Untermensch 35 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German word meaning "subhuman", used by the Nazis Cover of the Nazi propaganda brochure " Der Untermensch " ("The Subhuman"), 1942. The SS booklet depicted the natives of Eastern Europe as "subhumans".

[ 1 ] Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Untermensch ( German pronunciation: [ˈʔʊntɐˌmɛnʃ] ⓘ ; plural : Untermenschen ) is a German language word literally meaning 'underman', 'sub-man', or ' subhuman ', which was extensively used by Germany's Nazi Party to refer to their opponents and non- Aryan people they deemed as inferior. It was mainly used against "the masses from the East", that is Jews , Roma , and Slavs (mainly ethnic Poles , Belarusians , Czechs , Ukrainians , Russians and Serbs ).

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The term was also applied to " Mischling " (persons of mixed "Aryan" and non-Aryan ancestry) and black people .

[ 4 ] Jewish, Slavic, and Romani people, along with the physically and mentally disabled , as well as homosexuals and political dissidents , and on rare instances, POWs from Western Allied armies , were considered untermenschen who were to be exterminated [ 5 ] in the Holocaust .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] According to the Generalplan Ost , the Slavic population of East-Central Europe was to be reduced in part through mass murder in the Holocaust for Lebensraum , with a significant amount expelled further east to Siberia and used as forced labour in the Reich. These concepts were an important part of the Nazi racial policy .

[ 8 ] Etymology [ edit ] The term "under man" was  introduced by the American author and Ku Klux Klan member Lothrop Stoddard in his 1922 book The Revolt Against Civilization: The Menace of the Under-man .

[ 9 ] Stoddard applies the term to those who he considers unable to flourish in civilization due to their inferior heredity ("The word inferior has, however, been so often employed as a synonym for degenerate that it tends to produce confusion of thought, and to avoid this I have coined a term which seems to describe collectively all those kinds of persons whom I have just discussed. This term is The Under-Man – the
man who measures under the standards of capacity and adaptability imposed by the social order in which he lives". (p. 23)). Therefore, the term has no racial connotations. Indeed, in his book Stoddard maintains that without eugenics any and all civilizations - irrespective of race, time and geography - have been, are and inevitably will be prone to gradual degradation. The Nazi Party later used the term in propaganda, possibly influenced in part from the title of the book's German edition Der Kulturumsturz: Die Drohung des Untermenschen (1925).

[ 10 ] An Austro-Hungarian propaganda poster made during World War I which features the rhyming slogan "Serbia must die!" Such images were representative of the social attitudes underlying the concept of untermensch .

[ 11 ] The German word Untermensch had been used in earlier periods, but it had not been used in a racial sense, for example, it was used in the 1899 novel Der Stechlin by Theodor Fontane . Since most writers who employed the term did not address the question of when and how the word entered the German language, into English, Untermensch is usually translated as "subhuman". The leading Nazi who attributed the concept of the East-European "under man" to Stoddard was Alfred Rosenberg who, referring to communists of the Soviet Russia, wrote in his Der Mythus des zwanzigsten Jahrhunderts (1930) that "this is the kind of human being that Lothrop Stoddard has called the 'under man.'" ["...den Lothrop Stoddard als 'Untermenschen' bezeichnete."] [ 12 ] It needs to be mentioned though that despite Nazi official support for The Myth of the Twentieth Century and Rosenberg's prominent role in promoting Nazi ideology Adolf Hitler declared that it was not to be considered official ideology of the Nazi Party [ 13 ] and he privately described the book as "mysticism" and "nonsense".

[ 14 ] Albert Speer claimed that Goebbels mocked Alfred Rosenberg.

[ 15 ] Goebbels also called the book a "philosophical belch".

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] It is possible that Stoddard constructed his "under man" as an opposite of Friedrich Nietzsche 's Übermensch (superman) concept. Stoddard does not explicitly say this, but he critically refers to the "superman" idea at the end of his book (p. 262).

[ 9 ] Wordplays with Nietzsche's term seem to have been used repeatedly as early as the 19th century and, due to the German linguistic trait of being able to combine prefixes and roots almost at will in order to create new words, this development can be considered logical. For instance, German author Theodor Fontane contrasts the Übermensch/Untermensch word pair in chapter 33 of his novel Der Stechlin .

[ 19 ] Nietzsche used Untermensch at least once in contrast to Übermensch in Die fröhliche Wissenschaft (1882).

[ 20 ] Earlier examples of Untermensch include Romanticist Jean Paul using the term in his novel Hesperus (1795) in reference to an Orangutan (Chapter "8. Hundposttag").

[ 21 ] Nazi propaganda [ edit ] In a speech which he delivered to the Bavarian regional parliament in 1927, the Nazi Party propagandist Julius Streicher , publisher of Der Stürmer , used the term Untermensch referring to the communists of the German Bavarian Soviet Republic : It happened at the time of the [Bavarian] Soviet Republic: When the unleashed subhumans rambled murdering through the streets, the deputies hid behind a chimney in the Bavarian parliament.

[ 22 ] A chart used to illustrate the Nazi Nuremberg Laws introduced in 1935 The Nazi party and thereafter also the regime (1933—1945) repeatedly used the term Untermensch in writings and speeches which they directed against the Jews.  In the pamphlet "The SS as an Anti-Bolshevist Fighting Organization", published in 1936, Himmler wrote: We shall take care that never again in Germany, the heart of Europe, will the Jewish-Bolshevik revolution of subhumans be able to be kindled either from within or through emissaries from without.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] In his speech " Weltgefahr des Bolschewismus " ("World danger of Bolshevism") in 1936, Joseph Goebbels said that "subhumans exist in every people as a leavening agent ".

[ 26 ] At the 1935 Nazi party congress rally at Nuremberg, Goebbels also declared that, “Bolshevism is the declaration of war by Jewish-led international subhumans against culture itself." [ 27 ] The most notorious example of the usage of the term Untermensch by the Nazis is a Schutzstaffel (SS) brochure entitled " Der Untermensch [ de ] ", distributed by the Reich Security Main Office under the directives of Heinrich Himmler .

[ 28 ] Published in 1942 after the start of Operation Barbarossa , it is around 50 pages long and consists, for the most part, of photos portraying the natives of Eastern Europe in an extremely negative way. Nearly four million copies of the pamphlet were printed in the German language and distributed across German-occupied territories. The contents of the " Der Untermensch " brochure extensively emphasized Himmler's racist demonization of Russians as "bestial untermenschen " and Jews as "the decisive leader of untermenschen ".

[ 29 ] It was translated into Greek, French, Dutch, Danish, Bulgarian, Hungarian, Czech and seven other languages. It gives the following definition of an Untermensch : The subhuman is a biological creature, crafted by nature, which has hands, legs, eyes and mouth, even the semblance of a brain. Nevertheless, this terrible creature is only a partial human being. Although it has features similar to a human, the subhuman is lower on the spiritual and psychological scale than any animal. Inside this being is a cruel chaos of wild, unrestrained passions, nameless desire for destruction, the most primitive desires, the most naked meanness.

[ clarification needed ] Spanish Falangism [ edit ] This section may lend undue weight to certain ideas, incidents, or controversies .

Please help improve it by rewriting it to create a more balanced presentation . Discuss and resolve this issue before removing this message.

( December 2024 ) In Spain , in addition to the term underman , the terms subhuman and degenerate are frequent in speeches and articles, especially from the 1930s. These are words used naturally in the newspapers, without explanations of the specific meaning, so it can be deduced that they were general knowledge. They are terms that increase in intensity during the October Events , [ 30 ] [ 31 ] and during the civil war .

[ 32 ] As the civil war approaches or takes place, there is a divergence in the meaning of subhuman, on the rebel side it acquires a racial/ eugenic meaning, [ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] beside ideologic, [ 36 ] while on the republican side it is more of a cultural type.

[ 32 ] Once the war was won by the rebel side, Francoism, similar to Nazi Germany (and Soviet Russia as well [ 37 ] [ 38 ] ), promoted the idea of creating a new man , [ 32 ] [ 39 ] which led to the brutal repression of the Spanish population .

[ 40 ] Gonzalo de Aguilera , the press officer for the Nationalist faction during the Spanish Civil War, made the following classicidal statements to journalist John T. Whitaker : [ 41 ] "We have to kill, kill, you know? They are like animals, you know, and we cannot expect them to get rid of the virus of Bolshevism. After all, rats and lice are the carriers of the plague. Now I hope you understand what we mean by the regeneration of Spain... Our programme consists... of exterminating one third of the male population of Spain. That would cleanse the country and get rid of the proletariat. And it is also economically convenient. There will be no more unemployment in Spain, do you understand?" Policies of Nazi Germany [ edit ] When faced with increasing military manpower shortages, the Nazi regime used soldiers from some Slavic countries, firstly from the Reich's allies Croatia and Slovakia [ 42 ] as well as within occupied territories.

[ 43 ] The concept of the Slavs in particular being Untermenschen served the Nazis' political goals; it was used to justify their expansionist policy and especially their aggression against Poland and the Soviet Union in order to achieve Lebensraum , particularly in Ukraine . Early plans of the Nazi officials (summarized as Generalplan Ost ) envisioned the ethnic cleansing and extermination of no fewer than 50 million people, who were not considered fit for Germanization , from territories it wanted to conquer in Europe. Nazi planners considered  Ukraine's chernozem ("black earth") soil as a particularly desirable zone for colonization.

[ 8 ] Eastern Europe [ edit ] Main article: Generalplan Ost During the war, Nazi propaganda instructed Wehrmacht officers to tell their soldiers to target people whom they considered "Jewish Bolshevik subhumans". In addition, Nazi Germany conducted its warfare against the Soviet Union as a racial war targeting Jews, Romanis , Slavs , and various indigenous inhabitants of Eastern Europe who were categorized as "untermenschen" in the Nazi ideology.

[ 44 ] Nazis viewed Russians as animalistic sub-humans who were incapable of mounting any form of collective resistance against a German invasion. Nazi anti-Slavism was also tied to the Judeo-Bolshevik conspiracy theory; which claimed that Slavs were inferior people controlled by Jews as pawns in their plots against Aryans.

[ 45 ] Prior to the launch of Operation Barbarossa , the Wehrmacht 's High Command began issuing orders to enable German soldiers to indiscriminately target the inhabitants of Eastern Europe and unleash systematic violence against entire populations.

German Army was instructed to grant carte blanche to the anti-Jewish massacres carried out by the Einsatzgruppen death squads in German-occupied territories.

[ 46 ] “ Guidelines for the Conduct of the Troops in Russia ” issued by the German High Command in 19 May 1941, ordered German troops to target Jews, partisans, Bolsheviks, etc. and described the war in Eastern Europe as a "historic task to liberate the German people once forever from the Asiatic-Jewish danger".

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] In 1943 Himmler issued a secret order for the destruction of the Warsaw Ghetto in order to eliminate the "living space" of 500,000 Untermenschen , unsuitable for the Germans.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] [ 50 ] [ 51 ] Sub-human types [ edit ] The Nazis divided the people who they considered the sub-humans into different types; they placed priority on the extermination of the Jews, and the exploitation of others as slaves.

[ 52 ] Historian Robert Jan van Pelt writes that for the Nazis, "it was only a small step to a rhetoric pitting the European Mensch against the Soviet Untermensch , which had come to mean a Russian in the clutches of Judeo-Bolshevism ." [ 53 ] The Untermensch concept included Jews, Roma and Sinti (Gypsies), and Slavic peoples such as Poles, Ukrainians, and Russians.

[ 8 ] Slavs were regarded as Untermenschen , barely fit for exploitation as slaves.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] Hitler and Goebbels compared them to the "rabbit family" or to "stolid animals" that were "idle" and "disorganized" and spread like a "wave of filth".

[ 56 ] However, some among the Slavs who happened to have Nordic racial features were deemed to have distant Germanic descent which meant partially "Aryan" origin, and if under 10 years old, they were to be Germanized (see: kidnapping of children by Nazi Germany ).

The Nazis were utterly contemptuous of the Slavs , as even prior to World War II, Slavs – particularly the Poles – were deemed to be inferior to Germans and other Aryans. After Adolf Hitler gained political power in Germany, the concept of non-Aryan "sub-human slave-material" was developed and started to be used also towards other Slavic peoples.

[ 57 ] Poles were at the bottom of the Slavic "racial hierarchy" established by the Nazis. Soon after the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact expired, Russians also started to be seen as "subhumans". Similarly, Belarusians , Czechs , Slovaks , and Ukrainians were considered to be inferior.

[ 58 ] Nonetheless, there were Slavs such as Bosniaks , Bulgarians , and Croats who collaborated with Nazi Germany that were still being perceived as not racially "pure" enough to reach the status of Germanic peoples , yet they were eventually considered ethnically better than other Slavs, mostly due to  theories about these nations having a minimal amount of Slavic genes and considerable admixtures of Germanic and Turkic blood.

[ 3 ] [ 59 ] In order to forge a strategic alliance with the Independent State of Croatia – a puppet state created after the invasion of Yugoslavia and the Kingdom of Bulgaria , the Nazis deviated from a strict interpretation of their racial ideology, and Croats were officially described as "more Germanic than Slav", a notion supported by Croatia's fascist ( Ustashe ) dictator Ante Pavelić who maintained that the "Croats were descendants of the ancient Goths " and "had the Panslav idea forced upon them as something artificial".

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] Hitler also deemed the Bulgarians to be " Turkoman " in origin.

[ 61 ] This poster (from around 1938) reads: "60,000 Reichsmark is what this person suffering from a hereditary defect costs the People's community during his lifetime. Fellow citizen, that is your money too. Read the Neues Volk , the monthly magazine of the Office of Racial Policy of the NSDAP ." While the Nazis were inconsistent in the implementation of their policy – for instance, mostly implementing the Final Solution while also implementing Generalplan Ost – the democidal death toll was in the range of tens of millions of victims.

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] It is related to the concept of " life unworthy of life ", a more specific term which originally referred to the severely disabled who were involuntarily euthanised in Aktion T4 , and was eventually applied to the extermination of the Jews. That policy of euthanasia started officially on 1 September 1939 when Hitler signed an edict to the effect, and carbon monoxide was first used to murder disabled patients. The same gas was used in the death camps such as Treblinka , although they used engine exhaust gases to achieve the same end. In directive No. 1306 by Reich Ministry of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda from 24 October 1939, the term "Untermensch" is used in reference to Polish ethnicity and culture, as follows: It must become clear to everybody in Germany, even to the last milkmaid, that Polishness is equal to subhumanity. Poles, Jews and Gypsies are on the same inferior level. This must be clearly outlined [...] until every citizen of Germany has it encoded in his subconsciousness that every Pole, whether a farm worker or intellectual, should be treated like vermin.

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] Biology classes in Nazi-era Germany schools taught about differences between the race of Nordic German " Übermenschen " and "ignoble" Jewish and Slavic "subhumans".

[ 66 ] The view that Slavs were subhuman was widespread among the German masses, and chiefly applied to the Poles. It continued to find support after the war.

[ 67 ] See also [ edit ] Germany portal Antisemitism Anti-Romani sentiment Anti-Slavic sentiment Aryan race Master race Nazi racial theories References [ edit ] Notes ^ "Booklet" .

United States Holocaust Memorial Museum . Archived from the original on 30 June 2016.

^ Connelly, John (March 1999).

"Nazis and Slavs: From Racial Theory to Racist Practice" .

Central European History .

32 (1).

Cambridge University Press : 1– 33.

doi : 10.1017/S0008938900020628 .

PMID 20077627 .

S2CID 41052845 .

^ a b Gumkowski, Janusz; Leszczynski, Kazimierz; Robert, Edward (1961).

Hitler's Plans for Eastern Europe . Poland Under Nazi Occupation (First ed.). Polonia Pub. House. p. 219.

ASIN B0006BXJZ6 . Archived from the original (Paperback) on 9 April 2011 . Retrieved 12 March 2014 .

The category of sub-human (Untermensch) included Slavic peoples (Poles, Russians, Serbs, etc.) Gypsies and Jews.

^ Berenbaum, Michel; Peck, Abraham J. (1998).

The Holocaust and History: The Known, the Unknown, the Disputed, and the Reexamined .

United States Holocaust Memorial Museum , Indiana University Press . pp. 59 & 37.

ISBN 978-0253215291 .

^ Snyder, Timothy (2011) Bloodlands: Europe between Hitler and Stalin London:Vintage. pp.144-5, 188 ISBN 978-0-09-955179-9 ^ Mineau, André (2004).

Operation Barbarossa: Ideology and Ethics Against Human Dignity . Amsterdam; New York: Rodopi. p. 180.

ISBN 90-420-1633-7 ^ Gigliotti, Simone and Lang, Berel (2005) The Holocaust: A Reader London:Blackwell Publishing. p. 14 ^ a b c "Hitler's Plans for Eastern Europe" .

Northeastern University . Archived from the original on 27 May 2012 . Retrieved 10 July 2010 .

^ a b Stoddard, Lothrop (1922).

The Revolt Against Civilization: The Menace of the Under Man . New York: Charles Scribner's Sons .

^ Losurdo, Domenico (2004).

"Toward a Critique of the Category of Totalitarianism" (PDF, 0.2 MB) .

Historical Materialism .

12 (2). Translated by Marella & Jon Morris.

Brill : 25– 55, here p. 50.

doi : 10.1163/1569206041551663 .

ISSN 1465-4466 .

^ Paterson, Tony (7 April 2014).

"A History of the First World War in 100 Moments: Austro-Hungarian army executes civilians in Serbia" .

The Independent . Archived from the original on 21 April 2014 . Retrieved 22 December 2021 .

Anti-Serb propaganda postcards on sale in the Austrian capital depicted Serbs as backward "Untermenschen" or "Sub humans" – a term later used by Adolf Hitler and the Nazis to describe Jews and Slavs. Some advocated that Serbs should be boiled alive in cauldrons or stuck on forks and eaten.

^ Rosenberg, Alfred (1930).

Der Mythus des 20. Jahrhunderts: Eine Wertung der seelischgeistigen Gestaltungskämpfe unserer Zeit [ The Myth of the Twentieth Century ] (in German). Munich: Hoheneichen-Verlag. p. 214. Archived from the original on 4 November 2012 . Retrieved 18 September 2017 .

^ Hitler, Adolf; Hugh Trevor-Roper .

Adolf Hitler's Secret Conversations 1941-1944 , p. 400.

^ Steigmann-Gall, Richard (21 April 2003).

The Holy Reich: Nazi Conceptions of Christianity, 1919–1945 . Cambridge University Press. p. 130.

ISBN 978-1-107-39392-9 .

As he told a circle of confidants, 'What nonsense! Here we have at last reached an age that has left all mysticism behind, and now he wants to start that all over again. To think that I may some day be turned into an SS saint! [...]' ^ Albert Speer, Erinnerungen, Frankfurt am Main / Berlin / Wien 1969, p. 139 ^ Cite error: The named reference ReferenceA was invoked but never defined (see the help page ).

^ Cite error: The named reference Eatwell, 1995, p. 119 was invoked but never defined (see the help page ).

^ Steigmann-Gall, Richard (21 April 2003).

The Holy Reich: Nazi Conceptions of Christianity, 1919–1945 . Cambridge University Press. p. 93.

ISBN 978-1-107-39392-9 .

Goebbels was characteristically succinct, describing the book as an 'ideological belch.' ^ Fontane, Theodor (1898).

"Der Stechlin: 33. Kapitel" .

Der Stechlin [ The Stechlin ] (in German). Contumax GmbH & Company KG.

ISBN 978-3-86640-258-4 .

Jetzt hat man statt des wirklichen Menschen den sogenannten Übermenschen etabliert; eigentlich gibt es aber bloß noch Untermenschen, und mitunter sind es gerade die, die man durchaus zu einem ›Über‹ machen will. (Now one has established instead of the real human the so-called superhuman; but actually only subhumans are left, and sometimes they are the very ones that are tried to be declared as 'super'.) {{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Nietzsche, Friedrich (1882).

"Kapitel 143: Größter Nutzen des Polytheismus" .

Die fröhliche Wissenschaft [ The Gay Science ] (in German). Vol. 3rd book. Chemnitz: Ernst Schmeitzner.

Die Erfindung von Göttern, Heroen und Übermenschen aller Art, sowie von Neben- und Untermenschen, von Zwergen, Feen, Zentauren, Satyrn, Dämonen und Teufeln war die unschätzbare Vorübung zur Rechtfertigung der Selbstsucht und Selbstherrlichkeit des einzelnen [...]. (The invention of gods, heroes, and overmen of all kinds, as well as near-men and undermen, of dwarfs, fairies, centaurs, satyrs, demons and devils was the inestimable preliminary exercise for the justification of the egoism and sovereignty of the individual [...]) [From the translation by Walter Kaufmann] ^ Paul, Jean (1795).

"8. Hundposttag" .

Hesperus oder 45 Hundposttage (in German).

Obgleich Leute aus der großen und größten Welt, wie der Unter-Mensch, der Urangutang, im 25sten Jahre ausgelebt und ausgestorben haben – vielleicht sind deswegen die Könige in manchen Ländern schon im 14ten Jahre mündig –, so hatte doch Jenner sein Leben nicht so weit zurückdatiert und war wirklich älter als mancher Jüngling. (Although people from the great world and the greatest have, like the sub-man, the orang-outang, lived out and died out in their twenty-fifth year, — for which reason, perhaps, in many countries kings are placed under guardianship as early as their fourteenth, — nevertheless January had not ante-dated his life so far, and was really older than many a youth.) [From the translation by Charles T. Brooks] ^ "Kampf dem Weltfeind", Stürmer publishing house, Nuremberg, 1938, 05/25/1927, speech in the Bavarian regional parliament, German: "Es war zur Zeit der Räteherrschaft. Als das losgelassene Untermenschentum mordend durch die Straßen zog, da versteckten sich Abgeordnete hinter einem Kamin im bayerischen Landtag." ^ Himmler, Heinrich (1936).

Die Schutzstaffel als antibolschewistische Kampforganisation [ The SS as an Anti-bolshevist Fighting Organization ] (in German). Munich: Franz Eher Nachfolger .

Wir werden dafür sorgen, daß niemals mehr in Deutschland, dem Herzen Europas, von innen oder durch Emissäre von außen her die jüdisch-bolschewistische Revolution des Untermenschen entfacht werden kann.

^ Office of United States Chief of Counsel For Prosecution of Axis Criminality (1946). "Chapter XV: Criminality of Groups and Organizations – 5. Die Schutzstaffeln".

Nazi Conspiracy and Aggression (PDF, 46.2 MB) . Vol. II. Washington, D.C.: USGPO . p. 220.

OCLC 315871222 .

^ Stein, Stuart D. (8 January 1999).

"The Schutzstaffeln (SS) – The Nuremberg Charges, Part I" .

Web Genocide Documentation Centre .

University of the West of England . Archived from the original on 17 August 2010 . Retrieved 10 July 2010 .

^ Paul Meier-Benneckenstein, Deutsche Hochschule für Politik Titel: Dokumente der Deutschen Politik, Volume 4, Junker und Dünnhaupt Verlag, Berlin, 2. ed., 1937; speech held on 10 September 1936; In German: "... das Untermenschentum, das in jedem Volke als Hefe vorhanden ist ...".

^ Goebbels speech at the 1935 Nuremberg Rally ^ Sources: Müller, R. Ueberschar, Rolf-Dieter, Gerd (2009).

Hitler's war in the East, 1941-1945 . 150 Broadway, New York, NY 10038, United States: Berghahn Books. p. 245.

ISBN 978-1-84545-501-9 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location ( link ) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) "Der Untermensch" .

Bulmash Family Holocaust Collection . January 1942. Archived from the original on 26 November 2020.

E. Aschheim, Steven (1992). "8: Nietzsche in the Third Reich".

The Nietzsche Legacy in Germany, 1890-1990 . Los Angeles, California, United States: University of California Press. pp. 236, 237.

ISBN 0-520-08555-8 .

^ Sources: Müller, R. Ueberschar, Rolf-Dieter, Gerd (2009).

Hitler's war in the East, 1941-1945 . 150 Broadway, New York, NY 10038, United States: Berghahn Books. p. 245.

ISBN 978-1-84545-501-9 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location ( link ) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) "Der Untermensch" .

Bulmash Family Holocaust Collection . January 1942. Archived from the original on 26 November 2020.

E. Aschheim, Steven (1992). "8: Nietzsche in the Third Reich".

The Nietzsche Legacy in Germany, 1890-1990 . Los Angeles, California, United States: University of California Press. pp. 236, 237.

ISBN 0-520-08555-8 .

^ Calero, Antonio Mª (1985). "Outubro visto da direita". Em Gabriel Jackson e outros, ed. Outubro de 1934. Cinquenta anos de reflexão . Madri: século XXI. pág. 162-163.

ISBN 84-323-0515-4 ^ García, Hugo. “Historia de Un Mito Político: El Peligro Comunista En El Discurso de Las Derechas Españolas (1918-1936).” Historia Social , no. 51, 2005, pp. 3–20.

JSTOR , http://www.jstor.org/stable/40340928. Accessed 18 Nov. 2024.

^ a b c Llaudo, Avila (2021).

Racisme i supremacisme polítics a l'Espanya contemporània (in Catalan) (7 ed.). Parcir edicions.

ISBN 9788418849107 .

^ Vinyes Ribas, Ricard. CONSTRUYENDO A CAÍN. Ayer, nº 44, 2001, p.p. 227-250 ^ FERNÁNDEZ, José Guillermo Fouce, et al. España y sus derechos humanos: una deuda. Revista Digital Universitaria. 01 de julio 2010 • Volumen 11 Número 7 • ISSN: 1067-6079 ^ GUZMÁN, Eduardo de, et al. El terror desde el poder. Tiempo de historia. Año VIII, n. 92-93 (1 jul. 1982), p. 32-45 ^ Fresán Cuenca, F. J. (1). Un ideólogo olvidado: el joven José Antonio Maravall y la defensa del Estado Nacionalsindicalista. Su colaboración en "Arriba", órgano oficial de FET y de las JONS. 1939-1941.

Memoria Y Civilización , 6 , 153-187. https://doi.org/10.15581/001.6.33779 ^ Nikolay Ustryalov , From NEP to Soviet Socialism (1934) ( text online Archived 2 October 2023 at the Wayback Machine ) (in Russian) [ page needed ] ^ Geller, Mikhail (1988).

Cogs in the wheel : the formation of Soviet man . New York: Knopf.

ISBN 9780394569260 .

^ Vinyes Ribas, Ricard. Las desapariciones infantiles durante el franquismo y sus consecuencias. International Journal of Iberian Studies, Volume 19, Issue 1, Aug 2006, p. 53 - 7. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1386/ijis.19.1.53/1 ^ Preston, Paul (2013).

The Spanish Holocaust (1st ed.). HarperPress.

ISBN 978-0006386957 .

^ Moreno Gallo, Miguel Angel; Rilova Pérez, Isaac; Sanz, Clara (2018).

La prensa en Burgos durante la Guerra Civil (in Spanish). Madrid: Ed. Frágua.

ISBN 9788470748257 .

^ According to Nazi policy, the Croats were considered more "Germanic than Slavic"; this claim was supported by Croatia's fascist dictator Ante Pavelić , who maintained the view that the Croatians were the descendants of the ancient Goths along with the view that they "had the Pan-Slav idea forced upon them as something artificial".

Rich, Norman (1974).

Hitler's War Aims: the Establishment of the New Order , p. 276–277. W. W. Norton & Company Inc., New York.

^ Norman Davies.

Europe at War 1939–1945: No Simple Victory . Pp. 167, 209.

^ Burleigh, Michael (2000).

The Third Reich: A New History . Pan Macmillan. p. 512.

ISBN 978-0-330-48757-3 .

Many wars include instances of brutality and inhumanity, especially when they involve irregulars, but this is rarely cither premeditated or systemic. The German campaign in the Soviet Union was both. As a final reckoning between two antagonistic dictatorships, and a biologistic campaign against Bolsheviks, Jews, Gypsies and Slavic 'Untermenschen', the war in the East had a fundamentally different register from that in the West.

^ J. Evans, Richard (1989).

In Hitler's Shadow: West German historians and the attempt to escape from the Nazi past . New York, USA: Pantheon Books. pp. 46, 58.

ISBN 0-394-57686-1 .

^ a b J. Evans, Richard (1989).

In Hitler's Shadow: West German historians and the attempt to escape from the Nazi past . New York, USA: Pantheon Books. p. 58.

ISBN 0-394-57686-1 .

^ "Excerpts from "Guidelines for the Conduct of the Troops in Russia" (May 19, 1941)" .

Kirkwood Community College . Archived from the original on 11 February 2024.

^ Orders to Friedrich Krueger for the destruction of the Warsaw ghetto , a photocopy at the Harvard Law School Library  Nuremberg Trials Project ^ Deux documents allemands touchant la destruction du ghetto de Varsovie , sourced to Le Monde , Juif 1950/4 (N° 30), page 16; includes a low-resolution photocopy of the original Himmler's order ^ Josef Wulf , "Vom Leben. Kampf und Tod im Ghetto Warsau" , April 16, 1958, p. 176 ^ Yitzhak Arad ; Yisrael Gutman ; Abraham Margaliot (1999).

Documents on the Holocaust: Selected Sources on the Destruction of the Jews of Germany and Austria, Poland, and the Soviet Union . U of Nebraska Press. p. 292.

ISBN 0-8032-1050-7 .

^ Quality of Life: The New Medical Dilemma , edited by James J. Walter, Thomas Anthony Shannon, page 63 ^ van Pelt, Robert-Jan (January 1994). "Auschwitz: From Architect's Promise to Inmate's Perdition".

Modernism/Modernity .

1 (1): 80– 120, here p. 97.

doi : 10.1353/mod.1994.0013 .

ISSN 1071-6068 .

S2CID 145199283 .

^ Longerich, Peter (2010).

Holocaust: The Nazi Persecution and Murder of the Jews . Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press . p.

241 .

ISBN 978-0-19-280436-5 .

^ Huer, Jon (2012).

Call from the Cave: Our Cruel Nature and Quest for Power . Lanham, Maryland: Hamilton Books . p. 278.

ISBN 978-0-7618-6015-0 .

The Nazis considered any human being in the "east", usually the Slavs, as "sub-human", only fit for slavery to the Germans.

^ Sealing Their Fate (Large Print 16pt) by David Downing, page 49 ^ Timm, Annette F. (2010) The Politics of Fertility in Twentieth-Century Berlin . London: Cambridge University Press. p. 188 ISBN 9780521195393 ^ Oliver Rathkolb (2002).

Revisiting the National Socialist Legacy: Coming to Terms With Forced Labor, Expropriation, Compensation, and Restitution . Transaction Publishers. p. 84.

ISBN 978-1-4128-3323-3 .

Being Slavs the Russians, Ukrainians, Poles and Serbs were only slightly above the Jews in the racial hierarchy.

^ Shirer, William L.

(1960) The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich . New York: Simon and Schuster. pp.937, 939. Quotes: "The Jews and the Slavic people were the Untermenschen – subhumans." (937); "[The] obsession of the Germans with the idea that they were the master race and that Slavic people must be their slaves was especially virulent in regard to Russia.

Erich Koch , the roughneck Reich Commissar for the Ukraine , expressed it in a speech at Kiev on 5 March 1943.

We are the Master Race and must govern hard but just ... I will draw the very last out of this country. I did not come to spread bliss ... The population must work, work, and work again [...] We are a master race, which must remember that the lowliest German worker is racially and biologically a thousand times more valuable than the population [of the Ukraine]. (emphasis added) ^ Rich, Norman (1974) Hitler's War Aims: the Establishment of the New Order . New York: W. W. Norton & Company.  p.276-7.

^ a b Hitler, Adolf and  Weinberg, Gerhard (2007) Hitler's Table Talk, 1941-1944: His Private Conversations . Enigma Books.  p.356. Quoting Hitler: "For example to label the Bulgarians as Slavs is pure nonsense; originally they were Turkomans." ^ Rees, L (1997) The Nazis: A Warning from History , BBC Books, P126 ^ Mazower, M (2008) Hitler's Empire: How the Nazis Ruled Europe , Penguin Press P197 ^ Wegner, Bernt (1997) [1991].

From Peace to War: Germany, Soviet Russia, and the World, 1939-1941 .

Berghahn Books . p. 50.

ISBN 978-1-57181-882-9 .

^ Ceran, Tomasz (2015).

The History of a Forgotten German Camp: Nazi Ideology and Genocide at Szmalcówka . I.B.Tauris. p. 24.

ISBN 978-0-85773-553-9 .

^ Hitler Youth, 1922–1945: An Illustrated History by Jean-Denis Lepage, page 91 ^ Native Realm: A Search for Self Definition by Czeslaw Milosz , page 132 Further reading Lukas, Dr. Richard (1986).

The Forgotten Holocaust: Poles Under Nazi Occupation 1939-1944 . New York: University of Kentucky Press /Hippocrene Books.

ISBN 0-7818-0901-0 .

External links [ edit ] Look up untermensch in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Der Untermensch Archived 11 March 2009 at the Wayback Machine propaganda poster published by the SS .

Hitler's plans for Eastern Europe at archive.today (archived 2012-05-27) " Die Drohung des Untermenschen " This is an example of the term " Untermensch " being used in the context of the Nazi eugenics programme. The table suggests that "inferior" people (unmarried and married criminals, parents whose children have learning disabilities) have more children than "superior" people (ordinary Germans, academics). Note that the heading is the subtitle of the German version of Lothrop Stoddard 's book.

v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Untermensch&oldid=1305831283 " Categories : 1920s neologisms American English words Anti-black racism in Germany Anti-Polish sentiment Antiziganism in Germany Anti-Belarusian sentiment Anti-Russian sentiment Anti-Ukrainian sentiment Anti-Serbian sentiment Anti-Slavic sentiment Anti-LGBTQ sentiment Axis powers German words and phrases Historical definitions of race Holocaust terminology Race in Nazi Germany Racism in Germany Ethnic and religious slurs Antisemitism in Germany Anti-Marxism Racism Nazi eugenics Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Pages with reference errors CS1 German-language sources (de) Pages with broken reference names CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1: long volume value CS1 maint: location CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 Catalan-language sources (ca) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Russian-language sources (ru) Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2010 CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2019 Articles with excerpts Pages with German IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Wikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2023 Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes from December 2024 All Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes Articles containing German-language text Webarchive template archiveis links This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 09:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Untermensch 35 languages Add topic

