Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical development Toggle Historical development subsection 1.1 Classical antecedents 1.1.1 Ancient Greece 1.1.2 Ancient Rome 1.2 Renaissance republicanism 1.2.1 Dutch Republic 1.2.2 Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth 1.3 Enlightenment republicanism 1.3.1 Caribbean 1.3.2 Corsica 1.3.3 England 1.3.4 French and Swiss thought 1.3.5 Thirteen British Colonies in North America 1.3.6 Républicanisme 1.3.7 Ireland 2 Modern republicanism Toggle Modern republicanism subsection 2.1 Brazil 2.2 France 2.3 Italy 2.4 Latin America 2.5 Spain 2.6 Turkey 2.7 United Kingdom 2.8 United States 3 Theory Toggle Theory subsection 3.1 Neo-republicanism 3.2 Democracy 3.3 Constitutional monarchs and upper chambers 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 6.1 General 6.2 Europe 6.3 United States 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Republicanism 56 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Latviešu La .lojban.

Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political ideology centered on citizenship in a state organized as a republic For other uses, see Republican (disambiguation) .

Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e Part of the Politics Series Party politics Political spectrum Left-wing Far-left Centre-left Centre Centre-left Radical centre Centre-right Right-wing Centre-right Far-right Syncretism Major ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Christian democracy Communism Conservatism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Green politics Hindutva Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Monarchism Nationalism Populism Progressivism Classical radicalism Republicanism Social democracy Socialism Syncretism Third Way Types Bloc party Elite party Cartel party Competitive Catch-all party Entrepreneurial party Ethnic party Fraternal party Major party / Minor party Mass party Ruling party / Opposition party Rump party Parliamentary opposition Party of power Official party status Single-issue party Transnational / International Leaders and organization Backbencher Caucus Caucus chair Frontbencher Lead candidate Leader of the Opposition Majority leader Minority leader Political faction Parliamentary leader Party chair Party leader Party spokesperson Party secretary Shadow cabinet Whip Internal elections Primary election Leadership election Open list Party convention/conference Leadership convention Party discipline Conscience vote Crossing the floor Party discipline Party line Party-line vote Party switching Whip Party systems One-party Dominant-party Two-party Multi-party Non-partisan Coalitions between parties Parliamentary group Divided government Coalition government Confidence and supply Consensus government Cordon sanitaire Grand coalition Hung parliament Majority government Minority government National unity government Rotation government Tech-Trad Alliance Lists of political parties Ruling parties by country Political parties by region Banned political parties Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Republicanism is a political ideology that encompasses a range of ideas from civic virtue , political participation , harms of corruption , positives of mixed constitution , rule of law , and others.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Historically, it emphasizes the idea of self-governance and ranges from the rule of a representative minority or aristocracy to popular sovereignty . It has had different definitions and interpretations which vary significantly based on historical context and methodological approach. In countries ruled by a monarch or similar ruler such as the United Kingdom, republicanism is simply the wish to replace the hereditary monarchy by some form of elected republic.

[ 8 ] Republicanism may also refer to the non-ideological scientific approach to politics and governance. As the republican thinker and second president of the United States John Adams stated in the introduction to his famous A Defense of the Constitutions of Government of the United States of America , [ 9 ] the "science of politics is the science of social happiness" and a republic is the form of government arrived at when the science of politics is appropriately applied to the creation of a rationally designed government.

Rather than being ideological, this approach focuses on applying a scientific methodology to the problems of governance through the rigorous study and application of past experience and experimentation in governance. This is the approach that may best be described to apply to republican thinkers such as Niccolò Machiavelli (as evident in his Discourses on Livy ), John Adams, and James Madison .

The word "republic" derives from the Latin noun-phrase res publica (public thing), which referred to the system of government that emerged in the 6th century BCE following the expulsion of the kings from Rome by Lucius Junius Brutus and Collatinus .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] This form of government in the Roman state collapsed in the latter part of the 1st century BCE, giving way to what was a monarchy in form, if not in name. Republics recurred subsequently, with, for example, Renaissance Florence or early modern Britain . The concept of a republic became a powerful force in Britain's North American colonies, where it contributed to the American Revolution . In Europe, it gained enormous influence through the French Revolution and through the First French Republic of 1792–1804.

Historical development [ edit ] Main article: Classical republicanism Classical antecedents [ edit ] Ancient Greece [ edit ] Sculpture of Aristotle In Ancient Greece , several philosophers and historians analysed and described elements we now recognize as classical republicanism . Traditionally, the Greek concept of " politeia " was rendered into Latin as res publica. Consequently, political theory until relatively recently often used republic in the general sense of "regime". There is no single written expression or definition from this era that exactly corresponds with a modern understanding of the term "republic" but most of the essential features of the modern definition are present in the works of Plato , Aristotle and Polybius . These include theories of mixed government and of civic virtue . For example, in The Republic , Plato places great emphasis on the importance of civic virtue (aiming for the good) together with personal virtue ('just man') on the part of the ideal rulers. Indeed, in Book V, Plato asserts that until rulers have the nature of philosophers (Socrates) or philosophers become the rulers, there can be no civic peace or happiness.

[ 12 ] A number of Ancient Greek city-states such as Athens and Sparta have been classified as " classical republics ", because they featured extensive participation by the citizens in legislation and political decision-making. Aristotle considered Carthage to have been a republic as it had a political system similar to that of some of the Greek cities, notably Sparta, but avoided some of the defects that affected them.

Ancient Rome [ edit ] Sculpture of Cicero Both Livy , a Roman historian, and Plutarch , who is noted for his biographies and moral essays, described how Rome had developed its legislation, notably the transition from a kingdom to a republic , by following the example of the Greeks. Some of this history, composed more than 500 years after the events, with scant written sources to rely on, may be fictitious reconstruction.

The Greek historian Polybius , writing in the mid-2nd century BCE, emphasized (in Book 6) the role played by the Roman Republic as an institutional form in the dramatic rise of Rome's hegemony over the Mediterranean. In his writing on the constitution of the Roman Republic, [ 13 ] Polybius described the system as being a "mixed" form of government. Specifically, Polybius described the Roman system as a mixture of monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy with the Roman Republic constituted in such a manner that it applied the strengths of each system to offset the weaknesses of the others. In his view, the mixed system of the Roman Republic provided the Romans with a much greater level of domestic tranquillity than would have been experienced under another form of government. Furthermore, Polybius argued, the comparative level of domestic tranquillity the Romans enjoyed allowed them to conquer the Mediterranean. Polybius exerted a great influence on Cicero as he wrote his politico-philosophical works in the 1st century BCE. In one of these works, De re publica , Cicero linked the Roman concept of res publica to the Greek politeia .

The modern term "republic", despite its derivation, is not synonymous with the Roman res publica .

[ 14 ] Among the several meanings of the term res publica , it is most often translated "republic" where the Latin expression refers to the Roman state, and its form of government, between the era of the Kings and the era of the Emperors. This Roman Republic would, by a modern understanding of the word, still be defined as a true republic, even if not coinciding entirely. Thus, Enlightenment philosophers saw the Roman Republic as an ideal system because it included features like a systematic separation of powers .

Romans still called their state "Res Publica" in the era of the early emperors because, on the surface, the organization of the state had been preserved by the first emperors without significant alteration. Several offices from the Republican era, held by individuals, were combined under the control of a single person. These changes became permanent, and gradually conferred sovereignty on the Emperor.

Cicero's description of the ideal state, in De re Publica , does not equate to a modern-day "republic"; it is more like enlightened absolutism . His philosophical works were influential when Enlightenment philosophers such as Voltaire developed their political concepts.

In its classical meaning, a republic was any stable well-governed political community. Both Plato and Aristotle identified three forms of government: democracy , aristocracy , and monarchy . First Plato and Aristotle, and then Polybius and Cicero, held that the ideal republic is a mixture of these three forms of government. The writers of the Renaissance embraced this notion.

Cicero expressed reservations concerning the republican form of government. While in his theoretical works he defended monarchy, or at least a mixed monarchy/oligarchy, in his own political life, he generally opposed men, like Julius Caesar , Mark Antony , and Octavian , who were trying to realise such ideals. Eventually, that opposition led to his death and Cicero can be seen as a victim of his own Republican ideals.

Tacitus , a contemporary of Plutarch, was not concerned with whether a form of government could be analysed as a "republic" or a "monarchy".

[ 15 ] He analysed how the powers accumulated by the early Julio-Claudian dynasty were all given by a State that was still notionally a republic. Nor was the Roman Republic "forced" to give away these powers: it did so freely and reasonably, certainly in Augustus ' case, because of his many services to the state, freeing it from civil wars and disorder.

Tacitus was one of the first to ask whether such powers were given to the head of state because the citizens wanted to give them, or whether they were given for other reasons (for example, because one had a deified ancestor ). The latter case led more easily to abuses of power. In Tacitus' opinion, the trend away from a true republic was irreversible only when Tiberius established power, shortly after Augustus' death in 14 CE (much later than most historians place the start of the Imperial form of government in Rome). By this time, too many principles defining some powers as "untouchable" had been implemented.

[ 16 ] Renaissance republicanism [ edit ] Portrait of Niccolò Machiavelli In Europe, republicanism was revived in the late Middle Ages when a number of states, which arose from medieval communes , embraced a republican system of government.

[ 17 ] These were generally small but wealthy trading states in which the merchant class had risen to prominence. Haakonssen notes that by the Renaissance, Europe was divided, such that those states controlled by a landed elite were monarchies, and those controlled by a commercial elite were republics. The latter included the Italian city-states of Florence , Genoa , and Venice and members of the Hanseatic League . One notable exception was Dithmarschen , a group of largely autonomous villages, which confederated in a peasants' republic. Building upon concepts of medieval feudalism , Renaissance scholars used the ideas of the ancient world to advance their view of an ideal government. Thus the republicanism developed during the Renaissance is known as 'classical republicanism' because it relied on classical models. This terminology was developed by Zera Fink in the 1940s, [ 18 ] but some modern scholars, such as Brugger, consider it confuses the "classical republic" with the system of government used in the ancient world.

[ 19 ] 'Early modern republicanism' has been proposed as an alternative term. It is also sometimes called civic humanism . Beyond simply a non-monarchy, early modern thinkers conceived of an ideal republic, in which mixed government was an important element, and the notion that virtue and the common good were central to good government. Republicanism also developed its own distinct view of liberty .
Renaissance authors who spoke highly of republics were rarely critical of monarchies. While Niccolò Machiavelli 's Discourses on Livy is the period's key work on republics, he also wrote the treatise The Prince , which is better remembered and more widely read, on how best to run a monarchy. The early modern writers did not see the republican model as universally applicable; most thought that it could be successful only in very small and highly urbanized city-states.

Jean Bodin in Six Books of the Commonwealth (1576) identified monarchy with republic.

[ 20 ] Classical writers like Tacitus , and Renaissance writers like Machiavelli tried to avoid an outspoken preference for one government system or another. Enlightenment philosophers, on the other hand, expressed a clear opinion.

Thomas More , writing before the Age of Enlightenment, was too outspoken for the reigning king's taste, even though he coded his political preferences in a utopian allegory.

In England a type of republicanism evolved that was not wholly opposed to monarchy; thinkers such as Thomas More, John Fisher [ 21 ] and Sir Thomas Smith saw a monarchy, firmly constrained by law, as compatible with republicanism.

Dutch Republic [ edit ] Anti- monarchism became more strident in the Dutch Republic during and after the Eighty Years' War , which began in 1568. This anti-monarchism was more propaganda than a political philosophy; most of the anti-monarchist works appeared in the form of widely distributed pamphlets . This evolved into a systematic critique of monarchy, written by men such as the brothers Johan and Peter de la Court . They saw all monarchies as illegitimate tyrannies that were inherently corrupt. These authors were more concerned with preventing the position of Stadholder from evolving into a monarchy, than with attacking their former rulers.

Dutch republicanism also influenced French Huguenots during the Wars of Religion . In the other states of early modern Europe republicanism was more moderate.

[ 22 ] Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth [ edit ] In the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth , republicanism was the influential ideology. After the establishment of the Commonwealth of Two Nations, republicans supported the status quo, of having a very weak monarch, and opposed those who thought a stronger monarchy was needed. These mostly Polish republicans, such as Łukasz Górnicki , Andrzej Wolan , and Stanisław Konarski , were well read in classical and Renaissance texts and firmly believed that their state was a republic on the Roman model, and started to call their state the Rzeczpospolita . Atypically, Polish–Lithuanian republicanism was not the ideology of the commercial class, but rather of the landed nobility, which would lose power if the monarchy were expanded. This resulted in an oligarchy of the great landed magnates.

[ 23 ] Enlightenment republicanism [ edit ] Caribbean [ edit ] Victor Hugues , Jean-Baptiste Raymond de Lacrosse and Nicolas Xavier de Ricard were prominent supporters of republicanism for various Caribbean islands.

Edwin Sandys , William Sayle and George Tucker all supported the islands becoming republics, particularly Bermuda .

Julien Fédon and Joachim Philip led the republican Fédon's rebellion between 2 March 1795 and 19 June 1796, an uprising against British rule in Grenada .

Corsica [ edit ] Portrait of Pasquale Paoli The first of the Enlightenment republics established in Europe during the 18th century occurred in the small Mediterranean island of Corsica . Although perhaps an unlikely place to act as a laboratory for such political experiments, Corsica combined a number of factors that made it unique: a tradition of village democracy; varied cultural influences from the Italian city-states, Spanish empire and Kingdom of France which left it open to the ideas of the Italian Renaissance , Spanish humanism and French Enlightenment ; and a geo-political position between these three competing powers which led to frequent power vacuums in which new regimes could be set up, testing out the fashionable new ideas of the age.

From the 1720s the island had been experiencing a series of short-lived but ongoing rebellions against its current sovereign, the Italian city-state of Genoa . During the initial period (1729–36) these merely sought to restore the control of the Spanish Empire; when this proved impossible, an independent Kingdom of Corsica (1736–40) was proclaimed, following the Enlightenment ideal of a written constitutional monarchy . But the perception grew that the monarchy had colluded with the invading power, a more radical group of reformers led by the Pasquale Paoli pushed for political overhaul, in the form of a constitutional and parliamentary republic inspired by the popular ideas of the Enlightenment.

Its governing philosophy was both inspired by the prominent thinkers of the day, notably the French philosophers Montesquieu and Voltaire and the Swiss theorist Jean-Jacques Rousseau. Not only did it include a permanent national parliament with fixed-term legislatures and regular elections, but, more radically for the time, it introduced universal male suffrage , and it is thought to be the first constitution in the world to grant women the right to vote, female suffrage did exist for heads of the family.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] It also extended Enlightened principles to other spheres, including administrative reform, the foundation of a national university at Corte , and the establishment of a popular standing army .

The Corsican Republic lasted for fifteen years, from 1755 to 1769, eventually falling to a combination of Genoese and French forces and was incorporated as a province of the Kingdom of France. But the episode resonated across Europe as an early example of Enlightened constitutional republicanism, with many of the most prominent political commentators of the day recognising it to be an experiment in a new type of popular and democratic government. Its influence was particularly notable among the French Enlightenment philosophers: Rousseau's famous work On the Social Contract (1762: chapter 10, book II) declared, in its discussion on the conditions necessary for a functional popular sovereignty, that " There is still one European country capable of making its own laws: the island of Corsica. valour and persistency with which that brave people has regained and defended its liberty well deserves that some wise man should teach it how to preserve what it has won. I have a feeling that some day that little island will astonish Europe ."; indeed Rousseau volunteered to do precisely that, offering a draft constitution for Paoli'se use.

[ 26 ] Similarly, Voltaire affirmed in his Précis du siècle de Louis XV (1769: chapter LX) that " Bravery may be found in many places, but such bravery only among free peoples ". But the influence of the Corsican Republic as an example of a sovereign people fighting for liberty and enshrining this constitutionally in the form of an Enlightened republic was even greater among the Radicals of Great Britain and North America , [ 27 ] where it was popularised via An Account of Corsica , by the Scottish essayist James Boswell . The Corsican Republic went on to influence the American revolutionaries ten years later: the Sons of Liberty , initiators of the American Revolution , would declare Pascal Paoli to be a direct inspiration for their own struggle against the British; the son of Ebenezer Mackintosh was named Pascal Paoli Mackintosh in his honour, and no fewer than five American counties are named Paoli for the same reason.

England [ edit ] Portrait of Oliver Cromwell Oliver Cromwell set up a Christian republic called the Commonwealth of England (1649–1660) which he ruled after the overthrow of King Charles I .

James Harrington was then a leading philosopher of republicanism.

John Milton was another important Republican thinker at this time, expressing his views in political tracts as well as through poetry and prose. In his epic poem Paradise Lost , for instance, Milton uses Satan's fall to suggest that unfit monarchs should be brought to justice, and that such issues extend beyond the constraints of one nation.

[ 28 ] As Christopher N. Warren argues, Milton offers "a language to critique imperialism, to question the legitimacy of dictators, to defend free international discourse, to fight unjust property relations, and to forge new political bonds across national lines." [ 28 ] This form of international Miltonic republicanism has been influential on later thinkers including 19th-century radicals Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels , according to Warren and other historians.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] The collapse of the Commonwealth of England in 1660 and the restoration of the monarchy under Charles II discredited republicanism among England's ruling circles. Nevertheless, they welcomed the liberalism , and emphasis on rights, of John Locke , which played a major role in the Glorious Revolution of 1688. Even so, republicanism flourished in the "country" party of the early 18th century ( commonwealthmen ), which denounced the corruption of the "court" party, producing a political theory that heavily influenced the American colonists. In general, the English ruling classes of the 18th century vehemently opposed republicanism, typified by the attacks on John Wilkes , and especially on the American Revolution and the French Revolution .

[ 31 ] French and Swiss thought [ edit ] Portrait of Montesquieu French and Swiss Enlightenment thinkers, such as Voltaire , Baron Charles de Montesquieu and later Jean-Jacques Rousseau , expanded upon and altered the ideas of what an ideal republic should be: some of their new ideas were scarcely traceable to antiquity or the Renaissance thinkers. Concepts they contributed, or heavily elaborated, were social contract , positive law , and mixed government . They also borrowed from, and distinguished republicanism from, the ideas of liberalism that were developing at the same time.

Liberalism and republicanism were frequently conflated during this period, because they both opposed absolute monarchy. Modern scholars see them as two distinct streams that both contributed to the democratic ideals of the modern world. An important distinction is that, while republicanism stressed the importance of civic virtue and the common good , liberalism was based on economics and individualism . It is clearest in the matter of private property, which, according to some, can be maintained only under the protection of established positive law .

Jules Ferry , Prime Minister of France from 1880 to 1885, followed both these schools of thought. He eventually enacted the Ferry Laws , which he intended to overturn the Falloux Laws by embracing the anti-clerical thinking of the Philosophes . These laws ended the Catholic Church's involvement in many government institutions in late 19th-century France, including schools.

Thirteen British Colonies in North America [ edit ] Main article: Republicanism in the United States In recent years a debate has developed over the role of republicanism in the American Revolution and in the British radicalism of the 18th century. For many decades the consensus was that liberalism , especially that of John Locke , was paramount and that republicanism had a distinctly secondary role.

[ 32 ] The new interpretations were pioneered by J.G.A. Pocock , who argued in The Machiavellian Moment (1975) that, at least in the early 18th century, republican ideas were just as important as liberal ones. Pocock's view is now widely accepted.

[ 33 ] Bernard Bailyn and Gordon Wood pioneered the argument that the American founding fathers were more influenced by republicanism than they were by liberalism. Cornell University professor Isaac Kramnick , on the other hand, argues that Americans have always been highly individualistic and therefore Lockean.

[ 34 ] Joyce Appleby has argued similarly for the Lockean influence on America.

In the decades before the American Revolution (1776), the intellectual and political leaders of the colonies studied history intently, looking for models of good government. They especially followed the development of republican ideas in England.

[ 35 ] Pocock explained the intellectual sources in America: [ 36 ] The Whig canon and the neo-Harringtonians, John Milton , James Harrington and Sidney , Trenchard , Gordon and Bolingbroke , together with the Greek, Roman, and Renaissance masters of the tradition as far as Montesquieu , formed the authoritative literature of this culture; and its values and concepts were those with which we have grown familiar: a civic and patriot ideal in which the personality was founded in property, perfected in citizenship but perpetually threatened by corruption; government figuring paradoxically as the principal source of corruption and operating through such means as patronage, faction, standing armies (opposed to the ideal of the militia), established churches (opposed to the Puritan and deist modes of American religion) and the promotion of a monied interest – though the formulation of this last concept was somewhat hindered by the keen desire for readily available paper credit common in colonies of settlement. A neoclassical politics provided both the ethos of the elites and the rhetoric of the upwardly mobile, and accounts for the singular cultural and intellectual homogeneity of the Founding Fathers and their generation.

The commitment of most Americans to these republican values made the American Revolution inevitable. Britain was increasingly seen as corrupt and hostile to republicanism, and as a threat to the established liberties the Americans enjoyed.

[ 37 ] Leopold von Ranke in 1848 claimed that American republicanism played a crucial role in the development of European liberalism: [ 38 ] By abandoning English constitutionalism and creating a new republic based on the rights of the individual, the North Americans introduced a new force in the world. Ideas spread most rapidly when they have found adequate concrete expression. Thus republicanism entered our Romanic/Germanic world.... Up to this point, the conviction had prevailed in Europe that monarchy best served the interests of the nation. Now the idea spread that the nation should govern itself. But only after a state had actually been formed on the basis of the theory of representation did the full significance of this idea become clear. All later revolutionary movements have this same goal... This was the complete reversal of a principle. Until then, a king who ruled by the grace of God had been the center around which everything turned. Now the idea emerged that power should come from below.... These two principles are like two opposite poles, and it is the conflict between them that determines the course of the modern world. In Europe the conflict between them had not yet taken on concrete form; with the French Revolution it did.

Républicanisme [ edit ] See also: French republicans under the Restoration Portrait of Jean-Jacques Rousseau Republicanism, especially that of Rousseau , played a central role in the French Revolution and foreshadowed modern republicanism.

[ 39 ] The revolutionaries, after overthrowing the French monarchy in the 1790s, began by setting up a republic; Napoleon converted it into an Empire with a new aristocracy. In the 1830s Belgium adopted some of the innovations of the progressive political philosophers of the Enlightenment.

Républicanisme is a French version of modern republicanism.

[ 39 ] It is a form of social contract , deduced from Jean-Jacques Rousseau 's idea of a general will . Each citizen is engaged in a direct relationship with the state , removing the need for identity politics based on local, religious, or racial identification.

Républicanisme , in theory, makes anti-discrimination laws unnecessary, though some critics may argue that in republics also, colour-blind laws serve to perpetuate discrimination.

Ireland [ edit ] Main article: Irish republicanism Portrait of Theobald Wolfe Tone Inspired by the American and French Revolutions, the Society of United Irishmen was founded in 1791 in Belfast and Dublin. The inaugural meeting of the United Irishmen in Belfast on 18 October 1791 approved a declaration of the society's objectives. It identified the central grievance that Ireland had no national government: "...we are ruled by Englishmen, and the servants of Englishmen, whose object is the interest of another country, whose instrument is corruption, and whose strength is the weakness of Ireland..." [ 40 ] They adopted three central positions: (i) to seek out a cordial union among all the people of Ireland, to maintain that balance essential to preserve liberties and extend commerce; (ii) that the sole constitutional mode by which English influence can be opposed, is by a complete and radical reform of the representation of the people in Parliament; (iii) that no reform is practicable or efficacious, or just which shall not include Irishmen of every religious persuasion. The declaration, then, urged constitutional reform, union among Irish people and the removal of all religious disqualifications.

The movement was influenced, at least in part, by the French Revolution. Public interest, already strongly aroused, was brought to a pitch by the publication in 1790 of Edmund Burke 's Reflections on the Revolution in France , and Thomas Paine's response, Rights of Man , in February 1791.

[ citation needed ] Theobald Wolfe Tone wrote later that, "This controversy, and the gigantic event which gave rise to it, changed in an instant the politics of Ireland." [ 41 ] Paine himself was aware of this commenting on sales of Part I of Rights of Man in November 1791, only eight months after publication of the first edition, he informed a friend that in England "almost sixteen thousand has gone off – and in Ireland above forty thousand".

[ 42 ] Paine may have been inclined to talk up sales of his works but what is striking in this context is that Paine believed that Irish sales were so far ahead of English ones before Part II had appeared. On 5 June 1792, Thomas Paine , author of the Rights of Man was proposed for honorary membership of the Dublin Society of the United Irishmen.

[ 43 ] The fall of the Bastille was to be celebrated in Belfast on 14 July 1791 by a Volunteer meeting. At the request of Thomas Russell , Tone drafted suitable resolutions for the occasion, including one favouring the inclusion of Catholics in any reforms. In a covering letter to Russell, Tone wrote, "I have not said one word that looks like a wish for separation, though I give it to you and your friends as my most decided opinion that such an event would be a regeneration of their country".

[ 41 ] By 1795, Tone's republicanism and that of the society had openly crystallized when he tells us: "I remember particularly two days thae we passed on Cave Hill. On the first Russell, Neilson, Simms, McCracken and one or two more of us, on the summit of McArt's fort, took a solemn obligation...never to desist in our efforts until we had subverted the authority of England over our country and asserted her independence." [ 44 ] The culmination was an uprising against British rule in Ireland lasting from May to September 1798 – the Irish Rebellion of 1798 – with military support from revolutionary France in August and again October 1798. After the failure of the rising of 1798 the United Irishman, John Daly Burk, an émigré in the United States in his The History of the Late War in Ireland written in 1799, was most emphatic in its identification of the Irish, French and American causes.

[ 45 ] Modern republicanism [ edit ] Main article: Modern republicanism During the Enlightenment, anti- monarchism extended beyond the civic humanism of the Renaissance. Classical republicanism, still supported by philosophers such as Rousseau and Montesquieu , was only one of several theories seeking to limit the power of monarchies rather than directly opposing them.

Liberalism and socialism departed from classical republicanism and fueled the development of the more modern republicanism .

Brazil [ edit ] Cipriano Barata Brazilian historiography generally identifies republican thought with the movement that was formally organized in the Empire of Brazil during the 1870s to 1880s, but republicanism was already present in the country since the First Reign (1822–1831) and the regency period (1831–1840). During Brazil's early years after its independence , the country saw the emergence of a republican discourse among the writings of figures such as Cipriano Barata , Frei Caneca and João Soares Lisboa, but republican ideology better developed as a political current after the emergence of the so-called radical liberal faction in the crisis of the final years of the First Reign.

[ 46 ] During the First Reign, three groups emerged on the country's political scene: the moderate liberals, the radical liberals and the caramurus . The moderates defended political-institutional reforms such as decentralization, without, however, giving up the monarchical system. Their main doctrinal references were Locke, Montesquieu, Guizot and Benjamin Constant . The radicals, in turn, formed a heterogeneous group with almost no representation within the imperial bureaucracy. They were on the left of the political spectrum, along Jacobin lines, and defended broad reforms such as the abolition of the monarchy and the establishment of a republic, federalism, the extinction of the Moderating Power , the end of life tenure in the Senate , the separation between Church and State, relative social equality, the extension of political and civil rights to all free segments of society, including women, the staunch opposition to slavery , displaying a nationalist , xenophobic and anti-Portuguese discourse.

[ 46 ] In 1870 a group of radical liberals, convinced of the impossibility of achieving their desired reforms within the Brazilian monarchical system, met and founded the Republican Party. From its founding until 1889, the party operated in an erratic and geographically diverse manner. The republican movement was strongest in the Court and in São Paulo , but other smaller foci also emerged in Minas Gerais , Pará , Pernambuco and Rio Grande do Sul . Only in São Paulo, however, did the movement become a true organized and disciplined party capable of electoral competition.

[ 47 ] France [ edit ] Charles de Gaulle Discredited after the Second World War , French radicals split into a left-wing party – the Radical Party of the Left , an associate of the Socialist Party – and the Radical Party "valoisien" , an associate party of the conservative Union for a Popular Movement (UMP) and its Gaullist predecessors. Italian radicals also maintained close links with republicanism, as well as with socialism , with the Partito radicale founded in 1955, which became the Transnational Radical Party in 1989.

Increasingly, after the fall of communism in 1989 and the collapse of the Marxist interpretation of the French Revolution, France increasingly turned to republicanism to define its national identity.

[ 48 ] Charles de Gaulle , presenting himself as the military savior of France in the 1940s, and the political savior in the 1950s, refashioned the meaning of republicanism. Both left and right enshrined him in the Republican pantheon.

[ 49 ] Italy [ edit ] Main article: 1946 Italian institutional referendum Giuseppe Mazzini . His thoughts influenced many politicians of a later period, among them Woodrow Wilson , David Lloyd George , Mahatma Gandhi , Golda Meir and Jawaharlal Nehru .

[ 50 ] In the history of Italy there are several so-called "republican" governments that have followed one another over time. Examples are the ancient Roman Republic and the medieval maritime republics . From Cicero to Niccolò Machiavelli , Italian philosophers have imagined the foundations of political science and republicanism.

[ 51 ] But it was Giuseppe Mazzini who revived the republican idea in Italy in the 19th century.

[ 52 ] An Italian nationalist in the historical radical tradition and a proponent of a republicanism of social-democratic inspiration, Mazzini helped define the modern European movement for popular democracy in a republican state.

[ 53 ] Mazzini's thoughts had a very considerable influence on the Italian and European republican movements, in the Constitution of Italy , about Europeanism and more nuanced on many politicians of a later period, among them American president Woodrow Wilson , British prime minister David Lloyd George , Mahatma Gandhi , Israeli prime minister Golda Meir and Indian prime minister Jawaharlal Nehru .

[ 50 ] Mazzini formulated a concept known as "thought and action" in which thought and action must be joined together and every thought must be followed by action, therefore rejecting intellectualism and the notion of divorcing theory from practice.

[ 54 ] Pietro Barsanti , the first martyr of the modern Italian Republic [ 55 ] [ 56 ] In July 1831, in exile in Marseille , Giuseppe Mazzini founded the Young Italy movement, which aimed to transform Italy into a unitary democratic republic, according to the principles of freedom, independence and unity, but also to oust the monarchic regimes pre-existing the unification, including the Kingdom of Sardinia . The foundation of the Young Italy constitutes a key moment of the Italian Risorgimento . The philosopher Carlo Cattaneo promoted a secular and republican Italy in the extension of Mazzini's ideas, but organized as a federal republic.

[ 57 ] The political projects of Mazzini and Cattaneo were thwarted by the action of the Piedmontese Prime Minister Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour , and Giuseppe Garibaldi . The latter set aside his republican ideas to favor Italian unity.

[ 58 ] After having obtained the conquest of the whole of southern Italy during the Expedition of the Thousand , Garibaldi handed over the conquered territories to the king of Sardinia Victor Emmanuel II , which were annexed to the Kingdom of Sardinia after a plebiscite. This earned him heavy criticism from numerous republicans who accused him of treason.

[ 59 ] While a laborious administrative unification began, a first Italian parliament was elected and, on 17 March 1861, Victor Emmanuel II was proclaimed king of Italy .

[ 60 ] Carlo Cattaneo Felice Cavallotti In the political panorama of the time there was a republican political movement which had its martyrs, such as the soldier Pietro Barsanti .

[ 55 ] Barsanti was a supporter of republican ideas, and was a soldier in the Royal Italian Army with the rank of corporal. He was sentenced to death and shot in 1870 for having favored an insurrectional attempt against the Savoy monarchy and is therefore considered the first martyr of the modern Italian Republic [ 55 ] [ 56 ] and a symbol of republican ideals in Italy.

[ 61 ] The Republicans took part in the elections to the Italian Parliament, and in 1853 they formed the Action Party around Giuseppe Mazzini . Although in exile, Mazzini was elected in 1866, but refused to take his seat in parliament.

Carlo Cattaneo was elected deputy in 1860 and 1867, but refused so as not to have to swear loyalty to the House of Savoy . The problem of the oath of loyalty to the monarchy, necessary to be elected, was the subject of controversy within the republican forces. In 1873 Felice Cavallotti , one of the most committed Italian politicians against the monarchy, preceded his oath with a declaration in which he reaffirmed his republican beliefs.

[ 62 ] In October 1922, the nomination of Benito Mussolini as prime minister by King Victor Emmanuel III , following the march on Rome , paved the way for the establishment of the dictatorship. With the implementation of fascist laws (Royal Decree of 6 November 1926), all political parties operating on Italian territory were dissolved, with the exception of the National Fascist Party . The Kingdom of Italy entered World War II on 10 June 1940. Hostilities ended on 29 April 1945, when the German forces in Italy surrendered .

The aftermath of World War II left Italy also with an anger against the monarchy for its endorsement of the Fascist regime for the previous twenty years. These frustrations contributed to a revival of the Italian republican movement.

[ 63 ] Italy became a republic after the 1946 Italian institutional referendum [ 64 ] held on 2 June, a day celebrated since as Festa della Repubblica . It was the first time that the whole Italian Peninsula was under a form of republican governance since the end of the ancient Roman Republic .

The Italian Republican Party ( Italian : Partito Repubblicano Italiano , PRI) is a political party in Italy established in 1895, which makes it the oldest political party still active in the country. The Italian Republican Party identifies with 19th-century classical radicalism , [ 65 ] as well as Mazzinianism , [ 66 ] [ 67 ] and its modern incarnation is associated with liberalism , [ 68 ] [ 69 ] [ 70 ] social liberalism , [ 71 ] and centrism .

[ 72 ] The Italian Republican Party has old roots and a long history that began with a left-wing position, [ 73 ] being the heir of the Historical Far Left and claiming descent from the political thought of Giuseppe Mazzini and Giuseppe Garibaldi .

[ 74 ] With the rise of the Italian Communist Party and the Italian Socialist Party (PSI) to its left, it was associated with centre-left politics .

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] The early Italian Republican Party was also known for its anti-clerical , anti-monarchist , republican, and later anti-fascist stances.

[ 77 ] While maintaining those traits, during the second half of the 20th century the party moved towards the centre on the left–right political spectrum , becoming increasingly economically liberal .

[ 78 ] Ugo La Malfa was a politician and an important leader of the Italian Republican Party ( Partito Repubblicano Italiano ; PRI) After 1949, the Italian Republican Party was a member of the pro- NATO alliance formed by Christian Democracy (DC), the Italian Democratic Socialist Party , and the Italian Liberal Party (PLI), enabling it to participate in most governments of the 1950s, a period later known as Centrism . In 1963, the party helped bring together DC and PSI in Italy's first centre-left government, the Organic centre-left . Although small in terms of voter support, the Italian Republican Party was influential thanks to leaders like Eugenio Chiesa , Giovanni Conti , Cipriano Facchinetti , Randolfo Pacciardi , Oronzo Reale , Ugo La Malfa , Bruno Visentini , Oddo Biasini and Giovanni Spadolini .

[ 79 ] The latter served as Prime Minister of Italy in 1981–1982, the first non Christian Democrat since 1945. From 1976 to 2010, the Italian Republican Party was a member of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party (ELDR), along with the PLI, and the two parties usually ran together in European Parliament elections. After joining the centrist Segni Pact in 1994, the Italian Republican Party was part of the centre-left coalition from 1996 to 2006, and then of the centre-right coalition from 2008 to 2013 (its leader Giorgio La Malfa was minister in 2005–2006). Afterwards, it ran alone until joining the centrist Action – Italia Viva in 2022.

Latin America [ edit ] Andrés Bello Republicanism helped inspire movements for independence in former Spanish colonies of Latin America in the early 19th century, [ 80 ] and republican ideals and political designs were influential in the new Latin American republics.

[ 81 ] Diplomats and international jurists in Latin America, such as Andrés Bello , shaped a tradition of "republican internationalism" that connected domestic republican ideals and practices with the region's emerging place in international society.

Many key political figures in the region identified as republicans, including Simón Bolívar , José María Samper , Francisco Bilbao , and Juan Egaña . Several of these figures produced essays, pamphlets, and collections of speeches that drew upon and adapted the broader tradition of republican political thought.

Spain [ edit ] Main article: Republicanism in Spain 2018 demonstration in Madrid calling for the Third Spanish Republic There has existed in Spain a persistent trend of republican thought, especially throughout the 19th, 20th, and 21st centuries, that has manifested itself in diverse political parties and movements over the entire course of the history of Spain . While these movements have shared the objective of establishing a republic, during these three centuries there have surged distinct schools of thought on the form republicans would want to give to the Spanish State : unitary or federal . The roots of Spanish republicanism arose out of liberal thought in the wake of the French Revolution . The first manifestations of republicanism occurred during the Peninsular War , in which Spain and nearby regions fought for independence from Napoleon , 1808–1814. During the reign of Ferdinand VII (1813–1833) there were several liberalist military pronunciamientos , but it was not until the reign of Isabella II (1833–1868) that the first clearly republican and anti-monarchist movements appeared.

There is a renewed interest in republicanism in Spain after two earlier attempts: the First Spanish Republic (1873–1874) and the Second Spanish Republic (1931–1939). Movements such as Ciudadanos Por la República [ es ] , Citizens for the Republic in Spanish , have emerged, and parties like United Left and the Republican Left of Catalonia increasingly refer to republicanism. In a survey conducted in 2007 reported that 69% of the population prefer the monarchy to continue, compared with 22% opting for a republic.

[ 82 ] In a 2008 survey, 58% of Spanish citizens were indifferent, 16% favored a republic, 16% were monarchists, and 7% claimed they were Juancarlistas (supporters of continued monarchy under King Juan Carlos I , without a common position for the fate of the monarchy after his death).

[ 83 ] In recent years, there has been a tie between Monarchists and Republicans.

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] Turkey [ edit ] Main article: Republicanism in Turkey Mustafa Kemal Atatürk In 1923 after the fall of the Ottoman Empire an inherited aristocracy and sultanate suppressed republican ideas until the successful republican revolution of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk in the 1920s. Republicanism remains one of the six principles of Kemalism . Kemalism, as it was implemented by Mustafa Kemal Atatürk after the declaration of Republic in 1923 , was defined by sweeping political, social, cultural and religious reforms designed to separate the new Turkish state from its Ottoman predecessor and embrace a Western-style modernized lifestyle, [ 86 ] including the establishment of secularism/laicism , state support of the sciences, free education, gender equality , economic statism and many more. Most of those policies were first introduced to and implemented in Turkey during Atatürk's presidency through his reforms .

Many of the root ideas of Kemalism began during the late Ottoman Empire under various reforms to avoid the imminent collapse of the Empire , beginning chiefly in the early 19th-century Tanzimat reforms.

[ 87 ] The mid-century Young Ottomans attempted to create the ideology of Ottoman nationalism, or Ottomanism , to quell the rising ethnic nationalism in the Empire and introduce limited democracy for the first time while maintaining Islamist influences. In the early 20th century, the Young Turks abandoned Ottoman nationalism in favor of early Turkish nationalism , while adopting a secular political outlook. After the demise of the Ottoman Empire, Atatürk, influenced by both the Young Ottomans and the Young Turks, [ 88 ] as well as by their successes and failures, led the declaration of the Republic of Turkey in 1923, borrowing from the earlier movements' ideas of secularism and Turkish nationalism, while implementing free education [ 89 ] and other reforms that have been enshrined by later leaders into guidelines for governing Turkey.

United Kingdom [ edit ] Main article: Republicanism in the United Kingdom Dissatisfaction with British rule led to a longer period of agitation in the early 19th century and failed republican revolutions in Canada in the late 1830s and Ireland in 1848 . This led to the Treason Felony Act in 1848 which made it illegal to advocate for republicanism. Another "significant incarnation" of republicanism broke out in the late 19th century when Queen Victoria went into mourning and largely disappeared from public view after the death of her husband, Prince Albert . This led to questions about whether or not the institution should continue, with politicians speaking in support of abolition. This ended when Victoria returned to public duties later in the century and regained significant public support. More recently, in the early 21st century, increasing dissatisfaction with the House of Windsor , especially after the death of Elizabeth II in 2022, has led to public support for the monarchy reaching historical lows.

United States [ edit ] Main article: Republicanism in the United States Abraham Lincoln The values and ideals of republicanism are foundational in the constitution and history of the United States .

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] As the United States constitution prohibits granting titles of nobility , republicanism in this context does not refer to a political movement to abolish such a social class , as it does in countries such as the UK , Australia , and the Netherlands . Instead, it refers to the core values that citizenry in a republic have, [ 92 ] [ 93 ] or ought to have. Political scientists and historians have described these central values as liberty and inalienable individual rights ; recognizing the sovereignty of the people as the source of all authority in law; [ 94 ] rejecting monarchy , aristocracy , and hereditary political power; virtue and faithfulness in the performance of civic duties; and vilification of corruption .

[ 95 ] These values are based on those of Ancient Greco-Roman , Renaissance , and English models and ideas.

[ 96 ] Republicanism became the dominant political value of Americans during and after the American Revolution . The Founding Fathers were strong advocates of republican values, especially Thomas Jefferson , Samuel Adams , Patrick Henry , Thomas Paine , Benjamin Franklin , John Adams , James Madison and Alexander Hamilton .

[ 97 ] However, in 1854, social movements started to harness values of abolitionism and free labour.

[ 98 ] These burgeoning radical traditions in America became epitomized in the early formation of the Republican Party , known as "red republicanism." [ 99 ] The efforts were primarily led by political leaders such as Alvan E. Bovay , Thaddeus Stevens , and Abraham Lincoln .

[ 100 ] Theory [ edit ] Neo-republicanism [ edit ] Cass Sunstein Neorepublicanism is the effort by current scholars to draw on a classical republican tradition in the development of an attractive public philosophy intended for contemporary purposes.

[ 101 ] Neorepublicanism emerges as an alternative postsocialist critique of market society from the left.

[ 102 ] Prominent theorists in this movement are Philip Pettit and Cass Sunstein , who have each written several works defining republicanism and how it differs from liberalism.

Michael Sandel , a late convert to republicanism from communitarianism , advocates replacing or supplementing liberalism with republicanism, as outlined in his Democracy's Discontent: America in Search of a Public Philosophy .

Contemporary work from a neorepublican include jurist K. Sabeel Rahman 's book Democracy Against Domination , which seeks to create a neorepublican framework for economic regulation grounded in the thought of Louis Brandeis and John Dewey and popular control , in contrast to both New Deal -style managerialism and neoliberal deregulation .

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] Philosopher Elizabeth Anderson's Private Government traces the history of republican critiques of private power, arguing that the classical free market policies of the 18th and 19th centuries intended to help workers only lead to their domination by employers.

[ 105 ] [ 106 ] In From Slavery to the Cooperative Commonwealth , political scientist Alex Gourevitch examines a strain of late 19th century American republicanism known as labour republicanism that was the producerist labour union The Knights of Labor , and how republican concepts were used in service of workers rights , but also with a strong critique of the role of that union in supporting the Chinese Exclusion Act .

[ 107 ] [ 108 ] Democracy [ edit ] Portrait of Thomas Paine A revolutionary republican hand-written bill from the Stockholm riots during the Revolutions of 1848 , reading: "Dethrone Oscar he is not fit to be a king – rather the Republic! Reform! Down with the Royal house – long live Aftonbladet ! Death to the king – Republic! Republic! – the people! Brunkeberg this evening." The writer's identity is unknown.

In the late 18th century there was convergence of democracy and republicanism. Republicanism is a system that replaces or accompanies inherited rule. There is an emphasis on liberty, and a rejection of corruption.

[ 109 ] It strongly influenced the American Revolution and the French Revolution in the 1770s and 1790s, respectively.

[ 31 ] Republicans, in these two examples, tended to reject inherited elites and aristocracies, but left open two questions: whether a republic, to restrain unchecked majority rule, should have an unelected upper chamber —perhaps with members appointed as meritorious experts—and whether it should have a constitutional monarch .

[ 110 ] Though conceptually separate from democracy, republicanism included the key principles of rule by consent of the governed and sovereignty of the people. In effect, republicanism held that kings and aristocracies were not the real rulers, but rather the whole people were. Exactly how the people were to rule was an issue of democracy: republicanism itself did not specify a means.

[ 111 ] In the United States, the solution was the creation of political parties that reflected the votes of the people and controlled the government (see Republicanism in the United States ). In Federalist No. 10 , James Madison rejected "pure democracy" in favour of representative democracy, which he called "a republic".

[ 112 ] There were similar debates in many other democratizing nations.

[ 113 ] In contemporary usage, the term democracy refers to a government chosen by the people, whether it is direct or representative .

[ 114 ] Today the term republic usually refers to representative democracy with an elected head of state , such as a president , who serves for a limited term; in contrast to states with a hereditary monarch as a head of state, even if these states also are representative democracies, with an elected or appointed head of government such as a prime minister .

[ 115 ] The Founding Fathers of the United States rarely praised and often criticized (direct) democracy, which they equated with mob rule ; James Madison argued that what distinguished a democracy from a republic was that the former became weaker as it got larger and suffered more violently from the effects of faction, whereas a republic could get stronger as it got larger and combatted faction by its very structure.

[ 116 ] What was critical to American values, John Adams insisted, was that the government should be "bound by fixed laws, which the people have a voice in making, and a right to defend." [ 117 ] Thomas Jefferson warned that "an elective despotism is not the government we fought for." [ 118 ] Professors Richard Ellis of Willamette University and Michael Nelson of Rhodes College argue that much constitutional thought, from Madison to Lincoln and beyond, has focused on "the problem of majority tyranny." They conclude, "The principles of republican government embedded in the Constitution represent an effort by the framers to ensure that the inalienable rights of life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness would not be trampled by majorities." [ 119 ] Constitutional monarchs and upper chambers [ edit ] Some countries (such as the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, the Scandinavian countries, and Japan) turned powerful monarchs into constitutional ones with limited, or eventually merely symbolic, powers. Often the monarchy was abolished along with the aristocratic system, whether or not they were replaced with democratic institutions (such as in France, China, Iran, Russia, Germany, Austria, Hungary, Italy, Greece, Turkey and Egypt). In Australia, New Zealand, Canada, Papua New Guinea, and some other countries the monarch, or its representative, is given supreme executive power, but by convention acts only on the advice of his or her ministers. Many nations had elite upper houses of legislatures, the members of which often had lifetime tenure, but eventually these houses lost much power (as the UK House of Lords ), or else became elective and remained powerful.

[ 120 ] [ 121 ] See also [ edit ] Abolition of monarchy Christian republic Criticism of monarchy Democratic republic Federal Council (Switzerland) Islamic republic Kemalism People's republic Primus inter pares Republican Party GOP ("Grand Old Party") Secular republic Tacitean studies – differing interpretations whether Tacitus defended republicanism ("red Tacitists") or the contrary ("black Tacitists").

Venizelism Category:Republicanism by country References [ edit ] ^ Lovett, Frank (2022), "Republicanism" , in Zalta, Edward N.; Nodelman, Uri (eds.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2022 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2024-01-21 ^ Hammersley, Rachel (2020).

Republicanism: An Introduction . Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.

ISBN 978-1-5095-1341-3 .

OCLC 1145090006 .

^ Sellers, Mortimer NS (2015).

"Republicanism: Philosophical Aspects" .

International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences (Second ed.). pp.

477– 482.

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-08-097086-8.63076-3 .

ISBN 978-0080970875 .

^ Dagger, Richard (2011). "Republicanism". In Klosko, George (ed.).

The Oxford Handbook of the History of Political Philosophy . pp.

701– 711.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199238804.003.0043 .

^ Bellamy, Richard (2022). "Republicanism: Non-domination and the free state".

Routledge International Handbook of Contemporary Social and Political Theory (2nd ed.). London & New York: Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9781003111399-12 .

ISBN 978-1003111399 .

S2CID 242874484 .

^ MacGilvray, Eric (2014). "Republicanism".

The Encyclopedia of Political Thought . pp.

3234– 3243.

doi : 10.1002/9781118474396.wbept0886 .

ISBN 9781118474396 .

^ Murphy, Peter (2017). "Republicanism".

The Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology . John Wiley & Sons: 1– 2.

doi : 10.1002/9781405165518.wbeosr056 .

ISBN 9781405165518 .

^ Williams, Zoe (28 November 2023).

" 'The monarchy looks vulnerable': will Britain's republicans bring down the king?" .

The Guardian .

^ "The Works of John Adams, 10 vols" .

oll.libertyfund.org – Online Library of Liberty . Retrieved 2019-01-10 .

^ Mortimer N. S. Sellers.

American Republicanism: Roman Ideology in the United States Constitution . (New York University Press, 1994. p. 71.) ^ Fronda, Michael P. (2015). "Why Roman Republicanism? Its Emergence and Nature in Context".

A companion to Greek democracy and the Roman republic . Chichester: Wiley Blackwell. pp.

44– 64.

doi : 10.1002/9781118878347.ch3 .

ISBN 978-1118878347 .

^ Paul A. Rahe, Republics ancient and modern: Classical Republicanism and the American Revolution (1992).

^ Polybius; Shuckburgh, Evelyn S. (2009).

The Histories of Polybius . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

doi : 10.1017/cbo9781139333740 .

ISBN 978-1139333740 .

^ Mitchell, Thomas N. (2001).

"Roman Republicanism: The Underrated Legacy" .

Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society .

145 (2): 127– 137.

ISSN 0003-049X .

JSTOR 1558267 .

^ see for example Ann . IV, 32–33 ^ Ann . I–VI ^ J.G.A. Pocock, The Machiavellian Moment: Florentine political thought and the Atlantic republican tradition (1975) ^ Zera S. Fink, The classical republicans: an essay on the recovery of a pattern of thought in seventeenth-century England (2011).

^ Bill Brugger, Republican Theory in Political Thought: Virtuous or Virtual?

(1999).

^ John M. Najemy, "Baron's Machiavelli and renaissance republicanism." American Historical Review 101.1 (1996): 119–129.

^ Smelser, Marshall (1959).

"The Jacobin Phrenzy: The Menace of Monarchy, Plutocracy, and Anglophilia, 1789-1798" .

The Review of Politics .

21 (1): 239– 258.

doi : 10.1017/S003467050002204X .

ISSN 0034-6705 .

JSTOR 1405347 .

^ Eco Haitsma Mulier, "The language of seventeenth-century republicanism in the United Provinces: Dutch or European?." in Anthony Pagden, ed., The Languages of political theory in early-modern Europe (1987): 179–196.

^ Jerzy Lukowski, Disorderly Liberty: The political culture of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth in the eighteenth century (Bloomsbury Publishing, 2010).

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Lucien Felli, "La renaissance du Paolisme". M. Bartoli, Pasquale Paoli, père de la patrie corse, Albatros, 1974, p. 29. "There is one area where the pioneering nature of Paoli's institutions is particularly pronounced, and that is in the area of voting rights. Indeed they allowed for female suffrage at a time when French women could not vote." ^ Philippe-Jean Catinchi et Josyane Savigneau, "Les femmes : du droit de vote à la parité", Le Monde.fr, 31 janvier 2013 ISSN 1950-6244 , consuled on 14 August 2017) ^ "Projet de constitution pour la Corse ", published in Œuvres et correspondance inédites de J.J. Rousseau, (M.G. Streckeinsen-Moultou, ed.). Paris, 1861 ^ Michel Vergé-Franceschi, "Pascal Paoli, un Corse des Lumières", Cahiers de la Méditerranée, 72 | 2006, 97–112.

^ a b Warren, Christopher (2016).

"Big Leagues: Specters of Milton and Republican International Justice between Shakespeare and Marx" .

7 (3): 365.

doi : 10.17613/M6VW8W .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Rose, Jonathan (2001).

The Intellectual Life of the British Working Classes . pp. 26, 36–37, 122–125, 187.

^ Taylor, Antony (2002). "Shakespeare and Radicalism: The Uses and Abuses of Shakespeare in Nineteenth-Century Popular Politics." Historical Journal 45, no. 2. pp. 357–379.

^ a b Pocock, J.G.A.

The Machiavellian Moment: Florentine Political Thought and the Atlantic Republican Tradition (1975; new ed. 2003) ^ See for example Parrington, Vernon L. (1927).

"Main Currents in American Thought" . Archived from the original on September 1, 2006 . Retrieved 2013-12-18 .

^ Shalhope (1982) ^ Isaac Kramnick, Ideological Background , in Jack. P. Greene and J. R. Pole , The Blackwell Encyclopedia of the American Revolution (1994) ch. 9; Robert E. Shallhope, "Republicanism" ibid ch 70.

^ Trevor Colbourn, The Lamp of Experience: Whig History and the Intellectual Origins of the American Revolution (1965) online version Archived 2020-04-13 at the Wayback Machine ^ Pocock, The Machiavellian Moment p. 507 ^ Bailyn, Bernard .The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution (1967) [ ISBN missing ] ^ quoted in Becker 2002, p. 128 ^ a b "La rivoluzione francese tra repubblicanesimo e liberalismo" (in Italian) . Retrieved 18 August 2024 .

^ Denis Carroll, The Man from God knows Where , p. 42 (Gartan) 1995 ^ a b Henry Boylan, Wolf Tone, p. 16 (Gill and Macmillan, Dublin) 1981 ^ Paine to John Hall, 25 Nov. 1791 (Foner, Paine Writings, II, p. 1,322) ^ Dickson, Keogh and Whelan, The United Irishmen. Republicanism, Radicalism and Rebellion, pp. 135–137 (Lilliput, Dublin) 1993 ^ Henry Boylan, Wolf Tone, pp. 51–52 (Gill and Macmillan, Dublin) 1981 ^ Dickson, Keogh and Whelan, The United Irishmen. Republicanism, Radicalism and Rebellion , pp. 297–298 (Lilliput, Dublin) 1993 ^ a b Basile, Marcello (2011).

"O bom exemplo de Washington: o republicanismo no Rio de Janeiro (c.1830 a 1835)" .

Varia Historia .

27 (45): 17– 45.

doi : 10.1590/S0104-87752011000100002 .

ISSN 0104-8775 .

^ Carvalho, José Murilo de (2011).

"República, democracia e federalismo Brasil, 1870-1891" .

Varia Historia (in Portuguese).

27 (45): 141– 157.

doi : 10.1590/S0104-87752011000100007 .

ISSN 0104-8775 .

^ Sudhir Hazareesingh, "Conflicts Of Memory: Republicanism and the Commemoration of the Past in Modern France", French History (2009) 23#2 pp. 193–215 ^ Sudhir Hazareesingh, In the Shadow of the General: Modern France and the Myth of De Gaulle (2012) online review ^ a b King, Bolton (2019).

The Life of Mazzini . Good Press.

^ Jean-Jacques Rousseau notes, in The Social Contract , about Niccolò Machiavelli and his work The Prince : "Pretending to give lessons to kings, he gave great lessons to the people.

The Prince is the book of the republicans." (see Rousseau - Du Contrat social éd. Beaulavon 1903.djvu/237 - Wikisource .

^ Baquiast, Paul; Dupuy, Emmanuel; Ridolfi, Maurizio (2007).

L'idée républicaine en Europe (xviii e – xxi e siècle): histoire et pensée universelle, Europe - La République universelle (in French). Vol. 1. L'Harmattan. p. 85.

ISBN 978-2296027954 .

^ Swinburne, Algernon Charles (2013).

Delphi Complete Works of Algernon Charles Swinburne . Delphi Classics.

ISBN 978-1909496699 .

^ Schumaker, Paul (2010).

The Political Theory Reader (illustrated ed.). Hoboken: Wiley-Blackwell. p. 58.

ISBN 9781405189972 .

^ a b c Ridolfi, Maurizio (2003).

Almanacco della Repubblica. Storia d'Italia attraverso le tradizioni, le istituzioni e le simbologie repubblicane (in Italian). Mondadori Bruno. p. 172.

ISBN 978-8842494997 .

^ a b Spadolini, Giovanni (1989).

L'opposizione laica nell'Italia moderna (1861-1922) (in Italian). Le Monnier. p. 491.

ISBN 978-8800856256 .

^ Baquiast, Paul; Dupuy, Emmanuel; Ridolfi, Maurizio (2007).

L'idée républicaine en Europe (xviii e – xxi e siècle): histoire et pensée universelle, Europe - La République universelle (in French). Vol. 1. L'Harmattan. p. 91.

ISBN 978-2296027954 .

^ Romeo, Rosario (2011).

Vita di Cavour (in Italian). Editori Laterzi. p. 290.

ISBN 978-8842074915 .

^ Mack Smith, Denis (1990).

I Savoia re d'Italia (in Italian). Bur. pp.

90– 92.

ISBN 978-8817115674 .

^ Guichonnet, Paul (1975).

Histoire de l'Italie (in French). Presses universitaires de France. p. 95.

[ISBN unspecified] ^ Lodolini, Elio (1964), "BARSANTI, Pietro" , Dizionario Biografico degli Italiani (in Italian), vol. VI, Rome: Treccani ^ Garrone, Alessandro Galante (1973).

I radicali in Italia (1849-1925) (in Italian). Garzanti. pp.

129– 131.

[ISBN unspecified] ^ "Italia", Dizionario enciclopedico italiano (in Italian), vol. VI, Treccani , 1970, p. 456 ^ Damage Foreshadows A-Bomb Test, 1946/06/06 (1946) .

Universal Newsreel . 1946 . Retrieved 22 February 2012 .

^ Vít Hloušek, Lubomír Kopecek, ed. (2010).

Origin, Ideology and Transformation of Political Parties: East-Central and Western Europe Compared . Routledge. p. 108.

^ PRI (1968). Edizioni della Voce (ed.).

Il XXIX [i. e. Ventinovesimo] Congresso nazionale del Partito repubblicano italiano: Atti e risoluzioni. Roma, 25-28 marzo 1965 .

^ Silvio Berardi (2016). Sapienza Università Editrice (ed.).

Il socialismo mazziniano: Profilo storico-politico . Sapienza Università Editrice.

ISBN 9788898533817 .

^ Gary Marks; Carole Wilson (1999).

"National Parties and the Contestation of Europe" . In T. Banchoff; Mitchell P. Smith (eds.).

Legitimacy and the European Union . Taylor & Francis. p. 123.

ISBN 978-0-415-18188-4 . Retrieved 26 August 2012 .

^ Ari-Veikko Anttiroiko; Matti Mälkiä (2007).

Encyclopedia of Digital Government . Idea Group Inc (IGI). p. 389.

ISBN 978-1-59140-790-4 . Retrieved 19 July 2013 .

^ "Sovranisti contro Repubblicani, i poli ai tempi del governo giallo-verde" .

AGI.it . 1 June 2018.

^ Hans Slomp (2011).

Europe, A Political Profile: An American Companion to European Politics . ABC-CLIO. p. 403.

ISBN 978-0-313-39182-8 .

^ Gregory R. Copley; International Strategic Studies Association (1994).

Defense & Foreign Affairs Handbook . Copley & Associates. p. 586.

ISBN 9780960593293 .

^ Berardi, Silvio (2017).

Five Years of Edera: The Italian Republican Party in Search of a New Identity (1943–1948) . Rome: Edizioni Nuova Cultura. p. 228.

ISBN 978-8-868-12829-6 .

... there were many who believed the teachings of the Genoese patriot could be compatible with the Marxist doctrine and ... considered an alliance with the left-wing to be legitimate and desirable.

^ Cinzia Padovani (2007).

A Fatal Attraction: Public Television and Politics in Italy . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 262.

ISBN 978-0-7425-1950-3 . Retrieved 24 July 2013 .

^ Cinzia Padovani (2005).

A Fatal Attraction: Public Television and Politics in Italy . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 262.

ISBN 978-0-74-251950-3 .

^ Fabio Padovano; Roberto Ricciuti (2007).

Italian Institutional Reforms: A Public Choice Perspective . Springer New York. p. 35.

ISBN 978-0-38-772141-5 .

^ Mark Donovan (2002).

"The fate of the secular Centre: The Liberals, Republicans and Social Democrats" . In Stephen Gundle; Simon Parker (eds.).

The New Italian Republic: From the Fall of the Berlin Wall to Berlusconi . Routledge. p. 100.

ISBN 978-1-134-80790-1 .

^ "la Repubblica: storia d'Italia dal '45 ad oggi, centrismo (1947-1962)" .

Storia XXI Secolo (in Italian).

^ Frank J. Coppa, ed., Dictionary of modern Italian history (Greenwood, 1985) pp 210–211.

^ Rojas, Rafael (2009).

Las repúblicas de aire : utopía y desencanto en la revolución de Hispanoamérica (1st ed.). México, D.F.: Taurus.

ISBN 978-607-11-0366-6 .

OCLC 491949272 .

^ El republicanismo en hispanoamérica : ensayos de historia intelectual y política . José Antonio Aguilar Rivera, Rafael Rojas (1st ed.). México: Centro de Investigación y Docencia Económicas. 2002.

ISBN 968-16-6656-9 .

OCLC 55067097 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ "¿El Rey? Muy bien, gracias" .

El País . Elpais.com. 2007-12-30 . Retrieved 2013-02-03 .

^ "Indiferentes ante la Corona o la República" (in Spanish). E-pesimo.blogspot.com. 2004-02-27. Archived from the original on 2011-11-04 . Retrieved 2013-02-03 .

^ "España sigue siendo monárquica gracias a los andaluces y a pesar de catalanes y vascos" .

El Confidencial (in Spanish). 2019-06-19 . Retrieved 2020-04-14 .

^ "Empate técnico por primera vez: la República ya tiene tanto apoyo como la Monarquía" .

El Español (in European Spanish). 2019-01-10 . Retrieved 2020-04-14 .

^ Cleveland, William L., and Martin P. Bunton.

A History of the Modern Middle East . Boulder: Westview, 2013.

^ Cleveland, William L; Bunton, Martin (2009).

A History of the Modern Middle East (4th ed.). Westview Press. p. 82.

^ Cuthell, David Cameron Jr. (2009).

"Atatürk, Kemal (Mustafa Kemal)" . In Ágoston, Gábor; Masters, Bruce (eds.).

Encyclopedia of the Ottoman Empire .

New York : Facts On File . pp.

56– 60.

ISBN 978-0-8160-6259-1 .

LCCN 2008020716 . Retrieved 23 January 2021 .

^ Mango, Andrew (2002).

Atatürk: The Biography of the Founder of Modern Turkey .

The Overlook Press . p. 164.

ISBN 978-1-58567-334-6 .

^ Robert E. Shalhope, "Toward a Republican Synthesis: The Emergence of an Understanding of Republicanism in American Historiography", William and Mary Quarterly , 29 (January 1972), pp. 49–80.

^ Brown, Gordon (April 1990).

"Classical Republicanism and the American Revolution" .

Chicago-Kent Law Review .

66 : 13, 19– 20.

^ Hart, (2002), ch. 1 ^ Lovett, Frank; Pettit, Philip (June 2009).

"Neorepublicanism: A Normative and Institutional Research Program" .

Annual Review of Political Science .

12 (1): 11– 29.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.polisci.12.040907.120952 .

ISSN 1094-2939 .

^ Yick Wo vs. Hopkins, 118 U.S. 356, 370 ^ Richard Buel, Securing the Revolution: Ideology in American Politics, 1789–1815 (1972) ^ Becker et al (2002), ch 1 ^ Robert E. Shalhope, "Toward a Republican Synthesis", William and Mary Quarterly , 29 (Jan. 1972), pp. 49–80 ^ Contextual Essay ^ Nichols, John (2015).

The "S" word : a short history of an American tradition ... socialism . Verso Books.

ISBN 978-1784783402 .

OCLC 905685623 .

^ Commons, John R. (September 1909).

"Horace Greeley and the Working Class Origins of the Republican Party" .

Political Science Quarterly .

24 (3): 468– 88.

doi : 10.2307/2140888 .

hdl : 2027/hvd.32044086270303 .

JSTOR 2140888 .

^ Frank Lovett and Philip Pettit. "Neorepublicanism: a normative and institutional research program." Political Science 12.1 (2009): 11ff. ( online ).

^ Gerald F. Gaus, "Backwards into the future: Neorepublicanism as a postsocialist critique of market society." Social Philosophy and Policy 20/1 (2003): 59–91.

^ Rahman, K. Sabeel (2016).

Democracy Against Domination . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0190468538 .

^ Shenk, Timothy.

"Booked: The End of Managerial Liberalism, with K. Sabeel Rahman" .

Dissent Magazine . Retrieved 6 August 2018 .

^ Anderson, Elizabeth (2017).

Private Government: How Employers Rule Our Lives (and Why We Don't Talk about It) . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-1400887781 .

^ Rothman, Joshua (12 September 2017).

"Are Bosses Dictators?" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved 6 August 2018 .

^ Gourevitch, Alex (2014).

From Slavery to the Cooperative Commonwealth: Labor and Republican Liberty in the Nineteenth Century . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1139519434 .

^ Stanley, Amy Dru.

"Republic of Labor" .

Dissent Magazine . Retrieved 6 August 2018 .

^ "Republicanism (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)" . Plato.stanford.edu . Retrieved 2013-02-03 .

^ Gordon S. Wood, The Creation of the American Republic 1776–1787 (1969) ^ R. R. Palmer , The Age of the Democratic Revolution: Political History of Europe and America, 1760–1800 (1959) ^ "The Federalist Papers : No. 10" .

Avalon Project . 29 December 1998 . Retrieved April 22, 2022 .

a pure democracy, by which I mean a society consisting of a small number of citizens, who assemble and administer the government in person … A republic, by which I mean a government in which the scheme of representation takes place ^ Robert E. Shalhope, "Republicanism and Early American Historiography", William and Mary Quarterly , 39 (Apr. 1982), pp. 334–356 ^ "democracy – Definition from the Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary" . M-w.com . Retrieved 2013-02-03 .

^ "republic – Definition from the Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary" . M-w.com. 2012-08-31 . Retrieved 2013-02-03 .

^ See, e.g ., The Federalist No. 10 ^ Novanglus, no. 7, 6 Mar. 1775 ^ David Tucker, Enlightened republicanism: a study of Jefferson's Notes on the State of Virginia (2008) p. 109 ^ Richard J. Ellis and Michael Nelson, Debating the presidency (2009) p. 211 ^ Mark McKenna , The Traditions of Australian Republicanism (1996) online version ^ John W. Maynor, Republicanism in the Modern World . (2003).

Further reading [ edit ] General [ edit ] Becker, Peter, Jürgen Heideking and James A. Henretta, eds.

Republicanism and Liberalism in America and the German States, 1750–1850 . Cambridge University Press. 2002.

Deudney, Daniel. 2007.

Bounding Power: Republican Security Theory from the Polis to the Global Village . Princeton University Press.

Everdell, William R., "From State to Free-State: The Meaning of the word Republic from Jean Bodin to John Adams" 7th International Society for Eighteenth-Century Studies conference, Budapest, 7/31/87; Valley Forge Journal (June 1991); http://dhm.pdp6.org/archives/wre-republics.html Gourevitch, Alex (2014). "Republican Political Thought".

The Encyclopedia of Political Thought . pp.

3229– 3234.

doi : 10.1002/9781118474396.wbept0885 .

ISBN 9781118474396 .

Hammersley, Rachel, Republicanism an introduction (2020) Cambridge: Polity Pocock, J. G. A.

The Machiavellian Moment (1975).

Pocock, J. G. A. "The Machiavellian Moment Revisited: a Study in History and Ideology.: Journal of Modern History 1981 53(1): 49–72.

ISSN 0022-2801 Fulltext: in Jstor. Summary of Pocock's influential ideas that traces the Machiavellian belief in and emphasis upon Greco-Roman ideals of unspecialized civic virtue and liberty from 15th century Florence through 17th century England and Scotland to 18th century America. Pocock argues that thinkers who shared these ideals tended to believe that the function of property was to maintain an individual's independence as a precondition of his virtue. Therefore they were disposed to attack the new commercial and financial regime that was beginning to develop.

Pettit, Philip.

Republicanism: A Theory of Freedom and Government Oxford UP, 1997, ISBN 0198290837 .

Robbins, Caroline, The Eighteenth-Century Commonwealthman Studies in the Transmission, Development, and Circumstance of English Liberal Thought from the Restoration of Charles II Until the War with the Thirteen Colonies (1959) Snyder, R. Claire.

Citizen-Soldiers and Manly Warriors: Military Service and Gender in the Civic Republican Tradition (1999) ISBN 978-0847694440 online review .

Viroli, Maurizio.

Republicanism (2002), New York, Hill and Wang.

ISBN 9780809080779 Europe [ edit ] Berenson, Edward, et al. eds.

The French Republic: History, Values, Debates (2011) essays by 38 scholars from France, Britain and US covering topics since the 1790s Bock, Gisela; Skinner, Quentin; and Viroli, Maurizio, ed.

Machiavelli and Republicanism . Cambridge U. Press, 1990. 316 pp.

Brugger, Bill.

Republican Theory in Political Thought: Virtuous or Virtual?

St. Martin's Press, 1999.

Castiglione, Dario (2005).

"Republicanism and its Legacy" (PDF) .

European Journal of Political Theory .

4 (4): 453– 465.

doi : 10.1177/1474885105055993 . Archived from the original (PDF) on Oct 1, 2009.

Everdell, William R.

, The End of Kings: A History of Republics and Republicans , NY: The Free Press, 1983; 2nd ed., Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000 (condensed at http://dhm.pdp6.org/archives/wre-republics.html ).

Fink, Zera.

The Classical Republicans: An Essay in the Recovery of a Pattern of Thought in Seventeenth-Century England . Northwestern University Press, 1962.

Foote, Geoffrey.

The Republican Transformation of Modern British Politics Palgrave Macmillan, 2006.

Martin van Gelderen & Quentin Skinner , eds., Republicanism: A Shared European Heritage, v 1: Republicanism and Constitutionalism in Early Modern Europe; vol 2: The Value of Republicanism in Early Modern Europe Cambridge U.P., 2002.

Haakonssen, Knud. "Republicanism." A Companion to Contemporary Political Philosophy . Robert E. Goodin and Philip Pettit. eds. Blackwell, 1995.

Kramnick, Isaac.

Republicanism and Bourgeois Radicalism: Political Ideology in Late Eighteenth-Century England and America . Cornell University Press, 1990.

Mark McKenna, The Traditions of Australian Republicanism (1996) Maynor, John W.

Republicanism in the Modern World . Cambridge: Polity, 2003.

Moggach, Douglas. "Republican Rigorism and Emancipation in Bruno Bauer", The New Hegelians , edited by Douglas Moggach , Cambridge University Press, 2006. (Looks at German Republicanism with contrasts and criticisms of Quentin Skinner and Philip Pettit).

Robbins, Caroline.

The Eighteenth-Century Commonwealthman: Studies in the Transmission, Development, and Circumstance of English Liberal Thought from the Restoration of Charles II until the War with the Thirteen Colonies (1959, 2004).

table of contents online Archived 2007-02-09 at the Wayback Machine .

United States [ edit ] Main article: Republicanism in the United States § Further reading Appleby, Joyce Liberalism and Republicanism in the Historical Imagination . 1992.

Bailyn, Bernard.

The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution . Harvard University Press, 1967.

Banning, Lance.

The Jeffersonian persuasion: evolution of a party ideology (1978) online Colbourn, Trevor.

The Lamp of Experience: Whig History and the Intellectual Origins of the American Revolution . 1965.

online version Archived 2020-04-13 at the Wayback Machine Everdell, William R., The End of Kings: A History of Republics and Republicans , NY: The Free Press, 1983; 2nd ed., Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000.

Gish, Dustin, and Daniel Klinghard.

Thomas Jefferson and the Science of Republican Government: A Political Biography of Notes on the State of Virginia (Cambridge University Press, 2017) excerpt .

Kerber, Linda K.

Intellectual History of Women: Essays by Linda K. Kerber . 1997.

Kerber, Linda K.

Women of the Republic: Intellect and Ideology in Revolutionary America . 1997.

Klein, Milton, et al., eds., The Republican Synthesis Revisited . Essays in Honor of George A. Billias. 1992.

Kloppenberg, James T.

The Virtues of Liberalism . 1998.

Norton, Mary Beth.

Liberty's Daughters: The Revolutionary Experience of American Women, 1750–1800 . 1996.

Greene, Jack, and J. R. Pole, eds.

Companion to the American Revolution . 2004. (many articles look at republicanism, esp. Shalhope, Robert E.

Republicanism pp. 668–673).

Rodgers, Daniel T. "Republicanism: the Career of a Concept", Journal of American History . 1992.

in JSTOR .

Shalhope, Robert E. "Toward a Republican Synthesis: The Emergence of an Understanding of Republicanism in American Historiography", William and Mary Quarterly , 29 (Jan. 1972), 49–80 in JSTOR , (an influential article).

Shalhope, Robert E. "Republicanism and Early American Historiography", William and Mary Quarterly , 39 (Apr. 1982), 334–356 in JSTOR.

Vetterli, Richard and Bryner, Gary, "Public Virtue and the Roots of American Government" , BYU Studies Quarterly, Vol. 27, No. 3, July 1987.

Volk, Kyle G.

Moral Minorities and the Making of American Democracy . New York: Oxford University Press, 2014.

Wood, Gordon S.

The Creation of the American Republic 1776–1787 . 1969.

Wood, Gordon S.

The Radicalism of the American Revolution . 1993.

External links [ edit ] Library resources about Republicanism Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Media related to Republicanism at Wikimedia Commons Republicanism on In Our Time at the BBC Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry Emergence of the Roman Republic: Parallel Lives by Plutarch , particularly: (From the translation in 4 volumes, available at Project Gutenberg :) Plutarch's Lives, Volume I (of 4) More particularly following Lives and Comparisons ( D is Dryden translation; G is Gutenberg ; P is Perseus Project ; L is LacusCurtius ): Greeks Romans Comparisons Lycurgus G L Numa Pompilius D G L D G L Solon D G L P Poplicola D G L D G L v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e Political ideologies The Establishment Anti Hardline Moderate Political spectrum Far-left Left-wing Centre-left Centrism Centre-right Right-wing Far-right Radical Reactionary Revolutionary Accelerationism Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Communalism Communism Bolshevism Marxism-Leninism National Bolshevism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Constitutionalism Corporatism Distributism Social credit Environmentalism Familialism Fascism Nazism Third Position Feminism Fundamentalism Green Hindutva Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Marxism Monarchism Royalism Nationalism Republicanism Classical Modern Social democracy Socialism Third Way Zionism See also Authoritarianism Anti Collectivism Colonialism Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Extremism Federalism Confederalism Confederatism Globalism Ideological repression Imperialism Individualism Internationalism Localism Masculism Militarism Nihilism Pacifism Pluralism Populism Progressivism Reformism Regionalism Separatism Statism Syncretism Totalitarianism Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Republicanism&oldid=1302612994 " Categories : Republicanism Liberalism Political ideologies Political philosophy Hidden categories: Pages with missing ISBNs CS1 errors: missing periodical Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 maint: others CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 European Spanish-language sources (es-es) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from November 2020 Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2017 Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing Swedish-language text Commons category link from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 26 July 2025, at 14:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Republicanism 56 languages Add topic

