Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Visible light beams Toggle Visible light beams subsection 1.1 Visibility from the side as side effect 1.2 Visibility from the side as purpose 2 Other applications 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Light beam 16 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Cebuano Deutsch فارسی 한국어 Қазақша Nederlands Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Projection of light energy "Lightbeam" redirects here. For the Firefox browser add-on, see Lightbeam (software) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Light beam" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A natural lightbeam in the Majlis al-Jinn ( lit.

' Meeting place of the jinn ' ) cave in Oman Light beams were used to symbolize the missing towers of the World Trade Center as part of the Tribute in Light .

A light beam or beam of light is a directional projection of light energy radiating from a light source .

Sunlight forms a light beam (a sunbeam ) when filtered through media such as clouds , foliage , or windows . To artificially produce a light beam, a lamp and a parabolic reflector is used in many lighting devices such as spotlights , car headlights , PAR Cans , and LED housings. Light from certain types of laser has the smallest possible beam divergence .

Visible light beams [ edit ] From the side, a beam of light is only visible if part of the light is scattered by objects: tiny particles like dust , water droplets ( mist , fog , rain ), hail , snow , or smoke , or larger objects such as birds . If there are many objects in the light path, then it appears as a continuous beam, but if there are only a few objects, then the light is visible as a few individual bright points. In any case, this scattering of light from a beam, and the resultant visibility of a light beam from the side, is known as the Tyndall effect .

Visibility from the side as side effect [ edit ] Flashlight (UK 'Torch'), beam directed by hand Headlight , forward beam; the lamp is mounted in a vehicle, or on the forehead of a person, e.g. built into a helmet Lighthouse , beam sweeping around horizontally Searchlight , beam directed at something Visibility from the side as purpose [ edit ] For the purpose of visibility of light beams from the side, sometimes a haze machine or fog machine is used. The difference between the two is that the fog itself is also a visual effect .

Laser beams used for visual effects during a musical performance Laser beams with different wavelengths (405nm - 660nm).

Laser lighting display - Laser beams are often used for visual effects, often in combination with music.

Searchlights are often used in advertising , for instance by automobile dealers; the beam of light is visible over a large area, and (at least in theory) interested persons can find the dealer or store by following the beam to its source.  This also used to be done for movie premieres ; the waving searchlight beams are still to be seen as a design element in the logo of the 20th Century Fox movie studio .

Other applications [ edit ] Optical communication Infrared Data Association (IrDA) standards Infrared remote control Security alarms Fibre optics Laser pointer Laser sight List of applications for lasers See also [ edit ] Beam diameter Collimated beam Crepuscular rays Light pillar , atmospheric optical phenomena Pencil beam Ray (optics) Relativistic beaming References [ edit ] External links [ edit ] A short video showing how you can put sound on a light beam and transmit it by the Vega Science Trust Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Light_beam&oldid=1109438986 " Categories : Light Geometrical optics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2010 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 9 September 2022, at 21:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Light beam 16 languages Add topic

