Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Law enforcement agencies 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Law enforcement 31 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Чӑвашла Eesti Español فارسی 한국어 Hausa हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu עברית Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Português Русский Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenščina کوردی Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Enforcement of the law by some members of society New York City Police Department lieutenant debriefing police officers at Times Square Law enforcement is the activity of some members of the government or other social institutions who act in an organized manner to enforce the law by investigating, deterring, rehabilitating, or punishing people who violate the rules and norms governing that society.

[ 1 ] The term encompasses police, courts and corrections. These three components of the criminal justice system may operate independently of each other or collectively through the use of record sharing and cooperation. Throughout the world, law enforcement are also associated with protecting the public, life, property, and keeping the peace in society.

[ 2 ] The concept of law enforcement dates back to ancient times, and forms of law enforcement and police have existed in various forms across many human societies. Modern state legal codes use the term law enforcement officer or peace officer to include every person vested by the legislating state with police power or authority; traditionally, anyone sworn or badged who can arrest any person for a violation of criminal law is included under the umbrella term of law enforcement.

Although law enforcement may be most concerned with the prevention and punishment of crimes, organizations exist to discourage a wide variety of non-criminal violations of rules and norms, effected through the imposition of less severe consequences such as probation.

History [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( October 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) See also: Police § History , and History of criminal justice Toronto Police Service officers in 1883 Law enforcement organizations existed in ancient times, such as prefects in ancient China , paqūdus in Babylonia , curaca in the Inca Empire , vigiles in the Roman Empire , and Medjay in ancient Egypt . Who law enforcers were and reported to depended on the civilization and often changed over time, but they were typically enslaved people , soldiers , officers of a judge , or hired by settlements and households. Aside from their duties to enforce laws, many ancient law enforcers also served as slave catchers , firefighters , watchmen , city guards , and bodyguards .

By the post-classical period and the Middle Ages , forces such as the Santa Hermandades , the s hurta , and the Maréchaussée provided services ranging from law enforcement and personal protection to customs enforcement and waste collection. In England , a complex law enforcement system emerged, where tithings , groups of ten families, were responsible for ensuring good behavior and apprehending criminals; groups of ten tithings ("hundreds") were overseen by a reeve ; hundreds were governed by administrative divisions known as shires ; and shires were overseen by shire-reeves . In feudal Japan , samurai were responsible for enforcing laws.

The concept of police as the primary law enforcement organization originated in Europe in the early modern period ; the first statutory police force was the High Constables of Edinburgh in 1611, while the first organized police force was the Paris lieutenant général de police in 1667. Until the 18th century, law enforcement in England was mostly the responsibility of private citizens and thief-takers , albeit also including constables and watchmen. This system gradually shifted to government control following the 1749 establishment of the London Bow Street Runners , the first formal police force in Britain. In 1800, Napoleon reorganized French law enforcement to form the Paris Police Prefecture ; the British government passed the Glasgow Police Act , establishing the City of Glasgow Police ; and the Thames River Police was formed in England to combat theft on the River Thames . In September 1829, Robert Peel merged the Bow Street Runners and the Thames River Police to form the Metropolitan Police . The title of the "first modern police force" has still been claimed by the modern successors to these organizations.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Following European colonization of the Americas , the first law enforcement agencies in the Thirteen Colonies were the New York Sheriff's Office and the Albany County Sheriff's Department , both formed in the 1660s in the Province of New York . The Province of Carolina established slave-catcher patrols in the 1700s, and by 1785, the Charleston Guard and Watch was reported to have the duties and organization of a modern police force. The first municipal police department in the United States was the Philadelphia Police Department , while the first American state police , federal law enforcement agency was the United States Marshals Service , both formed in 1789. In the American frontier , law enforcement was the responsibility of county sheriffs , rangers , constables , and marshals . The first law enforcement agency in Canada was the Royal Newfoundland Constabulary , established in 1729, while the first Canadian national law enforcement agency was the Dominion Police , established in 1868.

Indonesian National Police officers conducting a foot patrol By the 19th century, improvements in technology, greater global connections, and changes in the sociopolitical order led to the establishment of police forces worldwide. National, regional, and municipal civilian law enforcement agencies exist in practically all countries; to promote their international cooperation, the International Criminal Police Organization , also known as Interpol, was formed in September 1923. Technology has made an immense impact on law enforcement, leading to the development and regular use of police cars , police radio systems, police aviation , police tactical units , and police body cameras .

Law enforcement agencies [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of law enforcement agencies .

Municipal police officers, county sheriff's deputies, and state highway patrol officers at the scene of a pursuit termination in Scotts Valley, California Most law enforcement is conducted by some law enforcement agency , typically a police force. Civilians generally staff police agencies, which are typically not a military branch . However, some militaries do have branches that enforce laws among the civilian populace, often called gendarmerie , security forces , or internal troops . Social investment in enforcement through such organizations can be massive in terms of the resources invested in the activity and the number of people professionally engaged to perform those functions.

[ 5 ] Law enforcement agencies are limited to operating within a specified jurisdiction . These are typically organized into three basic levels: national, regional, and municipal. However, depending on certain factors, there may be more or less levels, or they may be merged: in the United States, there are federal , state , and local police and sheriff agencies; in Canada, some territories may only have national-level law enforcement, while some provinces have national, provincial, and municipal; in Japan , there is a national police agency, which supervises the police agencies for each individual prefecture ; and in Niger , there is a national police for urban areas and a gendarmerie for rural areas, both technically national-level. In some cases, there may be multiple agencies at the same level but with different focuses: for example, in the United States, the Drug Enforcement Administration and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives are both national-level federal law enforcement agencies, but the DEA focuses on narcotics crimes, while the ATF focuses on weapon regulation violations.

Various segments of society may have their own specialist law enforcement agency , such as the military having military police , schools having school police or campus police , or airports having airport police .

Private police may exist in some jurisdictions, often to provide dedicated law enforcement for privately owned property or infrastructure, such as railroad police for private railways or hospital police for privately owned hospital campuses.

Riot police in Zurich Depending on various factors, such as whether an agency is autonomous or dependent on other organizations for its operations, the governing body that funds and oversees the agency may decide to dissolve or consolidate its operations. Dissolution of an agency may occur when the governing body or the agent itself decides to end operations. This can occur due to multiple reasons, including criminal justice reform , [ 6 ] a lack of population in the jurisdiction, mass resignations , [ 7 ] efforts to deter corruption , or the governing body contracting with a different agency that renders the original agency redundant or obsolete. According to the International Association of Chiefs of Police , agency consolidation can occur to improve efficiency, consolidate resources, or when forming a new type of government.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Criminal law Law enforcement by country Monopoly on violence Mutual legal assistance treaty Outline of law enforcement – structured list of topics related to law enforcement, organized by subject area Parking enforcement officer Vigilantism References [ edit ] ^ New Law Journal - Volume 123, Part 1 - Page 358, 1974 ^ "Law Enforcement Code of Ethics" .

IACP . Retrieved 6 July 2023 .

^ Staff, Home.

"Metropolitan Police's proud boast sets off police alarm in Glasgow" .

The Times .

ISSN 0140-0460 . Retrieved 2022-10-26 .

^ "Bicentenaire : theme_expo4" . 2008-05-06. Archived from the original on 2008-05-06 . Retrieved 2022-10-26 .

^ Kären M. Hess, Christine Hess Orthmann, Introduction to Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice (2008), p. 1.

^ L., Katherine; Ergan.

"The City that Really Did Abolish the Police" .

Politico . Retrieved 2022-01-29 .

^ Cummings, Brandi (2020-01-24).

"Rio Vista dissolving its police department" .

KCRA . Retrieved 2022-01-29 .

^ "Consolidating Police Services" (PDF) .

Department of Justice - USA . International Association of Chiefs of Police. 2003-05-01 . Retrieved 2022-01-29 .

External links [ edit ] Look up law enforcement in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

v t e Law enforcement in Africa Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Somaliland Dependencies and other territories Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla (Spain) Madeira (Portugal) Mayotte / Réunion (France) Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom) v t e Law enforcement in Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal v t e Law enforcement in  North America Sovereign states Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Dependencies and other territories Anguilla Aruba Bermuda Bonaire British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Curaçao Greenland Guadeloupe Martinique Montserrat Puerto Rico Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saba Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten Turks and Caicos Islands United States Virgin Islands v t e Law enforcement in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Vatican City States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard Other entities European Union v t e Law enforcement in South America Sovereign states Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Dependencies and other territories Falkland Islands French Guiana South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline Authority control databases National United States Czech Republic Other NARA Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐645954cd9f‐xqwgp
Cached time: 20250815185048
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.671 seconds
Real time usage: 0.830 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 26006/1000000
Revision size: 12734/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 143021/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 16787/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 16/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 80864/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.306/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7221798/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  676.547      1 -total
 34.34%  232.321      4 Template:Navbox
 28.69%  194.135    105 Template:Iso2country
 18.98%  128.391      1 Template:Asia_topic
 16.63%  112.531      1 Template:Reflist
 15.91%  107.666      1 Template:Europe_topic
 13.74%   92.965      5 Template:Cite_web
 12.83%   86.785      1 Template:Africa_topic
  9.64%   65.228      1 Template:Short_description
  9.23%   62.465    105 Template:Iso2country/data Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:18486:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815185048 and revision id 1306029746. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Law_enforcement&oldid=1306029746 " Category : Law enforcement Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2022 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 14:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Law enforcement 31 languages Add topic

