Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Components Toggle Components subsection 1.1 Transducer 1.2 Digital display 1.3 Rundown fixture (joint simulator) 2 References 3 External links Toggle the table of contents Torque tester Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Tool quality control device This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Torque tester" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A torque tester is a quality control device to test or calibrate torque -controlled tools. This includes electronic torque wrenches , click torque wrenches, dial torque wrenches, electric screwdrivers, air screwdrivers, pulse tools, cordless screwdrivers, nutrunners, and torque screwdrivers. Advanced torque testers include the ability to measure in clockwise and counter-clockwise directions, [ 1 ] [ failed verification ] and potentially convert to engineering units (such as in·oz, in·lb, ft·lb , N·m , cN·m, kgf·cm, gf·cm, kgf·fm). They can also have different modes of operation (such as peak, 1st peak, track), and may include a certificate from a local regulator (such as NIST ).

Torque testers measure properties such as torsional strength and stiffness and are used in quality control of various fields including medical devices, metals, and aerospace.

[ 2 ] Cap torque testers are also frequently used of measure the removal torque of screw caps on bottles and jars.

[ 3 ] Components [ edit ] Transducer [ edit ] A torque transducer , similar to a load cell , is an electronic device used to convert torque into an electrical signal. This conversion is indirect and happens in two stages. Through a mechanical arrangement, the torque being sensed deforms a strain gauge . The strain gauge converts the deformation ( strain ) to electrical signals. A torque transducer usually consists of four strain gauges in a Wheatstone bridge configuration. Torque transducers of one or two strain gauges are also available. The electrical signal output is typically in the order of a few millivolts and usually requires amplification by an instrumentation amplifier before it can be used. The output of the transducer is plugged into an algorithm to calculate the force applied to the transducer. There are several styles available for torque transducers. Rotary, stationary (reaction), and inline are used for different calibration and audit purposes.

Digital display [ edit ] A key component of modern torque testers is the digital display. A digital display is used to measure the output signal from the transducer and calculates that reading into a torque value that is displayed on screen. In most cases the display and transducer are contained together inside a housing. This is known as a "Desktop Torque Tester". External rotary and stationary transducers can be used with portable displays (handheld torque analyzers).

Rundown fixture (joint simulator) [ edit ] A rundown fixture, also known as a joint simulator, is used during the calibration process to help test power tools (electric screwdrivers, air screwdrivers, pulse tools, cordless screwdrivers, nutrunners, etc.). A joint simulator is placed on top of the transducers. An adapter bit is inserted into the power tool and is mated to the top of the joint simulator. By using springs of different stiffness or stacking Belleville washers in set patterns, the joint simulator can replicate soft, medium, or hard joints. This is important when trying to repeat how a tool may be used during an actual process.

References [ edit ] ^ "AT2E | Torque Tester | Manual or Automatic" . Archived from the original on 2013-02-28 . Retrieved 2012-10-20 .

^ "What to Know Before Getting a Torque Tester | Delta Regis" .

Electric Screwdrivers from Delta Regis . 2020-07-13 . Retrieved 2020-12-24 .

^ ASTM D3474 Standard Practice for Calibration and Use of Torque Meters Used in Packaging Applications External links [ edit ] Brief History of Torque Measurement Importance of torque tester for bottle testing Fastening: How Tight Is Tight?

How does a Torque Tester Ensure the Proper Performance of Bottle Caps?

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Torque_tester&oldid=1299419557 " Categories : Wrenches Measuring instruments Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2024 All articles needing additional references All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from December 2024 This page was last edited on 8 July 2025, at 08:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Torque tester Add languages Add topic

