Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mission 2 Planning 3 Payload 4 Power source 5 Science 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Astrobiology Field Laboratory 13 languages العربية Български Català Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Lietuvių Magyar 日本語 Português Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Canceled NASA Mars rover concept Astrobiology Field Laboratory Astrobiology Field Laboratory Mission type Astrobiology rover Operator NASA Website at jpl.nasa.gov (recovered from archive) Mission duration 1 Martian year (proposed) Spacecraft properties Launch mass 450 kg (990 lb) maximum Start of mission Launch date 2016 (proposed) The Astrobiology Field Laboratory ( AFL ) (also Mars Astrobiology Field Laboratory or MAFL ) was a proposed NASA rover that would have conducted a search for life on Mars .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] This proposed mission, which was not funded, would have landed a rover on Mars in 2016 and explore a site for habitat . Examples of such sites are an active or extinct hydrothermal deposit, a dry lake or a specific polar site.

[ 3 ] Had it been funded, the rover was to be built by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory , based upon the Mars Science Laboratory rover design, it would have carried astrobiology -oriented instruments, and ideally, a core drill . The original plans called for a launch in 2016, [ 4 ] however, budgetary constraints caused funding cuts.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Mission [ edit ] The rover could have been the first mission since the Viking program landers of the 1970s to specifically look for the chemistry associated with life ( biosignatures ), such as carbon-based compounds along with molecules involving both sulfur and nitrogen . The mission strategy was to search for habitable zones by "following the water" and "finding the carbon." [ 1 ] In particular, it was to conduct detailed analysis of geologic environments identified by the 2012 Mars Science Laboratory as being conducive to life on Mars and biosignatures , past and present. Such environments might include fine-grained sedimentary layers, hot spring mineral deposits, icy layers near the poles , or sites such as gullies where liquid water once flowed or may continue to seep into soils from melting ice packs.

Planning [ edit ] The Astrobiology Field Laboratory (AFL) would have followed the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (launched in 2005), Phoenix lander (launched in 2007), and Mars Science Laboratory (launched in 2011). The AFL 'Science Steering Group' developed the following set of search strategies and assumptions for increasing the likelihood of detecting biosignatures: [ 1 ] Life processes may produce a range of biosignatures such as lipids , proteins , amino acids , kerogen -like material or characteristic micropores in rock.

[ 7 ] However, the biosignatures themselves may become progressively destroyed by ongoing environmental processes.

Sample acquisition will need to be executed in multiple locations and at depths below that point on the Martian surface where oxidation results in chemical alteration. The surface is oxidizing as a consequence of the absence of magnetic field or magnetosphere shielding from harmful space radiation and solar electromagnetic radiation [ 8 ] [ 9 ] —which may well render the surface sterile down to a depth greater than 7.5 meters (24.6 ft).

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] To get under that potential sterile layer, a core drill design is currently being studied. As with any trade, the inclusion of the drill would come at the mass expense available for other payload elements.

Analytical laboratory biosignature measurements require the pre-selection and identification of high-priority samples, which could be subsequently subsampled to maximize detection probability and spatially resolve potential biosignatures for detailed analysis.

Payload [ edit ] The conceptual payload included a Precision Sample Handling and Processing System to replace and augment the functionality and capabilities provided by the Sample Acquisition Sample Processing and Handling system that was part of the 2009-configuration of Mars Science Laboratory rover [ 1 ] [ 12 ] (the system is known as SAM (Sample Analysis at Mars) in 2011-configuration of Mars Science Laboratory). The AFL payload was to attempt to minimize any conflicting positive detection of life by including a suite of instruments that provide at least three mutually confirming analytical laboratory measurements.

[ 3 ] For the purpose of discerning a reasonable estimate on which to base the rover mass, the conceptual payload was to include: [ 1 ] Precision Sample Handling and Processing System.

Forward Planetary Protection for Life-Detection Mission to a Special Region.

Life Detection-Contamination Avoidance.

Astrobiology Instrument Development.

MSL Parachute Enhancement.

Autonomous safe long-distance travel.

Autonomous single-cycle instrument placement.

Pinpoint landing (100–1000 m) (if necessary to reach specific science targets in hazardous regions).

Mobility for highly sloped terrain 30° (if required to reach science targets).

Power source [ edit ] It was suggested that the Astrobiology Field Laboratory use radioisotope thermoelectric generators (RTGs) as its power source, like the ones to be used on the Mars Science Laboratory .

[ 1 ] The radioactive RTG power source was to last for about one Martian year, or approximately two Earth years. RTGs can provide reliable, continuous power day and night, and waste heat can be used via pipes to warm systems, freeing electrical power for the operation of the vehicle and instruments.

Science [ edit ] Though the AFL science justification did not include a pre-definition of potential life forms that might be found on Mars, the following assumptions were made: [ 1 ] Life utilizes some form of carbon .

Life requires an external energy source (sunlight or chemical energy ) to survive.

Life is packaged in cellular-type compartments ( cells ).

Life requires liquid water.

Within the region of surface operations, identify and classify Martian environments (past or present) with different habitability potential, and characterize their geologic context. Quantitatively assess habitability potential by: [ 1 ] Measuring isotopic , chemical , mineralogical , and structural characteristics of samples, including the distribution and molecular complexity of carbon compounds .

Assessing biologically available sources of energy , including chemical, thermal and electromagnetic.

Determining the role of water (past or present) in the geological processes at the landing site.

Investigate the factors that will affect the preservation of potential signs of life (past or present) This refers to the potential for a particular biosignature to survive and therefore be detected in a particular habitat. Also, post-collection preservation may be required for later sample retrieval, although that would necessitate a further assessment of precision landing of the Mars sample return mission .

[ 3 ] Investigate the possibility of prebiotic chemistry on Mars, including non-carbon biochemistry .

Document any anomalous features that can be hypothesized as possible Martian biosignatures.

It is fundamental to the AFL concept to understand that organisms and their environment constitute a system, within which any one part can affect the other. If life exists or has existed on Mars, scientific measurements to be considered would focus on understanding those systems that support or supported it. If life never existed while conditions were suitable for life formation, understanding why a Martian genesis never occurred would be a future priority.

[ 1 ] The AFL team stated that it is reasonable to expect that missions like AFL will play a significant role in this process, but unreasonable to expect that they will bring it to a conclusion.

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Astronomy portal Biology portal Astrobiology – Science concerned with life in the universe ExoMars – Astrobiology programme Exploration of Mars Life on Mars – Scientific assessments on the microbial habitability of Mars Mars 2020 – Astrobiology Mars rover mission by NASA Mars Astrobiology Explorer-Cacher – Cancelled NASA Mars rover concept Curiosity (rover) – NASA robotic rover exploring Gale crater on Mars Viking program – Pair of NASA landers and orbiters sent to Mars in 1976 References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i Beegle, Luther W.; et al. (August 2007). "A Concept for NASA's Mars 2016 Astrobiology Field Laboratory".

Astrobiology .

7 (4): 545– 577.

Bibcode : 2007AsBio...7..545B .

doi : 10.1089/ast.2007.0153 .

PMID 17723090 .

^ "Missions to Mars" .

Jet Propulsion Laboratory . NASA. February 18, 2009. Archived from the original on July 16, 2009 . Retrieved July 20, 2009 .

^ a b c d Steele, A., Beaty; et al. (September 26, 2006).

"Final report of the MEPAG Astrobiology Field Laboratory Science Steering Group (AFL-SSG)" (.doc) . In David Beaty (ed.).

The Astrobiology Field Laboratory . U.S.A.: the Mars Exploration Program Analysis Group (MEPAG) - NASA. p. 72 . Retrieved July 22, 2009 .

^ "Mars Astrobiology Field Laboratory and the Search for Signs of Life" .

Mars Today . September 1, 2007. Archived from the original on December 16, 2012 . Retrieved July 20, 2009 .

^ Leonard, Tom (July 6, 2009).

"NASA experts scale back moon and Mars plans in face of Obama funding cut fears" . Daily Telegraph . Retrieved January 9, 2023 .

^ "Set sights on Mars, moon pioneers urge" . Mars Daily. July 20, 2009 . Retrieved January 9, 2023 .

^ Tanja Bosak; Virginia Souza-Egipsy; Frank A. Corsetti; Dianne K. Newman (May 18, 2004). "Micrometer-scale porosity as a biosignature in carbonate crusts".

Geology .

32 (9): 781– 784.

Bibcode : 2004Geo....32..781B .

doi : 10.1130/G20681.1 .

^ NASA Mars Global Surveyor ^ Arkani-Hamed, Jafar; Boutin, Daniel (July 20–25, 2003).

"Polar Wander of Mars: Evidence from Magnetic Anomalies" (PDF) .

Sixth International Conference on Mars . Pasadena, California: Dordrecht, D. Reidel Publishing Co . Retrieved March 2, 2007 .

^ Dartnell, L.R. et al., "Modelling the surface and subsurface Martian radiation environment: Implications for astrobiology," Geophysical Research Letters 34, L02207, doi:10,1029/2006GL027494, 2007.

^ "Mars Rovers Sharpen Questions About Livable Conditions" .

Jet Propulsion Laboratory . NASA. February 15, 2008.

Archived from the original on August 25, 2009 . Retrieved July 24, 2009 .

^ "A Concept for NASA's Mars 2016 Astrobiology Field Laboratory" .

SpaceRef . September 1, 2007 . Retrieved July 21, 2009 .

External links [ edit ] Astrobiology Field Laboratory Summary Mars Astrobiology Field Lab Rover (AFL) Mission Profile Final report of the Astrobiology Field Laboratory Science Steering Group (September 2006) v t e Astrobiology Disciplines Astrochemistry Astrophysics Atmospheric sciences Biochemistry Evolutionary biology Exoplanetology Geomicrobiology Microbiology Paleontology Planetary oceanography Planetary science Main topics Abiogenesis Allan Hills 84001 Biomolecule Biosignature Drake equation Earliest known life forms Earth analog Extraterrestrial life Extraterrestrial sample curation Extremophiles Hypothetical types of biochemistry List of microorganisms tested in outer space Ocean planet Panspermia Planetary protection Search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) Yamato meteorite Planetary habitability Circumstellar habitable zone Earth analog Extraterrestrial liquid water Galactic habitable zone Habitability of binary star systems Habitability of natural satellites Habitability of neutron star systems Habitability of red dwarf systems Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of yellow dwarf systems Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems Habitable zone for complex life List of potentially habitable exoplanets Tholin Superhabitable planet Space missions Earth orbit BIO BIOCORE Biolab Bion BIOPAN Biosatellite program E-MIST ERA Eu:CROPIS EXOSTACK EXPOSE Lunar Micro Ecosystem O/OREOS OREOcube Tanpopo VEGGIE Mars Beagle 2 Fobos-Grunt Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity rover Mars 2020 Perseverance rover Phoenix Tianwen-1 Zhurong rover Trace Gas Orbiter Viking Comets and asteroids Hayabusa2 OSIRIS-REx Rosetta Heliocentric BioSentinel Planned Dragonfly Europa Clipper ExoMars Rosalind Franklin rover Proposed Breakthrough Enceladus BRUIE CAESAR Enceladus Explorer Enceladus Life Finder‎ Enceladus Life Signatures and Habitability Enceladus Orbilander Europa Lander ExoLance Explorer of Enceladus and Titan Icebreaker Life Journey to Enceladus and Titan Laplace-P Life Investigation For Enceladus Mars sample return mission Oceanus THEO Trident Cancelled and undeveloped Astrobiology Field Laboratory Beagle 3 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection Kazachok Living Interplanetary Flight Experiment Mars Astrobiology Explorer-Cacher MELOS Northern Light Red Dragon Terrestrial Planet Finder Institutions and programs Astrobiology Society of Britain Astrobiology Science and Technology for Exploring Planets Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Breakthrough Starshot Carl Sagan Institute Center for Life Detection Science European Astrobiology Network Association NASA Astrobiology Institute Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Ocean Worlds Exploration Program Spanish Astrobiology Center‎ Category Commons v t e Spacecraft missions to Mars List of missions to Mars List of Mars orbiters List of artificial objects on Mars Active Flybys Psyche ‡ (2023, flyby in 2026) Orbiters 2001 Mars Odyssey Mars Express Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter timeline MAVEN ExoMars Trace Gas Orbiter Hope Tianwen-1 orbiter Rovers Curiosity Mars Science Laboratory timeline Perseverance Mars 2020 timeline Past Flybys Mars 1 † Mariner 4 Zond 2 † Mariner 6 and 7 Mars 6 Mars 7 Rosetta ‡ Dawn ‡ Mars Cube One Europa Clipper ‡ Hera ‡ Orbiters Mars 2 Mars 3 Mariner 9 Mars 4 † Mars 5 Viking program Viking 1 Viking 2 Phobos program Phobos 1 † Phobos 2 † Mars Observer † Mars Global Surveyor Nozomi † Mars Climate Orbiter † Mangalyaan Landers Mars 2 † Mars 3 † Mars 6 † Mars 7 † Viking 1 Viking 2 Mars Pathfinder Mars Polar Lander † / Deep Space 2 † Beagle 2 † Phoenix ExoMars Schiaparelli † InSight Tianwen-1 lander Rovers PrOP-M † Sojourner Mars Exploration Rover Spirit timeline Opportunity timeline Zhurong Aircraft Ingenuity helicopter flights Mars 2020 Failed launches Mars 1M No.1 1M No.2 2MV-4 No.1 2MV-3 No.1 Mariner 3 Mars 2M No.521 2M No.522 Mariner 8 Mars 3MS No.170 Mars 96 Fobos-Grunt / Yinghuo-1 Future Planned EscaPADE (2025) Tera-hertz Explorer (TEREX) (mid 2020s) Martian Moons eXploration (MMX) (2026) Mangalyaan-2 (2026) Tianwen-3 (2028) Rosalind Franklin (2028) MBR Explorer ‡ (2028, flyby in 2031) NASA-ESA Mars Sample Return Mars Sample Recovery Helicopters Kazachok Proposed MAGGIE SpaceX Mars program Mars-Grunt Cancelled or not developed Aerial Regional-scale Environmental Survey Astrobiology Field Laboratory Beagle 3 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection DePhine Icebreaker Life Marsokhod Mars 4NM & 5NM Mars 5M (Mars-79) Mars-Aster Mars Astrobiology Explorer-Cacher (MAX-C) Mars Geyser Hopper Mars Exploration Ice Mapper Mars One Mars Micro Orbiter Mars Surveyor Lander Mars Telecommunications Orbiter MELOS rover MetNet NetLander Northern Light Next Mars Orbiter PADME Phootprint Sample Collection for Investigation of Mars (SCIM) Sky-Sailor SpaceX Red Dragon Vesta Voyager Mars Exploration Concepts Flyby Orbiter Landing Atmospheric entry Rover Aircraft Sample return Human mission Permanent settlement Colonization Terraforming Strategies Mars Scout Program Mars Exploration Program Mars Exploration Joint Initiative Mars Next Generation Advocacy The Mars Project The Case for Mars Inspiration Mars Mars Institute Mars Society Mars race Missions are ordered by launch date. Sign † indicates failure en route or before intended mission data returned.

‡ indicates use of the planet as a gravity assist en route to another destination.

v t e Jet Propulsion Laboratory Current missions Euclid Psyche ACRIMSAT ASTER Atmospheric infrared sounder (AIRS) Deep Space Atomic Clock GRACE-FO InSight Juno Keck observatory Large Binocular Telescope (LBT) Mars Odyssey Mars 2020 Perseverance rover Ingenuity helicopter Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) Microwave limb sounder (MLS) Multi-angle imaging spectroradiometer (MISR) Soil Moisture Active Passive (SMAP) Tropospheric Emission Spectrometer (TES) SWOT Voyager program Voyager 1 Voyager 2 Past missions Cassini-Huygens Dawn Deep Impact Deep Space 1 Deep Space 2 Explorers GALEX Galileo spacecraft Genesis GRACE Herschel IRAS Jason-1 Kepler Magellan Mariner Mars Climate Orbiter Mars Cube One (MarCO) Mars Observer Mars Pathfinder Mars Polar Lander Mars Global Surveyor Mars Exploration Rovers Spirit rover Opportunity rover Near-Earth Asteroid Scout NSCAT Phoenix Pioneer QuikSCAT Ranger Rosetta Seasat Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) Solar Mesosphere Explorer (SME) Spaceborne Imaging Radar (SIR) Spitzer Space Telescope Stardust Surveyor SVLBI TOPEX/Poseidon Ulysses Viking Wide Field and Planetary Camera (WFPC) Wide Field Infrared Explorer (WIRE) Lunar Flashlight Planned missions Europa Clipper Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope SPHEREx Proposed missions Europa Lander FINESSE Canceled missions Astrobiology Field Laboratory (AFL) Mars Astrobiology Explorer-Cacher (MAX-C) Related organizations NASA Caltech NASA Deep Space Network Goldstone Complex Table Mountain Observatory Solar System Ambassadors JPL Science Division Near-Earth Asteroid Tracking Space Flight Operations Facility Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Astrobiology_Field_Laboratory&oldid=1186775005 " Categories : Cancelled spacecraft Mars rovers Proposed NASA space probes Missions to Mars Cancelled astrobiology space missions Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from September 2021 Use American English from January 2014 All Wikipedia articles written in American English This page was last edited on 25 November 2023, at 11:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Astrobiology Field Laboratory 13 languages Add topic

