Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Works 3 Notes 4 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Enrico Narducci 3 languages Català Français Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian librarian, bibliographer and paleographer Enrico Narducci Enrico Narducci Born ( 1832-11-12 ) November 12, 1832 Rome , Papal States Died 11 April 1893 (1893-04-11) (aged 60) Rome , Kingdom of Italy Nationality Italian Occupations librarian bibliographer paleographer Known for editio princeps of the treatise of Restoro d'Arezzo La composizione del mondo colle sue cascioni Parent(s) Domenico Antonio Narducci and Enrichetta Narducci (née Fioroni) Academic background Alma mater Roman College Influences Baldassarre Boncompagni [ 1 ] Enrico Narducci (12 November 1832 – 11 April 1893) was an Italian librarian , bibliographer and paleographer .

Biography [ edit ] Enrico Narducci was born on November 12, 1832, in Rome . He studied at the Roman College and, in 1848, he became an infantry officer of the Roman Republic .

[ 1 ] His cousin Paolo was one of the first to be injured during the French attack of April 30, 1849.

After the reinstallment of the papal government, he came into contact with Baldassarre Boncompagni , a Roman prince, mathematician and historian of science , who entrusted him with the care of his library and introduced him to the study of paleography .

[ 1 ] In the 1860s, he published in the monthly review Il Buonarroti the Discorso del modo di formare un catalogo universale delle biblioteche d'Italia .

[ 1 ] In 1867, Narducci published the work "Giunte all'opera Gli scrittori d'Italia " (letters A and B l) by Count Giammaria Mazzucchelli .

After the end of the papal government, he was entrusted with the management of the libraries of Rome.

[ 1 ] He proposed that all the Italian state libraries should have had a combined catalogue. To prove its possibility he compiled an article on Boccaccio , and showed at one view all the editions of that writer and the place where they are to be found.

[ 2 ] Narducci was also known as an editor of medieval philosophical writings. In 1859 he published the editio princeps of the treatise of Restoro d'Arezzo La composizione del mondo colle sue cascioni .

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] In 1884 he published an edition of the first two parts of the Tractatus sphere of Bartholomew of Parma from the manuscript, Rome, Biblioteca Vittorio Emanuele (now Biblioteca Nazionale Centrale ), Santa Croce, no. 228.

[ 4 ] He died in Rome on April 11, 1893. He was a member of the Royal Academy of Sciences of Turin, of the Italian Geographical Society and of the Accademia Galileiana of Padua.

[ 1 ] Works [ edit ] Saggio di voci italiane derivate dall'arabo . Rome: Tipografia delle scienze matematiche e fisiche. 1858.

Secondo saggio di voci italiane derivate dall'arabo . Rome: Tipografia delle belle arti. 1863.

Intorno a due edizioni della Summa de arithmetica di fra Luca Pacioli . Rome: Tipografia delle scienze matematiche e fisiche. 1863.

Intorno alla vita ed agli scritti dell'avvocato Gustavo Camillo Galletti . Rome: Tipografia delle scienze matematiche e fisiche. 1868.

Notizie della Biblioteca Alessandrina nella R. Università di Roma . Rome: Tipografia delle Scienze matematiche e fisiche. 1872.

Li nuptiali di Marco Antonio Altieri...

Rome: Tipografia romana di c. Bartoli. 1873.

Catalogo dei codici Petrarcheschi delle biblioteche Barberina, Chigiana, Corsiniana, Vallicelliana e Vaticana e delle edizioni Petrarchesche esistenti nelle biblioteche pubbliche di Roma . Rome: E. Loescher. 1874.

Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g Cerri 2012 .

^ Enrico Narducci.

Di un catalogo generale dei mss. ed dei libri a stampa delle biblioteche governative d'Italia, proposta al sig. Ministro della Pubblica Istruzione, nella quale si dà per saggio l'articolo Boccaccio . Rome, 1877.

^ Piciocco, Michele (2016).

"Restoro d'Arezzo" .

Dizionario Biografico degli Italiani , Volume 87: Renzi–Robortello (in Italian). Rome: Istituto dell'Enciclopedia Italiana .

ISBN 978-88-12-00032-6 .

^ Nardi, Bruno (1964).

"Bartolomeo da Parma" .

Dizionario Biografico degli Italiani , Volume 6: Baratteri–Bartolozzi (in Italian). Rome: Istituto dell'Enciclopedia Italiana .

OCLC 883370 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Solimine, Giovanni (1994). "Enrico Narducci e le biblioteche nei primi decenni dell'Italia unita".

Nuovi Annali della Scuola Speciale per Archivisti e Bibliotecari .

VIII : 195– 218.

Cerri, Maria Giuseppina (2012).

"NARDUCCI, Enrico" .

Dizionario Biografico degli Italiani , Volume 77: Morlini–Natolini (in Italian). Rome: Istituto dell'Enciclopedia Italiana .

ISBN 978-88-12-00032-6 .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Poland Vatican Israel Belgium People Italian People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Enrico_Narducci&oldid=1298345749 " Categories : Italian librarians Italian non-fiction writers Librarians from the Papal States 1832 births 1893 deaths Curators from Rome Italian bibliographers Academics from Rome Hidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using infobox person with multiple parents Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 1 July 2025, at 22:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Enrico Narducci 3 languages Add topic

