Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical context 2 By material Toggle By material subsection 2.1 Wood and organic materials 2.2 Stone 2.3 Metal 3 Forms of art Toggle Forms of art subsection 3.1 Beads 3.2 Textiles 3.3 Other sources 4 Origins and background 5 Scholarship 6 Styles Toggle Styles subsection 6.1 Oseberg Style 6.1.1 Broa style 6.2 Borre Style 6.3 Jellinge Style 6.4 Mammen Style 6.5 Ringerike Style 6.6 Urnes Style 6.6.1 Early Urnes Style 6.6.2 Mid-Urnes Style 6.6.3 Late Urnes Style 6.6.4 Urnes-Romanesque Style 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References Toggle References subsection 9.1 Background 9.2 General Surveys 9.3 Specialist Studies 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Viking art 18 languages العربية Català Dansk Eesti Español Français Hrvatski Italiano Lietuvių Magyar Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Português Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски தமிழ் Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Term for art of Scandinavia and Viking settlements of 8th-11th centuries Gold jewellery from the 10th century Hiddensee treasure , mixing Norse pagan and Christian symbols.

Pair of "tortoise brooches," which were worn by married Viking women Viking art , also known commonly as Norse art , is a term widely accepted for the art of Scandinavian Norsemen and Viking settlements further afield—particularly in the British Isles and Iceland —during the Viking Age of the 8th-11th centuries. Viking art has many design elements in common with Celtic , Germanic , the later Romanesque and Eastern European art, sharing many influences with each of these traditions.

[ 1 ] Generally speaking, the current knowledge of Viking art relies heavily upon more durable objects of metal and stone ; wood , bone , ivory and textiles are more rarely preserved. The artistic record, therefore, as it has survived to the present day, remains significantly incomplete. Ongoing archaeological excavation and opportunistic finds, of course, may improve this situation in the future, as indeed they have in the recent past.

Viking art is usually divided into a sequence of roughly chronological styles, although outside Scandinavia itself local influences are often strong, and the development of styles can be less clear.

Historical context [ edit ] Decorated plaque in whale bone , 8th–late 9th century, 22×18.3×0.8 cm (8.7×7.2×0.3 in) The Vikings' regional origins lay in Scandinavia, the northernmost peninsula of continental Europe, while the term 'Viking' likely derived from their own term for coastal raiding—the activity by which many neighboring cultures became acquainted with the inhabitants of the region.

Viking raiders attacked wealthy targets on the north-western coasts of Europe from the late 8th until the mid-11th century CE. Pre-Christian traders and sea raiders, the Vikings first enter recorded history with their attack on the Christian monastic community on Lindisfarne Island in 793.

The Vikings initially employed their longships to invade and attack European coasts, harbors and river settlements on a seasonal basis.  Subsequently, Viking activities diversified to include trading voyages to the east, west, and south of their Scandinavian homelands, with repeated and regular voyages following river systems east into Russia and the Black and Caspian Sea regions, and west to the coastlines of the British Isles , Iceland and Greenland . Evidence exists for Vikings reaching Newfoundland well before the later voyages of Christopher Columbus came to the New World .

Trading and merchant activities were accompanied by settlement and colonization in many of these territories.

[ 2 ] By material [ edit ] Wood and organic materials [ edit ] Wood carving at Urnes Stave Church in Norway—a rare survival.

Wood was undoubtedly the primary material of choice for Viking artists, being relatively easy to carve, inexpensive, and abundant in northern Europe. The importance of wood as an artistic medium is underscored by chance survivals of wood artistry at the very beginning and end of the Viking period, namely, the Oseberg ship-burial carvings of the early 9th century and the carved decoration of the Urnes Stave Church from the 12th century. As summarised by James Graham-Campbell : "These remarkable survivals allow us to form at least an impression of what we are missing from original corpus of Viking art, although wooden fragments and small-scale carvings in other materials (such as antler, amber, and walrus ivory) provide further hints. The same is inevitably true of the textile arts, although weaving and embroidery were clearly well-developed crafts." [ 3 ] Woodworking was used on all sorts of items like ships, furniture, and ceremonial objects.

Stone [ edit ] With the exception of the Gotlandic picture stones prevalent in Sweden early in the Viking period, stone carving was apparently not practiced elsewhere in Scandinavia until the mid-10th century and the creation of the royal monuments at Jelling in Denmark . Subsequently, and likely influenced by the spread of Christianity, the use of carved stone for permanent memorials became more prevalent.

Metal [ edit ] Silver penannular brooches from the Penrith Hoard from Viking north England, early 10th century Viking Silver Neck-Ring - two twisted silver ropes in Hunt Museum Beyond the discontinuous artifactual records of wood and stone, the reconstructed history of Viking art to date relies most on the study of decoration of ornamental metalwork from a great variety of sources.

[ 4 ] Several types of archaeological context have succeeded in preserving metal objects for present study, while the durability of precious metals , in particular, has preserved much artistic expression and endeavor.

Jewelry was worn by both men and women, though of different types. Married women fastened their overdresses near the shoulder with matching pairs of large brooches. Modern scholars often call them "tortoise brooches" because of their domed shape. The shapes and styles of women's paired brooches varied regionally, but many used openwork . Women often strung metal chains or strings of beads between the brooches or suspended ornaments from the bottom of the brooches. Men wore rings on their fingers, arms and necks, and held their cloaks closed with penannular brooches , often with extravagantly long pins. Their weapons were often richly decorated on areas such as sword hilts . A small number of large and lavish pieces or sets in solid gold have been found, probably belonging to royalty or major figures.

Decorated metalwork of an everyday nature is frequently recovered from Viking period graves , on account of the widespread practice of making burials accompanied by grave goods . The deceased was dressed in their best clothing and jewelry, and was interred with weapons, tools, and household goods. Items were forged by casting, inlay, and engraving.  Less common, but significant nonetheless, are finds of precious metal objects in the form of treasure hoards , many apparently concealed for safe-keeping by owners later unable to recover their contents, although some may have been deposited as offerings to the gods.

Recently, given the increasing popularity and legality of metal-detecting , an increasing frequency of single, chance finds of metal objects and ornaments (most probably representing accidental losses) is creating a fast expanding corpus of new material for study.

Viking coins fit well into this latter category, but nonetheless form a separate category of Viking period artefact, their design and decoration largely independent of the developing styles characteristic of wider Viking artistic endeavor.

Forms of art [ edit ] Beads [ edit ] Beads were a significant part of Viking society for a multitude of reasons. They were a form of art commonly made out of glass [ 5 ] but also from different types of metals and, more rarely, natural materials such as amber, carnelian, rock crystal, etc.

[ 6 ] These were used to create pendants and/or beads for Vikings. Typically, beads were globular and monochrome; however, the rarer beads were kaleidoscopic and had unique patterns.

[ 7 ] Beads from the Viking age have been found primarily within Viking burial sites like Birka and also in known Viking settlement locations and trading towns like Hedeby .

[ 8 ] Beads during this era were costly items, so if used for individual purposes, they were an indicator of wealth and high social status; [ 9 ] The role of beads in burial sites indicated their cultural significance and value within the Viking Society.

Beads were also a huge drive for trade; The Norse used them as portable wealth and leverage for economic determinism. While Scandivania’s beads were an attraction and gave wealth to early Viking establishments, over time and through widespread trade routes from Viking expansion , Eastern beads became more popular.

[ 10 ] However, beads were still used as a form of currency and a symbol of wealth. Beads were an incentive for trade further establishing Viking settlement and were a huge part of Viking art and culture.

Textiles [ edit ] While often less preserved reveal a sophisticated tradition of weaving and embroidery, with silk and wool often adorned with elaborate patterns.

Other sources [ edit ] A non-visual source of information for Viking art lies in skaldic verse , the complex form of oral poetry composed during the Viking Age and passed on until written down centuries later.

[ 11 ] Several verses speak of painted forms of decoration that have but rarely survived on wood and stone. The 9th-century skald poet Bragi Boddason , for example, cites four apparently unrelated scenes painted on a shield. One of these scenes depicted the god Thor 's fishing expedition, which motif is also referenced in a 10th-century poem by Úlfr Uggason describing the paintings in a newly constructed hall in Iceland.

Origins and background [ edit ] A continuous artistic tradition common to most of north-western Europe and developing from the 4th century CE formed the foundations on which Viking Age art and decoration were built: from that period onwards, the output of Scandinavian artists was broadly focused on varieties of convoluted animal ornamentation used to decorate a wide variety of objects.

The art historian Bernhard Salin was the first to systematise Germanic animal ornament, dividing it into three styles (I, II, and III).

[ 12 ] The latter two were subsequently subdivided by Arwidsson [ 13 ] into three further styles: Style C, flourishing during the 7th century and into the 8th century, before being largely replaced (especially in southern Scandinavia) by Style D. Styles C and D provided the inspiration for the initial expression of animal ornament within the Viking Age, Style E, commonly known as the Oseberg / Broa Style. Both Styles D and E developed within a broad Scandinavian context which, although in keeping with north-western European animal ornamentation generally, exhibited little influence from beyond Scandinavia      .

Scholarship [ edit ] Although preliminary formulations were made in the late 19th century, the history of Viking art first achieved maturity in the early 20th century with the detailed publication of the ornate wood carvings discovered in 1904 as part of the Oserberg ship-burial by the Norwegian archaeologist Haakon Shetelig .

Importantly, it was the English archaeologist David M. Wilson , working with his Danish colleague Ole Klindt-Jensen to produce the 1966 survey work Viking Art , who created foundations for the systematic characterization of the field still employed today, together with a developed chronological framework.

David Wilson continued to produce mostly English-language studies on Viking art in subsequent years, joined over recent decades by the Norwegian art-historian Signe Horn Fuglesang with her own series of important publications. Together these scholars have combined authority with accessibility to promote the increasing understanding of Viking art as a cultural expression.

Styles [ edit ] Timeline for the Norse animal styles.

The art of the Viking Age is organized into a loose sequence of stylistic phases which, despite the significant overlap in style and chronology, may be defined and distinguished on account both of formal design elements and of recurring compositions and motifs: Oseberg Style Borre Style Jellinge Style Mammen Style Ringerike Style Urnes Style Unsurprisingly, these stylistic phases appear in their purest form in Scandinavia itself; elsewhere in the Viking world, notable admixtures from external cultures and influences frequently appear. In the British Isles, for example, art historians identify distinct, 'Insular' versions of Scandinavian motifs, often directly alongside 'pure' Viking decoration.

Oseberg Style [ edit ] The Oseberg Viking Ship at the Viking Ship Museum , Oslo.

The Oseberg Style characterises the initial phase in what has been considered Viking art.

[ 14 ] The Oseberg Style takes its name from the Oseberg Ship grave, a well-preserved and highly decorated longship discovered in a large burial mound at the Oseberg farm near Tønsberg in Vestfold , Norway , which also contained a number of other richly decorated wooden objects.

[ 15 ] Currently located at the Viking Ship Museum , Bygdøy , and over 70 feet long, the Oseberg Ship held the remains of two women and many precious objects that were probably removed by robbers early before it was found. The Oseberg ship itself is decorated with a more traditional style of animal interlace that does not feature the gripping beast motif. However, five carved wooden animal-head posts were found in the ship, and the one known as the Carolingian animal-head post is decorated with gripping beasts, as are other grave goods from the ship.

[ 16 ] The Carolingian head represents a snarling beast, possibly a wolf, with surface ornamentation in the form of interwoven animals that twist and turn as they are gripping and snapping.

Detail of the Carolingian animal-head post from the Oseberg ship burial, showing the gripping beast motif.

Detail from the Oseberg ship Oseberg bow detail Broa style [ edit ] Fragment of a sword pommel decorated in Broa style, from grave 174 at Stora och Lilla Ihre, Hellvi parish, Gotland. Bronze. 550 – 800, Vendel age.

The Broa style , named after a bridle-mount found at Broa, Halla parish, Gotland, is sometimes included with the Oseberg style, and sometimes held as its own.

Photograph of the Broa bridle taken by Ola Myrin for the Swedish Historiska museet exhibit "The Viking World".

Right side relative to the horse.

Detail of left side.

Detail of mounts hanging from the bit.

Borre Style [ edit ] Bronze pendant from Hedeby (Haithabu) The Borre Style embraces a range of geometric interlace / knot patterns and zoomorphic (single animal) motifs, first recognised in a group of gilt-bronze harness mounts recovered from a ship grave in Borre mound cemetery near the village of Borre , Vestfold , Norway , and from which the name of the style derives. Borre Style prevailed in Scandinavia from the late 9th through to the late 10th century, a timeframe supported by dendrochronological data supplied from sites with characteristically Borre Style artifacts [ 17 ] Found in Brooches The 'gripping-beast' with a ribbon-shaped body continues as a characteristic of this and earlier styles. As with geometric patterning in this phase, the visual thrust of the Borre Style results from the filling of available space: ribbon animal plaits are tightly interlaced and animal bodies are arranged to create tight, closed compositions. As a result, any background is markedly absent – a characteristic of the Borre Style that contrasts strongly with the more open and fluid compositions that prevailed in the overlapping Jellinge Style.

A more particular diagnostic feature of Borre Style lies in a symmetrical, double-contoured 'ring-chain' (or 'ring-braid'), whose composition consists of interlaced circles separated by transverse bars and a lozenge overlay. The Borre ring-chain occasionally terminates with an animal head in high relief, as seen on strap fittings from Borre and Gokstad.

The ridges of designs in metalwork are often nicked to imitate the filigree wire employed in the finest pieces of craftsmanship.

[ 18 ] Jellinge Style [ edit ] Gorm's Cup , from the barrow of Gorm the Old at Jelling.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] The Jellinge Style is a phase of Scandinavian animal art during the late 10th century.

[ 22 ] Bridging the earlier Borre style with the later Mammen style. The style is characterized by markedly ribbon -like stylized animal motifs and often band-shaped bodies of animals.

[ 23 ] [ 22 ] It was originally applied to a complex of objects in Jelling , Denmark , such as Gorm's Cup (by King Gorm,) and Harald Bluetooth 's great runestone, but more recently the style is included in the Mammen style.

[ 22 ] Mammen Style [ edit ] The axe head from Mammen. Iron with silver engraving.

The Mammen Style takes its name from its type object, an axe recovered from a wealthy male burial marked a mound (Bjerringhø) at Mammen , in Jutland , Denmark (on the basis of dendrochronology, the wood used in construction of the grave chamber was felled in winter 970–971). Richly decorated on both sides with inlaid silver designs, the iron axe was probably a ceremonial parade weapon that was the property of a man of princely status, his burial clothes bearing elaborate embroidery and trimmed with silk and fur.

A replica of the original but lost Cammin Chest, a small late-Viking period golden reliquary in the Mammen style ( Nationalmuseet ).

On one face, the Mammen axe features a large bird with pelleted body, crest, circular eye, and upright head and beak with lappet. A large shell-spiral marks the bird's hip, from which point its thinly elongated wings emerge: the right wing interlaces with the bird's neck, while the left wing interlaces with its body and tail. The outer wing edge displays a semi-circular nick typical of Mammen Style design. The tail is rendered as a triple tendril, the particular treatment of which on the Mammen axe – with open, hook-like ends – forming a characteristic of the Mammen Style as a whole. Complicating the design is the bird's head-lappet, interlacing twice with neck and right wing, whilst also sprouting tendrils along the blade edge. At the top, near the haft, the Mammen axe features an interlaced knot on one side, a triangular human mask (with large nose, moustache and spiral beard) on the other; the latter would prove a favoured Mammen Style motif carried over from earlier styles.

On the other side, the Mammen axe bears a spreading foliate (leaf) design, emanating from spirals at the base with thin, 'pelleted' tendrils spreading and intertwining across the axe head towards the haft.

Ringerike Style [ edit ] The Vang Stone The Ringerike Style receives its name from the Ringerike district north of Oslo , Norway, where the local reddish sandstone was widely employed for carving stones with designs of the style.

[ 24 ] The type object most commonly used to define the period is a 2.15-metre (7 ft 1 in) high carved stone from Vang in Oppland . Apart from a runic memorial inscription on its right edge, the main field of the Vang Stone is filled with a balanced tendril ornament springing from two shell spirals at the base: the main stems cross twice to terminate in lobed tendrils. At the crossing, further tendrils spring from loops and pear-shaped motifs appear from the tendril centres on the upper loop. Although axial in conception, a basic asymmetry arises in the deposition of the tendrils. Surmounting the tendril pattern appears a large striding animal in double-contoured rendering with spiral hips and a lip lappet. Comparing the Vang Stone animal design with the related animal from the Mammen axe-head, the latter lacks the axiality seen in the Vang Stone and its tendrils are far less disciplined: the Mammen scroll is wavy, while the Vang scroll appears taut and evenly curved, these features marking a key difference between Mammen and Ringerike ornament. The inter-relationship between the two styles is obvious, however, when comparing the Vang Stone animal with that found on the Jelling Stone .

The Söderala vane , Söderala , Sweden With regard to metalwork, Ringerike Style is best seen in two copper-gilt weather-vanes , from Källunge, Gotland and from Söderala, Hälsingland (the Söderala vane ), both in Sweden. The former displays one face two axially-constructed loops in the form of snakes, which in turn sprout symmetrically-placed tendrils. The snake heads, as well as the animal and snake on the reverse, find more florid treatment than on the Vang Stone: all have lip lappets, the snakes bear pigtails, while all animals have a pear-shaped eye with the point directed towards the snout – a diagnostic feature of Ringerike Style.

The Ringerike Style evolved out of the earlier Mammen Style . It received its name from a group of runestones with animal and plant motifs in the Ringerike district north of Oslo . The most common motifs are lions, birds, band-shaped animals and spirals.

[ 25 ] Some elements appear for the first time in Scandinavian art, such as different types of crosses, palmettes and pretzel-shaped nooses that tie together two motifs.

[ 22 ] Most of the motifs have counterparts in Anglo-Saxon , Insular and Ottonian art .

[ 25 ] English Runic Inscription 2 The runestone Ög 111 with a cross in Ringerike style Runestone Sö 280 at Strängnäs Cathedral Runestone U 1146 in Gillberga, Uppland Urnes Style [ edit ] Bronze ornament from Denmark .

The Urnes Style was the last phase of Scandinavian animal art during the second half of the 11th century and in the early 12th century.

[ 26 ] The Urnes Style is named after the northern gate of the Urnes stave church in Norway , but most objects in the style are runestones in Uppland , Sweden , which is why some scholars prefer to call it the Runestone style .

[ 26 ] The style is characterized by slim and stylised animals that are interwoven into tight patterns.

[ 26 ] The animals heads are seen in profile, they have slender almond-shaped eyes and there are upwardly curled appendages on the noses and the necks.

[ 26 ] Uppland Runic Inscription 871 showing Åsmund's craftmanship in the Early Urnes Style.

The eponymous carving on the Urnes stave church is an example of the last Urnes Style stage.

Early Urnes Style [ edit ] The early style has received a dating which is mainly based on runestone U 343 , runestone U 344 and a silver bowl from c. 1050, which was found at Lilla Valla.

[ 27 ] The early version of this style on runestones comprises England Runestones referring to the Danegeld and Canute the Great and works by Åsmund Kåresson .

[ 27 ] Mid-Urnes Style [ edit ] The mid-Urnes Style has received a relatively firm dating based on its appearance on coins issued by Harald Hardrada (1047–1066) and by Olav Kyrre (1080–1090). Two wood carvings from Oslo have been dated to c. 1050–1100 and the Hørning plank is dated by dendrochronology to c. 1060–1070.

[ 28 ] There is, however, evidence suggesting that the mid-Urnes style was developed before 1050 in the manner it is represented by the runemasters Fot and Balli .

[ 28 ] Late Urnes Style [ edit ] The mid-Urnes Style would stay popular side by side with the late Urnes style of the runemaster Öpir .

[ 28 ] He is famous for a style in which the animals are extremely thin and make circular patterns in open compositions.

[ 28 ] This style was not unique to Öpir and Sweden, but it also appears on a plank from Bølstad and on a chair from Trondheim , Norway .

[ 28 ] The Jarlabanke Runestones show traits both from this late style and from the mid-Urnes style of Fot and Balli, and it was the Fot-Balli type that would mix with the Romanesque style in the 12th century.

[ 28 ] Urnes-Romanesque Style [ edit ] The Urnes-Romanesque Style does not appear on runestones which suggests that the tradition of making runestones had died out when the mixed style made its appearance since it is well represented in Gotland and on the Swedish mainland.

[ 29 ] The Urnes-Romanesque Style can be dated independently of style thanks to representations from Oslo in the period 1100–1175, dendrochronological dating of the Lisbjerg frontal in Denmark to 1135, as well as Irish reliquaries that are dated to the second half of the 12th century.

[ 29 ] See also [ edit ] Migration Period art Medieval art Celtic art Anglo-Saxon art Insular art Picture stone Runestone styles Interlace Saint Manchan's Shrine , Urnes style adapted to Ringerike style.

Notes [ edit ] ^ *Maurizio Tani, Le origini mediterranee ed eurasiatiche dell’arte vichinga. Casi esemplari dall’Islanda , in Studi Nordici (Roma), XIII, 2006, pp. 81–95 ^ Kleiner, Gardner's Art Through The Ages: The Western Perspective, Volume I, 288.

^ Graham-Campbell, J., Viking Art , 2013, p. 46.

^ Graham-Campbell, J., Viking Art , 2013, pp. 46–47.

^ Barfod, Gry H.; Feveile, Claus; Sindbæk, Søren M. (September 2022). "Splinters to splendours: from upcycled glass to Viking beads at Ribe, Denmark".

Archaeological and Anthropological Sciences .

14 (9): 180.

Bibcode : 2022ArAnS..14..180B .

doi : 10.1007/s12520-022-01646-8 .

ProQuest 2706986075 .

^ Delvaux, Matthew C. (2018). "Colors of the Viking Age: A Cluster Analysis of Glass Beads from Hedeby".

Journal of Glass Studies .

60 : 41– 68.

JSTOR 26678008 .

^ Callmer, Johan. “Beads and Bead Production in Scandinavia and the Baltic Region c. AD 600-1100: A General Outline,” n.d.

^ O’Sullivan, Joanne (January 2015). "Strung Along: Re-evaluating Gendered Views of Viking-Age Beads".

Medieval Archaeology .

59 (1): 73– 86.

doi : 10.1080/00766097.2015.1119384 .

^ Mannion, Mags (2015). "Beads and Society".

Glass Beads from Early Medieval Ireland: Classification, dating, social performance . Archaeopress. pp.

90– 97.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctvr43k7k.11 .

ISBN 978-1-78491-196-6 .

JSTOR j.ctvr43k7k.11 .

^ Faḍlān, Aḥmad ibn; Montgomery, James E. (2017).

Mission to the Volga . Vol. 28. NYU Press. pp.

3– 40.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctt1gk093h.7 .

ISBN 978-1-4798-9989-0 .

JSTOR j.ctt1gk093h.7 .

^ Graham-Campbell, J., Viking Art , 2013, p.47.

^ Salin 1904 ^ Arwidsson 1942a, 1942b ^ The Broa/Oseberg Style (Viking Art Styles) Archived February 1, 2014, at the Wayback Machine ^ Viking Ship from Oseberg (The Viking Rune: All Things Norse) ^ Sinbaek, Soren (2012).

Enter the Gripping Beast . British Archaeological Reports International Series.

^ Dated Borre sites include Borre (c. 900), Gokstad (900–905), Tune (905–910), Fyrkat (980) and Trelleborg (980/1), as well as several coin-dated hoards; cf. Bonde and Christensen 1993.

^ Borre style (Trustees of the British Museum) ^ Green, J. R. (1902).

A Short History of the English People . Vol. 1. London: Macmillan & Co., Ltd. pp. xxxv, 101.

^ Worsaae, J. J. A. (1882).

The Industrial Arts of Denmark . Vol. 2. Chapman & Hall, Ltd. pp.

84– 85.

^ Roesdahl, Else (1993). "Pagan Beliefs, Christian Impact and Archaeology—a Danish View". In Faulkes, Anthony; Perkins, Richard (eds.).

Viking Revaluations: Viking Society Centenary Symposium, 14–15 May 1992 . Viking Society for Northern Research, University College London. p. 132.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.683.8845 .

^ a b c d The article jellingestil in Nationalencyklopedin (1993).

^ Price, Neil (2019).

The Viking Way: Magic and Mind in Late Iron Age Scandinavia . Oxbow Books.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctvhhhgz3 .

ISBN 978-1-84217-260-5 .

JSTOR j.ctvhhhgz3 .

[ page needed ] ^ Only one stone carved in this style, however, has been found in Ringerike itself, at Tanberg, cf. Fugelesang 1980:pl.38.

^ a b Moss (2014), p. 44 ^ a b c d The article urnesstil in Nationalencyklopedin (1996).

^ a b Fuglesang, S.H.

Swedish runestones of the eleventh century: ornament and dating , Runeninschriften als Quellen interdisziplinärer Forschung (K.Düwel ed.). Göttingen 1998, pp. 197–218. p. 206 ^ a b c d e f Fuglesang, S.H.

Swedish runestones of the eleventh century: ornament and dating , Runeninschriften als Quellen interdisziplinärer Forschung (K.Düwel ed.). Göttingen 1998, pp. 197–218. p. 207 ^ a b Fuglesang, S.H.

Swedish runestones of the eleventh century: ornament and dating , Runeninschriften als Quellen interdisziplinärer Forschung (K.Düwel ed.). Göttingen 1998, pp. 197–218. p. 208 References [ edit ] Background [ edit ] Brink, S. with Price, N. (eds) (2008).

The Viking World , [Routledge Worlds], Routledge: London and New York, 2008.

ISBN 9780415692625 Graham-Campbell, J. (2001), The Viking World , London, 2001.

ISBN 9780711234680 General Surveys [ edit ] Anker, P. (1970).

The Art of Scandinavia , Volume I, London and New York, 1970.

Fuglesang, S.H. (1996). "Viking Art", in Turner, J. (ed.), The Grove Dictionary of Art , Volume 32, London and New York, 1996, pp. 514–27, 531–32.

Graham-Campbell, J. (1980).

Viking Artefacts: A Select Catalogue , British Museum Publications: London, 1980.

ISBN 9780714113548 Graham-Campbell, James (2013).

Viking Art , Thames & Hudson, 2013.

ISBN 9780500204191 Fred S. Kleiner, Gardner's Art Through The Ages: The Western Perspective , Volume I. (Boston, Mass.: Wadsworth Cengage Learning, 2009) [1] Roesdahl, E. and Wilson, D.M. (eds) (1992).

From Viking to Crusader: Scandinavia and Europe 800–1200 , Copenhagen and New York, 1992. [exhibition catalogue].

ISBN 9780847816255 Williams, G., Pentz, P. and Wemhoff, M. (eds), Vikings: Life and Legend , British Museum Press: London, 2014. [exhibition catalogue].

ISBN 9780714123363 Wilson, D.M. & Klindt-Jensen, O. (1980).

Viking Art , second edition, George Allen and Unwin, 1980.

ISBN 9780047090189 Specialist Studies [ edit ] Arwidsson, G.

(1942a).

Valsgärdestudien I. Vendelstile: Email und Glas im 7.-8. Jahrhundert , [Acta Musei antiquitatum septentrionalium Regiae Universitatis Upsaliensis 2], Uppsala: Almqvist, 1942.

Arwidsson, G.

(1942b).

Die Gräberfunde von Valsgärde I, Valsgärde 6 , [Acta Musei antiquitatum septentrionalium Regiae Universitatis Upsaliensis 1], Uppsala: Almqvist & Wiksell, 1942.

Bailey, R.N. (1980).

Viking Age Sculpture in Northern England , Collins Archaeology: London, 1980.

ISBN 9780002162289 Bonde, N. and Christensen, A.E. (1993). "Dendrochronological dating of the Viking Age ship burials at Oseberg, Gokstad and Tune, Norway", Antiquity 67 (1993), pp. 575–83.

Bruun, Per (1997). "The Viking Ship".

Journal of Coastal Research .

13 (4): 1282– 1289.

JSTOR 4298737 .

Capelle, T. (1968).

Der Metallschmuck von Haithabu: Studien zur wikingischen Metallkunst , [Die Ausgrabungen in Haithabu 5], Neumunster: K. Wachholtz, 1968.

Curle, James (1916). "A Find of Viking Relics in the Hebrides".

The Burlington Magazine for Connoisseurs .

29 (162): 241– 243.

JSTOR 860122 .

Fuglesang, S.H. (1980).

Some Aspects of the Ringerike Style: A Phase of 11th Century Scandinavian Art , [Mediaeval Scandinavia Supplements], University Press of Southern Denmark: Odense, 1980.

ISBN 9788774921837 Fuglesang, S.H. (1981). "Stylistic Groups in Late Viking and Early Romanesque Art", Acta ad Archaeologiam et Artium Historiam Pertinentia , [Series altera in 8°] I, 1981, pp. 79–125.

Fuglesang, S.H. (1982). "Early Viking Art", Acta ad Archaeologiam et Artium Historiam Pertinentia [Series altera in 8°] II, 1982, pp. 125–73.

Fuglesang, S.H. (1991). "The Axe-Head from Mammen and the Mammen Style", in Iversen (1991), pp. 83–108.

Fuglesang, S.H. (1998). "Swedish Runestones of the Eleventh Century: Ornament and Dating", in Düwel, K. and Nowak, S. (eds), Runeninschriften als Quellen interdisziplinärer Forschung: Abhandlungen des vierten internationalen Symposiums über Runen und Runeninschriften in Gottingen vom 4.-9. August 1995 , Göttingen: Walter de Gruyter, 1998, pp. 197–218.

Fuglesang, S.H. (2001). "Animal Ornament: the Late Viking Period", in Müller-Wille and Larsson (eds) (2001), pp. 157–94.

Fuglesang, S.H. (2013). "Copying and Creativity in Early Viking Ornament", in Reynolds and Webster (eds) (2013), pp. 825–41.

Hedeager, L. (2003). "Beyond Mortality: Scandinavian Animal Styles AD 400–1200", in Downes, J. and Ritchie, A. (eds), Sea Change: Orkney and Northern Europe in the Later Iron Age AD 300–800 , Balgavies, 2003, pp. 127–36.

ISBN 9781874012382 Iversen, M. (ed.) (1991).

Mammen: Grav, Kunst og Samfund i Vikingetid , [Jysk Arkæologisk Selskabs Skrifter XXVIII], Højbjerg, 1991.

ISBN 8772885718 Kershaw, J. (2008). "The Distribution of the 'Winchester' Style in Late Saxon England: Metalwork Finds from the Danelaw", Anglo-Saxon Studies in Archaeology and History  15 (2008), pp. 254–69.

Academic.edu ( registration required ) Krafft, S. (1956).

Pictorial Weavings from the Viking Age , Oslo: Dreyer, 1956.

Lang, J.T. (1984). "The hogback: a Viking colonial monument", Anglo-Saxon Studies in Archaeology and History 3 (1984), pp. 85–176.

Lang, J.T. (1988).

Viking Age Decorated Wood: A Study of its Ornament and Style , Dublin: Royal Irish Academy, 1988.

ISBN 9780901714695 Moss, Rachel .

Medieval c. 400—c. 1600: Art and Architecture of Ireland . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2014.

ISBN 978-0-3001-7919-4 Müller-Wille, M. and Larsson, L.O. (eds) (2001).

Tiere – Menschen – Götter: Wikingerzeitliche Kunststile und ihre Neuzeitliche Rezeption , Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht: Gottingen, 2001.

ISBN 9783525863091 Myhre, B. (1992). "The Royal Cemetery at Borre, Vestfold: A Norwegian Centre in a European Periphery", in Carter, M. (ed.), The Age of Sutton Hoo. The Seventh Century in North-West Europe , Woodbridge: Boydell, 1992.

Owen, O. (2001). "The strange beast that is the English Urnes Style", in Graham-Campbell, J.

et al.

(eds), Vikings and the Danelaw – Selected Papers from the Proceedings of the Thirteenth Viking Congress , Oxford: Oxbow, 2001, pp. 203–22.

Paterson, C. (2002). "From Pendants to Brooches – The Exchange of Borre and Jelling Style Motifs across the North Sea", Hikuin 29 (2002), pp. 267–76.

Reynolds, A. and Webster, L.

(eds) (2013), Early Medieval Art and Archaeology in the Northern World—Studies in Honour of James Graham-Campbell , Brill: Leiden and Boston, 2013.

ISBN 9789004235038 Richards, J.D.

and Naylor, J. (2010). "The metal detector and the Viking Age in England", in Sheehan, J. and Corráin, D. Ó. (eds), The Viking Age. Ireland and the West. Proceedings of the Fifteenth Viking Congress , Dublin: Four Courts Press, 2010, pp. 338–52.

Roesdahl, E. (1994). "Dendrochronology and Viking Studies in Denmark, with a Note on the Beginning of the Viking Age", in Abrosiani, B. and Clarke, H. (eds), Developments around the Baltic and the North Sea in the Viking Age , Stockholm: Birka Project for Riksantikvarieämbetet and Statens Historiska Museer, 1994, pp. 106–16.

Roesdahl, E. (2010a). "Viking Art in European Churches (Cammin – Bamberg – Prague – León)", in Sheehan and Ó Corráin (eds) (2010), pp. 149–64.

Roesdahl, E. (2010b). "From Scandinavia to Spain: a Viking Age Reliquary in León and its Significance", in Sheehan, J. and Corráin, D. Ó. (eds), The Viking Age. Ireland and the West. Proceedings of the Fifteenth Viking Congress , Dublin: Four Courts Press, 2010, pp. 353–60.

Salin, Bernhard (1904).

Die altgermanische Thieronamentik , Stockholm: Wahlström & Widstrand, 1904.

Sheehan, J. and Ó Corráin, D. (eds) (2010).

The Viking Age: Ireland and the West. Proceedings of the XVth Viking Congress, Cork, 2005.

, Dublin and Portland: Four Courts Press, 2010.

ISBN 9781846821011 Shetelig, H. (1920).

Osebergfundet , Volume III, Kristiania, 1920.

Wilson, D.M. (2001). "The Earliest Animal Styles of the Viking Age", in Müller-Wille and Larsson (eds) (2001), pp. 131–56.

Wilson, D.M. (2008a). "The Development of Viking Art", in Brink with Price (2008), pp. 323–38.

Wilson, D.M. (2008b).

The Vikings in the Isle of Man , Aarhus: Aarhus University Press, 2008.

ISBN 9788779343702 External links [ edit ] British Museum: Explore / World Cultures: Vikings Sorabella, Jean, "The Vikings (780–1100)" , in Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History , New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2000–. Updated October 2002.

Age of spirituality : late antique and early Christian art, third to seventh century from The Metropolitan Museum of Art Oseberg Ship Oseberg Style Cart Examples of the Broa and Oseberg Style Borrehaugene Jane Kershaw, Viking-Age Scandinavian art styles and their appearance in the British Isles – Part 1: Early Viking-Age art styles – The Finds Research Group AD 700–1700, Datasheet 42, 2010. (Academia.edu registration required).

Jane Kershaw, Viking-Age Scandinavian art styles and their appearance in the British Isles Part 2: Late Viking-Age art styles – The Finds Research Group AD 700–1700, Datasheet 43, 2011. (Academia.edu registration required).

v t e Vikings Culture Blót Brisingamen Danegeld Dís Eddas Einherjar Futhark Elder Futhark Younger Futhark Germanic deities Gothi Hnefatafl Holmgang Leysingi Mjölnir Norsemen Norse funeral ( ship burial ) Norse mythology Norse rituals Old Norse Old Norse religion Raven banner Sagas Skald Seeress Skíðblaðnir Thrall Tyrfing Valhalla Valkyrie Viking Age Viking art Viking runestones Viking Age trade Wergeld Yggdrasil Ships and navigation Knarr Longship Viking ships Viking ship replica Visby lenses Homelands and colonies North Sea Empire Iceland Greenland Orkney Islands Shetland Faroe Islands North America L'Anse aux Meadows Vinland Jomsborg Kievan Rus' Expansion British Isles Danelaw Anglia Mercia York Isle of Man Scotland Wessex France Brittany Normandy Rhineland Pomerania Estonia Iberia Dublin Italy Battles Raid warfare and tactics Battle of Aclea First Battle of Alton Battle of Anglesey Sound Battle of Ashdown Battle of Assandun Battle of Basing Battle of Barry Battle of Bauds Battle of Benfleet Battle of Brávellir Battle of Brentford (1016) Battle of Brissarthe Battle of Brunanburh Battle of Buttington Battle of Cathair Cuan Battle of Chippenham Battle of Clontarf Battle of Confey Battle of Corbridge Battle of Cynwit Battle of Derby Battle of Dollar Battle of Edington Battle of Englefield Battle of Epiphany Battle of Fitjar Battle of Florvåg Battle of Fulford Battle of Fýrisvellir Battle of Glenmama Battle of Hafrsfjord Battle of Helgeå Battle of Hingston Down Battle of the Holme Battle of Hjörungavágr Battle of Islandbridge Battle of Largs Battle of Leuven (891) Battle of London Bridge Battle of Lüneburg Heath Battle of Lyrskov Heath Battle of Mag Femen Battle of Maldon Battle of Meretun Battle of Nesjar Battle of Niså Battle of Norditi Battle of Pinhoe Battle of Rastarkalv Battle of Reading (871) Battle of Renfrew Battle of Remich Battle of Ringmere Battle of Rochester Battle of Sasireti Battle of Saucourt-en-Vimeu Battle of Skyhill Battle of Stainmore Battle of Stamford (894) Battle of Stamford (918) Battle of Stamford Bridge Battle of Stiklestad Battle of Strangford Lough Battle of Svolder Battle of Sulcoit Battle of Tara (Ireland) Battle of Tarbat Ness Battle of Tempsford Battle of Tettenhall Battle of Thetford Battle of Thimeon Battle of Trans-la-Forêt Battle of York Burning of Luimneach Viking raid on Galicia and Asturias Raids in the Rhineland Raid on Seville Sack of Santiago de Compostela Siege of Asselt Siege of Chartres (911) Siege of Constantinople (860) Sack of Paris Siege of Paris Cnut the Great's invasion of England Arms, armour and fortifications Berserker Danevirke Great Heathen Army Hersir Hird Holmgang Viking Age arms and armour Halberd Atgeir Skeggöx Dane axe Gjermundbu helmet Yarm helmet Sword Ulfberht Ingelrii Ring Fortress Raid Warfare and Tactics Shield-maiden Svinfylking Formation Varangian Guard Historical figures Airdeconut Amlaíb Cenncairech Amlaíb Cuarán Amlaíb Conung Aud the Deep-Minded (Ketilsdóttir) Auisle Bagsecg Berle-Kari Birka female Viking warrior Bjørn (floruit 856–58) Bjorn Asbrandsson Bjarni Herjólfsson Björn Ironside Bjorn the Easterner Cnut Egill Skallagrímsson Eohric of East Anglia Eric Bloodaxe Erik the Red Eric I of Denmark Eiríkr Hákonarson Freydís Eiríksdóttir Freygeirr Garðar Svavarsson Godfrid Haraldsson Godfrid, Duke of Frisia Grímur Kamban Gudrid Thorbjarnardóttir Gunnar Hámundarson Guthred Guthrum Hakon Rognvaldsson Haakon the Good Haakon Sigurdsson Halfdan Long-Leg Halfdan Ragnarsson Hagrold Harald Bluetooth Harald Fairhair Harald Hardrada Harald Wartooth Hastein Hemming Halfdansson Hervor Hrafna-Flóki Vilgerðarson Hvitserk Ingvar the Far-Travelled Ingólfr Arnarson Ivar the Boneless Jomsvikings Ketilsdóttir Ketill Flatnose Ketil Trout (Iceland) Lagertha Leif Erikson Magnus Barefoot Naddodd Náttfari Olaf Tryggvason Olav Haraldsson Olaf the White Olof Skötkonung Orm Storolfsson Ohthere of Hålogaland Ottir Palnatoke Ragnar Lodbrok Ragnar Ragnarsson Ragnhild Eriksdotter Ragnall ua Imair Raud the Strong Reginheri Rognvald Eysteinsson Rollo Rorik Rusla Snæfrithr Svásadottir Sigvaldi Strut-Haraldsson Sigurd Ring Sigurd Snake-in-the-Eye Sigurd the Stout Sitric Caech Skalla-Grímr Snorri Sturluson Steinunn Refsdóttir Styrbjörn the Strong Sweyn Asleifsson Sweyn Forkbeard Þorbjörg Lítilvölva Thorfinn the Mighty Thorfinn Torf-Einarsson Thorkell the Tall Thorir Hund Thorolf Kveldulfsson Thorstein the Red Tryggvi the Pretender Turgesius Valtoke Gormsson Vagn Åkesson Veborg Ubba Uí Ímair Unn the Deep-Minded Runestones Ballstorp Runestone Baltic area runestones Danish Runic Inscription 66 Danish Runic Inscription 154 Danish Runic Inscription 380 Egtved Runestone England runestones Greece runestones Gunnar's bridge runestones Hagby Runestones Hakon Jarl runestones Hällestad Runestones Ingvar runestones Italy runestones Karlevi Runestone Lingsberg Runestones Norra Härene Runestone Orkesta Runestones Runestones at Aspa Runestones of Högby Sædinge Runestone Sigtrygg Runestones Simris Runestones Sjörup Runestone Småland Runic Inscription 48 Södermanland Runic Inscription 174 Södermanland Runic Inscription 333 Sparlösa Runestone Stangeland stone Stone of Eric Runestone U 582 Uppland Runic Inscription 158 Varangian runestones Västergötland Runic Inscription 40 Västra Nöbbelöv Runestone Viking runestones Related Viking revival Viking Ship Museum (Oslo) Viking Ship Museum (Roskilde) v t e Germanic peoples Ethnolinguistic group of Northern European origin primarily identified as speakers of Germanic languages History Nordic Bronze Age Germania Pre-Roman Iron Age Roman Iron Age Romano-Germanic culture Germanic Iron Age Viking Age Early culture Architecture Art Calendar Clothing Family Festivals Folklore Proto-Germanic folklore Anglo-Saxon mythology Continental Germanic mythology Norse mythology ) Funerary practices Anglo-Saxon Norse Law Anglo-Saxon Norse Literature Anglo-Saxon Norse Names Gothic Numbers Paganism Anglo-Saxon Gothic Norse Rings Scripts Gothic alphabet Runes Sippe Symbology Warfare Anglo-Saxon Gothic and Vandal Viking Languages Germanic parent language Proto-Germanic language East Germanic languages North Germanic languages West Germanic languages Groups Alemanni Brisgavi Bucinobantes Lentienses Raetovari Adrabaecampi Angles Anglo-Saxons Ambrones Ampsivarii Angrivarii Armalausi Auiones Avarpi Baemi Baiuvarii Banochaemae Bastarnae Batavi Belgae Germani cisrhenani Atuatuci Caeroesi Condrusi Eburones Paemani Segni Morini Nervii Bateinoi Betasii Brondings Bructeri Burgundians Buri Cananefates Caritni Casuari Chaedini Chaemae Chamavi Chali Charudes Chasuarii Chattuarii Chatti Chauci Cherusci Cimbri Cobandi Corconti Cugerni Danes Dauciones Dulgubnii Favonae Firaesi Fosi Franks Ripuarian Franks Salian Franks Frisiavones Frisii Gambrivii Geats Gepids Goths Crimean Goths Greuthungi Gutones Ostrogoths Thervingi Thracian Goths Visigoths Gutes Harii Hermunduri Heruli Hilleviones Ingaevones Irminones Istvaeones Jutes Juthungi Lacringi Lemovii Lombards Heaðobards Lugii Diduni Helisii Helveconae Manimi Nahanarvali Marcomanni Marsacii Marsi Mattiaci Nemetes Njars Nuithones Osi Quadi Reudigni Rugii Rugini Saxons Semnones Sicambri Sciri Sitones Suarines Suebi Sunici Swedes Taifals Tencteri Teutons Thelir Thuringii Toxandri Treveri Triboci Tubantes Tulingi Tungri Ubii Usipetes Vagoth Vandals Hasdingi Silingi Vangiones Varisci Victohali Vidivarii Vinoviloth Warini Christianization Gothic Christianity Christianization of the Franks Christianisation of Anglo-Saxon England Christianization of Scandinavia Christianization of Iceland Category v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Viking_art&oldid=1297948636 " Category : Viking art Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages with login required references or sources This page was last edited on 29 June 2025, at 15:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Viking art 18 languages Add topic

