Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Predecessors to the Gaia theory 2 Range of views 3 Gaia in biology and science 4 Gaia in the social sciences and politics 5 Gaia in religion 6 Criticism 7 See also 8 Books on Gaia 9 References Toggle the table of contents Gaia philosophy 6 languages العربية فارسی Kiswahili Português Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Broadly inclusive term For other uses, see Gaia (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Gaia philosophy" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2006 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Gaia philosophy (named after Gaia , Greek goddess of the Earth ) is a broadly inclusive term for relating concepts about humanity as an effect of the life of this planet .

The Gaia hypothesis holds that all organisms on a life-giving planet regulate the biosphere in such a way as to promote its habitability. Gaia concepts draw a connection between the survivability of a species (hence its evolutionary course) and its usefulness to the survival of other species. While there were a number of precursors to Gaia hypothesis, the first scientific form of this idea was proposed as the Gaia hypothesis by James Lovelock , a UK chemist, in 1970. The Gaia hypothesis deals with the concept of biological homeostasis , and claims the resident life forms of a host planet coupled with their environment have acted and act like a single, self-regulating system. This system includes the near-surface rocks, the soil, and the atmosphere. These theories are, however, significant in green politics .

Predecessors to the Gaia theory [ edit ] There are some mystical, scientific and religious predecessors to the Gaia philosophy, which had a Gaia-like conceptual basis.  Many religious mythologies had a view of Earth as being a whole that is greater than the sum of its parts (e.g. some Native American religions and various forms of shamanism ).

Isaac Newton wrote of the earth, "Thus this Earth resembles a great animal or rather inanimate vegetable, draws in æthereall breath for its dayly refreshment & vitall ferment & transpires again with gross exhalations, And according to the condition of all other things living ought to have its times of beginning youth old age & perishing." [ 1 ] Pierre Teilhard de Chardin , a paleontologist and geologist , believed that evolution fractally unfolded from cell to organism to planet to solar system and ultimately the whole universe, as we humans see it from our limited perspective. Teilhard later influenced Thomas Berry and many Catholic humanist thinkers of the 20th century.

Lewis Thomas believed that Earth should be viewed as a single cell; he derived this view from Johannes Kepler 's view of Earth as a single round organism.

[ 2 ] Buckminster Fuller is generally credited with making the idea respectable in Western scientific circles in the 20th century.  Building to some degree on his observations and artifacts, e.g. the Dymaxion map of the Earth he created, others began to ask if there was a way to make the Gaia theory scientifically sound.

In 1931, L.G.M. Baas Becking delivered an inaugural lecture about Gaia in the sense of life and earth.

[ 3 ] Oberon Zell-Ravenheart in 1970 in an article in Green Egg Magazine, independently articulated the Gaia Thesis.

[ 4 ] Many believe that these ideas cannot be considered scientific hypotheses; by definition a scientific hypothesis must make testable predictions. As the above claims are not currently testable, they are outside the bounds of current science. This does not mean that these ideas are not theoretically testable. As one can postulate tests that could be applied, given enough time and space, then these ideas should be seen as scientific hypotheses.

These are conjectures and perhaps can only be considered as social and maybe political philosophy; they may have implications for theology , or thealogy as Zell-Ravenheart and Isaac Bonewits put it.

Range of views [ edit ] According to James Kirchner there is a spectrum of Gaia hypotheses, ranging from the undeniable to radical. At one end is the undeniable statement that the organisms on the Earth have radically altered its composition. A stronger position is that the Earth's biosphere effectively acts as if it is a self-organizing system which works in such a way as to keep its systems in some kind of equilibrium that is conducive to life. Today many scientists consider that such a view (and any stronger views) are unlikely to be correct.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] An even stronger claim is that all lifeforms are part of a single planetary being, called Gaia. In this view, the atmosphere, the seas, the terrestrial crust would be the result of interventions carried out by Gaia, through the coevolving diversity of living organisms.

The most extreme form of Gaia theory is that the entire Earth is a single unified organism with a highly intelligent mind that arose as an emergent property of the whole biosphere. In this view, the Earth's biosphere is consciously manipulating the climate in order to make conditions more conducive to life. Scientists contend that there is no evidence at all to support this last point of view, and it has come about because many people do not understand the concept of homeostasis . Many non-scientists instinctively and incorrectly see homeostasis as a process that requires conscious control.

[ dubious – discuss ] [ 10 ] The more speculative versions of Gaia, including versions in which it is believed that the Earth is actually conscious, sentient, and highly intelligent, are usually considered outside the bounds of what is usually considered science.

Gaia in biology and science [ edit ] Main article: Gaia hypothesis Buckminster Fuller has been credited as the first to incorporate scientific ideas into a Gaia theory, which he did with his Dymaxion map of the Earth.

The first scientifically rigorous theory was the Gaia hypothesis by James Lovelock , a UK chemist.

A variant of this hypothesis was developed by Lynn Margulis , a microbiologist, in 1979.
Her version is sometimes called the "Gaia Theory" (note uppercase-T). Her model is more limited in scope than the one that Lovelock proposed.

Whether this sort of system is present on Earth is still open to debate. Some relatively simple homeostatic mechanisms are generally accepted. For example, when atmospheric carbon dioxide levels rise, plants are able to grow better and thus remove more carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. Other biological effects and feedbacks exist, [ 9 ] but the extent to which these mechanisms have stabilized and modified the Earth's overall climate is largely not known.

The Gaia hypothesis is sometimes viewed from significantly different philosophical perspectives. Some environmentalists view it as an almost conscious process, in which the Earth's ecosystem is literally viewed as a single unified organism. Some evolutionary biologists, on the other hand, view it as an undirected emergent property of the ecosystem: as each individual species pursues its own self-interest, their combined actions tend to have counterbalancing effects on environmental change. Proponents of this view sometimes point to examples of life's actions in the past that have resulted in dramatic change rather than stable equilibrium, such as the conversion of the Earth's atmosphere from a reducing environment to an oxygen-rich one.

Depending on how strongly the case is stated, the hypothesis conflicts with mainstream neo-Darwinism . Most biologists would accept Daisyworld-style homeostasis as possible, but would certainly not accept the idea that this equates to the whole biosphere acting as one organism.

A very small number of scientists, and a much larger number of environmental activists, claim that Earth's biosphere is consciously manipulating the climate in order to make conditions more conducive to life. Scientists contend that there is no evidence to support this belief.

Gaia in the social sciences and politics [ edit ] A social science view of Gaia theory is the role of humans as a keystone species who may be able to accomplish global homeostasis . Whilst a few social scientists who draw inspiration from 'organic' views of society have embraced Gaia philosophy as a way to explain the human-nature interconnections, most professional social scientists are more involved in reflecting upon the way Gaia philosophy is used and engaged with within sub-sections of society.

Alan Marshall , in the Department of Social Sciences at Mahidol University , for example, reflects upon the way Gaia philosophy has been used and advocated in various societal settings by environmentalists, spiritualists, managers, economists, and scientists and engineers. As Marshall explains, most social scientists had already given up on systems ideas of society in the 1960s before Gaia philosophy was born under James Lovelock's ideas since such ideas were interpreted as supporting conservatism and traditionalism.

[ 11 ] Gaia theory also influenced the dynamics of green politics.

[ 12 ] Gaia in religion [ edit ] Rosemary Radford Ruether , the American feminist scholar and theologian, wrote a book called Gaia and God: An Ecofeminist Theology of Earth Healing .

A book edited by Allan Hunt Badiner called Dharma Gaia explores the ground where Buddhism and ecology meet through writings by the Dalai Lama , Gary Snyder , Thich Nhat Hanh , Allen Ginsberg , David Abram , Joanna Macy , Robert Aitken , and 25 other Buddhists and ecologists.

[ 13 ] Gaianism , an earth-centered philosophical, holistic , and spiritual belief that shares expressions with earth religions and paganism while not identifying exclusively with any specific religion, sprang from the gaia hypothesis.

[ 12 ] [ 14 ] Criticism [ edit ] One of the most problematic issues with referring to Gaia as an organism is its apparent failure to meet the biological criterion of being able to reproduce .

Richard Dawkins has asserted that the planet is not the offspring of any parents and is unable to reproduce.

[ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Arcology Climate engineering Environmental philosophy Gaia (mythology) Gaia hypothesis (James Lovelock's ideas) Gardening James Kirchner Guy Murchie Keystone species Odic force Pachamama Places to intervene in a system Pantheism Technogaianism Teleology Urban ecology Steven M. Greer - Categorises entire planets to be individual conscious organisms Superorganism Edward Goldsmith Books on Gaia [ edit ] Toby Tyrrell (2013), On Gaia: A Critical Investigation of the Relationship between Life and Earth Anne Primavesi (2008), Gaia and Climate Change: A Theology of Gift Events Mary Midgley (2007), Earthy realism: the meaning of Gaia Pepper Lewis (2005), Gaia Speaks Stephen Henry Schneider (2004), Scientists debate gaia: the next century Tyler Volk (2003), Gaia's Body: Toward a Physiology of Earth Anne Primavesi (2003), Gaia's gift: earth, ourselves, and God after Copernicus Alan Marshall (2002), The Unity of Nature , Imperial College Press.

Francesca Ciancimino Howell (2002), Making Magic with Gaia: Practices to Heal Ourselves and Our Planet Mary Midgley (2001), Gaia: the next big idea Anne Primavesi (2000), Sacred Gaia: holistic theology and earth system science George Ronald Williams (1996), The molecular biology of Gaia Peter Bunyard (1996), Gaia in Action: Science of the Living Earth Norman Myers (1993), Gaia An Atlas of Planet Management Lawrence E. Joseph (1991), Gaia: the growth of an idea Allan Hunt Badiner (1990), Dharma Gaia: A Harvest of Essays in Buddhism and Ecology References [ edit ] ^ Of Natures obvious laws & processes in vegetation, Dibner MS 1031 ^ 1974, The Lives of a Cell: Notes of a Biology Watcher ^ L.G.M. Baas Becking (1931) 'Gaia of leven en aarde' (Gaia or life and earth), inaugural lecture for a chair at Leiden university.

^ "CAWeb - CAW Articles - Theagenesis: The Birth of the Goddess" . Archived from the original on 2010-06-17 . Retrieved 2009-03-09 .

^ Waltham, David (2014).

Lucky Planet: Why Earth is Exceptional – and What that Means for Life in the Universe . Icon Books.

ISBN 9781848316560 .

^ Beerling, David (2007).

The Emerald Planet: How plants changed Earth's history . Oxford: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-280602-4 .

^ Cockell, Charles ; Corfield, Richard; Dise, Nancy; Edwards, Neil; Harris, Nigel (2008).

An Introduction to the Earth-Life System . Cambridge (UK): Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 9780521729536 .

^ Tyrrell, Toby (26 October 2013), "Gaia: the verdict is…", New Scientist , 220 : 30– 31, doi : 10.1016/s0262-4079(13)62532-4 ^ a b Tyrrell, Toby (2013), On Gaia: A Critical Investigation of the Relationship between Life and Earth , Princeton: Princeton University Press , p. 209, ISBN 9780691121581 ^ "Gaia Hypothesis, Mythology, Metaphysics - Crystalinks" .

www.crystalinks.com . Retrieved 2019-02-27 .

^ The Unity of Nature, 2002, Imperial College Press: London and Singapore ^ a b Dobson, Andrew (1995).

The Politics of Nature: Explorations in Green Political Theory . Routledge. pp. 8, 9, 14.

ISBN 0415124719 .

^ [1] Archived March 15, 2012, at the Wayback Machine ^ Richard Peet, Nigel Thrift (1989).

New Models in Geography - Vol 1: The Political-Economy Perspective . Routledge. pp. 90, 97– 99.

ISBN 0049101013 .

^ Harding, Stephan (2006).

Animate Earth .

Chelsea Green Publishing . p. 65.

ISBN 1-933392-29-0 .

v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐nkqnk
Cached time: 20250816150645
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.420 seconds
Real time usage: 0.525 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1523/1000000
Revision size: 15449/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 147394/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 976/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 51370/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.261/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6570843/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  425.549      1 -total
 37.97%  161.571      1 Template:Reflist
 24.17%  102.855      1 Template:Philosophy_topics
 23.72%  100.943      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 20.74%   88.248      2 Template:Cite_web
 12.56%   53.430      1 Template:Short_description
 12.26%   52.184      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 11.44%   48.687      1 Template:Ambox
  8.69%   36.984      6 Template:Cite_book
  7.37%   31.376      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:12393:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816150645 and revision id 1289486372. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gaia_philosophy&oldid=1289486372 " Categories : Environmentalism Matriarchy Nature and religion Environment and religion Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2006 All articles needing additional references All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from October 2014 This page was last edited on 8 May 2025, at 23:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gaia philosophy 6 languages Add topic

