Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Works and theories Toggle Works and theories subsection 2.1 Achieving happiness 2.2 A System of Logic 2.3 Colonialism 2.4 Economic philosophy 2.4.1 Criticism 2.4.2 Economic democracy and market socialism 2.4.3 Political democracy 2.4.4 Theories of wealth and income distribution 2.4.5 The environment 2.4.6 Rate of profit 2.5 Slavery and racial equality 2.6 Theory of liberty 2.6.1 Social liberty and tyranny of majority 2.6.2 Liberty 2.6.3 Freedom of speech 2.6.4 Harm principle 2.6.5 Freedom of the press 2.7 Utilitarianism 2.7.1 Higher and lower pleasures 2.7.2 Chapters 2.8 Women's rights 3 Major publications 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Mill's work 6.2 Other sources 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents John Stuart Mill 92 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Piemontèis Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Саха тыла Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English philosopher and author (1806–1873) "Stuart Mill" redirects here. For the town in Australia, see Stuart Mill, Victoria .

John Stuart Mill Mill, c.

1870 Member of Parliament for City of Westminster In office 25 July 1865 – 17 November 1868 Serving with Robert Grosvenor Preceded by De Lacy Evans Succeeded by William Henry Smith Personal details Born ( 1806-05-20 ) 20 May 1806 Pentonville , Middlesex, England Died 7 May 1873 (1873-05-07) (aged 66) Avignon , Vaucluse, France Political party Liberal Spouse Harriet Taylor ​ ​ ( m.

1851 ; died 1858 ) ​ Parents James Mill (father) Harriet Barrow (mother) Alma mater University College London Philosophical work Era 19th-century philosophy Classical economics Region Western philosophy School Empiricism Consequentialism Liberalism Social liberalism [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Psychologism Utilitarianism Academic background Influences Appleton Bentham Carlyle Comte Fourier Mill Owen Priestly Ricardo Saint-Simon Smith Taylor Taylor Mill Main interests Economics ethics logic politics Notable ideas Public / private sphere social liberty hierarchy of pleasures in utilitarianism rule utilitarianism classical liberalism early liberal feminism harm principle Mill's Methods direct reference theory Millian theory of proper names emergentism Signature Part of a series on Utilitarianism Predecessors Mozi Shantideva David Hume Claude Adrien Helvétius Cesare Beccaria William Godwin Francis Hutcheson William Paley Key proponents Jeremy Bentham John Stuart Mill Henry Sidgwick R. M. Hare Peter Singer Types of utilitarianism Negative Rule Act Two-level Total Average Preference Classical Key concepts Pain Suffering Pleasure Utility Happiness Eudaimonia Consequentialism Equal consideration Felicific calculus Utilitarian social choice rule Problems Demandingness objection Mere addition paradox Paradox of hedonism Replaceability argument Utility monster Works An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) On Liberty (1859) Utilitarianism (1861) Related topics Rational choice theory Game theory Neoclassical economics Population ethics Effective altruism Philosophy portal v t e Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e John Stuart Mill (20 May 1806 – 7 May 1873) [ 4 ] was an English philosopher , political economist , politician and civil servant. One of the most influential thinkers in the history of liberalism and social liberalism , [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 3 ] he contributed widely to social theory , political theory , and political economy. Dubbed "the most influential English-speaking philosopher of the nineteenth century" by the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , [ 7 ] he conceived of liberty as justifying the freedom of the individual in opposition to unlimited state and social control .

[ 8 ] He advocated political and social reforms such as proportional representation, the emancipation of women, and the development of labour organisations and farm cooperatives.

The Columbia Encyclopedia describes Mill as occasionally coming "close to socialism, a theory repugnant to his predecessors".

[ 9 ] He was a proponent of utilitarianism , an ethical theory developed by his predecessor Jeremy Bentham . He contributed to the investigation of scientific methodology , though his knowledge of the topic was based on the writings of others, notably William Whewell , John Herschel , and Auguste Comte , and research carried out for Mill by Alexander Bain . He engaged in written debate with Whewell.

[ 10 ] A member of the Liberal Party and author of the early feminist work The Subjection of Women , Mill was also the second Member of Parliament to call for women's suffrage after Henry Hunt in 1832.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] The ideas presented in his 1859 essay On Liberty have remained the basis of much political thought, and a copy is passed to the president of the Liberal Democrats (the successor party to Mill's own) as a symbol of office .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Biography [ edit ] John Stuart Mill was born at 13 Rodney Street in Pentonville , then on the edge of the capital and now in central London , the eldest son of Harriet Barrow and the Scottish philosopher , historian, and economist James Mill . John Stuart was educated by his father, with the advice and assistance of Jeremy Bentham and Francis Place . He was given an extremely rigorous upbringing, and was deliberately shielded from association with children his own age other than his siblings. His father, a follower of Bentham and an adherent of associationism , had as his explicit aim to create a genius intellect that would carry on the cause of utilitarianism and its implementation after he and Bentham had died.

[ 15 ] Mill was a notably precocious child. He describes his education in his autobiography. At the age of three he was taught Greek .

[ 16 ] By the age of eight, he had read Aesop's Fables , Xenophon 's Anabasis , [ 16 ] and the whole of Herodotus , [ 16 ] and was acquainted with Lucian , Diogenes Laërtius , Isocrates and six dialogues of Plato .

[ 16 ] He had also read a great deal of history in English and had been taught arithmetic , physics and astronomy.

At the age of eight, Mill began studying Latin , the works of Euclid , and algebra , and was appointed schoolmaster to the younger children of the family. His main reading was still history, but he went through all the commonly taught Latin and Greek authors and by the age of ten could read Plato and Demosthenes with ease. His father also thought that it was important for Mill to study and compose poetry. One of his earliest poetic compositions was a continuation of the Iliad . In his spare time he also enjoyed reading about natural sciences and popular novels, such as Don Quixote and Robinson Crusoe .

His father's work, The History of British India , was published in 1818; immediately thereafter, at about the age of twelve, Mill began a thorough study of the scholastic logic , at the same time reading Aristotle 's logical treatises in the original language. In the following year he was introduced to political economy and studied Adam Smith and David Ricardo with his father, ultimately completing their classical economic view of factors of production . Mill's comptes rendus of his daily economy lessons helped his father in writing Elements of Political Economy in 1821, a textbook to promote the ideas of Ricardian economics ; however, the book lacked popular support.

[ 17 ] Ricardo, who was a close friend of his father, used to invite the young Mill to his house for a walk to talk about political economy .

At the age of fourteen, Mill stayed a year in France with the family of Sir Samuel Bentham , brother of Jeremy Bentham and in the company of George Ensor , then pursuing his polemic against the political economy of Thomas Malthus .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] The mountain scenery he saw led to a lifelong taste for mountain landscapes. The lively and friendly way of life of the French also left a deep impression on him. In Montpellier , he attended the winter courses on chemistry , zoology , logic of the Faculté des Sciences , as well as taking a course in higher mathematics. While coming and going from France, he stayed in Paris for a few days in the house of the renowned economist Jean-Baptiste Say , a friend of Mill's father. There he met many leaders of the Liberal party, as well as other notable Parisians, including Henri Saint-Simon .

Mill went through months of sadness and contemplated suicide at twenty years of age. According to the opening paragraphs of Chapter V of his autobiography, he had asked himself whether the creation of a just society, his life's objective, would actually make him happy. His heart answered "no", and unsurprisingly he lost the happiness of striving towards this objective. Eventually, the poetry of William Wordsworth showed him that beauty generates compassion for others and stimulates joy.

[ 20 ] With renewed vigour, he continued to work towards a just society, but with more relish for the journey. He considered this one of the most pivotal shifts in his thinking. In fact, many of the differences between him and his father stemmed from this expanded source of joy.

Mill met Thomas Carlyle during one of the latter's visits to London in the early 1830s, and the two quickly became companions and correspondents. Mill offered to print Carlyle's works at his own expense and encouraged Carlyle to write his French Revolution , supplying him with materials in order to do so. In March 1835, while the manuscript of the completed first volume was in Mill's possession, Mill's housemaid unwittingly used it as tinder, destroying all "except some three or four bits of leaves".

[ 21 ] Mortified, Mill offered Carlyle £200 (£17,742.16 in 2021) as compensation (Carlyle would only accept £100). Ideological differences would put an end to the friendship during the 1840s, though Carlyle's early influence on Mill would colour his later thought.

[ 22 ] Mill had been engaged in a pen-friendship with Auguste Comte , the founder of positivism and sociology, since Mill first contacted Comte in November 1841. Comte's sociologie was more an early philosophy of science than modern sociology is. Comte's positivism motivated Mill to eventually reject Bentham's psychological egoism and what he regarded as Bentham's cold, abstract view of human nature focused on legislation and politics, instead coming to favour Comte's more sociable view of human nature focused on historical facts and directed more towards human individuals in all their complexities.

[ 23 ] As a nonconformist who refused to subscribe to the Thirty-Nine Articles of the Church of England , Mill was not eligible to study at the University of Oxford or the University of Cambridge .

[ 24 ] Instead he followed his father to work for the East India Company , and attended University College, London , to hear the lectures of John Austin , the first Professor of Jurisprudence .

[ 25 ] He was elected a foreign honorary member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1856.

[ 26 ] Mill's career as a colonial administrator at the East India Company spanned from when he was 17 years old in 1823 until 1858, when the company's territories in India were directly annexed by the Crown , establishing direct Crown control over India .

[ 27 ] In 1836, he was promoted to the company's political department, where he was responsible for correspondence pertaining to the company's relations with the princely states , and, in 1856, was finally promoted to the position of Examiner of Indian Correspondence. In On Liberty , A Few Words on Non-Intervention , and other works, he opined that "To characterize any conduct whatever towards a barbarous people as a violation of the law of nations, only shows that he who so speaks has never considered the subject." [ 28 ] (However, Mill immediately added that "A violation of the great principles of morality it may easily be.") [ 29 ] Mill viewed places such as India as having once been progressive in their outlook, but had now become stagnant in their development; he opined that this meant these regions had to be ruled via a form of " benevolent despotism ...provided the end is improvement." [ 30 ] When the Crown proposed to take direct control over the territories of the East India Company , Mill was tasked with defending Company rule and penned Memorandum on the Improvements in the Administration of India during the Last Thirty Years , among other petitions.

[ 31 ] He was offered a seat on the Council of India , the body created to advise the new Secretary of State for India , but declined, citing disapproval of the new system of administration in India.

[ 31 ] On 21 April 1851, Mill married Harriet Taylor after 21 years of intimate friendship. Taylor was married when they met, and their relationship was close but generally believed to be chaste during the years before her first husband died in 1849. The couple waited two years before marrying in 1851. Upon marriage, he made a declaration to repudiate the rights conferred upon him over her by virtue of the marriage under Victorian law. John Stuart Mill and Harriet Taylor Mill were foundational figures in feminist economic thought. Their collaborative works, particularly The Subjection of Women (1869) and Taylor Mill's The Enfranchisement of Women (1851), argued that gender inequality was both a moral injustice and an economic inefficiency (Hansson, 2022; McCabe, 2021). Rejecting classical economic assumptions that marginalized women, they advocated for legal reforms, educational access, and women's autonomy. Their ideas laid groundwork for modern feminist economists who critique unpaid labor, gender wage gaps, and structural oppression (Munte & Monica, 2023; Knüfer, 2023). Taylor Mill's Unitarian and rationalist views enriched this critique, while stylometric evidence supports her significant role in Mill's writings (Schmidt-Petri et al., 2021). Today, their arguments resonate in debates on digital capitalism, care work, and reproductive rights, offering a lens to assess economic justice through the interplay of gender, labor, and autonomy (Hampton, 2021; Smajdor, 2021).

[ 32 ] Accomplished in her own right, Taylor was a significant influence on Mill's work and ideas during both friendship and marriage. His relationship with Taylor reinforced Mill's advocacy of women's rights . He said that in his stand against domestic violence, and for women's rights he was "chiefly an amanuensis to my wife". He called her mind a "perfect instrument", and said she was "the most eminently qualified of all those known to the author". He cites her influence in his final revision of On Liberty , which was published shortly after her death. Taylor died in 1858 after developing severe lung congestion , after only seven years of marriage to Mill.

Between the years 1865 and 1868 Mill served as Lord Rector of the University of St Andrews . At his inaugural address, delivered to the university on 1 February 1867, he made the now-famous (but often wrongly attributed) remark that "Bad men need nothing more to compass their ends, than that good men should look on and do nothing." [ 33 ] That Mill included that sentence in the address is a matter of historical record, but it by no means follows that it expressed a wholly original insight. During the same period, 1865–68, he was also a Member of Parliament (MP) for City of Westminster .

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] He was sitting for the Liberal Party . During his time as an MP, Mill advocated easing the burdens on Ireland. In 1866, he became the first person in the history of Parliament to call for women to be given the right to vote, vigorously defending this position in subsequent debate. He also became a strong advocate of such social reforms as labour unions and farm cooperatives. In Considerations on Representative Government , he called for various reforms of Parliament and voting, especially proportional representation , the single transferable vote , and the extension of suffrage . In April 1868, he favoured in a Commons debate the retention of capital punishment for such crimes as aggravated murder ; he termed its abolition "an effeminacy in the general mind of the country".

[ 36 ] (It is said in 1868, when his first term ended, no party would nominate him due to his independent spirit.

[ 37 ] ) He was elected to membership of the American Philosophical Society in 1867.

[ 38 ] He was godfather to the philosopher Bertrand Russell .

[ 39 ] In his views on religion, Mill was an agnostic and a sceptic .

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] [ 42 ] [ 43 ] Like other philosophers of his time, Mill was interested in botany.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] It is believed that approximately 1,000 of his specimens are held by the Museum Requien in Avignon , France, and Mill's stepdaughter, Helen Taylor , donated specimens to the Kew Herbarium after his death.

[ 46 ] In the southern hemisphere, there are also specimens at the National Herbarium of Victoria , Royal Botanic Gardens Victoria , Australia.

[ 47 ] Mill died on 7 May 1873, at the age of 66, of erysipelas in Avignon, where his body was buried alongside his wife's. He bequeathed his estate to his step-daughter, Helen Taylor, and designated her his literary executor.

[ 48 ] Works and theories [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Liberalism in the United Kingdom Schools Classical Gladstonian Libertarian Manchester Whiggist Conservative Muscular Economic Green Neo Radical Social Principles Capitalism Civil and political rights Due process Economic freedom Environmentalism Equality before the law Freedom of the press Freedom of religion Freedom of speech Laissez-faire Natural law Rule of law Social justice Welfare state History English Civil War Glorious Revolution Anti-Corn Law League Victorian era Chartism 1905–1915 liberal government Liberal welfare reforms Intellectuals Acton Arnold Bentham Berlin Beveridge Burke Byron Chesterton Collingwood Fawcett Freeden Green Hammond (Barbara) Hammond (John Lawrence) Hayek Hobhouse Keynes Locke Macaulay Mill (James) Mill (John Stuart) Muir Paine Priestley Ricardo Shelley Smith Spencer Taylor Mill Trevelyan (George) Trevelyan (George Macaulay) Wilson Wollstonecraft Politicians Asquith Bass Bright Burke Cable Campbell-Bannerman Chamberlain Clegg Cobden Fox Gladstone Hunt Jenkins Kennedy Lloyd George Mill (John Stuart) Muir Naoroji Rosebery Simon Steel Thorpe Parties Active Alliance Party of Northern Ireland Liberal Democrats Scottish Liberal Democrats Defunct Liberal Party Peelite Radicals Social Democratic Party Whigs Media The Economist Financial Times The Guardian The Independent The Sunday Times The Times Related topics Centrism Centre-left Centre-right Conservatism in the United Kingdom Liberal conservatism Politics of the United Kingdom Scottish Liberals for Independence Socialism in the United Kingdom Liberal socialism Liberalism portal United Kingdom portal v t e Achieving happiness [ edit ] Mill believed that for the majority of people (those with but a moderate degree of sensibility and of capacity for enjoyment) happiness is best achieved en passant, rather than striving for it directly. This meant no self-consciousness, scrutiny, self-interrogation, dwelling on, thinking about, imagining or questioning on one's happiness. Then, if otherwise fortunately circumstanced, one would "inhale happiness with the air you breathe." [ 49 ] [ 50 ] A System of Logic [ edit ] Main article: A System of Logic Mill joined the debate over the scientific method which followed on from John Herschel 's 1830 publication of A Preliminary Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy , which incorporated inductive reasoning from the known to the unknown, discovering general laws in specific facts and verifying these laws empirically.

William Whewell expanded on this in his 1837 History of the Inductive Sciences, from the Earliest to the Present Time , followed in 1840 by The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences, Founded Upon their History , presenting induction as the mind superimposing concepts on facts. Laws were self-evident truths, which could be known without need for empirical verification.

Mill countered this in 1843 in A System of Logic (fully titled A System of Logic, Ratiocinative and Inductive, Being a Connected View of the Principles of Evidence, and the Methods of Scientific Investigation ). In " Mill's Methods " (of induction), as in Herschel's, laws were discovered through observation and induction, and required empirical verification.

[ 51 ] Matilal remarks that Dignāga analysis is much like John Stuart Mill's Joint Method of Agreement and Difference, which is inductive. He suggested that it was very likely that during his stay in India he came across the tradition of logic, in which scholars started taking interest after 1824, though it is unknown whether it influenced his work.

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] Colonialism [ edit ] Mill was a member of Edward Gibbon Wakefield 's Colonization Society.

[ 54 ] In his Principles of Political Economy (1848) he praised Wakefield for his "important writings on colonization".

[ 55 ] Mill, an employee of the East India Company from 1823 to 1858, [ 56 ] argued in support of what he called a "benevolent despotism" with regard to the administration of overseas colonies.

[ 57 ] Mill argued: [ 58 ] To suppose that the same international customs, and the same rules of international morality, can obtain between one civilized nation and another, and between civilized nations and barbarians, is a grave error. ... To characterize any conduct whatever towards a barbarous people as a violation of the law of nations, only shows that he who so speaks has never considered the subject.

For Mill India was " a burden " for England and British colonialism "a blessing of unspeakable magnitude to the population" of India.

[ 59 ] He also stated his support for settler colonialism .

[ 60 ] Mill expressed general support for Company rule in India , but expressed reservations on specific Company policies in India which he disagreed with.

[ 61 ] He also supported colonialism in other places, such as Australia. Mill was among the founding members of the South Australian Association in 1833, which was set up to lobby the government to establish colonies in Australia.

[ 62 ] Economic philosophy [ edit ] Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e Main article: Principles of Political Economy Essays on Economics and Society , 1967 Mill's early economic philosophy was one of free markets . However, he accepted interventions in the economy, such as a tax on alcohol, if there were sufficient utilitarian grounds. He also accepted the principle of legislative intervention for the purpose of animal welfare.

[ 63 ] He originally believed that "equality of taxation" meant " equality of sacrifice " and that progressive taxation penalized those who worked harder and saved more and was therefore "a mild form of robbery".

[ 64 ] Given an equal tax rate regardless of income, Mill agreed that inheritance should be taxed. A utilitarian society would agree that everyone should be equal one way or another. Therefore, receiving inheritance would put one ahead of society unless taxed on the inheritance. Those who donate should consider and choose carefully where their money goes—some charities are more deserving than others. Considering public charities boards such as a government will disburse the money equally. However, a private charity board like a church would disburse the monies fairly to those who are in more need than others.

[ 65 ] [ page needed ] Later he altered his views toward a more socialist bent, adding chapters to his Principles of Political Economy in defence of a socialist outlook, and defending some socialist causes.

[ 66 ] Within this revised work he also made the radical proposal that the whole wage system be abolished in favour of a co-operative wage system. Nonetheless, some of his views on the idea of flat taxation remained, [ 67 ] albeit altered in the third edition of the Principles of Political Economy to reflect a concern for differentiating restrictions on "unearned" incomes, which he favoured, and those on "earned" incomes, which he did not favour.

[ 68 ] In his autobiography, Mill stated that in relation to his later views on political economy, his "ideal of ultimate improvement... would class [him] decidedly under the general designation of Socialists." His views shifted partly due to reading the works of utopian socialists , but also from the influence of Harriet Taylor.

[ 69 ] In his 1879 work Socialism , Mill argued that the prevalence of poverty in contemporary industrial capitalist societies was " pro tanto a failure of the social arrangements", and that attempts to condone this state of affairs as being the result of individual failings did not represent a justification of them but instead were "an irresistible claim upon every human being for protection against suffering".

[ 70 ] Mill's Principles , first published in 1848, was one of the most widely read of all books on economics in the period.

[ 71 ] As Adam Smith 's Wealth of Nations had during an earlier period, Principles came to dominate economics teaching. In the case of Oxford University it was the standard text until 1919, when it was replaced by Marshall's Principles of Economics .

Criticism [ edit ] Karl Marx , in his critique of political economy , mentioned Mill in the Grundrisse . Marx contended that Mill's thinking posited the categories of capital in an ahistorical fashion.

[ 72 ] Economic democracy and market socialism [ edit ] Part of a series on Socialism in the United Kingdom Development Agrarian socialism Anarchism Bennism Black radical tradition Chartism Christian socialism Corbynism Democratic socialism Eco-socialism Ethical socialism Guild socialism Marxism ( Centrist · Humanist · Marxism–Leninism · Trotskyism ) Owenism Republicanism Revolutionary socialism Ricardian socialism Social democracy Utopian socialism Principles Anti-capitalism Anti-imperialism Anti-racism Environmental justice Equality Equality of opportunity Euroscepticism (factions) Fairness Freedom Justice Peace Pro-Europeanism (factions) Progress Radical democracy Redistribution Social justice Solidarity State intervention Sustainability Intellectuals Aaronovitch Anderson Barmby (Catherine) Barmby (John) Berger Bhaskar Blackburn Blakeley Burawoy Callinicos Campbell Carpenter Carter Charles Cockshott Cole Dobb Eagleton Engels Fisher (Mark) Gibson Gilroy Hall (Catherine) Hall (Charles) Hall (Stuart) Haldane Harvey Hatherley Hill Hobsbawm Hodgskin James Jessop Jones (Owen) Kingsley Laski Low MacIntyre Mainwaring Marx (Karl) Miliband Mill Mitchison More Morris Nairn Orwell Owen Penny Raven Read Rowbotham Russell Samuel Seymour Shaw Sivanandan Slaughter Tawney Thompson Thorn Toynbee Ward Wells Williams Zephaniah Works Das Kapital The Communist Manifesto News from Nowhere The Ragged-Trousered Philanthropists The Intelligent Woman's Guide to Socialism and Capitalism The Lion and the Unicorn: Socialism and the English Genius The Future of Socialism The Making of the English Working Class The Country and the City Social Justice and the City Anarchy in Action Ways of Seeing There Ain't No Black in the Union Jack Towards a New Socialism Capitalist Realism A Guide to the New Ruins of Great Britain Chavs: The Demonization of the Working Class The Establishment: And How They Get Away with It History British left Labour Party history Politicians Abbott Attlee Benn Bevan Brar Burgon Castle Cliff Coates Corbyn Cripps Crosland Crosman Curran Dutt Foot (Michael) Gallacher Galloway Hardie Harney Healy Hyndman Inkpin Lansbury Laski Livingstone Long-Bailey Lucas Maclean Marx (Eleanor) Maxton McDonnell Nellist Pollitt Skinner Sultana Taaffe Thornberry Webb (Beatrice) Webb (Sidney) Whittome Wilkinson Wilson Activists Ali Ashton Bastani Crow Daly Eden Fisher (Andrew) Foot (Paul) Formby Fryer Gonzalez Headon Heathfield Jones (Claudia) Jones (Jack) Kuya Lane Lawson Lazarus Loach Lynch Mann McCluskey Meltzer Monbiot Pankhurst Papworth Redgrave Sarkar Scanlon Scargill Schneider Silverthorne Smyth Stephen Tatchell Tillett Waters Winstanley Wrack Parties Social democracy Co-operative Party Labour Party Socialism Breakthrough Party Left Unity Socialist Labour Party Socialist Party GB Socialist Party Socialist Workers Party (UK) Transform TUSC Workers Party of Britain Communism Communist Party of Britain Communist Party Britain-ML Communist Party GB-ML Communist Party GB-PCC New Communist Party of Britain RCG Revolutionary Communist Party RCPB-ML Northern Ireland People Before Profit Sinn Féin Social Democratic and Labour Party Scotland Scottish Labour Scottish National Party Scottish Socialist Party Wales Plaid Cymru Welsh Labour Organisations Trade unions CWU GMB IWGB IWW ICTU NASUWT NEU NUM STUC TUC ( Wales TUC ) RMT Unison Unite the Union USDAW UVW Other Anarchist Federation Institute for Public Policy Research Left Book Club Momentum Solidarity Federation The World Transformed News publications Daily Herald Morning Star New Left Review New Statesman Novara Media Race & Class Red Pepper Socialist Worker Tribune Workers' Dreadnought Culture Attila the Stockbroker Banks Bleasdale Boyle Bragg Brand Churchill Crass Days of Hope Fender The Housemartins I, Daniel Blake The King Blues Kumar Loach Long (Josie) Made in Dagenham Massive Attack Miéville Pride Red Wedge Sayle Smurthwaite Thee Faction Related topics Communism in the United Kingdom Hard left Soft left New Labour New Left Miliband–Poulantzas debate Socialism portal Organised labour portal United Kingdom portal v t e Mill's main objection to socialism focused on what he saw as its destruction of competition. He wrote, "[W]hile I agree and sympathize with socialists in this practical portion of their aims, I utterly dissent from the most conspicuous and vehement part of their teaching—their declamations against competition." Though he was an egalitarian , Mill argued more for equal opportunity and placed meritocracy above all other ideals in this regard. He further argued that a socialist society would only be attainable through the provision of basic education for all, promoting economic democracy instead of capitalism , in the manner of substituting capitalist businesses with worker cooperatives . He wrote: The form of association, however, which if mankind continue to improve, must be expected in the end to predominate, is not that which can exist between a capitalist as chief, and work-people without a voice in the management, but the association of the labourers themselves on terms of equality, collectively owning the capital with which they carry on their operations, and working under managers elected and removable by themselves.

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] In his later thought, he advocated for a cooperative economic order, an economy based on enterprises run by workers themselves in an open market, rather than the employment-wage relationship of capitalist companies, and Mill's ideas led him to be classified as an early proponent of market socialism theory.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] [ 77 ] [ 78 ] [ 79 ] Political democracy [ edit ] Mill's major work on political democracy , Considerations on Representative Government , defends two fundamental principles: extensive participation by citizens and enlightened competence of rulers.

[ 80 ] The two values are obviously in tension, and some readers have concluded that he is an elitist democrat , [ 81 ] while others count him as an earlier participatory democrat .

[ 82 ] In one section, he appears to defend a type of plural voting where more competent citizens are given extra votes (a view he later repudiated). However, in another chapter he argues cogently for the value of participation by all citizens. He believed that the incompetence of the masses could eventually be overcome if they were given a chance to take part in politics, especially at the local level.

Mill is one of the few political philosophers ever to serve in government as an elected official. In his three years in Parliament, he was more willing to compromise than the "radical" principles expressed in his writing would lead one to expect.

[ 83 ] Mill was a major proponent of the diffusion and use of public education to the working class. He saw the value of the individual person, and believed that "man had the inherent capability of guiding his own destiny-but only if his faculties were developed and fulfilled", which could be achieved through education.

[ 84 ] He regarded education as a pathway to improve human nature which to him meant "to encourage, among other characteristics, diversity and originality, the energy of character, initiative, autonomy, intellectual cultivation, aesthetic sensibility, non-self-regarding interests, prudence , responsibility, and self-control ." [ 85 ] Education allowed for humans to develop into full informed citizens that had the tools to improve their condition and make fully informed electoral decisions. The power of education lay in its ability to serve as a great equalizer among the classes allowing the working class the ability to control their own destiny and compete with the upper classes. Mill recognised the paramount importance of public education in avoiding the tyranny of the majority by ensuring that all the voters and political participants were fully developed individuals. It was through education, he believed, that an individual could become a full participant within representative democracy.

In regards to higher education, Mill defended liberal education against contemporary arguments for models of higher education focused on religion or science. His 1867 St. Andrews Address called on elites educated in reformed universities to work towards education policy committed to liberal principles.

[ 86 ] Theories of wealth and income distribution [ edit ] In Principles of Political Economy , Mill offered an analysis of two economic phenomena often linked together: the laws of production and wealth and the modes of their distribution. Regarding the former, he believed that it was not possible to alter the laws of production, "the ultimate properties of matter and mind... only to employ these properties to bring about events we are interested in." [ 87 ] The modes of distribution of wealth is a matter of human institutions solely, starting with what Mill believed to be the primary and fundamental institution: Individual Property.

[ 88 ] He believed that all individuals must start on equal terms, with division of the instruments of production fairly among all members of society. Once each member has an equal amount of individual property, they must be left to their own exertion not to be interfered with by the state. Regarding inequality of wealth , Mill believed that it was the role of the government to establish both social and economic policies that promote the equality of opportunity.

The government, according to Mill, should implement three tax policies to help alleviate poverty: [ 89 ] fairly assessed income tax ; an inheritance tax ; and a policy to restrict sumptuary consumption .

Inheritance of capital and wealth plays a large role in the development of inequality, because it provides greater opportunity for those receiving the inheritance. Mill's solution to inequality of wealth brought about by inheritance was to implement a greater tax on inheritances, because he believed the most important authoritative function of the government is taxation , and taxation judiciously implemented could promote equality.

[ 89 ] The environment [ edit ] In Book IV, chapter VI of Principles of Political Economy : "Of the Stationary State", [ 90 ] [ 91 ] Mill recognised wealth beyond the material and argued that the logical conclusion of unlimited growth was destruction of the environment and a reduced quality of life. He concluded that a stationary state could be preferable to unending economic growth : I cannot, therefore, regard the stationary states of capital and wealth with the unaffected aversion so generally manifested towards it by political economists of the old school.

If the earth must lose that great portion of its pleasantness which it owes to things that the unlimited increase of wealth and population would extirpate from it, for the mere purpose of enabling it to support a larger, but not a better or a happier population, I sincerely hope, for the sake of posterity, that they will be content to be stationary, long before necessity compel them to it.

Rate of profit [ edit ] According to Mill, the ultimate tendency in an economy is for the rate of profit to decline due to diminishing returns in agriculture and increase in population at a Malthusian rate .

[ 92 ] Slavery and racial equality [ edit ] In 1850, Mill sent an anonymous letter in rebuttal to Thomas Carlyle 's letter to Fraser's Magazine for Town and Country (which came to be known under the title " The Negro Question "), [ 93 ] in which Carlyle argued for slavery . Mill supported abolishing slavery in the United States , expressing his opposition to slavery in his essay of 1869, The Subjection of Women : [ 94 ] This absolutely extreme case of the law of force, condemned by those who can tolerate almost every other form of arbitrary power, and which, of all others, presents features the most revolting to the feeling of all who look at it from an impartial position, was the law of civilized and Christian England within the memory of persons now living: and in one half of Anglo-Saxon America three or four years ago, not only did slavery exist, but the slave trade, and the breeding of slaves expressly for it, was a general practice between slave states. Yet not only was there a greater strength of sentiment against it, but, in England at least, a less amount either of feeling or of interest in favour of it, than of any other of the customary abuses of force: for its motive was the love of gain, unmixed and undisguised: and those who profited by it were a very small numerical fraction of the country, while the natural feeling of all who were not personally interested in it, was unmitigated abhorrence.

Mill corresponded with John Appleton , an American legal reformer from Maine , extensively on the topic of racial equality. Appleton influenced Mill's work on such, especially swaying him on the optimal economic and social welfare plan for the Antebellum South .

[ 95 ] [ 96 ] [ 97 ] In a letter sent to Appleton in response to a previous letter, Mill expressed his view on antebellum integration: [ 95 ] I cannot look forward with satisfaction to any settlement but complete emancipation—land given to every negro family either separately or in organized communities under such rules as may be found temporarily necessary—the schoolmaster set to work in every village & the tide of free immigration turned on in those fertile regions from which slavery has hitherto excluded it. If this be done, the gentle & docile character which seems to distinguish the negroes will prevent any mischief on their side, while the proofs they are giving of fighting powers will do more in a year than all other things in a century to make the whites respect them & consent to their being politically & socially equals.

Unlike many of his peers, Mill supported the Union in the American Civil War , seeing it as a necessary evil that would deliver a vital "salutary shock" to the national conscience and help preserve liberal ideals while eradicating the "stain" of slavery in the United States .

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] Mill expressed his views in an article for Fraser's Magazine , arguing against the defenders of the Confederate States of America .

There are people who tell us that, on the side of the North, the question is not one of slavery at all. The North, it seems, have no more objection to slavery than the South have. [...] If this be the true state of the case, what are the Southern chiefs fighting about? Their apologists in England say that it is about tariffs, and similar trumpery.

They say nothing of the kind. They tell the world, and they told their own citizens when they wanted their votes, that the object of the fight was slavery. [...] The world knows what the question between the North and South has been for many years, and still is. Slavery alone was thought of, alone talked of.

[ 100 ] For more information about the historical revisionism of the role of slavery in the Confederate States during the American Civil War , see Lost Cause of the Confederacy .

Theory of liberty [ edit ] Part of a series on Radicalism History Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Belgian Revolution Chartism Progressive Era Ideas Anti-clericalism Civic nationalism Civil liberties Classical liberalism Cultural radicalism Classical radicalism Direct democracy Egalitarianism Freedom of movement Jacobinism Labor movement Laissez-faire Liberal socialism Social democracy Libertarianism left Liberté, égalité, fraternité Modernity Populism left-wing Progressivism Rationalism Reform movement Republicanism Revolution Secularism Laicité Social change Social justice Social liberalism Suffrage women Utilitarianism Utopian socialism Welfare People Alem Alfonsín Atatürk Bentham Bolívar Bonino Bright Bryan Cartwright Castberg Clemenceau Cobbett Cobden Daladier Dewey Dilke Domergue Fox Garibaldi George Godwin Green Hébert Herriot Hobhouse Hunt Jefferson Lacombe La Follette Leclerc Lerroux Lloyd George Mazzini Mendès France Mill (James) Mill (John Stuart) Mommsen Mossadegh Paine Pannella Papanastasiou Papandreou Plastiras Robespierre Roosevelt Rosselli Roux Sacchi Saint-Just Servan-Schreiber Stevens Varlet Venizelos Videla Virchow Wilkes Wilson Wollstonecraft Yrigoyen Zahle Groups Alfarista Radical Front Association of Radicals for the United States of Europe Authentic Radical Liberal Party Ecuadorian Radical Liberal Party European Radical Alliance Independent Radicals Italian Radical Party Italian Radicals Liberals, Democrats and Radicals National Radical Party Partido Ecologista Radical Intransigente People's Radical Party 1881 1919 1990 Political Party of Radicals Radical Cause Radical Change Radical Civic Union Radicales K Radical Democracy Radical Democratic Party Bulgaria Estonia India Spain United States Radical Federative Movement Radical International Radical League Radical Liberal Party Luxembourg Paraguay Radical Movement Radical Movement of Social Democratic Alliance Radical Party Bolivia France Hungary Italy Luxembourg Radical Party of Chile 1863 2018 Radical Party of the Left Radical People's Party Finland Norway Turkey Radical Republican Party Radical Republicans Radical Socialist Party Luxembourg Estonia Radical Socialist Republican Party Radical Whigs Radicals of the Left Radicals (UK) Socialist Radical Party Stratford Dialectical and Radical Club Transnational Radical Party Ultra-radicals By region Bulgaria Chile Denmark Ecuador France Hungary Italy Paraguay Romania Spain Switzerland United States Works Rights of Man (1791) The English Constitution Produced and Illustrated (1824) Related Conservative liberalism History of socialism Irish republicanism Liberalism in Europe History portal Liberalism portal v t e Main article: On Liberty Mill's On Liberty (1859) addresses the nature and limits of the power that can be legitimately exercised by society over the individual . Mill's idea is that only if a democratic society follows the Principle of Liberty can its political and social institutions fulfill their role of shaping national character so that its citizens can realise the permanent interests of people as progressive beings. (Rawls, Lectures on the History of Political Philosophy, p. 289) Mill states the Principle of Liberty as: "the sole end for which mankind are warranted, individually or collectively, in interfering with the liberty of action of any of their number, is self-protection." "The only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilised community, against his will, is to prevent harm to others. His own good, either physical or moral, is not a sufficient warrant." [ 101 ] One way to read Mill's Principle of Liberty as a principle of public reason is to see it excluding certain kinds of reasons from being taken into account in legislation, or in guiding the moral coercion of public opinion. (Rawls, Lectures on the History of Political Philosophy, p. 291) These reasons include those founded in other persons good; reasons of excellence and ideals of human perfection; reasons of dislike or disgust, or of preference.

Mill states that "harms" which may be prevented include acts of omission as well as acts of commission. Thus, failing to rescue a drowning child counts as a harmful act, as does failing to pay taxes , or failing to appear as a witness in court. All such harmful omissions may be regulated, according to Mill. By contrast, it does not count as harming someone if—without force or fraud—the affected individual consents to assume the risk: thus one may permissibly offer unsafe employment to others, provided there is no deception involved. He does, however, recognise one limit to consent: society should not permit people to sell themselves into slavery .

The question of what counts as a self-regarding action and what actions, whether of omission or commission, constitute harmful actions subject to regulation, continues to exercise interpreters of Mill. He did not consider giving offence to constitute "harm"; an action could not be restricted because it violated the conventions or morals of a given society.

[ 102 ] John Stuart Mill and Helen Taylor . Helen was the daughter of Harriet Taylor and collaborated with Mill for fifteen years after her mother's death in 1858.

Social liberty and tyranny of majority [ edit ] Mill believed that "the struggle between Liberty and Authority is the most conspicuous feature in the portions of history." [ 103 ] For him, liberty in antiquity was a "contest...between subjects, or some classes of subjects, and the government." [ 103 ] Mill defined social liberty as protection from "the tyranny of political rulers". He introduced a number of different concepts of the form tyranny can take, referred to as social tyranny, and tyranny of the majority .

Social liberty for Mill meant putting limits on the ruler's power so that he would not be able to use that power to further his own wishes and thus make decisions that could harm society. In other words, people should have the right to have a say in the government's decisions. He said that social liberty was "the nature and limits of the power which can be legitimately exercised by society over the individual." It was attempted in two ways: first, by obtaining recognition of certain immunities (called political liberties or rights ); and second, by establishment of a system of " constitutional checks".

However, in Mill's view, limiting the power of government was not enough: [ 104 ] Society can and does execute its own mandates: and if it issues wrong mandates instead of right, or any mandates at all in things with which it ought not to meddle, it practises a social tyranny more formidable than many kinds of political oppression, since, though not usually upheld by such extreme penalties, it leaves fewer means of escape, penetrating much more deeply into the details of life, and enslaving the soul itself.

Liberty [ edit ] Mill's view on liberty , which was influenced by Joseph Priestley and Josiah Warren , is that individuals ought to be free to do as they wished unless they caused harm to others. Individuals are rational enough to make decisions about their well-being. Government should interfere when it is for the protection of society. Mill explained: [ 101 ] The sole end for which mankind are warranted, individually or collectively, in interfering with the liberty of action of any of their number, is self-protection. That the only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilized community, against his will, is to prevent harm to others. His own good, either physical or moral, is not sufficient warrant. He cannot rightfully be compelled to do or forbear because it will be better for him to do so, because it will make him happier, because, in the opinion of others, to do so would be wise, or even right. ... The only part of the conduct of anyone, for which he is amenable to society, is that which concerns others. In the part which merely concerns him, his independence is, of right, absolute . Over himself, over his own body and mind, the individual is sovereign .

Freedom of speech [ edit ] On Liberty involves an impassioned defence of free speech . Mill argues that free discourse is a necessary condition for intellectual and social progress . We can never be sure, he contends, that a silenced opinion does not contain some element of the truth. He also argues that allowing people to air false opinions is productive for two reasons. First, individuals are more likely to abandon erroneous beliefs if they are engaged in an open exchange of ideas . Second, by forcing other individuals to re-examine and re-affirm their beliefs in the process of debate, these beliefs are kept from declining into mere dogma . It is not enough for Mill that one simply has an unexamined belief that happens to be true; one must understand why the belief in question is the true one. Along those same lines Mill wrote, "unmeasured vituperation, employed on the side of prevailing opinion, really does deter people from expressing contrary opinions, and from listening to those who express them." [ 105 ] [ 102 ] : 51 As an influential advocate of freedom of speech, Mill objected to censorship: [ 106 ] I choose, by preference the cases which are least favourable to me—in which the argument opposing freedom of opinion, both on truth and that of utility , is considered the strongest. Let the opinions impugned be the belief in God and in a future state, or any of the commonly received doctrines of morality. ... But I must be permitted to observe, that it is not the feeling sure of a doctrine (be it what it may) which I call an assumption of infallibility . It is the undertaking to decide that question for others , without allowing them to hear what can be said on the contrary side. And I denounce and reprobate this pretension not the less, if put forth on the side of my most solemn convictions. However positive any one's persuasion may be, not only of the falsity, but of the pernicious consequences–not only of the pernicious consequences, but (to adopt expressions which I altogether condemn) the immorality and impiety of an opinion; yet if, in pursuance of that private judgment, though backed by the public judgment of his country or his contemporaries, he prevents the opinion from being heard in its defence, he assumes infallibility. And so far from the assumption being less objectionable or less dangerous because the opinion is called immoral or impious, this is the case of all others in which it is most fatal.

Mill outlines the benefits of "searching for and discovering the truth" as a way to further knowledge. He argued that even if an opinion is false, the truth can be better understood by refuting the error. And as most opinions are neither completely true nor completely false, he points out that allowing free expression allows the airing of competing views as a way to preserve partial truth in various opinions.

[ 107 ] Worried about minority views being suppressed, he argued in support of freedom of speech on political grounds, stating that it is a critical component for a representative government to have to empower debate over public policy .

[ 107 ] He also eloquently argued that freedom of expression allows for personal growth and self-realization . He said that freedom of speech was a vital way to develop talents and realise a person's potential and creativity. He repeatedly said that eccentricity was preferable to uniformity and stagnation.

[ 107 ] Harm principle [ edit ] The belief that freedom of speech would advance society presupposed a society sufficiently culturally and institutionally advanced to be capable of progressive improvement. If any argument is really wrong or harmful, the public will judge it as wrong or harmful, and then those arguments cannot be sustained and will be excluded. Mill argued that even any arguments which are used in justifying murder or rebellion against the government should not be politically suppressed or socially persecuted . According to him, if rebellion is really necessary, people should rebel; if murder is truly proper, it should be allowed. However, the way to express those arguments should be a public speech or writing, not in a way that causes actual harm to others. Such is the harm principle : "That the only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilized community, against his will, is to prevent harm to others." [ 108 ] At the beginning of the 20th century, Associate justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.

made the standard of "clear and present danger" based on Mill's idea. In the majority opinion, Holmes writes: The question in every case is whether the words used are used in such circumstances and are of such a nature as to create a clear and present danger that they will bring about the substantive evils that Congress has a right to prevent.

[ 109 ] Holmes suggested that falsely shouting out "Fire!" in a dark theatre , which evokes panic and provokes injury, would be such a case of speech that creates an illegal danger.

[ 110 ] But if the situation allows people to reason by themselves and decide to accept it or not, any argument or theology should not be blocked.

Here is Mill on the same topic: "No one pretends that actions should be as free as opinions. On the contrary, even opinions lose their immunity, when the circumstances in which they are expressed are such as to constitute their expression a positive instigation to some mischievous act. An opinion that corn-dealers are starvers of the poor, or that private property is robbery, ought to be unmolested when simply circulated through the press, but may justly incur punishment when delivered orally to an excited mob assembled before the house of a corn-dealer, or when handed about among the same mob in the form of a placard" ( On LIberty , chapter 3).

Mill's argument is now generally accepted by many democratic countries , and they have laws at least guided by the harm principle. For example, in American law some exceptions limit free speech such as obscenity , defamation , breach of peace , and " fighting words ".

[ 111 ] Freedom of the press [ edit ] In On Liberty , Mill thought it was necessary for him to restate the case for press freedom. He considered that argument already won. Almost no politician or commentator in mid-19th-century Britain wanted a return to Tudor and Stuart-type press censorship. However, Mill warned new forms of censorship could emerge in the future.

[ 112 ] Indeed, in 2013 the Cameron Tory government considered setting up an independent official regulator of the UK press.

[ 113 ] This prompted demands for better basic legal protection of press freedom. A new British Bill of Rights could include a US-type constitutional ban on governmental infringement of press freedom and block other official attempts to control freedom of opinion and expression.

[ 114 ] Utilitarianism [ edit ] Main article: Utilitarianism (book) "The utilitarian doctrine is, that happiness is desirable, and the only thing desirable, as an end; all other things being only desirable as means to that end." ~ John Stuart Mill, Utilitarianism (1863) [ 115 ] The canonical statement of Mill's utilitarianism can be found in his book, Utilitarianism . Although this philosophy has a long tradition, Mill's account is primarily influenced by Jeremy Bentham and Mill's father James Mill .

John Stuart Mill believed in the philosophy of utilitarianism , which he would describe as the principle that holds "that actions are right in the proportion as they tend to promote happiness, wrong as they tend to produce the reverse of happiness." By happiness he means, "intended pleasure, and the absence of pain; by unhappiness, pain, and the privation of pleasure".

[ 116 ] It is clear that we do not all value virtues as a path to happiness and that we sometimes only value them for selfish reasons. However, Mill asserts that upon reflection, even when we value virtues for selfish reasons we are in fact cherishing them as a part of our happiness.

Bentham's famous formulation of utilitarianism is known as the greatest-happiness principle . It holds that one must always act so as to produce the greatest aggregate happiness among all sentient beings , within reason. In a similar vein, Mill's method of determining the best utility is that a moral agent, when given the choice between two or more actions, ought to choose the action that contributes most to (maximizes) the total happiness in the world.

Happiness , in this context, is understood as the production of pleasure or privation of pain. Given that determining the action that produces the most utility is not always so clear-cut, Mill suggests that the utilitarian moral agent, when attempting to rank the utility of different actions, should refer to the general experience of persons. That is, if people generally experience more happiness following action X than they do action Y , the utilitarian should conclude that action X produces more utility than action Y , and so is to be preferred.

[ 117 ] Utilitarianism is a consequentialist ethical theory, meaning that it holds that acts are justified insofar as they produce a desirable outcome. The overarching goal of utilitarianism—the ideal consequence—is to achieve the "greatest good for the greatest number as the result of human action".

[ 118 ] In Utilitarianism, Mill states that "happiness is the sole end of human action." [ 36 ] This statement aroused some controversy, which is why Mill took it a step further, explaining how the very nature of humans wanting happiness, and who "take it to be reasonable under free consideration", demands that happiness is indeed desirable.

[ 7 ] In other words, free will leads everyone to make actions inclined on their own happiness, unless reasoned that it would improve the happiness of others, in which case, the greatest utility is still being achieved. To that extent, the utilitarianism that Mill is describing is a default lifestyle that he believes is what people who have not studied a specific opposing field of ethics would naturally and unconsciously use when faced with a decision.

Utilitarianism is thought of by some of its activists to be a more developed and overarching ethical theory of Immanuel Kant 's belief in goodwill, and not just some default cognitive process of humans. Where Kant (1724–1804) would argue that reason can only be used properly by goodwill, Mill would say that the only way to universally create fair laws and systems would be to step back to the consequences, whereby Kant's ethical theories become based around the ultimate good—utility.

[ 119 ] By this logic the only valid way to discern what is the proper reason would be to view the consequences of any action and weigh the good and the bad, even if on the surface, the ethical reasoning seems to indicate a different train of thought.

Higher and lower pleasures [ edit ] Mill's major contribution to utilitarianism is his argument for the qualitative separation of pleasures. Bentham treats all forms of happiness as equal, whereas Mill argues that intellectual and moral pleasures ( higher pleasures ) are superior to more physical forms of pleasure ( lower pleasures ). He distinguishes between happiness and contentment , claiming that the former is of higher value than the latter, a belief wittily encapsulated in the statement that, "it is better to be a human being dissatisfied than a pig satisfied; better to be Socrates dissatisfied than a fool satisfied. And if the fool, or the pig, are of a different opinion, it is because they only know their own side of the question." [ 117 ] This made Mill believe that "our only ultimate end" [ 120 ] is happiness. One unique part of his utilitarian view, that is not seen in others, is the idea of higher and lower pleasures. Mill explains the different pleasures as: If I am asked, what I mean by difference of quality in pleasures, or what makes one pleasure more valuable than another, merely as a pleasure, except its being greater in amount, there is but one possible answer. Of two pleasures, if there be one to which all or almost all who have experience of both give a decided preference [...] that is the more desirable pleasure.

[ 121 ] He defines higher pleasures as mental, moral, and aesthetic pleasures, and lower pleasures as being more sensational. He believed that higher pleasures should be seen as preferable to lower pleasures since they have a greater quality in virtue. He holds that pleasures gained in activity are of a higher quality than those gained passively.

[ 122 ] Mill defines the difference between higher and lower forms of pleasure with the principle that those who have experienced both tend to prefer one over the other. This is, perhaps, in direct contrast with Bentham's statement that "Quantity of pleasure being equal, push-pin is as good as poetry", [ 123 ] that, if a simple child's game like hopscotch causes more pleasure to more people than a night at the opera house , it is more incumbent upon a society to devote more resources to propagating hopscotch than running opera houses. Mill's argument is that the "simple pleasures" tend to be preferred by people who have no experience with high art , and are therefore not in a proper position to judge . He also argues that people who, for example, are noble or practise philosophy, benefit society more than those who engage in individualist practices for pleasure, which are lower forms of happiness. It is not the agent's own greatest happiness that matters "but the greatest amount of happiness altogether".

[ 124 ] Chapters [ edit ] Mill separated his explanation of Utilitarianism into five different sections: "General Remarks"; "What Utilitarianism Is"; "Of the Ultimate Sanction of the Principle of Utility"; "Of What Sort of Proof the Principle of Utility is Susceptible"; and "Of the Connection between Justice and Utility".

In the "General Remarks" portion of his essay, he speaks about how next to no progress has been made when it comes to judging what is right and what is wrong in morality and if there is such a thing as moral instinct (which he argues that there may not be). However, he agrees that in general, "Our moral faculty, according to all those of its interpreters who are entitled to the name of thinkers, supplies us only with the general principles of moral judgments." [ 125 ] In "What Utilitarianism Is", he focuses no longer on background information but on utilitarianism itself. He quotes utilitarianism as "the greatest happiness principle ", defining this theory by saying that pleasure and no pain are the only inherently good things in the world and expands on it by saying that "actions are right in proportion as they tend to promote happiness, wrong as they tend to produce the reverse of happiness. By happiness is intended pleasure, and the absence of pain; by unhappiness, pain, and the privation of pleasure." [ 126 ] He views it not as an animalistic concept because he sees seeking out pleasure as a way of using our higher facilities. He also says in this chapter that the happiness principle is based not exclusively on the individual but mainly on the community.

Mill also defends the idea of a "strong utilitarian conscience (i.e., a strong feeling of obligation to the general happiness)".

[ 120 ] He argued that humans have a desire to be happy and that that desire causes us to want to be in unity with other humans. This causes us to care about the happiness of others, as well as the happiness of complete strangers. But this desire also causes us to experience pain when we perceive harm to other people. He believes in internal sanctions that make us experience guilt and appropriate our actions. These internal sanctions make us want to do good because we do not want to feel guilty for our actions. Happiness is our ultimate end because it is our duty. He argues that we do not need to be constantly motivated by the concern of people's happiness because most of the actions done by people are done out of good intention, and the good of the world is made up of the good of the people.

In Mill's fourth chapter, "Of What Sort of Proof the Principle of Utility is Susceptible", he speaks of what proofs of Utility are affected. He starts this chapter off by saying that all of his claims cannot be backed up by reasoning. He claims that the only proof that something brings one pleasure is if someone finds it pleasurable. Next, he talks about how morality is the basic way to achieve happiness. He also discusses in this chapter that utilitarianism is beneficial for virtue. He says that "it maintains not only that virtue is to be desired, but that it is to be desired disinterestedly, for itself." [ 127 ] In his final chapter he looks at the connection between utilitarianism and justice . He contemplates the question of whether justice is something distinct from utility or not. He reasons this question in several different ways and finally comes to the conclusion that in certain cases justice is essential for utility, but in others, social duty is far more important than justice. Mill believes that "justice must give way to some other moral principle, but that what is just in ordinary cases is, by reason of that other principle, not just in the particular case." [ 128 ] The qualitative account of happiness that Mill advocates thus sheds light on his account presented in On Liberty . As he suggests in that text, utility is to be conceived in relation to humanity "as a progressive being", which includes the development and exercise of rational capacities as we strive to achieve a "higher mode of existence". The rejection of censorship and paternalism is intended to provide the necessary social conditions for the achievement of knowledge and the greatest ability for the greatest number to develop and exercise their deliberative and rational capacities.

Mill redefines the definition of happiness as "the ultimate end, for the sake of which all other things are desirable (whether we are considering our own good or that of other people) is an existence as free as possible from pain and as rich as possible in enjoyments." [ 129 ] He firmly believed that moral rules and obligations could be referenced to promoting happiness, which connects to having a noble character. While Mill is not a standard act utilitarian or rule utilitarian , he is a minimizing utilitarian, which "affirms that it would be desirable to maximize happiness for the greatest number, but not that we are morally required to do so." [ 130 ] Women's rights [ edit ] "A Feminine Philosopher". Caricature by Spy published in Vanity Fair in 1873.

Mill's view of history was that right up until his time "the whole of the female" and "the great majority of the male sex" were simply "slaves". He countered arguments to the contrary, arguing that relations between sexes simply amounted to "the legal subordination of one sex to the other – [which] is wrong itself, and now one of the chief hindrances to human improvement; and that it ought to be replaced by a principle of perfect equality." Here, then, we have an instance of Mill's use of "slavery" in a sense which, compared to its fundamental meaning of absolute unfreedom of person, is an extended and arguably a rhetorical rather than a literal sense.

With this, Mill can be considered among the earliest male proponents of gender equality, having been recruited by American feminist John Neal during his stay in London circa 1825–1827.

[ 131 ] His book The Subjection of Women (1861, publ.1869) is one of the earliest written on this subject by a male author.

[ 132 ] In The Subjection of Women , Mill attempts to make a case for perfect equality.

[ 133 ] In his proposal for a universal education system sponsored by the state, Mill expands benefits for many marginalized groups, especially for women. For Mill, a universal education held the potential to create new abilities and novel types of behaviour of which the current receiving generation and their descendants could both benefit from. Such a pathway to opportunity would enable women to gain "industrial and social independence" that would allow them the same movement in their agency and citizenship as men. Mill's view of opportunity stands out in its reach, but even more so for the population he foresees who could benefit from it. Mill was hopeful of the autonomy such an education could allow for its recipients and especially for women. Through the consequential sophistication and knowledge attained, individuals are able to properly act in ways that recedes away from those leading towards overpopulation. This stands directly in contrast with the view held by many of Mill's contemporaries and predecessors who viewed such inclusive programs to be counter-intuitive. Aiming such help at marginalized groups, such as the poor and working class, would only serve to reward them with the opportunity to move to a higher status, thus encouraging greater fertility which at its extreme could lead to overproduction.

He talks about the role of women in marriage and how it must be changed. Mill comments on three major facets of women's lives that he felt are hindering them: society and gender construction ; education ; and marriage .

He argues that the oppression of women was one of the few remaining relics from ancient times, a set of prejudices that severely impeded the progress of humanity.

[ 94 ] [ 134 ] As a Member of Parliament, Mill introduced an unsuccessful amendment to the Reform Bill to substitute the word "person" in place of " man ".

[ 135 ] Major publications [ edit ] Title Date Source "Two Letters on the Measure of Value" 1822 "The Traveller" "Questions of Population" 1823 "Black Dwarf" "War Expenditure" 1824 Westminster Review "Quarterly Review – Political Economy" 1825 Westminster Review "Review of Miss Martineau's Tales" 1830 Examiner "The Spirit of the Age" 1831 Examiner "Use and Abuse of Political Terms" 1832 "What is Poetry" 1833, 1859 "Rationale of Representation" 1835 "De Tocqueville on Democracy in America [i]" 1835 "State of Society in America" 1836 "Civilization" 1836 "Essay on Bentham" 1838 "Essay on Coleridge" 1840 "Essays on Government" 1840 "De Tocqueville on Democracy in America [ii]" 1840 A System of Logic 1843 Essays on Some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy 1844 "Claims of Labour" 1845 Edinburgh Review The Principles of Political Economy 1848 "The Negro Question" 1850 Fraser's Magazine "Reform of the Civil Service" 1854 Dissertations and Discussions 1859 A Few Words on Non-Intervention 1859 On Liberty 1859 Thoughts on Parliamentary Reform 1859 Considerations on Representative Government 1861 "Centralisation" 1862 Edinburgh Review "The Contest in America" 1862 Harper's Magazine Utilitarianism 1863 An Examination of Sir William Hamilton 's Philosophy 1865 Auguste Comte and Positivism 1865 Inaugural Address at St. Andrews Concerning the value of culture 1867 "Speech in Favour of Capital Punishment" [ 136 ] [ 137 ] 1868 England and Ireland 1868 "Thornton on Labour and its Claims" 1869 Fortnightly Review The Subjection of Women 1869 Chapters and Speeches on the Irish Land Question 1870 Autobiography 1873 Three Essays on Religion: Nature, the Utility of Religion, and Theism 1874 Internet Archive Socialism 1879 Belfords, Clarke & Co.

"Notes on N.W. Senior's Political Economy" 1945 Economica N.S.

12 See also [ edit ] John Stuart Mill Institute Mill's methods of induction described 1843 book A System of Logic John Stuart Mill Library List of liberal theorists On Social Freedom , essay discovered and published posthumously in 1907 Women's suffrage in the United Kingdom Notes [ edit ] ^ "Utilitarianism and the New Liberalism | History of ideas and intellectual history" .

Cambridge University Press . Retrieved 29 September 2022 .

^ Brink, David O. (2013).

"Liberalism, utilitarianism, and rights" .

Mill's Progressive Principles . pp.

214– 233.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199672141.003.0009 .

ISBN 978-0199672141 .

Archived from the original on 17 January 2023 . Retrieved 30 September 2022 .

^ a b Eatwell, Roger; Wright, Anthony (1999).

Contemporary Political Ideologies . Continuum International Publishing Group.

ISBN 978-0826451736 .

^ Thouverez, Emile. 1908.

Stuart Mill (4th ed.) Paris: Bloud & Cie. p. 23.

^ "Utilitarianism and the New Liberalism | History of ideas and intellectual history" .

Cambridge University Press . Retrieved 29 September 2022 .

^ Brink, David O. (2013).

"Liberalism, utilitarianism, and rights" .

Mill's Progressive Principles . pp.

214– 233.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199672141.003.0009 .

ISBN 978-0199672141 .

Archived from the original on 17 January 2023 . Retrieved 30 September 2022 .

^ a b Macleod, Christopher (2017).

"John Stuart Mill" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 6 March 2024.

^ "John Stuart Mill's On Liberty " . victorianweb. 6 November 2000 . Retrieved 23 July 2009 .

On Liberty is a rational justification of the freedom of the individual in opposition to the claims of the state to impose unlimited control and is thus a defence of the rights of the individual against the state.

^ Lagassé, Paul; Columbia University, eds. (2000).

The Columbia Encyclopedia (6th ed.). New York, NY: Columbia University Press. p. 1842.

ISBN 978-0787650155 .

^ Macleod, Christopher.

"John Stuart Mill" . Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

Archived from the original on 30 May 2012 . Retrieved 31 July 2009 .

^ "Orator Hunt and the first suffrage petition 1832" .

UK Parliament .

^ "John Stuart Mill and the 1866 petition" .

UK Parliament .

^ Books, Five.

"Nick Clegg on his Favourite Books" .

Five Books . Retrieved 11 August 2025 .

The tradition is that it is given to the president of the Liberal Democrats. The traditions of J. S. Mill are still handed down like some sort of totemic emblem of everything that we're supposed to still believe in, even now. It's extraordinary, given it was written in 1859.

^ Books, Five.

"On Liberty | Five Books Expert Reviews" .

Five Books . Retrieved 11 August 2025 .

^ Halevy, Elie (1966).

The Growth of Philosophic Radicalism . Beacon Press. pp.

282– 284.

ISBN 978-0191010200 .

^ a b c d "Cornell University Library Making of America Collection" .

collections.library.cornell.edu .

^ Murray N. Rothbard (2006).

An Austrian Perspective on the History of Economic Thought . Ludwig von Mises Institute. p.

105 .

ISBN 978-0945466482 . Retrieved 21 January 2011 .

^ Ritchey, Rosemary (2009).

"Ensor, George | Dictionary of Irish Biography" .

www.dib.ie . Retrieved 17 February 2023 .

^ Mill, John Stuart (1988).

The Collected Works of John Stuart Mill, Vol. XXVI – Journals and Debating Speeches, Part I [1820] (PDF) . London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. pp.

53– 58.

^ "John Stuart Mill's Mental Breakdown, Victorian Unconversions, and Romantic Poetry" .

victorianweb.org .

^ Carlyle, T. (10 January 1835). "TC to James Fraser".

The Carlyle Letters Online .

8 (1): 66– 70.

doi : 10.1215/lt-18350307-TC-JFR-01 (inactive 12 July 2025).

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ Baumgarten, Murray (2004). "Mill, John Stuart". In Cumming, Mark (ed.).

The Carlyle Encyclopedia . Madison and Teaneck, NJ: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press. p. 326.

ISBN 978-0838637920 .

^ Pickering, Mary. 1993.

Auguste Comte: An Intellectual Biography.

Cambridge University Press . pp. 509, 512, 535, 537.

^ Capaldi, Nicholas .

John Stuart Mill: A Biography.

p. 33, Cambridge, 2004, ISBN 0521620244 .

^ "Cornell University Library Making of America Collection" .

collections.library.cornell.edu .

^ "Book of Members, 1780–2010: Chapter M" (PDF) . American Academy of Arts and Sciences . Retrieved 15 April 2011 .

^ Mill, John Stuart.

Writings on India . Edited by John M. Robson, Martin Moir and Zawahir Moir. Toronto: University of Toronto Press; London: Routledge, c. 1990.

^ Klausen, Jimmy Casas (March 2016). "Violence and Epistemology: J.S. Mill's Indians after the 'Mutiny' ".

Political Research Quarterly .

69 (1): 96– 107.

doi : 10.1177/1065912915623379 .

S2CID 157038995 .

^ Jennifer Pitts, Boundaries of the International: Law and Empire (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2018), 165.

^ Harris, Abram L. (1964). "John Stuart Mill: Servant of the East India Company".

The Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science .

30 (2): 185– 202.

doi : 10.2307/139555 .

JSTOR 139555 .

^ a b Lal, Vinay (1998). " 'John Stuart Mill and India', a review-article".

New Quest .

54 (1): 54– 64.

^ "Being about, if I am so happy as to obtain her consent, to enter into the marriage relation with the only woman I have ever known, with whom I would have entered into that state; & the whole character of the marriage relation as constituted by law being such as both she and I entirely & conscientiously disapprove, for this amongst other reasons, that it confers upon one of the parties to the contract, legal power & control over the person, property, & freedom of action of the other party, independent of her own wishes and will; I, having no means of legally divesting myself of these odious powers (as I most assuredly would do if an engagement to that effect could be made legally binding on me) feel it my duty to put on record a formal protest against the existing law of marriage, in so far as conferring such powers; and a solemn promise never in any case or under any circumstances to use them. And in the event of marriage between Mrs. Taylor and me I declare it to be my will and intention, & the condition of the engagement between us, that she retains in all respects whatever the same absolute freedom of action, & freedom of disposal of herself and of all that does or may at any time belong to her, as if no such marriage had taken place; and I absolutely disclaim & repudiate all pretension to have acquired any rights whatever by virtue of such marriage. 6th March 1851 J.S. Mill", The Voice of Harriet Taylor Mill, pp. 166–167." ^ Inaugural Address at St Andrews , Longmans, Green, Reader and Dyer, 1867.

^ "No. 22991" .

The London Gazette . 14 July 1865. p. 3528.

^ Capaldi, Nicholas.

John Stuart Mill: A Biography.

pp. 321–322, Cambridge, 2004, ISBN 0521620244 .

^ a b Sher, George , ed. 2001.

Utilitarianism and the 1868 Speech on Capital Punishment , by J.S. Mill.

Hackett Publishing Co.

^ Report of meeting on Proportional representation or effective voting (1894) . p. 25.

^ "APS Member History" .

search.amphilsoc.org . Retrieved 21 April 2021 .

^ "More Adept With Concepts Than People" .

The New York Times . 6 December 1996 . Retrieved 19 March 2022 .

^ "Editorial Notes" .

Secular Review .

16 (13): 203. 28 March 1885.

It has always seemed to us that this is one of the instances in which Mill approached, out of deference to conventional opinion, as near to the borderland of Cant as he well could without compromising his pride of place as a recognised thinker and sceptic.

^ Linda C. Raeder (2002). "Spirit of the Age".

John Stuart Mill and the Religion of Humanity . University of Missouri Press. p. 65.

ISBN 978-0826263278 .

Comte welcomed the prospect of being attacked publicly for his irreligion, he said, as this would permit him to clarify the nonatheistic nature of his and Mill's "atheism".

^ Larsen, Timothy (2018).

John Stuart Mill: A Secular Life .

Oxford University Press . p. 14.

ISBN 978-0198753155 .

A letter John wrote from Forde Abbey when he was eight years old casually mentions in his general report of his activities that he too had been to Thorncombe parish church, so even when Bentham had home-field advantage, the boy was still receiving a Christian spiritual formation. Indeed, Mill occasionally attended Christian worship services during his teen years and thereafter for the rest of his life.

^ Larsen, Timothy (7 December 2018).

"A surprisingly religious John Stuart Mill" .

TL: Mill decided that strictly in terms of proof the right answer to that question of God's existence is that it is 'a very probable hypothesis.' He also thought it was perfectly rational and legitimate to believe in God as an act of hope or as the result of one's efforts to discern the meaning of life as a whole.

^ Flannery, Maura (12 October 2020).

"Other Callings: Philosophers" .

Herbarium World . Wordpress . Retrieved 22 November 2024 .

Probably the most long-term collector among philosophers was John Stuart Mill, who was interested in botany throughout his life in part because he saw the hierarchical classification of living things as a model for ordering many aspects of human affairs such as law.

^ Flannery, Maura (2023).

In the Herbarium: The Hidden World of Collecting and Preserving Plants . United States of America: Yale University Press. p. 144.

ISBN 978-0300247916 .

^ Curtis, Simon (1988). "The philosopher's flowers: John Stuart Mill as botanist".

Encounter .

80 (2): 2– 33.

^ "John Stuart Mill: Specimens collected" .

Bionomia . Retrieved 15 November 2024 .

^ "Characteristic Will of John Stuart Mill" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 15 March 2025 .

^ "Autobiography, by John Stuart Mill" . Retrieved 11 March 2021 – via Project Gutenberg.

^ "AUTO Chapter 5, John Stuart Mill, Autobiography" .

laits.utexas.edu . Retrieved 11 March 2021 .

^ Shermer, Michael (2002).

In Darwin's Shadow: The Life and Science of Alfred Russel Wallace: A Biographical Study on the Psychology of History . Oxford University Press. p. 212.

ISBN 978-0199923854 .

^ Matilal, Bimal K.; Chakrabarti, A. (1994).

Knowing from Words: Western and Indian Philosophical Analysis of Understanding and Testimony . Springer Science & Business Media.

ISBN 978-0792323457 .

OCLC 28016267 .

[ page needed ] ^ Matilal, Bimal K. (March 1989). "Nyāya critique of the Buddhist doctrine of non-soul".

Journal of Indian Philosophy .

17 (1).

doi : 10.1007/bf00160139 .

S2CID 170181380 .

^ Varouxakis, Georgios (2013).

Liberty Abroad: J.S. Mill on International Relations . Cambridge University Press. p. 126.

^ Mill, J.S. (1896).

Principles of Political Economy (Vol. 2) . D. Appleton and Company. p. 310.

^ "J.S. Mill's Career at the East India Company" .

victorianweb.org .

^ Goldberg, David Theo (2000). "Liberalism's Limits: Carlyle and Mill on 'The Negro Question' ".

Nineteenth-Century Contexts .

22 (2): 203– 216.

doi : 10.1080/08905490008583508 .

S2CID 194002917 .

^ John Stuart Mill, Dissertations and Discussions: Political, Philosophical and Historical (New York 1874) Vol. 3, pp. 252–253.

^ Pitts, Jennifer (April 2003). "Legislator of the World? A Rereading of Bentham on Colonies".

Political Theory .

31 (2): 220.

doi : 10.1177/0090591702251009 .

^ Poole, Thomas M. (2015).

Reason of State: Law, Prerogative and Empire . Cambridge University Press. p. 184.

^ Williams, David (October 2021).

"John Stuart Mill and the practice of colonial rule in India" .

Journal of International Political Theory .

17 (3): 412– 428.

doi : 10.1177/1755088220903349 .

S2CID 214445850 .

^ Levin, Michael (2004).

J.S. Mill on Civilization and Barbarism . Routledge. p. 37.

^ "Ifaw.org" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 June 2008.

^ IREF | Pour la liberte economique et la concurrence fiscale .

Archived 27 March 2009 at the Wayback Machine (PDF).

^ Strasser 1991 .

^ Mill, John Stuart; Bentham, Jeremy (2004). Ryan, Alan (ed.).

Utilitarianism and Other Essays . London: Penguin Books. p.

11 .

ISBN 978-0140432725 .

^ Wilson, Fred (2007).

"John Stuart Mill: Political Economy" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 4 May 2009 .

^ Mill, John Stuart (1852). "On The General Principles of Taxation, V.2.14".

Principles of Political Economy (3rd ed.).

Library of Economics and Liberty .

The passage about flat taxation was altered by the author in this edition, which is acknowledged in this online edition's footnote 8: "[This sentence replaced in the 3rd ed. a sentence of the original: 'It is partial taxation, which is a mild form of robbery.']") ^ McManus, Matt (30 May 2021).

"Was John Stuart Mill a Socialist?" .

Jacobin . Retrieved 1 June 2021 .

^ Mill, John Stuart (2011) [1st pub. Belfords, Clarke & Co.:1879].

Socialism .

Project Gutenberg . p. 29 . Retrieved 1 June 2021 .

^ Ekelund, Robert B. Jr.; Hébert, Robert F. (1997).

A History of Economic Theory and Method (4th ed.). Waveland Press [Long Grove, Illinois]. p. 172.

ISBN 978-1577663812 .

^ Marx.

"Grundrisse" .

The aim is, rather, to present production – see e.g. Mill – as distinct from distribution etc., as encased in eternal natural laws independent of history, at which opportunity bourgeois relations are then quietly smuggled in as the inviolable natural laws on which society in the abstract is founded. This is the more or less conscious purpose of the whole proceeding. In distribution, by contrast, humanity has allegedly permitted itself to be considerably more arbitrary. Quite apart from this crude tearing-apart of production and distribution and of their real relationship, it must be apparent from the outset that, no matter how differently distribution may have been arranged in different stages of social development, it must be possible here also, just as with production, to single out common characteristics, and just as possible to confound or to extinguish all historic differences under general human laws.

^ Principles of Political Economy with some of their Applications to Social Philosophy, IV.7.21 John Stuart Mill: Political Economy, IV.7.21 ^ Principles of Political Economy and On Liberty, Chapter IV, Of the Limits to the Authority of Society Over the Individual ^ Carson, Kevin (16 July 2006).

"J.S. Mill, Market Socialist" .

Mutualist Blog: Free Market Anti-Capitalism .

Archived from the original on 6 March 2019 . Retrieved 14 April 2025 .

^ Where Did Mill Go Wrong?: Why the Capital-Managed Firm Rather than the Labor-Managed Enterprise Is the Predominant Organizational Form in Market Economies , by Schwartz, Justin. 2011. Ohio State Law Journal, vol. 73, no. 2, 2012 ^ Capaldi, Nicholas (13 July 2015).

"What Did Mill Understand as "Socialism"?" .

Liberty Matters (Online Library of Liberty) . Liberty Fund, Inc.

Archived from the original on 2 December 2024 . Retrieved 19 April 2025 .

^ Matthew McManus (26 April 2022).

"The Socialist Sympathies of John Stuart Mill" .

Liberal Currents .

Archived from the original on 17 March 2025 . Retrieved 14 April 2025 .

^ Manioudis, Manolis & Milonakis, Dimitris. (2024). "An Early Anticipation of Market Socialism? Liberalism, Heresy, and Knowledge in John Stuart Mill's Political Economy of Socialism".

Science & Society , 88(3), 368–394.

^ Thompson, Dennis F. (1976).

John Stuart Mill and Representative Government . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0691021874 .

^ Letwin, Shirley (1965).

The Pursuit of Certainty . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 306.

ISBN 978-0865971943 .

^ Pateman, Carole (1970).

Participation and Democratic Theory . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 28.

ISBN 978-0521290043 .

^ Thompson, Dennis (2007). "Mill in Parliament: When Should a Philosopher Compromise?". In Urbinati, N.; Zakaras, A. (eds.).

J.S. Mill's Political Thought . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

166– 199.

ISBN 978-0521677561 .

^ Davis, Elynor G. (1985). "Mill, Socialism and the English Romantics: An Interpretation".

Economica .

52 (207): 345–358 (351).

doi : 10.2307/2553857 .

JSTOR 2553857 .

^ de Mattos, Laura Valladão (2000). "John Stuart Mill, Socialism, and His Liberal Utopia: An Application of His View of Social Institutions".

History of Economic Ideas .

8 (2): 95– 120.

JSTOR 23722559 .

^ Ward, Lee (August 2023).

"John Stuart Mill on the Political Significance of Higher Education" .

History of Education Quarterly .

63 (3): 336– 356.

doi : 10.1017/heq.2023.22 .

S2CID 260335019 .

^ Mill, John Stuart (1885).

Principles of Political Economy . New York: D. Appleton and Company.

^ Jensen, Hans (December 2001). "John Stuart Mill's Theories of Wealth and Income Distribution".

Review of Social Economy .

59 (4): 491– 507.

doi : 10.1080/00346760110081599 .

S2CID 145340813 .

^ a b Ekelund, Robert; Tollison, Robert (May 1976). "The New Political Economy of J.S. Mill: Means to Social Justice".

The Canadian Journal of Economics .

9 (2): 213– 231.

doi : 10.2307/134519 .

JSTOR 134519 .

^ " The Principles of Political Economy , Book 4, Chapter VI" . Archived from the original on 23 September 2015 . Retrieved 9 March 2008 .

^ Røpke, Inge (1 October 2004). "The Early History of Modern Ecological Economics".

Ecological Economics .

50 ( 3– 4): 293– 314.

Bibcode : 2004EcoEc..50..293R .

doi : 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2004.02.012 .

^ Mill, John Stuart.

Principles of Political Economy (PDF) . p. 25 . Retrieved 1 November 2016 .

^ Mill, John Stuart. 1850.

The Negro Question .

Archived 17 November 2022 at the Wayback Machine .

Fraser's Magazine for Town and Country 41:25–31.

^ a b Mill, John Stuart. 1869.

The Subjection of Women .

Archived 29 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine . Ch. 1.

^ a b "The Collected Works of John Stuart Mill, Volume XV – The Later Letters of John Stuart Mill 1849–1873 Part II – Online Library of Liberty" .

oll.libertyfund.org . Retrieved 28 April 2020 .

^ Vile, John R. (2003).

Great American Judges: An Encyclopedia . ABC-CLIO.

ISBN 978-1576079898 .

^ Park, T. Peter (1 September 1991). "John Stuart Mill, Thomas Carlyle, and the U.S. Civil War".

The Historian .

54 (1): 93– 106.

doi : 10.1111/j.1540-6563.1991.tb00843.x .

^ "Blood for Liberty" .

The Wilson Quarterly . 2008 . Retrieved 25 January 2024 .

^ Somin, Ilya (17 July 2013).

"John Stuart Mill on Slavery, the Confederacy, and the American Civil War" .

The Volokh Conspiracy . Retrieved 25 January 2024 .

^ "The Contest In America" .

American Battlefield Trust . Retrieved 25 January 2024 .

^ a b Mill, John Stuart. [1859] 1869.

On Liberty (4th ed.). London: Longmans, Green, Reader and Dyer , pp. 21–22 .

Archived 17 November 2022 at the Wayback Machine .

^ a b Mill, John Stuart. [1859] 2001.

On Liberty .

Archived 14 November 2019 at the Wayback Machine . Kitchener, ON: Batoche Books. Retrieved 17 June 2020.

^ a b "I. Introductory. Mill, John Stuart. 1869. On Liberty" .

bartleby.com . Retrieved 16 July 2018 .

^ Mill, John Stuart. [1859] 2006.

On Liberty .

Penguin Classics .

ISBN 978-0141441474 . pp. 10–11.

^ Mill, John Stuart. [1859] 1909. " On Liberty ". pp. 195–290 in Harvard Classics 25, edited by C.W. Eliot . New York: PF Collier & Son .

p. 248 .

^ Mill, John Stuart. [1859] 1985.

On Liberty , edited by G. Himmelfarb , UK: Penguin . pp. 83–84.

^ a b c Paul, Ellen Frankel, Fred Dycus Miller, and Jeffrey Paul. 2004.

Freedom of Speech 21.

Cambridge University Press .

^ Mill, John Stuart. [1859] 1863.

On Liberty .

Ticknor and Fields . p. 23.

^ Schenck v. United States , 249 U.S. 47 (1919).

^ George & Kline 2006 , p. 409.

^ George & Kline 2006 , p. 410.

^ John Stuart Mill's On Liberty: A Translation into Modern English , Kindle edition, 2013.

ISBN 978-0906321638 .

^ "British Press Freedom under Threat", New York Times, 14 November 2013.

^ Abbott, Lewis F.

Defending Liberty: The Case for a New Bill of Rights . ISR/Google Books, 2019. p. 22.

ISBN 978-0906321737 .

^ Mill 1863 , p. 51.

^ Mill, John (2002).

The Basic Writings of John Stuart Mill . The Modern Library. p. 239.

^ a b Utilitarianism by John Stuart Mill . February 2004 – via Project Gutenberg.

^ Freeman, Stephen J.; Engels, Dennis W.; Altekruse, Michael K. (April 2004). "Foundations for Ethical Standards and Codes: The Role of Moral Philosophy and Theory in Ethics".

Counseling and Values .

48 (3): 163– 173.

doi : 10.1002/j.2161-007X.2004.tb00243.x .

^ Davis, G. Scott. 2005. "Introduction", Introduction to Utilitarianism, by John Stuart Mill , vii–xiv. Barnes & Noble Library of Essential Reading.

^ a b Heydt, Colin.

"John Stuart Mill (1806–1873)" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Mill, John (1961).

Utilitarianism . Doubleday. p. 211.

^ Driver, Julia (27 March 2009).

"The History of Utilitarianism" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Bronfenbrenner, Martin (1977). "Poetry, Pushpin, and Utility".

Economic Inquiry .

15 : 95– 110.

doi : 10.1111/j.1465-7295.1977.tb00452.x .

^ Mill 1863 , p.

16 .

^ Mill 1863 , p. 2.

^ Mill 1863 , p. 3.

^ Mill 1863 , p. 24.

^ Mill 1863 , p. 29.

^ Mill 1863 , p. 8.

^ Fitzpatrick 2006 , p. 84.

^ Daggett, Windsor (1920).

A Down-East Yankee From the District of Maine . Portland, Maine: A.J. Huston. p. 32.

^ Johnson Lewis, Jone (10 February 2019).

"About John Stuart Mill, a Male Feminist and Philosopher" .

ThoughtCo . Retrieved 9 July 2019 .

^ Cunningham Wood, John .

John Stuart Mill: Critical Assessments 4.

^ Mill, John Stuart. [1869] 2005. "The Subjection of Women". pp. 17–26 in Feminist Theory: A Philosophical Anthology , edited by A.E. Cudd and R.O. Andreasen. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishing .

ISBN 978-1405116619 .

^ West, Henry R. (2015). "J.S. Mill". In Crisp, Roger (ed.).

The Oxford Handbook of the History of Ethics . Oxford. p. 528.

ISBN 978-0198744405 .

OCLC 907652431 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Hansard report of Commons Sitting: Capital Punishment Within Prisons Bill – [Bill 36.] Committee stage: HC Deb 21 April 1868 vol. 191 cc 1033–63 including Mill's speech Col. 1047–1055 Archived 30 June 2009 at the Wayback Machine ^ His speech against the abolition of capital punishment was commented upon in an editorial in The Times , Wednesday, 22 April 1868; p. 8; Issue 26105; col E: References [ edit ] Mill's work [ edit ] Mill, John Stuart (1863).

Utilitarianism . London: Parker, Son, and Bourn, West Strand.

OCLC 78070085 .

Other sources [ edit ] Bell, Duncan (2010). "John Stuart Mill on Colonies".

Political Theory .

38 (1): 34– 64.

doi : 10.1177/0090591709348186 .

JSTOR 25655532 .

S2CID 145582945 .

Brink, David O. (1992). "Mill's Deliberative Utilitarianism".

Philosophy & Public Affairs .

21 (1): 67– 103.

JSTOR 2265175 .

Brink, David, "Mill's Moral and Political Philosophy" Archived 17 November 2022 at the Wayback Machine , The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2016 Ed.), Edward N. Zalta (ed.) Claeys, Gregory.

Mill and Paternalism (Cambridge University Press, 2013) Christians, Clifford G. & John C. Merrill (eds) Ethical Communication: Five Moral Stances in Human Dialogue, Columbia, MO: University of Missouri Press, 2009 Fitzpatrick, J.R. (2006).

John Stuart Mill's Political Philosophy . Continuum Studies in British Philosophy. Bloomsbury Publishing.

ISBN 978-1847143440 .

George, Roger Z.; Kline, Robert D. (2006).

Intelligence and the national security strategist: enduring issues and challenges . Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 978-0742540385 .

Garrard, Graeme (2021).

"John Stuart Mill and the Liberal Idea of Canada" (PDF) .

British Journal of Canadian Studies .

33 (1): 31– 46.

doi : 10.3828/bjcs.2021.2 .

S2CID 233833435 .

Gopnik, Adam , "Right Again, The passions of John Stuart Mill", The New Yorker , 6 October 2008 Archived 20 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine Harrington, Jack (2010).

Sir John Malcolm and the Creation of British India, Ch. 5 . New York: Palgrave Macmillan .

ISBN 978-0230108851 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) Harwood, Sterling. "Eleven Objections to Utilitarianism", in Louis P. Pojman, ed., Moral Philosophy: A Reader (Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing Co., 1998), and in Sterling Harwood, ed., Business as Ethical and Business as Usual (Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publishing Co., 1996), Chapter 7 Hollander, Samuel , The Economics of John Stuart Mill (University of Toronto Press, 1985) Kitcher, Philip .

On John Stuart Mill . Columbia University Press, 2023.

Kolmar, Wendy & Frances Bartowski.

Feminist Theory . 2nd ed. New York: Mc Graw Hill, 2005 Letwin, Letwin , The Pursuit of Certainty (Cambridge University Press, 1965).

ISBN 978-0865971943 Packe, Michael St. John , The Life of John Stuart Mill (Macmillan, 1952) Pateman, Carole , Participation and Democratic Theory (Cambridge University Press, 1970).

ISBN 978-0521290043 Reeves, Richard, John Stuart Mill: Victorian Firebrand , Atlantic Books (2007), paperback 2008.

ISBN 978-1843546443 Robinson, Dave & Groves, Judy (2003).

Introducing Political Philosophy . Icon Books.

ISBN 184046450X Rosen, Frederick, Classical Utilitarianism from Hume to Mill ( Routledge Studies in Ethics & Moral Theory), 2003.

ISBN 0415220947 Skoble, Aeon (2008).

"Mill, John Stuart (1806–1873)" . In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage ; Cato Institute . pp.

329– 331.

doi : 10.4135/9781412965811.n202 .

ISBN 978-1412965804 .

Spiegel, H.W. (1991).

The Growth of Economic Thought . Economic history. Duke University Press.

ISBN 978-0822309734 .

Strasser, Mark Philip (1991).

The Moral Philosophy of John Stuart Mill: Toward Modifications of Contemporary Utilitarianism . Longwood Academic.

ISBN 978-0893416812 .

Ten, Chin Liew , Mill on Liberty , Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1980, full-text online at Contents Victorianweb.org (National University of Singapore) Thompson, Dennis F.

, John Stuart Mill and Representative Government (Princeton University Press, 1976).

ISBN 978-0691021874 Thompson, Dennis F., "Mill in Parliament: When Should a Philosopher Compromise?" in J.S. Mill's Political Thought , eds. N. Urbinati and A. Zakaras (Cambridge University Press, 2007).

ISBN 978-0521677561 Walker, Francis Amasa (1876).

The Wages Question: A Treatise on Wages and the Wages Class . Henry Holt.

Further reading [ edit ] Alican, Necip Fikri (1994).

Mill's Principle of Utility: A Defense of John Stuart Mill's Notorious Proof . Amsterdam and Atlanta: Editions Rodopi B.V.

ISBN 978-9051837483 .

Bayles, M. D. (1968).

Contemporary Utilitarianism . Anchor Books, Doubleday.

Bentham, Jeremy (2009).

An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (Dover Philosophical Classics) . Dover Publications Inc.

ISBN 978-0486454528 .

Brandt, Richard B.

(1979).

A Theory of the Good and the Right . Clarendon Press.

ISBN 978-0198245506 .

Henderson, David R.

, ed. (2008).

"John Stuart Mill (1806–1873)" .

The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics .

Library of Economics and Liberty (2nd ed.).

Liberty Fund . p. 566–567.

ISBN 978-0865976665 .

Lee, Sidney , ed. (1894).

"Mill, John Stuart" .

Dictionary of National Biography . Vol. 37. London: Smith, Elder & Co.

López, Rosario (2016).

Contexts of John Stuart Mill's Liberalism: Politics and the Science of Society in Victorian Britain . Baden-Baden, Nomos.

ISBN 978-3848736959 .

Lyons, David (1965).

Forms and Limits of Utilitarianism . Oxford University Press (UK).

ISBN 978-0198241973 .

Mill, John Stuart (2011).

A System of Logic, Ratiocinative and Inductive (Classic Reprint) . Forgotten Books.

ISBN 978-1440090820 .

Mill, John Stuart (1981). "Autobiography". In Robson, John (ed.).

Collected Works, volume XXXI . University of Toronto Press.

ISBN 978-0710007186 .

Moore, G.E. (1903).

Principia Ethica . Prometheus Books UK.

ISBN 978-0879754983 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Rosen, Frederick (2003).

Classical Utilitarianism from Hume to Mill . Routledge.

Scheffler, Samuel (August 1994).

The Rejection of Consequentialism: A Philosophical Investigation of the Considerations Underlying Rival Moral Conceptions (2nd ed.). Clarendon Press.

ISBN 978-0198235118 .

Smart, J.J.C.

; Williams, Bernard (January 1973).

Utilitarianism: For and Against . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521098229 .

Francisco Vergara, « Bentham and Mill on the "Quality" of Pleasures », Revue d'études benthamiennes , Paris, 2011.

Vergara, Francisco (1998). "A Critique of Elie Halévy: Refutation of an Important Distortion of British Moral Philosophy".

Philosophy .

73 (283): 97– 111.

doi : 10.1017/S0031819197000144 .

JSTOR 3752129 .

S2CID 170370954 .

Minto, William ; Mitchell, John Malcolm (1911).

"Mill, John Stuart" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 18 (11th ed.). pp.

454– 459.

Catalogue of Mill's correspondence and papers held at the Archives Division of the London School of Economics . View the Archives Catalogue of the contents of this important holding, which also includes letters of James Mill and Helen Taylor.

John Stuart Mill's library Archived 24 July 2016 at the Wayback Machine , Somerville College Library in Oxford holds ≈ 1700 volumes owned by John Stuart Mill and his father James Mill, many containing their marginalia "John Stuart Mill (Obituary Notice, Tuesday, November 4, 1873)".

Eminent Persons: Biographies reprinted from The Times . Vol. I (1870–1875).

Macmillan & Co.

1892. pp.

195– 224.

hdl : 2027/uc2.ark:/13960/t6n011x45 – via HathiTrust.

Mill , BBC Radio 4 discussion with A.C. Grayling, Janet Radcliffe Richards, & Alan Ryan ( In Our Time , 18 May 2006) Portraits of John Stuart Mill at the National Portrait Gallery, London John Stuart Mill Archived 17 April 2019 at the Wayback Machine on Google Scholar John Stuart Mill , biographical profile, including quotes and further resources, at Utilitarianism.net .

External links [ edit ] John Stuart Mill at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata Works by John Stuart Mill at Project Gutenberg Works by or about John Stuart Mill at the Internet Archive Works by John Stuart Mill at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Parliament of the United Kingdom Preceded by Sir George de Lacy Evans Member of Parliament for Westminster 1865 – 1868 Succeeded by William Henry Smith Academic offices Preceded by William Stirling of Keir Rector of the University of St Andrews 1865–1868 Succeeded by James Anthony Froude v t e John Stuart Mill Essays Essays on Some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy (1844) " A Few Words on Non-Intervention " (1859) " The Subjection of Women " (1869) Books A System of Logic (1843) Principles of Political Economy (1848) On Liberty (1859) Considerations on Representative Government (1861) Utilitarianism (1863) Three Essays on Religion (1874) Articles John Stuart Mill Institute Mill's Methods Articles related to John Stuart Mill v t e Economics Theoretical Microeconomics Decision theory Price theory Game theory Contract theory Mechanism design Macroeconomics Mathematical economics Complexity economics Computational economics Agent-based computational economics Behavioral economics Pluralism in economics Empirical Econometrics Economic statistics Experimental economics Economic history Applied Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Schools ( history ) Attention Mainstream Heterodox American (National) Ancient thought Austrian Behavioral Buddhist Chartalism Modern monetary theory Chicago Classical Critique of political economy Democratic Disequilibrium Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgism Happiness Historical Humanistic Institutional Keynesian Neo- ( neoclassical–Keynesian synthesis ) New Post- Circuitism Malthusianism Marginalism Marxian Neo- Mercantilism Mixed Mutualism Neoclassical Lausanne New classical Real business-cycle theory New institutional Physiocracy Socialist Stockholm Supply-side Thermo Economists de Mandeville Quesnay Smith Malthus Say Ricardo von Thünen List Bastiat Cournot Mill Gossen Marx Walras Jevons George Menger Marshall Edgeworth Clark Pareto von Böhm-Bawerk von Wieser Veblen Gesell Fisher Pigou Heckscher von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Knight Polanyi Frisch Sraffa Myrdal Hayek Kalecki Röpke Kuznets Tinbergen Robinson von Neumann Hicks Lange Leontief Galbraith Koopmans Schumacher Friedman Samuelson Simon Buchanan Arrow Baumol Solow Rothbard Greenspan Sowell Becker Ostrom Sen Lucas Stiglitz Thaler Hoppe Krugman Piketty more Lists Glossary Economists Publications ( journals ) Schools Category Index Lists Outline Publications Business portal v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e Liberalism Ideas Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history Schools Classical Economic Fiscal Neo Equity feminism Georgist Radical Anti-clerical Civic nationalism Republican Utilitarian Whig Physiocratic Encyclopaedist Conservative Liberal conservatism National Ordo Social Green Liberal feminism Ecofeminism Liberal socialism Social democracy Progressivism Third Way Other Constitutional Constitutional patriotism Cultural Corporate International Libertarianism Left-libertarianism Geolibertarianism Neoclassical liberalism Paleolibertarianism Right-libertarianism Radical centrism Religious Christian Islamic Secular Techno By region Africa Egypt Nigeria Senegal South Africa Tunisia Zimbabwe Asia China Hong Kong India Iran Israel Japan South Korea Anti- Chinilpa Centrist reformist Progressive Philippines Turkey Europe Albania Armenia Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech lands Denmark Estonia Finland France Orléanist Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Italy Berlusconism Liberism Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia Moldova Montenegro Netherlands Norway Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Gladstonian Libertarian Manchester Muscular Radical Whiggist Latin America and the Caribbean Bolivia Brazil Lulism Chile Colombia Cuba Ecuador Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Uruguay North America Canada United States Jacksonian Jeffersonian Libertarian Modern Progressive Oceania Australia Small-l New Zealand Philosophers Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organisations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism Portal v t e Feminist philosophy Major works Early François Poullain de la Barre De l’Égalité des deux sexes , 1673 Mary Astell A Serious Proposal to the Ladies , 1694 Mary Wollstonecraft A Vindication of the Rights of Woman , 1792 Sarah Moore Grimké Letters on the Equality of the Sexes and the Condition of Women , 1837 Flora Tristan The Emancipation of Working Class Women , 1843 Elizabeth Cady Stanton Declaration of Sentiments , 1848 Harriet Taylor Mill The Enfranchisement of Women , 1851 John Stuart Mill The Subjection of Women , 1869 Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State , 1884 1940s–1960s Simone de Beauvoir The Second Sex , 1949 Betty Friedan The Feminine Mystique , 1963 1970s Kate Millett Sexual Politics , 1970 Shulamith Firestone The Dialectic of Sex , 1970 Germaine Greer The Female Eunuch , 1970 Robin Morgan Sisterhood Is Powerful , 1970 Andrea Dworkin Woman Hating , 1974 Sandra Bartky "Toward a Phenomenology of Feminist Consciousness", 1974 Susan Brownmiller Against Our Will , 1975 Hélène Cixous "Le Rire de la Méduse", 1975 Mary Daly Gyn/Ecology , 1978 Dale Spender Man Made Language , 1978 Audre Lorde "The Master's Tools Will Never Dismantle the Master's House", 1979 1980s Monique Wittig "On ne naît pas femme", 1980 bell hooks Ain't I a Woman?

, 1981 Marilyn Frye The Politics of Reality , 1983 Sheila Jeffreys The Spinster and Her Enemies , 1985 Gerda Lerner The Creation of Patriarchy , 1986 Catharine MacKinnon Toward a Feminist Theory of the State , 1989 Kimberlé Crenshaw "Demarginalizing the Intersection of Race and Sex", 1989 1990s Judith Butler Gender Trouble , 1990 Patricia Hill Collins Black Feminist Thought , 1990 Naomi Wolf The Beauty Myth , 1990 Drucilla Cornell Beyond Accommodation , 1991 Val Plumwood Feminism and the Mastery of Nature , 1993 Christina Hoff Sommers Who Stole Feminism?

, 1994 Martha Nussbaum Sex and Social Justice , 1998 Other theorists Elizabeth Anderson Martha Albertson Fineman Nancy Fraser Donna Haraway Sandra Harding Sally Haslanger Luce Irigaray Anna Jónasdóttir Ideas Écriture féminine Feminism analytical aesthetics empiricism epistemology ethics existentialism justice ethics legal theory metaphysics method philosophy radical standpoint theory theory Gender equality performativity Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Matriarchy Patriarchy Women's studies Journals Hypatia transracialism controversy philoSOPHIA Radical Philosophy Signs Categories Feminist philosophers Feminist theorists v t e Liberal feminism Issues Gender equality Women's suffrage Female education Right to work Violence against women Anti-discrimination law Sexism Gender pay gap and equal pay for equal work Glass ceiling Women in development Feminist foreign policy LGBT+ rights Variants Liberal state feminism Equality feminism Social feminism Equity feminism Difference feminism Individualist feminism Groups Present German Association of Female Citizens (1865) Danish Women's Society (1871) Norwegian Association for Women's Rights (1884) Fredrika Bremer Association (1884) International Council of Women (1888) National Council of Women of the United States (1888) Naisasialiitto Unioni (1892) International Alliance of Women (1904) Icelandic Women's Rights Association (1907) Women's International League for Peace and Freedom (1915) League of Women Voters (1920) All India Women's Conference (1927) League of Women Voters of Japan (1946) Deutscher Frauenring (1949) All Pakistan Women's Association (1949) German Women's Council (1951) Fawcett Society (1953) National Organization for Women (1966) National Women's Political Caucus (1971) UN Women (2010) Former Seneca Falls Convention (1848) National Women's Rights Convention (1850) National Society for Women's Suffrage (1867) London National Society for Women's Suffrage (1867) National Woman Suffrage Association (1869) American Woman Suffrage Association (1869) National American Woman Suffrage Association (1890) Bund Deutscher Frauenvereine (1894) National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies (1897) People Mary Wollstonecraft Judith Sargent Murray John Stuart Mill Harriet Taylor Mill Susan B. Anthony Elizabeth Cady Stanton Millicent Fawcett Na Hye-sok Gina Krog Hagbart Berner Fredrikke Marie Qvam Carrie Chapman Catt Margery Corbett Ashby Hanna Rydh Margarete Bonnevie Eva Kolstad Ra'ana Liaquat Ali Khan Betty Friedan Hillary Clinton Symbolism Sunflower v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject v t e Property By owner Collective Common Communal Community Crown Customary Cooperative Private Public Self Social State Unowned By nature Croft Estate (landed) Intangible Intellectual indigenous Personal Tangible real Commons Common land Common-pool resource Digital Global Information Knowledge Theory Bundle of rights Commodity fictitious commodities Common good (economics) Excludability First possession appropriation homestead principle Free-rider problem Game theory Georgism Gift economy Labor theory of property Law of rent rent-seeking Legal plunder Natural rights Ownership Property rights primogeniture usufruct women's Right to property Rivalry Tragedy of the commons anticommons Applications Acequia (watercourse) Ejido (agrarian land) Estate legal literary real Forest types Huerta Inheritance executor Land tenure Property law alienation easement restraint on alienation real estate title Rights Air Fishing Forest-dwelling (India) Freedom to roam Grazing pannage Hunting Land aboriginal indigenous squatting Littoral Mineral Bergregal Right of way Water prior-appropriation riparian Disposession / redistribution Bioprospecting biopiracy Collectivization Eminent domain Enclosure Eviction Expropriation Farhud Forced migration population transfer repatriation Illegal fishing Illegal logging Land Back Land reform Legal plunder Piracy Poaching Primitive accumulation Privatization Regulatory taking Slavery bride buying human trafficking spousal husband-selling wife selling wage Tax inheritance poll progressive property Theft Scholars ( key work ) Frédéric Bastiat The Law Ronald Coase Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State Henry George Progress and Poverty Garrett Hardin David Harvey John Locke Two Treatises of Government Karl Marx Das Kapital Marcel Mauss The Gift John Stuart Mill Elinor Ostrom Karl Polanyi The Great Transformation Pierre-Joseph Proudhon What Is Property?

David Ricardo Murray N. Rothbard The Ethics of Liberty Jean-Jacques Rousseau The Social Contract Adam Smith The Wealth of Nations Categories: Property Property law by country v t e Rectors of the University of St Andrews University of St Andrews Sir Ralph Abercromby Anstruther, 4th Baronet Sir William Stirling-Maxwell, 9th Baronet John Stuart Mill James Anthony Froude Charles Neaves, Lord Neaves Arthur Penrhyn Stanley Roundell Palmer, 1st Earl of Selborne Sir Theodore Martin Donald Mackay, 11th Lord Reay Arthur Balfour Frederick Hamilton-Temple-Blackwood, 1st Marquess of Dufferin and Ava John Crichton-Stuart, 3rd Marquess of Bute James Stuart Andrew Carnegie John Lubbock, 1st Baron Avebury Archibald Primrose, 5th Earl of Rosebery John Hamilton-Gordon, 1st Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair Douglas Haig, 1st Earl Haig Sir J. M. Barrie Rudyard Kipling Fridtjof Nansen Wilfred Grenfell Jan Smuts Guglielmo Marconi Robert MacGregor Mitchell, Lord MacGregor Mitchell Sir David Munro Sir George Cunningham David Cecil, 6th Marquess of Exeter David Lindsay, 28th Earl of Crawford David Maxwell Fyfe, 1st Earl of Kilmuir Robert Boothby, Baron Boothby C. P. Snow Sir John Rothenstein Learie Constantine John Cleese Alan Coren Frank Muir Tim Brooke-Taylor Katharine Whitehorn Stanley Adams Nicholas Parsons Nicky Campbell Donald Findlay Andrew Neil Sir Clement Freud Simon Pepper Kevin Dunion Alistair Moffat Catherine Stihler Srđa Popović Leyla Hussein Stella Maris v t e Bertrand Russell British philosopher, logician, and social critic Philosophy Views on philosophy Copleston–Russell debate Logical atomism Russell's teapot Theory of descriptions Views on society Russell–Einstein Manifesto Russell Tribunal Mathematics Peano–Russell notation Russell's paradox Works The Principles of Mathematics (1903) " On Denoting " (1905) Principia Mathematica (1910–1913) The Problems of Philosophy (1912) Why Men Fight (1916) Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy (1919) " Free Thought and Official Propaganda " (1922) " Why I Am Not a Christian " (1927) Marriage and Morals (1929) In Praise of Idleness and Other Essays (1935) Power: A New Social Analysis (1938) A History of Western Philosophy (1945) My Philosophical Development (1959) Family Alys Pearsall Smith (wife, 1894–1921) Dora Russell (wife, 1921–1935) Patricia Russell (wife, 1936–1951) Edith Finch Russell (wife, 1952–1970) John Russell, 4th Earl Russell (son) Conrad Russell, 5th Earl Russell (son) Frank Russell, 2nd Earl Russell (brother) John Russell, Viscount Amberley (father) Katharine Russell, Viscountess Amberley (mother) John Stuart Mill (godfather) John Russell, 1st Earl Russell (paternal grandfather) Henrietta Stanley, Baroness Stanley of Alderley (maternal grandmother) Related Appointment court case Earl Russell Peace Foundation Professorship of Philosophy Category: Works by Bertrand Russell Portals : Biography Politics United Kingdom Economics England Liberalism Philosophy Science Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France 2 BnF data 2 Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Russia Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile 2 Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii zbMATH Google Scholar Artists RKD Artists FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Te Papa (New Zealand) Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_Stuart_Mill&oldid=1306363563 " Categories : John Stuart Mill 1806 births 1873 deaths 19th-century English essayists 19th-century English philosophers 19th-century English writers 19th-century British autobiographers Anglo-Scots British classical liberal economists British free speech activists British radicals British male feminists British philosophers of logic British philosophers of mind British philosophy writers British social liberals British social philosophers Consequentialists Empiricists English agnostics English autobiographers English ethicists English feminist writers English libertarians English logicians English male essayists English male non-fiction writers English non-fiction writers English people of Scottish descent English philosophers of language English philosophers of science English political philosophers English political writers English republicans English socialist feminists English socialists English suffragists European democratic socialists Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Feminist economists Honorary Fellows of the Royal Society of Edinburgh Individualist feminists Infectious disease deaths in France International members of the American Philosophical Society Liberal Party (UK) MPs for English constituencies Logicians National Society for Women's Suffrage People associated with criticism of economic growth People from Pentonville Philosophers of culture Philosophers of economics Philosophers of history Philosophers of psychology Philosophers of sexuality Rectors of the University of St Andrews Scholars of feminist philosophy Theorists on Western civilization UK MPs 1865–1868 Utilitarians Voting theorists Hidden categories: CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from March 2023 Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from August 2023 Use dmy dates from November 2022 Articles with hCards Pages using infobox economist as a module Biography with signature Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from October 2023 CS1 maint: publisher location Articles incorporating Cite DNB template CS1 errors: ISBN date Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference CS1: long volume value Pages using Sister project links with default search Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Articles with excerpts Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 10:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents John Stuart Mill 92 languages Add topic

