Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Psychological and health effects 2 Development of the concept 3 Cause 4 Online 5 In the workplace 6 At school 7 In academia 8 Checklists 9 Counteracting 10 Persecutory delusions 11 See also 12 References 13 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Mobbing 44 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ქართული Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски მარგალური Монгол Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Bullying of an individual by a group This article is about mobbing in relation to human bullying behaviour. For mobbing as an antipredatory animal behaviour, see Mobbing (animal behavior) . For political control by a mass of ordinary people, see Mob rule . For mobbing as a crime in Scots law, see Mobbing (Scots law) . For the software development technique, see Mob programming .

Mobbing , as a sociological term, refers either to bullying in any context, or specifically to that within the workplace, especially when perpetrated by a group rather than an individual.

[ 1 ] Psychological and health effects [ edit ] Victims of workplace mobbing frequently suffer from: adjustment disorders , somatic symptoms, psychological trauma (e.g., trauma tremors or sudden onset selective mutism ), post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), or major depression .

[ 2 ] In mobbing targets with PTSD, Leymann notes that the "mental effects were fully comparable with PTSD from war or prison camp experiences." Some patients may develop alcoholism or other substance abuse disorders. Family relationships routinely suffer and victims sometimes display acts of aggression towards strangers in the street. Workplace targets and witnesses may even develop brief psychotic episodes (see Occupational psychosis ) , generally with paranoid symptoms. Leymann estimated that 15% of suicides in Sweden could be directly attributed to workplace mobbing.

[ 2 ] Development of the concept [ edit ] Konrad Lorenz , in his book entitled On Aggression (1966), first described mobbing among birds and other animals, attributing it to instincts rooted in the Darwinian struggle to thrive (see animal mobbing behavior ). In his view, most humans are subject to similar innate impulses but capable of bringing them under rational control.

[ 3 ] Lorenz's explanation for his choice of the English word "mobbing" was omitted in the English translation by Marjorie Kerr Wilson. According to Kenneth Westhues , Lorenz chose the word "mobbing" because he remembered in the collective attack by birds, the old German term hassen auf , which means "to hate after" or "to put a hate on" was applied and this emphasised "the depth of antipathy with which the attack is made" rather than the English word 'mobbing' which emphasised the collective aspect of the attack.

[ 4 ] In the 1970s, the Swedish physician Peter-Paul Heinemann [ sv ; de ; pl ] applied Lorenz's conceptualization to the collective aggression of children against a targeted child.

[ 3 ] In the 1980s, professor and practising psychologist Heinz Leymann applied the term to ganging up in the workplace.

[ 3 ] In 2011, anthropologist Janice Harper suggested that some anti-bullying approaches effectively constitute a form of mobbing by using the label "bully" to dehumanize, encouraging people to shun and avoid people labeled bullies, and in some cases sabotage their work or refuse to work with them, while almost always calling for their exclusion and termination from employment.

[ 5 ] Cause [ edit ] Janice Harper followed her Huffington Post essay with a series of essays in both The Huffington Post [ 6 ] and in her column "Beyond Bullying: Peacebuilding at Work, School and Home" in Psychology Today [ 7 ] that argued that mobbing is a form of group aggression innate to primates , and that those who engage in mobbing are not necessarily "evil" or "psychopathic", but responding in a predictable and patterned manner when someone in a position of leadership or influence communicates to the group that someone must go. For that reason, she indicated that anyone can and will engage in mobbing, and that once mobbing gets underway, just as in the animal kingdom it will almost always continue and intensify as long as the target remains with the group. She subsequently published a book on the topic [ 8 ] in which she explored animal behavior, organizational cultures and historical forms of group aggression, suggesting that mobbing is a form of group aggression on a continuum of structural violence with genocide as the most extreme form of mob aggression.

Online [ edit ] See also: Cyberstalking § By anonymous online mobs , and Cyberbullying Social networking sites and blogs have enabled anonymous groups to coordinate and attack other people. The victims of these groups can be targeted by various attacks and threats, sometimes causing the victims to use pseudonyms or go offline to avoid them.

[ 9 ] Herd mentality and cyberbullying are common on social media platforms. The "social media mob" that formed may evolve to "bullying anyone who didn’t align with their beliefs or conclusions".

[ 10 ] In the workplace [ edit ] Main article: Workplace bullying British anti-bullying researchers Andrea Adams and Tim Field have used the expression "workplace bullying" instead of what Leymann called "mobbing" in a workplace context. They identify mobbing as a particular type of bullying that is not as apparent as most, defining it as "an emotional assault. It begins when an individual becomes the target of disrespectful and harmful behavior. Through innuendo , rumors, and public discrediting, a hostile environment is created in which one individual gathers others to willingly, or unwillingly, participate in continuous malevolent actions to force a person out of the workplace." [ 11 ] Adams and Field believe that mobbing is typically found in work environments that have poorly organised production or working methods and incapable or inattentive management and that mobbing victims are usually "exceptional individuals who demonstrated intelligence, competence, creativity, integrity, accomplishment and dedication".

[ 11 ] In contrast, Janice Harper [ 8 ] suggests that workplace mobbing is typically found in organizations where there is limited opportunity for employees to exit, whether through tenure systems or contracts that make it difficult to terminate an employee (such as universities or unionized organizations), and/or where finding comparable work in the same community makes it difficult for the employee to voluntarily leave (such as academic positions, religious institutions, or military). In these employments, efforts to eliminate the worker will intensify to push the worker out against his or her will through shunning, sabotage, false accusations and a series of investigations and poor reviews. Another form of employment where workers are mobbed are those that require the use of uniforms or other markers of group inclusion (law enforcement, fire fighting, military), organizations where a single gender has predominated, but another gender is beginning to enter (STEM fields, fire fighting, military, nursing, teaching, and construction). Finally, she suggests that organizations where there are limited opportunities for advancement can be prone to mobbing because those who do advance are more likely to view challenges to their leadership as threats to their precarious positions. Harper further challenges the idea that workers are targeted for their exceptional competence. In some cases, she suggests, exceptional workers are mobbed because they are viewed as threatening to someone, but some workers who are mobbed are not necessarily good workers. Rather, Harper contends, some mobbing targets are outcasts or unproductive workers who cannot easily be terminated, and are thus treated inhumanely to push them out. While Harper emphasizes the cruelty and damaging consequences of mobbing, her organizational analysis focuses on the structural, rather than moral, nature of the organization. Moreover, she views the behavior itself, which she terms workplace aggression, as grounded in group psychology, rather than individual psychosis—even when the mobbing is initiated due to a leader's personal psychosis, the dynamics of group aggression will transform the leader's bullying into group mobbing—two vastly distinct psychological and social phenomena.

Shallcross, Ramsay and Barker consider workplace "mobbing" to be a generally unfamiliar term in some English speaking countries. Some researchers claim that mobbing is simply another name for bullying. Workplace mobbing can be considered as a " virus " or a " cancer " that spreads throughout the workplace via gossip , rumour and unfounded accusations . It is a deliberate attempt to force a person out of their workplace by humiliation , general harassment , emotional abuse and/or terror . Mobbing can be described as being "ganged up on." Mobbing is executed by a leader (who can be a manager, a co-worker, or a subordinate). The leader then rallies others into a systematic and frequent "mob-like" behaviour toward the victim.

[ 12 ] Mobbing as "downward bullying" by superiors is also known as "bossing", and "upward bullying" by colleagues as "staffing", in some European countries, for instance, in German-speaking regions.

[ 13 ] At school [ edit ] See also: School bullying Following on from the work of Heinemann, Elliot identifies mobbing as a common phenomenon in the form of group bullying at school. It involves "ganging up" on someone using tactics of rumor , innuendo , discrediting , isolating , intimidating , and above all, making it look as if the targeted person is responsible ( victim blaming ).

[ 14 ] It is to be distinguished from normal conflicts (between pupils of similar standing and power), which are an integral part of everyday school life.

[ 15 ] In academia [ edit ] See also: Bullying in academia Kenneth Westhues ' study of mobbing in academia found that vulnerability was increased by personal differences such as being a foreigner or of a different sex; by working in fields such as music or literature which have recently come under the sway of less objective and more post-modern scholarship; financial pressure; or having an aggressive superior.

[ 16 ] Other factors included envy , heresy and campus politics .

[ 16 ] Checklists [ edit ] Sociologists and authors have created checklists and other tools to identify mobbing behaviour.

[ 14 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] Common approaches to assessing mobbing behavior is through quantifying frequency of mobbing behavior based on a given definition of the behavior or through quantifying what respondents believe encompasses mobbing behavior. These are referred to as "self-labeling" and "behavior experience" methods respectively.

[ 19 ] Limitations of some mobbing examination tools are: Participant exhaustion due to examination length Limited sample exposure resulting in limited result generalizability Confounding with constructs that result in the same affect as mobbing but are not purposely harmful Common Tools used to measure mobbing behavior are: Leyman Inventory of Psychological Terror [ 20 ] (LIPT) Negative Acts Questionnaire – Revised [ 21 ] (NAQ-R) Luxembourg Workplace Mobbing Scale [ 19 ] (LWMS) Counteracting [ edit ] From an organizational perspective, it has been suggested that mobbing behavior can be curtailed by acknowledging behaviors as mobbing behaviors and that such behaviors result in harm and/or negative consequences.

[ 22 ] Precise definitions of such traits are critical due to ambiguity of unacceptable and acceptable behaviors potentially leading to unintentional mobbing behavior. Attenuation of mobbing behavior can further be enhanced by developing policies that explicitly address specific behaviors that are culturally accepted to result in harm or negative affect.

[ 23 ] This provides a framework from which mobbing victims can respond to mobbing. Lack of such a framework may result in a situation where each instance of mobbing is treated on an individual basis with no recourse of prevention. It may also indicate that such behaviors are warranted and within the realm of acceptable behavior within an organization.

[ 24 ] Direct responses to grievances related to mobbing that are handled outside of a courtroom and training programs outlining antibully-countermeasures also demonstrate a reduction in mobbing behavior.

[ citation needed ] Persecutory delusions [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Gang stalking .

[ edit ] Gang stalking or group-stalking is a set of persecutory beliefs in which those affected believe they are being followed, stalked , and harassed by a large number of people.

[ 25 ] The term is associated with the virtual community formed by people who consider themselves "targeted individuals" ("T.I."), claiming their lives are disrupted from being stalked by organized groups intent on causing them harm.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] See also [ edit ] Look up mobbing in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Cyberbullying Group narcissism Industrial and organizational psychology Lynch mob Ochlocracy Occupational health psychology Real estate mobbing Relational aggression Scapegoating Swatting Stalking Victim blaming Victimisation References [ edit ] ^ "Bullying vs mobbing" .

www.kwesthues.com . Retrieved 21 March 2024 .

^ a b Hillard JR Workplace mobbing: Are they really out to get your patient?

Archived 9 May 2010 at the Wayback Machine Current Psychiatry Volume 8 Number 4 April 2009 Pages 45–51 ^ a b c "Workplace Mobbing in Academe" .

arts.uwaterloo.ca . Archived from the original on 12 August 2011 . Retrieved 19 July 2006 .

^ Westhues, Kenneth.(2007) Mobbing a Natural Fact , Adapted and revised from "Mobbing am akademischen Arbeitsplatz," a lecture given in the Society for Sociology at the University of Graz, Austria, on 23 January 2007, Retrieved on 17 August 2018 ^ Harper, Janice (1 November 2011).

"The Bully Label Has to Go" .

HuffPost .

^ "Janice Harper – HuffPost" .

www.huffingtonpost.com .

^ "Beyond Bullying" .

Psychology Today .

^ a b PhD, Janice Harper (2013).

Mobbed!: What to Do When They Really Are Out to Get You . Backdoor Press.

ISBN 978-0692693339 .

^ Citron, Danielle Keats (February 2009).

"Cyber Civil Rights" (PDF) .

Boston University Law Review . 61.

89 : 62. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 November 2013 . Retrieved 28 July 2022 .

^ "Mohbad Death And The Online Mob Mentality" .

Leadership News . 30 September 2023 . Retrieved 9 December 2024 .

Ironically, many of those supporting MohBad, alleging that he was bullied by Naira Marley and his crew, are among the most prominent bullies on social media. It is essential to emphasize that it is perfectly acceptable to hold different opinions, support different political candidates, or have contrary viewpoints. Succumbing to the pressure of online fascists who have turned social media into a battleground for those with dissenting opinions is not the solution ^ a b Davenport NZ, Schwartz RD & Elliott GP Mobbing, Emotional Abuse in the American Workplace , 3rd ed., 2005, Civil Society Publishing. Ames, IA, ^ Shallcross, L, Ramsay, S, & Barker M, (2008) Workplace Mobbing: Expulsion, Exclusion, and Transformation Archived 13 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine , retrieved 17 May 2010 ^ Oberhofer, P Bossing und Staffing , retrieved 25 November 2015 ^ a b Gail Pursell Elliott (2003).

School Mobbing and Emotional Abuse: See It – Stop It – Prevent It (with dignity and respect) . Taylor & Francis. p. 14.

ISBN 978-0-203-49861-3 .

^ Burger, C. (2022).

"School bullying is not a conflict: The interplay between conflict management styles, bullying victimization and psychological school adjustment" .

International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health .

19 (18): 11809.

doi : 10.3390/ijerph191811809 .

ISSN 1661-7827 .

PMC 9517642 .

PMID 36142079 .

^ a b Workplace Bullying in the Academic World?

, Higher Education Development Association, 13 May 2007, archived from the original on 24 July 2011 ^ Westhues K.

Checklist of Mobbing Indicators Archived 13 June 2010 at the Wayback Machine 2006 ^ Margaret R. Kohut (2008).

The Complete Guide to Understanding, Controlling, and Stopping Bullies & Bullying at Work: A Complete Guide for Managers, Supervisors, and Co-workers . Atlantic Publishing Company. p. 171.

ISBN 978-1-60138-236-8 .

^ a b Steffgen, Georges; Sischka, Philipp; Schmidt, Alexander; Kohl, Diane; Happ, Christian (2016).

"The Luxembourg Workplace Mobbing Scale" (PDF) .

European Journal of Psychological Assessment .

35 (2): 164– 171.

doi : 10.1027/1015-5759/a000381 .

S2CID 54649984 .

^ Leymann, Heinz (1996). "Leymann Inventory of Psychological Terror".

Tübingen: Deutsche Gellschaft für Verhaltenstherapie Verlag .

^ Einarsen, Staale; Hoel, Helge; Notelaers, Guy (2009). "Measuring exposure to bullying and harassment at work: Validity, factor structure and psychometric properties of the Negative Acts Questionnaire-Revised".

Work & Stress .

23 : 24– 44.

doi : 10.1080/02678370902815673 .

S2CID 145212957 .

^ Sperry, Len (2009). "Workplace mobbing and bullying: a consulting psychology perspective and overview".

Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research .

61 (3): 165– 168.

doi : 10.1037/a0016936 .

^ Duffy, Maureen (2009). "Preventing workplace mobbing and bullying with effective organizational consultation, policies, and legislation".

Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research .

61 (3): 242– 262.

doi : 10.1037/a0016783 .

^ Ferris, Patricia (2009). "The role of the consulting psychologist in the prevention, detection, and correction of bullying and mobbing in the workplace".

Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research .

61 (3): 169– 189.

doi : 10.1037/a0016783 .

^ Lustig, A; Brookes, G; Hunt, D (5 March 2021).

"Linguistic Analysis of Online Communication About a Novel Persecutory Belief System (Gangstalking): Mixed Methods Study" .

Journal of Medical Internet Research .

23 (3): e25722.

doi : 10.2196/25722 .

PMC 7980115 .

PMID 33666560 .

^ Mcphate, Mike (10 June 2016).

"United States of Paranoia: They See Gangs of Stalkers" .

The New York Times . New York City.

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 20 August 2016 .

^ Flatley, Joseph (2 February 2017).

"Paranoid delusions in the police state" .

The Outline .

Further reading [ edit ] Croteau, Jeanne (1 February 2019).

"Social Media And The Mob Mentality: How We Can Fight It" .

Forbes . Retrieved 22 February 2025 .

What We Can Do …  individual level … Do your research before forming an opinion and be open to additional information ... Get comfortable with standing out, even if that means standing alone ... Your courage could ... Stop ignoring bullies ...

Maureen P. Duffy ; Len Sperry (2012).

Mobbing: Causes, Consequences, and Solutions . New York: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-538001-9 .

Davenport NZ, Schwartz RD & Elliott GP Mobbing, Emotional Abuse in the American Workplace , 3rd ed., 2005, Civil Society Publishing. Ames, IA, Hecker, Thomas E. (2007). "Workplace Mobbing: A Discussion for Librarians".

The Journal of Academic Librarianship .

33 (4): 439– 445.

doi : 10.1016/j.acalib.2007.03.003 .

Shallcross L., Ramsay S. & Barker M.

"Workplace Mobbing: Expulsion, Exclusion, and Transformation (2008) (blind peer reviewed) Australia and New Zealand Academy of Management Conference (ANZAM) Westhues .

Eliminating Professors: A Guide to the Dismissal Process .

Lewiston, New York : Edwin Mellen Press .

Westhues K The Envy of Excellence: Administrative Mobbing of High-Achieving Professors Lewiston, New York : Edwin Mellen Press .

Westhues K "At the Mercy of the Mob" OHS Canada, Canada's Occupational Health & Safety Magazine (18:8), pp. 30–36.

Institute for education of works councils Germany – Information about Mobbing, Mediation and conflict resolution Archived 19 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine (German) Zapf D. & Einarsen S. 2005 "Mobbing at Work: Escalated Conflicts in Organizations." Counterproductive Work Behavior : Investigations of Actors and Targets. Fox, Suzy & Spector, Paul E. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. p. vii v t e Aspects of workplaces Topics Absenteeism Abusive supervision Aggression Anti-pattern Artificial intelligence Bullying Climate Culture Computer surveillance Conflict Control freak Counterproductive behaviour Coworking Culture of fear Democracy Deviance Discrimination Diversity Divide and rule Drug tests Effects of overtime Emotional labor Emotions Employee assistance Employee engagement Employee experience Employee monitoring Employee morale Employee recognition Employee silence Employee surveys Empowerment Evaluation Feminisation Generations Goofing off Gossip Happiness Harassment Health promotion Health surveillance Hostile work environment Humor Incivility Inequality Intervention Jargon Kick the cat Kiss up kick down Listening Machiavellianism Menopause Micromanagement Mobbing Narcissism Office politics Overwork Parkinson's law Performance appraisal Personality clash Phobia Positive psychology Privacy Probation Profanity Psychopathy Quality of working life Queen bee syndrome Rat race Relationships Revenge Robotics safety Role conflict Sabotage Spirituality Strategy Stress Toxic workplace Toxic leader Training Turnover Undermining Violence Virtual Wellness Work–family conflict Workload Workplace harassment Workwear See also Corporation Employment Factory Headquarters Job Job sharing Labour movement Labor rights Office Organization Remote work Strike action Trade union Whistleblower Templates Aspects of corporations Aspects of jobs Aspects of occupations Aspects of organizations Employment v t e Bullying Types Abusive supervision Cyberbullying Disability bullying Displaced aggression Doxing LGBTQ bullying Hazing Military bullying Mobbing Parental bullying of children Peer victimization Prison bullying Rank Relational aggression School bullying Higher education Sexual bullying Workplace harassment Workplace bullying Academia Information technology Legal aspects Legal profession Medicine Nursing Teaching Toxic leader Toxic workplace Elements Betrayal Blacklisting Bullying and emotional intelligence Cancel culture Character assassination Coercion Culture of fear Defamation Destabilisation Discrediting Embarrassment False accusation Gaslighting Gossip Harassment Humiliation Incivility Intimidation Kiss up kick down Mind games Moving the goalposts Nagging Name calling Personal attacks Physical abuse Psychological abuse Rudeness Sarcasm Screaming Shame Smear campaign Social exclusion Social undermining Swatting Taunting Workplace incivility Verbal abuse Organizations Act Against Bullying Ban Bossy Bullying UK Bystander Revolution Canadian Centre for Gender and Sexual Diversity Ditch the Label GRIN Campaign It Gets Better Project Kidscape Society Against Violence in Education Experts Academics Anna Costanza Baldry Wendy Craig Dorothy Espelage David P. Farrington Shelley Hymel Heinz Leymann Gary Namie James O'Higgins Norman Dan Olweus Debra Pepler Christina Salmivalli Kenneth Westhues Activists Andrea Adams Louise Burfitt-Dons Tim Field SuEllen Fried Liam Hackett Lizzie Velásquez Actions Anti-Bullying Day Anti-Bullying Week Anti-bullying legislation International Day of Pink International Stand Up to Bullying Day Think Before You Speak Notable suicides ( List ) William Arthur Gibbs (1877) Kelly Yeomans (1997) Hamed Nastoh (2000) Dawn-Marie Wesley (2000) Nicola Ann Raphael (2001) Ryan Halligan (2003) Megan Meier (2006) Sladjana Vidovic (2008) Phoebe Prince (2010) Tyler Clementi (2010) Jamey Rodemeyer (2011) Jamie Hubley (2011) Kenneth Weishuhn (2012) Audrie Pott (2012) Amanda Todd (2012) Jadin Bell (2013) Rehtaeh Parsons (2013) Rebecca Sedwick (2013) Leelah Alcorn (2014) Conrad Roy (2014) Tyrone Unsworth (2016) Murder–suicides (incidents) Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold Columbine , 1999 Jeff Weise Red Lake , 2005 Seung-Hui Cho Virginia Tech , 2007 Pekka-Eric Auvinen Jokela High School , 2007 Matti Juhani Saari Kauhajoki School of Hospitality , 2008 Jose Horacio Reyes Sparks Middle School , 2013 Elliot Rodger Isla Vista , 2014 Related topics Emotional blackmail Just-world fallacy List of LGBT-related suicides Machiavellianism in the workplace Narcissism in the workplace Personal boundaries Personality disorders Playing the victim Psychopathy in the workplace Scapegoating Self-esteem Social dominance orientation Suicide among LGBTQ people Victim blaming Victimisation Victimology v t e Abuse Types Adverse childhood experiences Anti-social behaviour Bullying Child abuse neglect sexual military marriage Cruelty to animals Disability abuse military draft Domestic abuse Elder abuse Financial Marriage Gaslighting Harassment Humiliation Incivility Institutional abuse Intimidation Neglect Persecution Professional abuse Psychological abuse Physical abuse Police brutality Religious abuse Social abuse Sexual abuse Stalking Structural abuse Substance abuse Alcohol abuse Surveillance abuse Referee and umpire abuse Verbal abuse more...

Related topics Abusive supervision Abuse of power Controlling behavior Complex post-traumatic stress disorder Dehumanization Denial Destabilisation Discrimination Exaggeration Just-world fallacy Lying Manipulation Minimisation Narcissism Playing the victim Psychological projection Psychological trauma Psychopathy Rationalization Sexual grooming Traumatic bonding Victim blaming Victimisation Victimology v t e Manipulation (psychology) Positive manipulation Big lie Brainwashing Bribery Disinformation Flattery Love bombing Predatory marriage Propaganda Seduction Sexual grooming Negative manipulation Bullying Character assassination Coercion Intimidation Mind games Mobbing Smear campaign Social rejection Other manipulation Entrapment Gaslighting Good cop, bad cop Indoctrination Influence-for-hire Interrogation Spin (propaganda) Related manipulation topics Boosting Crowd manipulation Confidence trick Internet manipulation Market manipulation Media manipulation Nudge theory Shill Undue influence Emotional blackmail Guilt trip Passive-aggressive behavior v t e Conformity Enforcement Proscription Damnatio memoriae Dissident / Dissenter Exile Émigré Homo sacer Ostracism Blacklisting Cancel culture Censorship Deplatforming Outcast Outlaw Civil death Vogelfrei Persona non grata Public enemy Enemy of the people Enemy of the state Scapegoating Shunning Governmental pressure Authoritarianism Harmonisation of law Nationalism Left-wing nationalism National conservatism Totalitarianism Tyranny of the majority Group pressure Bandwagon effect Brainwashing Closure (sociology) Collectivism Consensus reality Culture shock Dogma Echo chamber False consensus effect Fear of missing out Groupthink Hazing Herd mentality Identification (psychology) Indoctrination Invented tradition Memory conformity Mere-exposure effect Milieu control Mobbing Normalization Normative social influence Passing (sociology) Patriotism Peer pressure Pluralistic ignorance Propaganda Psychosocial issue Purity spiral Operant conditioning Rally 'round the flag effect Social construction of gender Social contagion Addiction Behavioral Crime Hysterical Suicide Emotional Social influence Social integration Socialization Spiral of silence Teasing Toxic positivity Untouchability Individual pressure Authoritarian personality Authoritarian leadership style Right-wing authoritarianism Control freak Obsessive–compulsive personality disorder Conformity Compliance Communal reinforcement Countersignaling Creeping normality Herd behavior Internalization Normalization of deviance Obedience Preference falsification Social proof Social reality Experiments Asch conformity experiments Breaching experiment Milgram experiment Stanford prison experiment Anticonformity Alternative media Anti-authoritarianism Anti-social behaviour Self-segregation Civil disobedience Cosmopolitanism Counterculture Culture jamming Deviance Devil's advocate Dissent / Defection Political Eccentricity Eclecticism Hermit Idiosyncrasy Individualism Insubordination Pueblo clown Rebellion Red team Satire Shock value v t e Media and human factors Cognitive psychology Externality Evolutionary psychology Behavioral modernity Cognition Mismatch Media psychology Media studies Social psychology Media practices Betteridge's law of headlines Gatekeeping Infotainment Human-interest story Junk food news Least objectionable program Soft media Journalistic scandal Media bias Media manipulation Pink-slime journalism Political endorsement Propaganda Public relations Missing white woman syndrome News values Sensationalism Hot take Spiking Tabloid television Yellow journalism Attention Attention economy Attention inequality Attention management Attention span Chumbox Clickbait Cognitive miser Low information voter Digital zombie Phubbing Doomscrolling Human multitasking Media multitasking Mobile phones and driving safety Smartphones and pedestrian safety Texting while driving Influence-for-hire Infodemic Information explosion Information overload Information pollution Information–action ratio Rage farming Screen time Binge-watching Television consumption Sticky content Cognitive bias / Conformity Availability cascade Availability heuristic Bandwagon effect Confirmation bias Crowd psychology Mobbing Moral panic Mean world syndrome Negativity bias Peer pressure Social-desirability bias Social influence bias Spiral of silence Digital divide / Political polarization Algorithmic radicalization Youth Echo chamber Fake news website Post-truth politics United States Filter bubble Knowledge divide Knowledge gap hypothesis Political polarization in the United States Social media use in politics United States 2016 U.S. presidential election 2020 U.S. presidential election Related topics Computer rage Criticism of Facebook 2021 Facebook company files leak Facebook–Cambridge Analytica data scandal Criticism of Netflix Cultural impact of TikTok Digital media use and mental health Effects of violence in mass media Fascination with death Griefer Mass shooting contagion Psychological effects of Internet use Sealioning Social aspects of television Social bot Social impact of YouTube Technophilia Neophile Technophobia Violence and video games Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐vwvbc
Cached time: 20250812001156
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.634 seconds
Real time usage: 0.755 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3022/1000000
Revision size: 23450/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 162386/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3112/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 148272/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.362/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7399483/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  555.742      1 -total
 36.57%  203.253      1 Template:Reflist
 18.02%  100.152      8 Template:Cite_web
 15.54%   86.357      8 Template:Navbox
 11.63%   64.641      1 Template:Aspects_of_workplaces
  9.53%   52.973     10 Template:Cite_journal
  9.52%   52.906      1 Template:Excerpt
  9.28%   51.547      1 Template:Short_description
  5.01%   27.843      2 Template:Pagetype
  4.87%   27.075      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:355559:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812001156 and revision id 1297044066. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mobbing&oldid=1297044066 " Categories : Abuse Aggression Harassment and bullying Interpersonal conflict Injustice Persecution Group processes Occupational health psychology Stalking 1960s neologisms Majority–minority relations Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1:Vancouver names with accept markup Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2019 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2018 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 21:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mobbing 44 languages Add topic

