Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Characteristics 2 History 3 Generalized semantics 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Classical logic 25 languages Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Italiano Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Slovenčina Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Class of formal logics Classical logic (or standard logic ) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] or Frege–Russell logic [ 3 ] is the intensively studied and most widely used class of deductive logic .

[ 4 ] Classical logic has had much influence on analytic philosophy .

Characteristics [ edit ] Each logical system in this class shares characteristic properties: [ 5 ] Law of excluded middle and double negation elimination Law of noncontradiction , and the principle of explosion Monotonicity of entailment and idempotency of entailment Commutativity of conjunction De Morgan duality : every logical operator is dual to another While not entailed by the preceding conditions, contemporary discussions of classical logic normally only include propositional and first-order logics.

[ 4 ] [ 6 ] In other words, the overwhelming majority of time spent studying classical logic has been spent studying specifically propositional and first-order logic, as opposed to the other forms of classical logic.

Most semantics of classical logic are bivalent , meaning all of the possible denotations of propositions can be categorized as either true or false.

History [ edit ] Main article: History of logic Classical logic is a 19th and 20th-century innovation. The name does not refer to classical antiquity , which used the term logic of Aristotle . Classical logic was the reconciliation of Aristotle's logic, which dominated most of the last 2000 years, with the propositional Stoic logic . The two were sometimes seen as irreconcilable.

Leibniz 's calculus ratiocinator can be seen as foreshadowing classical logic.

Bernard Bolzano has the understanding of existential import found in classical logic and not in Aristotle. Though he never questioned Aristotle, George Boole 's algebraic reformulation of logic, so-called Boolean logic , was a predecessor of modern mathematical logic and classical logic.

William Stanley Jevons and John Venn , who also had the modern understanding of existential import, expanded Boole's system.

Begriffsschrift title page The original first-order , classical logic is found in Gottlob Frege 's Begriffsschrift . It has a wider application than Aristotle's logic and is capable of expressing Aristotle's logic as a special case. It explains the quantifiers in terms of mathematical functions. It was also the first logic capable of dealing with the problem of multiple generality , for which Aristotle's system was impotent. Frege, who is considered the founder of analytic philosophy, invented it to show all of mathematics was derivable from logic, and make arithmetic rigorous as David Hilbert had done for geometry , the doctrine is known as logicism in the foundations of mathematics . The notation Frege used never much caught on.

Hugh MacColl published a variant of propositional logic two years prior.

The writings of Augustus De Morgan and Charles Sanders Peirce also pioneered classical logic with the logic of relations. Peirce influenced Giuseppe Peano and Ernst Schröder .

Classical logic reached fruition in Bertrand Russell and A. N. Whitehead 's Principia Mathematica , and Ludwig Wittgenstein 's Tractatus Logico Philosophicus . Russell and Whitehead were influenced by Peano (it uses his notation) and Frege and sought to show mathematics was derived from logic. Wittgenstein was influenced by Frege and Russell and initially considered the Tractatus to have solved all problems of philosophy.

Willard Van Orman Quine believed that a formal system that allows quantification over predicates ( higher-order logic ) didn't meet the requirements to be a logic, saying that it was " set theory in disguise".

Classical logic is the standard logic of mathematics. Many mathematical theorems rely on classical rules of inference such as disjunctive syllogism and the double negation elimination . The adjective "classical" in logic is not related to the use of the adjective "classical" in physics, which has another meaning. In logic, "classical" simply means "standard". Classical logic should also not be confused with term logic , also known as Aristotelian logic.

Jan Łukasiewicz pioneered non-classical logic .

Generalized semantics [ edit ] With the advent of algebraic logic , it became apparent that classical propositional calculus admits other semantics . In Boolean-valued semantics (for classical propositional logic ), the truth values are the elements of an arbitrary Boolean algebra ; "true" corresponds to the maximal element of the algebra, and "false" corresponds to the minimal element. Intermediate elements of the algebra correspond to truth values other than "true" and "false". The principle of bivalence holds only when the Boolean algebra is taken to be the two-element algebra , which has no intermediate elements.

References [ edit ] ^ Nicholas Bunnin; Jiyuan Yu (2004).

The Blackwell dictionary of Western philosophy . Wiley-Blackwell. p. 266.

ISBN 978-1-4051-0679-5 .

^ L. T. F. Gamut (1991).

Logic, language, and meaning, Volume 1: Introduction to Logic . University of Chicago Press. pp.

156– 157.

ISBN 978-0-226-28085-1 .

^ Akihiro Kanamori (2000).

"Introduction" .

Proceedings of the Twentieth World Congress of Philosophy . Vol. 6. Philosophy Documentation Center.

^ a b Shapiro, Stewart (2000). Classical Logic. In Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy [Web]. Stanford: The Metaphysics Research Lab. Retrieved October 28, 2006, from http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/logic-classical/ ^ Gabbay, Dov , (1994). 'Classical vs non-classical logic'. In D.M. Gabbay, C.J. Hogger, and J.A. Robinson, (Eds), Handbook of Logic in Artificial Intelligence and Logic Programming , volume 2, chapter 2.6. Oxford University Press.

^ Haack, Susan , (1996).

Deviant Logic, Fuzzy Logic: Beyond the Formalism . Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

Further reading [ edit ] Media related to Classical logic at Wikimedia Commons Warren Goldfarb, "Deductive Logic", 1st edition, 2003, ISBN 0-87220-660-2 v t e Classical logic General Quantifiers Predicate Connective Tautology Truth tables Truth function Truth value Well-formed formula Logicism Problem of multiple generality Associativity Distribution Validity Soundness Classical logics Term Propositional First-order Second-order Higher-order Principles Commutativity of conjunction Excluded middle Bivalence Noncontradiction Monotonicity of entailment Explosion Rules De Morgan's laws Material implication Transposition modus ponens modus tollens modus ponendo tollens Constructive dilemma Destructive dilemma Disjunctive syllogism Hypothetical syllogism Absorption Introduction Negation Double negation Existential Universal Biconditional Conjunction Disjunction Elimination Double negation Existential Universal Biconditional Conjunction Disjunction People Bernard Bolzano George Boole Georg Cantor Richard Dedekind Augustus De Morgan Gottlob Frege Kurt Gödel Hugh MacColl Giuseppe Peano Charles Sanders Peirce Bertrand Russell Ernst Schröder Henry M. Sheffer Alfred Tarski Willard Van Orman Quine Ludwig Wittgenstein Jan Łukasiewicz Works Begriffsschrift Function and Concept The Principles of Mathematics Principia Mathematica Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus v t e Mathematical logic General Axiom list Cardinality First-order logic Formal proof Formal semantics Foundations of mathematics Information theory Lemma Logical consequence Model Theorem Theory Type theory Theorems ( list ) and paradoxes Gödel's completeness and incompleteness theorems Tarski's undefinability Banach–Tarski paradox Cantor's theorem, paradox and diagonal argument Compactness Halting problem Lindström's Löwenheim–Skolem Russell's paradox Logics Traditional Classical logic Logical truth Tautology Proposition Inference Logical equivalence Consistency Equiconsistency Argument Soundness Validity Syllogism Square of opposition Venn diagram Propositional Boolean algebra Boolean functions Logical connectives Propositional calculus Propositional formula Truth tables Many-valued logic 3 finite ∞ Predicate First-order list Second-order Monadic Higher-order Fixed-point Free Quantifiers Predicate Monadic predicate calculus Set theory Set hereditary Class ( Ur- ) Element Ordinal number Extensionality Forcing Relation equivalence partition Set operations: intersection union complement Cartesian product power set identities Types of sets Countable Uncountable Empty Inhabited Singleton Finite Infinite Transitive Ultrafilter Recursive Fuzzy Universal Universe constructible Grothendieck Von Neumann Maps and cardinality Function / Map domain codomain image In / Sur / Bi -jection Schröder–Bernstein theorem Isomorphism Gödel numbering Enumeration Large cardinal inaccessible Aleph number Operation binary Set theories Zermelo–Fraenkel axiom of choice continuum hypothesis General Kripke–Platek Morse–Kelley Naive New Foundations Tarski–Grothendieck Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Ackermann Constructive Formal systems ( list ), language and syntax Alphabet Arity Automata Axiom schema Expression ground Extension by definition conservative Relation Formation rule Grammar Formula atomic closed ground open Free/bound variable Language Metalanguage Logical connective ¬ ∨ ∧ → ↔ = Predicate functional variable propositional variable Proof Quantifier ∃ !

∀ rank Sentence atomic spectrum Signature String Substitution Symbol function logical/constant non-logical variable Term Theory list Example axiomatic systems ( list ) of arithmetic : Peano second-order elementary function primitive recursive Robinson Skolem of the real numbers Tarski's axiomatization of Boolean algebras canonical minimal axioms of geometry : Euclidean : Elements Hilbert's Tarski's non-Euclidean Principia Mathematica Proof theory Formal proof Natural deduction Logical consequence Rule of inference Sequent calculus Theorem Systems axiomatic deductive Hilbert list Complete theory Independence ( from ZFC ) Proof of impossibility Ordinal analysis Reverse mathematics Self-verifying theories Model theory Interpretation function of models Model equivalence finite saturated spectrum submodel Non-standard model of arithmetic Diagram elementary Categorical theory Model complete theory Satisfiability Semantics of logic Strength Theories of truth semantic Tarski's Kripke's T-schema Transfer principle Truth predicate Truth value Type Ultraproduct Validity Computability theory Church encoding Church–Turing thesis Computably enumerable Computable function Computable set Decision problem decidable undecidable P NP P versus NP problem Kolmogorov complexity Lambda calculus Primitive recursive function Recursion Recursive set Turing machine Type theory Related Abstract logic Algebraic logic Automated theorem proving Category theory Concrete / Abstract category Category of sets History of logic History of mathematical logic timeline Logicism Mathematical object Philosophy of mathematics Supertask Mathematics portal Portal : Philosophy Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Classical_logic&oldid=1266662201 " Categories : Classical logic History of logic Logic Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 January 2025, at 17:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Classical logic 25 languages Add topic

