Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History 3 Engineering 4 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 4.1 Examples of causeways around the world 5 Disadvantages Toggle Disadvantages subsection 5.1 Impact to shipping 5.2 Ecological consequences 6 Gallery 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Causeway 20 languages العربية Cymraeg Dansk Español Esperanto فارسی Français हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia ಕನ್ನಡ Limburgs Nederlands Nedersaksies 日本語 Polski Português Simple English தமிழ் ไทย 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Route raised up on an embankment For other uses, see Causeway (disambiguation) .

This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( November 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Causeway The Johor–Singapore Causeway supports over 100 million annual international border crossings.

Ancestor None. (See Ford (crossing) ) Related None. (See Step-stone bridge ) Descendant None. (See Viaduct ) Carries Traffic , Rail , Cyclists, Pedestrians Material Concrete, Masonry, Earth-fill Movable No Design effort medium Falsework required No A causeway is a track, road or railway on the upper point of an embankment across "a low, or wet place, or piece of water".

[ 1 ] It can be constructed of earth, masonry , wood, or concrete. One of the earliest known wooden causeways is the Sweet Track in the Somerset Levels , England, which dates from the Neolithic age.

[ 2 ] Timber causeways may also be described as both boardwalks and bridges .

Etymology [ edit ] Look up rez-de-chaussée or rez , de , or chaussée in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

When first used, the word causeway appeared in a form such as "causey way", making clear its derivation from the earlier form "causey". This word seems to have come from the same source by two different routes. It derives ultimately, from the Latin for heel, calx , and most likely comes from the trampling technique to consolidate earthworks .

Originally, the construction of a causeway used earth that had been trodden upon to compact and harden it as much as possible, one layer at a time, often by slaves or flocks of sheep . Today, this work is done by machines. The same technique would have been used for road embankments, raised river banks, sea banks and fortification earthworks.

The second derivation route is simply the hard, trodden surface of a path. The name by this route came to be applied to any firmly surfaced road. It is now little-used except in dialect and in the names of roads which were originally notable for their solidly made surface. The 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica states: "causey, a mound or dam, which is derived, through the Norman-French caucie (cf. modern chaussée ), [ 3 ] from the late Latin via calciata , a road stamped firm with the feet ( calcare , to tread)." [ 4 ] The word is comparable in both meanings with the French chaussée , from a form of which it reached English by way of Norman French . The French adjective chaussée carries the meaning of having been given a hardened surface and is used to mean either paved or shod. As a noun chaussée is used on the one hand for a metalled carriageway, and on the other for an embankment with or without a road.

Other languages have a noun with similar dual meaning. In Welsh , it is sarn . The Welsh is relevant here, as it also has a verb sarnu , meaning to trample. The trampling and ramming technique for consolidating earthworks was used in fortifications and there is a comparable, outmoded form of wall construction technique, used in such work and known as pisé, a word derived not from trampling but from ramming or tamping. The Welsh word cawsai translates directly to the English word 'causeway'; it is possible that, with Welsh being a lineal linguistic descendant of the original native British tongues, the English word derives from the Welsh.

[ citation needed ] A transport corridor that is carried instead on a series of arches, perhaps approaching a bridge, is a viaduct ; a short stretch of viaduct is called an overpass . The distinction between the terms causeway and viaduct becomes blurred when flood-relief culverts are incorporated, though generally a causeway refers to a roadway supported mostly by earth or stone, while a bridge supports a roadway between piers (which may be embedded in embankments). Some low causeways across shore waters become inaccessible when covered at high tide .

History [ edit ] The Aztec city-state of Tenochtitlan had causeways supporting roads and aqueducts. One of the oldest engineered roads yet discovered is the Sweet Track in England . Built in 3807 or 3806 BC, [ 5 ] the track was a walkway consisting mainly of planks of oak laid end-to-end, supported by crossed pegs of ash , oak, and lime , driven into the underlying peat.

In East Africa , the Husuni Kubwa (the "Great Fort"), situated outside the town of Kilwa , was an early 14th-century sultan's palace and emporium that contained causeways and platforms at the entrance of the Harbour made from blocks of reef and coral nearly a meter high. These acted as breakwaters , allowing mangroves to grow which is one of the ways the breakwater can be spotted from a distance. Some parts of the causeway are made from the bedrock, but usually the bedrock was used as a base. Coral stone was also used to build up the causeways, with sand and lime being used to cement the cobbles together. However, some of the stones were left loose.

[ 6 ] In Scotland , the skirmish known as Clense the Calsey, or Cleanse the Causeway , took place in the High Street of Edinburgh in 1520.

[ 7 ] In the 18th century, Dahomey lacked an effective navy hence it built causeways for naval purposes starting in 1774.

[ 8 ] Engineering [ edit ] Diagram showing how the Wendover Cut-off in Utah was built across salt flats in the early 1920s The modern embankment may be constructed within a cofferdam : two parallel steel sheet pile or concrete retaining walls , anchored to each other with steel cables or rods. This construction may also serve as a dyke that keeps two bodies of water apart, such as bodies with a different water level on each side, or with salt water on one side and fresh water on the other. This may also be the primary purpose of a structure, the road providing a hardened crest for the dike, slowing erosion in the event of an overflow. It also provides access for maintenance as well perhaps, as a public service.

Examples [ edit ] Afsluitdijk with the North Sea on the left and the IJsselmeer on the right Notable causeways include those that connect Singapore and Malaysia (the Johor-Singapore Causeway ), Bahrain and Saudi Arabia (25-km long King Fahd Causeway ) and Venice to the mainland, all of which carry roadways and railways. In the Netherlands there are a number of prominent dikes which also double as causeways, including the Afsluitdijk , Brouwersdam , and Markerwaarddijk . In the Republic of Panama a causeway connects the islands of Perico, Flamenco, and Naos to Panama City on the mainland. It also serves as a breakwater for ships entering the Panama Canal .

Causeways are also common in Florida , where low bridges may connect several human-made islands , often with a much higher bridge (or part of a single bridge) in the middle so that taller boats may pass underneath safely. Causeways are most often used to connect the barrier islands with the mainland . In the case of the Courtney Campbell Causeway , however, the mainland ( Hillsborough County ) is connected by a causeway to a peninsula ( Pinellas County ). A well-known causeway is the NASA Causeway connecting the town of Titusville on the Florida mainland to the rocket-launching facility at the Kennedy Space Center on Merritt Island .

The Churchill Barriers in Orkney are some of the most notable sets of causeways in Europe.  Constructed in waters up to 18 metres deep, the four barriers link five islands on the eastern side of the natural harbour at Scapa Flow . They were built during World War II as military defences for the harbour, on the orders of Winston Churchill .

The Estrada do Istmo connecting the islands of Taipa and Coloane in Macau was initially built as a causeway. The sea on both sides of the causeway then became shallower as a result of silting, and mangroves began to conquer the area.  Later, land reclamation took place on both sides of the road and the area has subsequently been named Cotai and become home to several casino complexes.

Examples of causeways around the world [ edit ] Adam's Bridge , historic causeway which existed until 1480 CE [ dubious – discuss ] Afsluitdijk , Netherlands .

Canso Causeway , Nova Scotia , Canada ( 45°38′39″N 61°25′06″W ﻿ / ﻿ 45.6443°N 61.4184°W ﻿ / 45.6443; -61.4184 ) Churchill Barriers , 4 causeways in Orkney , Scotland Colaba Causeway , Mumbai , India 18°55′N 72°49′E ﻿ / ﻿ 18.91°N 72.81°E ﻿ / 18.91; 72.81 Courtney Campbell Causeway , Tampa Bay , Florida, United States Gaoji Causeway , Xiamen , China Hindenburgdamm , 11km rail link between the island of Sylt and the German mainland ( 54°53′07″N 8°32′25″E ﻿ / ﻿ 54.8852°N 8.5404°E ﻿ / 54.8852; 8.5404 ) Johor–Singapore Causeway ( 1°27′07″N 103°46′12″E ﻿ / ﻿ 1.4520°N 103.7700°E ﻿ / 1.4520; 103.7700 ) King Fahd Causeway , Bahrain , Saudi Arabia ( 26°11′03″N 50°19′27″E ﻿ / ﻿ 26.1841°N 50.3241°E ﻿ / 26.1841; 50.3241 ) Lake Cuitzeo Causeway, Michoacán , Mexico ( 19.9380°N 101.1547°W ) Lake Pontchartrain Causeway , Metairie, Louisiana , Southern; Mandeville, Louisiana , Northern, United States Lucin Cutoff railroad causeway across the Great Salt Lake in Utah, USA MacArthur Causeway , Florida , United States Mahim Causeway , Mumbai , India 19°02′55″N 72°50′17″E ﻿ / ﻿ 19.04871°N 72.83816°E ﻿ / 19.04871; 72.83816 Pulaski Skyway Robert Moses Causeway , Bay Shore , Long Island , New York , United States ( [1] ) Rømødæmningen , 9km link between Rømø , and the Danish mainland Sanibel Causeway , Sanibel , Florida, United States Sloedam , Zeeland , Netherlands Swarkestone causeway, Derby , England, United Kingdom The Causeway , Bermuda The Causeway , Western Australia Venice ( 45°27′13″N 12°17′56″E ﻿ / ﻿ 45.4535°N 12.2990°E ﻿ / 45.4535; 12.2990 ) Yolo Causeway , California , USA Ponte Conde de Linhares , Panjim , Goa , India. The 3.2 km route was the longest causeway in Asia at the time of its completion in 1634.

Cherkasy Dam ( uk:Черкаська дамба ), Ukraine Cayo Santa María Causeway , Cuba Cayo Coco Causeway , Cuba Disadvantages [ edit ] Impact to shipping [ edit ] Satellite photo of the Great Salt Lake in Utah , U.S.A., from August 2018 showing a major color difference between the northern and southern portions of the lake as a result of a mineral imbalance caused by the Lucin Cutoff .

A major drawback of causeways is that, unlike tunnels or bridges, they prevent shipping through the strait they cross. In some cases, causeways have been built with "gates" or other facilities to permit shipping to pass through.

Ecological consequences [ edit ] Causeways affect currents and may therefore be involved in beach erosion or changed deposition patterns; this effect has been a problem at the Hindenburgdamm in northern Germany. During hurricane seasons, the winds and rains of approaching tropical storms —as well as waves generated by the storm in the surrounding bodies of water—make traversing causeways problematic at best and impossibly dangerous during the fiercest parts of the storms. For this reason (and related reasons, such as the need to minimize traffic jams on both the roads approaching the causeway and the causeway itself), emergency evacuation of island residents is a high priority for local, regional, and even national authorities.

Causeways can separate populations of wildlife, putting further pressure on endangered species .

Causeways can cause a mineral imbalance between portions of a body of water. For example, the Lucin Cutoff , built across the Great Salt Lake has caused the northern half of the lake to have much higher salinity, to the point that the two halves show a major color imbalance. Furthermore, the difference in salinity has become so severe that native brine shrimp cannot survive in much of the waters, with the northern part being too salty and the southern part being insufficiently salty.

Gallery [ edit ] The Julia Tuttle Causeway , one of the major arteries connecting Miami and Miami Beach in Florida Causeway on the West Branch Reservoir in Carmel, New York , typical of the form throughout the New York City water supply system Aerial view of the Lucin Cutoff railway trestle in Utah , U.S.A., before removal. The 1950s causeway is visible to its right.

The causeway to Antelope Island in the Great Salt Lake , Utah The Johor–Singapore Causeway is an important road which connects Singapore to Malaysia The Sorell Causeway in Tasmania , Australia Lake Pontchartrain Causeway bridge in New Orleans Causeway across Colwyn Bay Beach , Wales , United Kingdom The King Fahd Causeway from satellite photo The Causeway in St. George's, Bermuda Causeway that connects Victor Harbor with Granite Island in Australia (Completed in 1867 ) Canso Causeway from Cape Breton Island See also [ edit ] Causey Arch , County Durham , England Causewayed enclosure Giant's Causeway , County Antrim , Northern Ireland Kūlgrinda Sacbe References [ edit ] ^ Oxford English Dictionary 1971 .

^ Williams, Robin; Williams, Romey (1992).

The Somerset Levels . Bradford on Avon: Ex Libris Press. pp.

35– 36.

ISBN 0-948578-38-6 .

^ Wedgwood, Hensleigh (1855).

"On False Etymologies" .

Transactions of the Philological Society (6): 66.

^ "Causeway" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.

^ Brunning, Richard (February 2001). "The Somerset Levels".

Current Archaeology . XV (4) (172 (Special issue on Wetlands)): 139– 143.

^ Pollard, Edward (2008). "Inter-Tidal Causeways and Platforms of the 13th- to 16th-Century City-States of Kilwa Kisiwani, Tanzania".

The International Journal of Nautical Archaeology .

1 (37): 98– 114.

Bibcode : 2008IJNAr..37...98P .

doi : 10.1111/j.1095-9270.2007.00167.x .

S2CID 161753263 .

^ "Cleanse Causeway" .

Battle of Linlithgow Bridge . Retrieved 13 November 2024 .

^ Coetzee, DanielJ.M.; Eysturlid, Lee W. (2013).

Philosophers of War: The Evolution of History's Greatest Military Thinkers [2 Volumes]: The Evolution of History's Greatest Military Thinkers .

ABC-CLIO . p. 353.

ISBN 9780313070334 .

Further reading [ edit ] Oxford English Dictionary . 1971.

ASIN B01JXP1GBY .

Atkins, Beryl T. (1998).

Collins Robert French Dictionary (5th ed.). HarperCollins.

ISBN 0-00-470526-2 .

Nouveau Petit Larousse Illustré (in French). Paris. 1934.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Grape, W. (1994).

The Bayeux Tapestry . Munich: Prestel.

ISBN 3-7913-1365-7 .

Evans, H. M.; Thomas, W. O. (1953).

The New Welsh Dictionary (Y Geiriadur Newydd) . Llandybie: Llyfrau'r Dryw.

External links [ edit ] Media related to causeways at Wikimedia Commons v t e Infrastructure Bridge Canal Causeway Dam Drainage Footbridge Interchange Levee Overpass Pipeline Road Skyway Storm drain Tunnel See also: Architecture Arena Civil engineering Construction Playground Public Stadium Theater Urban park v t e Road hierarchy Types of road Limited-access Bicycle highway Freeway / Motorway Dual carriageway / Divided highway / Expressway Elevated highway By country Australia Belgium Brazil Canada China Croatia Czech Republic Germany Greece Hong Kong India Ireland Italy Nepal Pakistan Poland Portugal Spain Taiwan United Kingdom United States Main roads Arterial road Collector road County highway Express–collector setup Farm-to-market road Highway Link road Two-lane expressway 2+1 road 2+2 road Parkway Ring road Trunk road Highway systems by country Local roads Alley Avenue Back road Bicycle boulevard Boulevard Country lane Dead end Driveway Frontage road Green lane Main street Primitive road Side road Single carriageway Single-track road Sunken lane Other terms Concurrency Detour Road hierarchy Private highway Route number special route business route Street hierarchy Stravenue Stroad Toll road Winter road Road junctions Interchanges ( grade-separated ) Cloverleaf Diamond Free-flow Directional T Diverging diamond Parclo Raindrop Roundabout Single-point urban (SPUI) Stack Three-level diamond Trumpet Intersections (at-grade) 3-way junction Bowtie Box junction Channelization Continuous flow Hook turn Jughandle Michigan left Offset T-intersection Protected intersection Quadrant roadway Right-in/right-out (RIRO) Roundabout Seagull intersection Split intersection Superstreet Texas U-turn Turnaround Surfaces Asphalt concrete Bioasphalt Chipseal Cobblestone Concrete Reinforced concrete Corduroy Crocodile cracking Crushed stone Diamond grinding of pavement Dirt Full depth recycling Glassphalt Gravel Ice Macadam Pavement milling Permeable Plank Plastic Rubberized asphalt Sealcoat Sett Stamped asphalt Tarmac Texture Road safety factors Road and environment Aquaplaning Avalanche Black ice Bleeding Crosswind Dead Man's Curve Expansion joint Fog Ford Hairpin turn Level crossing Manhole cover Oil spill Oversize load Pothole Road debris Road slipperiness Road train Roadkill Rockfall Rut Snow squall Speed bump Storm drain Traffic light Traffic sign Washboarding Washout Whiteout Human factors Driver's education Driving under the influence Drowsy driving Road rage Single-vehicle crash Vehicles Airbag Automotive safety Crumple zone Seat belt Risk compensation (road transport) Underride guard Space and time allocation Barrier transfer machine Bike lane Climbing lane Complete streets Contraflow lane Contraflow lane reversal High-occupancy toll lane High-occupancy vehicle lane Living street Managed lane Median / Central reservation Motorcycle lane Passing lane Pedestrian crossing Pedestrian zone Refuge island Reversible lane Road diet Road verge Runaway truck ramp Shared space Sidewalk / Pavement Shoulder Street-running railway Traffic calming Traffic directionality Traffic island Traffic lanes Traffic signal preemption Truck bypass Unused highway Wide outside lane Woonerf Demarcation Bollard Botts' dots Cable barrier Cat's eye (road) Concrete step barrier Constant-slope barrier F-shape barrier Guard rail Jersey barrier Kassel kerb Noise barrier Raised pavement marker Road surface marking Rumble strip Traffic barrier Traffic cone Structures Causeway Overpass / Flyover Underpass / Tunnel Performance indicators Pavement condition index International roughness index Present serviceability index Pavement performance modeling Granular base equivalency Glossary of road transport terms Road types by features Template:Traffic signs v t e Geotechnical engineering Offshore geotechnical engineering Investigation and instrumentation Field ( in situ ) Core drill Cone penetration test Geo-electrical sounding Permeability test Load test Static Dynamic Statnamic Pore pressure measurement Piezometer Well Ram sounding Rock control drilling Rotary-pressure sounding Rotary weight sounding Sample series Screw plate test Deformation monitoring Inclinometer Settlement recordings Shear vane test Simple sounding Standard penetration test Total sounding Trial pit Visible bedrock Nuclear densometer test Exploration geophysics Crosshole sonic logging Pile integrity test Wave equation analysis Laboratory testing Soil classification Atterberg limits California bearing ratio Direct shear test Hydrometer Proctor compaction test R-value Sieve analysis Triaxial shear test Oedometer test Hydraulic conductivity tests Water content tests Soil Types Clay Silt Sand Gravel Peat Loam Loess Properties Hydraulic conductivity Water content Void ratio Bulk density Thixotropy Reynolds' dilatancy Angle of repose Friction angle Cohesion Porosity Permeability Specific storage Shear strength Sensitivity Structures ( Interaction ) Natural features Topography Vegetation Terrain Topsoil Water table Bedrock Subgrade Subsoil Earthworks Shoring structures Retaining walls Gabion Ground freezing Mechanically stabilized earth Pressure grouting Slurry wall Soil nailing Tieback Land development Landfill Excavation Trench Embankment Cut Causeway Terracing Cut-and-cover Cut and fill Fill dirt Grading Land reclamation Track bed Erosion control Earth structure Expanded clay aggregate Crushed stone Geosynthetics Geotextile Geomembrane Geosynthetic clay liner Cellular confinement Infiltration Foundations Shallow Deep Mechanics Forces Effective stress Pore water pressure Lateral earth pressure Overburden pressure Preconsolidation pressure Phenomena/ problems Permafrost Frost heaving Consolidation Compaction Earthquake Response spectrum Seismic hazard Shear wave Landslide analysis Stability analysis Mitigation Classification Sliding criterion Slab stabilisation Bearing capacity * Stress distribution in soil Numerical analysis software SEEP2D STABL SVFlux SVSlope UTEXAS Plaxis Related fields Geology Geochemistry Petrology Earthquake engineering Geomorphology Soil science Hydrology Hydrogeology Biogeography Earth materials Archaeology Agricultural science Agrology Authority control databases NARA Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Causeway&oldid=1301680457 " Categories : Causeways Buildings and structures by type Transport buildings and structures Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from November 2018 All articles that may contain original research Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Norman-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Welsh-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2018 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from September 2022 Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 French-language sources (fr) Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 04:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Causeway 20 languages Add topic

