Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 The rhetoric and humanism of Vico 3 Response to the Cartesian method 4 The principle of Verum factum 5 The Scienza Nuova 6 Influence 7 Works 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Giambattista Vico 64 languages العربية Aragonés Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Magyar Македонски مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Napulitano Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 Yorùbá 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian philosopher (1668–1744) Giambattista Vico Born Giovan Battista Vico ( 1668-06-23 ) 23 June 1668 Naples , Kingdom of Naples Died 23 January 1744 (1744-01-23) (aged 75) Naples, Kingdom of Naples Education Education University of Naples ( LL.D.

, 1694) Philosophical work Era 18th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy Italian philosophy School Christian humanism Counter-Enlightenment [ 1 ] Italian Enlightenment Natural law [ 1 ] Perspectivism [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Institutions University of Naples Main interests Epistemology , humanities , jurisprudence , philosophy of history , philosophy of science , poetry ( Theologia Poetica ), political philosophy , rhetoric Notable works Principî di Scienza Nuova De antiquissima Italorum sapientia Notable ideas Class struggle [ 1 ] Criticism of rationalism and reductionism Humanities as human science or social science Ideal eternal history Philosophy of history Theory of political mythology " Verum esse ipsum factum " (an early form of constructivist epistemology ) Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Giambattista Vico (born Giovan Battista Vico / ˈ v iː k oʊ / ; Italian: [ˈviko] ; 23 June 1668 – 23 January 1744) was an Italian philosopher , rhetorician , historian , and jurist during the Italian Enlightenment . He criticized the expansion and development of modern rationalism , finding Cartesian analysis and other types of reductionism impractical to human life, and he was an apologist for classical antiquity and the Renaissance humanities , in addition to being the first expositor of the fundamentals of social science and of semiotics . He is recognised as one of the first Counter-Enlightenment figures in history.

The Latin aphorism " Verum esse ipsum factum " ("truth is itself something made") coined by Vico is an early instance of constructivist epistemology .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] He inaugurated the modern field of the philosophy of history , and, although the term philosophy of history is not in his writings, Vico spoke of a "history of philosophy narrated philosophically." [ 6 ] Although he was not an historicist , contemporary interest in Vico usually has been motivated by historicists, such as Isaiah Berlin , a philosopher and historian of ideas , [ 7 ] Edward Said , a literary critic , and Hayden White , a metahistorian .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Vico's intellectual magnum opus is the book Scienza Nuova or New Science (1725), which attempts a systematic organization of the humanities as a single science that records and explains the historical cycles by which societies rise and fall.

[ 10 ] Biography [ edit ] "In this little room Giambattista Vico was born on June 23 1668. Here he resided until he was seventeen years old, and in the subdued little workshop of his bookseller father he used to spend the nights in his study. Youthful eve of his sublime work. The city of Naples poses." Tombstone in the house where he was born in Via San Biagio dei Librai.

Born to a bookseller in Naples , Italy, Giovan Battista Vico attended several schools, but ill health and dissatisfaction with the scholasticism of the Jesuits led to his being educated at home by tutors. Evidence from his autobiographical work indicates that Vico likely was an autodidact educated under paternal influence, during a three-year absence from school, consequence of an accidental fall when the boy was seven years old.

[ 11 ] Giovan Battista's formal education was at the University of Naples from which he graduated in 1694, as Doctor of Civil and Canon Law.

[ 11 ] In 1686, after surviving a bout of typhus , he accepted a job as a tutor, in Vatolla, south of Salerno , which became a nine-year professional engagement that lasted till 1695.

[ 11 ] Four years later, in 1699, Vico married Teresa Caterina Destito, a childhood friend, and accepted a chair in rhetoric at the University of Naples, which he held until ill-health retirement, in 1741.

[ 11 ] Throughout his academic career, Vico would aspire to, but never attain, the more respectable chair of jurisprudence ; however, in 1734, he was appointed historiographer royal , by Charles III , King of Naples, at a salary greater than he had earned as a university professor.

The rhetoric and humanism of Vico [ edit ] Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e Vico's version of rhetoric is a product of his humanistic and pedagogic concerns. In the 1708 commencement speech De Nostri Temporis Studiorum Ratione ( On the Order of the Scholarly Disciplines of Our Times ), Vico said that whoever "intends a career in public life, whether in the courts, the senate, or the pulpit" should be taught to "master the art of topics and [to] defend both sides of a controversy, be it on Nature, Man, or politics, in a freer and brighter style of expression, so he can learn to draw on those arguments which are most probable and have the greatest degree of verisimilitude "; yet, in Scienza Nuova , Vico denounced defending both sides in controversies as false eloquence .

As Royal Professor of Latin Eloquence, Vico prepared students for higher studies in the fields of Law and of Jurisprudence ; thus, his lessons were about the formal aspects of the canon of rhetoric, including the arrangement and the delivery of an argument. Yet he chose to emphasize the Aristotelian connection of rhetoric with logic and dialectic , thereby placing ends (rhetoric) at their center. Vico's objection to modern rhetoric is that it is disconnected from common sense ( sensus communis ), defined as the "worldly sense" that is common to all men.

In lectures and throughout the body of his work, Vico's rhetoric begins from a central argument ( medius terminus ), which is to be clarified by following the order of things as they arise in our experience.

Probability and circumstance retain their proportionate importance, and discovery —reliant upon topics ( loci )—supersedes axioms derived through reflective, abstract thought. In the tradition of classical Roman rhetoric, Vico sets out to educate the orator (rhetorician) as the transmitter of the oratio , a speech with ratio (reason) at the centre. What is essential to the oratorical art (Gr. ῥητορική, rhētorikē ) is the orderly link between common sense and an end commensurate with oratory; an end that is not imposed upon the imagination from above (in the manner of the moderns and dogmatic Christianity), but that is drawn from common sense, itself.  In the tradition of Socrates and Cicero , Vico's true orator will be midwife to the birth of "the true" (as an idea) from "the certain", the ignorance in the mind of the student.

Rediscovery of "the most ancient wisdom" of the senses, a wisdom that is humana stultitia ("human foolishness"), Vico's emphases on the importance of civic life and of professional obligations are in the humanist tradition. He would call for a maieutic oratory art against the grain of the modern privilege of the dogmatic form of reason, in what he called the "geometrical method" of René Descartes and the logicians at the Port-Royal-des-Champs abbey.

Response to the Cartesian method [ edit ] As he relates in his autobiography, Vico returned to Naples from Vatolla to find "the physics of Descartes at the height of its renown among the established men of letters." Developments in both metaphysics and the natural sciences abounded as the result of Cartesianism. Widely disseminated by the Port Royal Logic of Antoine Arnauld and Pierre Nicole , Descartes's method was rooted in verification: the only path to truth, and thus knowledge, was through axioms derived from observation. Descartes's insistence that the "sure and indubitable" (or, "clear and distinct") should form the basis of reasoning had an obvious impact on the prevailing views of logic and discourse. Studies in rhetoric—indeed all studies concerned with civic discourse and the realm of probable truths—met with increasing disdain.

Vico's humanism and professional concerns prompted an obvious response that he would develop throughout the course of his writings: the realms of verifiable truth and human concern share only a slight overlap, yet reasoning is required in equal measure in both spheres. One of the clearest and earliest forms of this argument is available in the De Italorum Sapientia , where Vico argues that to introduce geometrical method into practical life is "like trying to go mad with the rules of reason", attempting to proceed by a straight line among the tortuosities of life, as though human affairs were not ruled by capriciousness, temerity, opportunity, and chance. Similarly, to arrange a political speech according to the precepts of geometrical method is equivalent to stripping it of any acute remarks and to uttering nothing but pedestrian lines of argument.

Vico's position here and in later works is not that the Cartesian method is irrelevant, but that its application cannot be extended to the civic sphere. Instead of confining reason to a string of verifiable axioms, Vico suggests (along with the ancients) that appeals to phronēsis (φρόνησις or practical wisdom ) must also be made, and likewise appeals to the various components of persuasion that comprise rhetoric. Vico would reproduce this argument consistently throughout his works, and would use it as a central tenet of the Scienza Nuova .

The principle of Verum factum [ edit ] Vico is best known for his verum factum principle, first formulated in 1710 as part of his De antiquissima Italorum sapientia, ex linguae latinae originibus eruenda (1710) ("Of the most ancient wisdom of the Italians, unearthed from the origins of the Latin language").

[ 12 ] The principle states that truth is verified through creation or invention and not, as per Descartes , through observation: "The criterion and rule of the true is to have made it. Accordingly, our clear and distinct idea of the mind cannot be a criterion of the mind itself, still less of other truths. For while the mind perceives itself, it does not make itself." This criterion for truth would later shape the history of civilization in Vico's opus, the Scienza Nuova ( The New Science , 1725), because he would argue that civil life—like mathematics —is wholly constructed.

The Scienza Nuova [ edit ] Main article: Scienza Nuova Title page of Principj di Scienza Nuova (1744 edition) The New Science (1725, Scienza Nuova ) is Vico's major work. It has been highly influential in the philosophy of history, and for historicists such as Isaiah Berlin and Hayden White.

Influence [ edit ] Samuel Beckett 's first published work, in the selection of critical essays on James Joyce entitled Our Exagmination Round His Factification for Incamination of Work in Progress , is "Dante... Bruno. Vico.. Joyce". In it, Beckett sees a profound influence of Vico's philosophy and poetics—as well the cyclical form of the Scienza Nuova —on the avant-garde compositions of Joyce, and especially the titular Work in Progress, viz.

Finnegans Wake .

In Knowledge and Social Structure (1974), Peter Hamilton identified Vico as the "sleeping partner" of the Age of Enlightenment .

[ 13 ] Despite having been relatively unknown in his 18th-century time, and read only in his native Naples, the ideas of Vico are predecessors to the ideas of the intellectuals of the Enlightenment. Moreover, recognition of Vico's intellectual influence began in the 19th century, when the French Romantic historians used his works as methodological models and guides.

[ 13 ] In Capital: Critique of Political Economy (1867), Karl Marx 's mention of Vico indicates their parallel perspectives about history, the role of historical actors, and an historical method of narrative.

[ 14 ] Marx and Vico saw social-class warfare as the means by which men achieve the end of equal rights ; Vico called that time the "Age of Men".

[ citation needed ] Marx concluded that such a state of affairs is the optimal end of social change in a society, but Vico thought that such complete equality of rights would lead to socio-political chaos and the consequent collapse of society. In that vein, Vico proposed a social need for religion, for a supernatural divine providence to keep order in human society.

[ 15 ] In Orientalism (1978), Edward Said acknowledged his scholar's debt to Vico, [ 16 ] whose "ideas anticipate and later infiltrate the line of German thinkers I am about to cite. They belong to the era of Herder and Wolff , later to be followed by Goethe , Humboldt , Dilthey , Nietzsche , Gadamer , and finally the great twentieth century Romance philologists Erich Auerbach , Leo Spitzer , and Ernst Robert Curtius ." [ 16 ] As a humanist and early philologist, Vico represented "a different, alternative model that has been extremely important to me in my work", which differed from mainstream Western prejudice against the Orient and the dominating "standardization" that came with modernity and culminated in National Socialism .

[ 16 ] That the interdependence of human history and culture facilitates the scholars' task to "take seriously Vico's great observation that men make their own history, that what they can know is what they have made, and extend it to geography. As geographical and cultural entities—to say nothing of historical entities—such locales, regions, and geographical sectors as 'Orient' and 'Occident' are man-made." [ 16 ] Works [ edit ] Opere di G. B. Vico . Fausto Nicolini (ed.), Bari: Laterza, 1911–41.

De nostri temporis studiorum ratione (1708) De Antiquissima Italorum Sapientia ex Linguae Originibus Eruenda Libri Tres (On the Most Ancient Wisdom of the Italians Unearthed from the Origins of the Latin Language). 1710, Palmer, L. M., trans. Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1988.

Institutiones Oratoriae (The Art of Rhetoric). 1711–1741, Pinton, Girogio, and Arthur W. Shippee, trans. Amsterdam: Editions Rodopi B.V., 1984.*  "On Humanistic Education", trans. Giorgio A. Pinton and Arthur W. Shippee.  Ithaca:   Cornell UP, 1993.

On the Study Methods of Our Time , trans. Elio Gianturco.  Ithaca:  Cornell UP, 1990.

Universal right (Diritto universale). Translated from Latin and Edited by Giorgio Pinton and Margaret Diehl. Amsterdam/New York, Rodopi, 2000 On the Most Ancient Wisdom of the Italians: Unearthed from the Origins of the Latin Language , trans. L. M. Palmer. Ithaca, Cornell UP, 1988.

Scienza Nuova (The First New Science). 1725, Pompa, Leon, trans. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 2002.

The New Science of Giambattista Vico , (1744). trans.

Thomas G. Bergin and Max H. Fisch.  Ithaca:  Cornell UP, 2nd ed. 1968.

De rebus gestis Antonj Caraphaei (1713×1715), trans. Giorgio A. Pinton, Statecraft: The Deeds of Antonio Carafa (Peter Lang, 2004), a biography of Antonio Carafa (died 1693).

See also [ edit ] Finnegans Wake Historic recurrence New Vico Studies (Institute for Vico Studies at Emory University ) Recapitulation theory Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c Bertland, Alexander.

"Giambattista Vico (1668—1744)" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Gambarota, Paola (2017). "Giambattista Vico, the Vernacular, and the Foundations of Modern Italy".

Irresistible Signs . Toronto: University of Toronto Press. pp.

99– 144.

doi : 10.3138/9781442695269-004 .

ISBN 9781442695269 .

^ Lollini, Massimo (2011). "Vico's More than Human Humanism".

Annali d'Italianistica .

29 : 381– 399.

JSTOR 24016434 .

^ Ernst von Glasersfeld, An Introduction to Radical Constructivism .

^ Bizzell and Herzberg, The Rhetorical Tradition , p. 800.

^ The contemporary interpretation of Vico is by Verene, Donald Philip. See: "Giambattista Vico" (2002), A Companion to Early Modern Philosophy , Steven M. Nadler, ed. London:Blackwell Publishing, ISBN 0-631-21800-9 , p. 570.

^ Vico and Herder: Two Studies in the History of Ideas ^ Giambattista Vico (1976), "The Topics of History: The Deep Structure of the New Science", in Giorgio Tagliacozzo and Donald Philip Verene, eds, Science of Humanity , Baltimore and London: 1976.

^ Giambattista Vico: An International Symposium .  Giorgio Tagliacozzo and Hayden V. White, eds. Johns Hopkins University Press: 1969.  Attempts to inaugurate a non-historicist interpretation of Vico are in Interpretation: A Journal of Political Philosophy [1] , Spring 2009, Vol. 36.2, and Spring 2010 37.3; and in Historia Philosophica , Vol. 11, 2013 [2] .

^ The Penguin Encyclopedia (2006), David Crystal, ed., p. 1,409.

^ a b c d Costelloe, Timothy (Fall 2022).

"Giambattista Vico" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 16 June 2024 .

^ His wording was "Verum et factum reciprocantur seu convertuntur" ("The true and the made are convertible into each other"), an idea which can be found also in occasionalism and Scotist scholasticism ^ a b Hamilton, Peter (1974).

Knowledge and Social Structure . London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. pp.

4 .

ISBN 978-0710077462 .

^ Marx, Karl.

Capital, Book 1 . pp. Book 1, part IV, chapter 13, n. 89 (footnote).

^ Chaix-Ruy, Jules-Marie.

"Giambattista Vico" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 6 March 2014 .

^ a b c d Said, Edward (2003) [1978].

Orientalism . Penguin Classics. pp. xviii, 4– 5.

References [ edit ] Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Vico, Giovanni Battista" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 28 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

Fabiani, Paolo.

"The Philosophy of the Imagination in Vico and Malebranche". F.U.P. (Florence UP), Italian edition 2002, English edition 2009.

Goetsch, James.

Vico's Axioms: The Geometry of the Human World.

. New Haven: Yale UP, 1995.

Mooney, Michael.

Vico in the Tradition of Rhetoric . New Jersey: Princeton UP, 1985.

Pompa, Leon.

Vico: A Study of the New Science . Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1990.

"Giambattista Vico" entry  in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Further reading [ edit ] Andreacchio, Marco. " Epistemology's Political-Theological Import in Giambattista Vico " in Telos .  Vol. 185 (2019); pp. 105–27.

Bedani, Gino.

Vico Revisited: Orthodoxy, Naturalism and Science in the Scienza Nuova . Oxford: Berg Publishers, 1989.

Berlin, Isaiah .

Vico and Herder. Two Studies in the History of Ideas . London, 1976.

Berlin, Isaiah.

Three Critics of the Enlightenment: Vico, Hamann, Herder . London and Princeton, 2000.

Bizzell, Patricia, and Bruce Herzberg.

The Rhetorical Tradition: Readings from Classical Times to the Present . 2nd ed. Basingstoke: Macmillan; Boston, Ma: Bedford Books of St Martin's Press, 2001. Pp. Xv, 1673. (First Ed. 1990). 2001.

Colilli, Paul.

Vico and the Archives of Hermetic Reason . Welland, Ont.: Editions Soleil, 2004.

Croce, Benedetto.

The Philosophy of Giambattista Vico.

Trans. R.G. Collingwood. London: Howard Latimer, 1913.

Danesi, Marcel.

Vico, Metaphor, and the Origin of Language . Bloomington: Indiana UP, 1993 Fabiani, Paolo, "The Philosophy of the Imagination in Vico and Malebranche". F.U.P. (Florence UP), Italian edition 2002, English edition 2009.

Fisch, Max, and Thomas G. Bergin , trans.

Vita di Giambattista Vico (The Autobiography of Giambattista Vico). 1735–41. Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1963.

Giannantonio, Valeria.

Oltre Vico – L'identità del passato a Napoli e Milano tra '700 e '800 , Carabba Editore, Lanciano, 2009.

Gould, Rebecca Ruth. “ Democracy and the Vernacular Imagination in Vico's Plebian Philology ,” History of Humanities 3.2 (2018): 247–277.

Grassi, Ernesto.

Vico and Humanism: Essays on Vico, Heidegger, and Rhetoric.

New York: Peter Lang, 1990.

Hösle, Vittorio. "Vico und die Idee der Kulturwissenschaft"  in Prinzipien einer neuen Wissenschaft über die gemeinsame Natur der Völker , Ed. V. Hösle and C. Jermann, Hamburg : F. Meiner, 1990, pp. XXXI-CCXCIII Levine, Joseph.

Giambattista Vico and the Quarrel between the Ancients and the Moderns.

Journal of the History of Ideas 52.1(1991): 55-79.

Lilla, Mark.

G. B. Vico: The Making of an Anti-Modern.

Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1993.

Mazzotta, Giuseppe.

The New Map of the World: The Poetic Philosophy of Giambattista Vico.

Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1999.

Miner, Robert.

Vico, Genealogist of Modernity.

Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 2002.

Schaeffer, John.

Sensus Communis: Vico, Rhetoric, and the Limits of Relativism . Durham: Duke UP, 1990.

Verene, Donald.

Vico's Science of Imagination . Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1981.

Verene, Molly Black "Vico: A Bibliography of Works in English from 1884 to 1994." Philosophy Documentation Center, 1994.

Alain Pons, Vie et mort des Nations. Lecture de la Science nouvelle de Giambattista Vico , L'Esprit de la Cité, Gallimard, 2015 External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Giambattista Vico .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Giambattista Vico .

Works by Giambattista Vico at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Giambattista Vico at the Internet Archive Institute for Vico Studies Entry in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Entry in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Entry in the Johns Hopkins Guide to Literary Theory Archived 2002-05-20 at the Wayback Machine Verene, Donald Phillip.

Essay on Vico's humanism at the Wayback Machine (archived May 20, 2002), archived from Johns Hopkins University Press.

Vico's Poetic Philosophy within Europe's Cultural Identity, Emanuel L. Paparella Archived 2023-06-09 at the Wayback Machine Leon Pompa, Vico's Theory of the Causes of Historical Change , archived at The Institute for Cultural Research Portale Vico - Vico Portal Text of the New Science in multiple formats Essays on Vico's creative influence on James Joyce's Finnegans Wake Samuel Beckett's essay on Vico and Joyce Vico's creative influence on Richard James Allen's The Way Out At Last Cycle Vico's Historical Mythology Rafferty, Michael (1913). "VICO (1668-1744)". In Macdonell, John ; Manson, Edward William Donoghue (eds.).

Great Jurists of the World . London: John Murray. pp.

345 -389 . Retrieved 11 March 2019 – via Internet Archive.

v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii zbMATH Artists ULAN People Trove Italian People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC RISM Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Giambattista_Vico&oldid=1302070216 " Categories : Giambattista Vico 1668 births 1744 deaths 17th-century Italian philosophers 17th-century Neapolitan people 17th-century Roman Catholics 18th-century Italian philosophers 18th-century Neapolitan people 18th-century Roman Catholics Catholic philosophers Christian humanists Enlightenment philosophers Italian epistemologists Italian historians of philosophy Italian male non-fiction writers Italian Roman Catholic writers Philosophers of education Philosophers of history Italian philosophy academics Rhetoric theorists University of Naples Federico II alumni Academic staff of the University of Naples Federico II Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with hCards Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Pages with Italian IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy links Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Webarchive template wayback links Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 23 July 2025, at 05:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Giambattista Vico 64 languages Add topic

