Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Description and application Toggle Description and application subsection 2.1 Description 2.2 Planning process and parties involved 2.3 Application 2.4 Conditions necessary 3 Pros and cons Toggle Pros and cons subsection 3.1 Pros 3.2 Cons 4 Land use planning and environmental sustainability 5 Types of planning 6 Methods 7 Basis of land use planning authority in the United States 8 Practical examples Toggle Practical examples subsection 8.1 Milan 8.2 Indigenous communities 8.3 Examples in the Global South 8.4 The future of land use planning 9 See also 10 Academic journals 11 References Toggle References subsection 11.1 Bibliography 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Land-use planning 5 languages العربية বাংলা فارسی 한국어 Монгол Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Land use planning ) Process of regulating the use of land by a central authority See also: Planning permission The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( November 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Infrastructure Grand Coulee Dam Assets and facilities Airports Bridges Broadband Canals Coastal management Critical infrastructure Dams Electricity Energy Hazardous waste Hospitals Irrigation Levees Lighthouses Parks Pipeline Ports Mass transit Public housing State schools Public spaces Rail Roads Sewage treatment Sewerage Sluices Snow removal Solid waste Telecommunications Trails Utilities Water supply Weirs Concepts Asset management Appropriation Lindahl tax Build–operate–transfer Design–bid–build Design–build Earmark European green infrastructure Fixed cost Engineering contracts Externality Government debt Green infrastructure Life-cycle assessment Maintenance Monopoly Property tax Public–private partnership Public capital Public finance Public good Public sector Renovation Replacement (upgrade) Spillover Supply chain Tax Issues and ideas Air traffic control Brownfield Carbon footprint Containerization Congestion pricing Environmental tax Ethanol fuel Fuel tax Groundwater High-speed rail Hybrid vehicles Land-use planning Mobile data terminal Pork barrel Rapid bus transit Recycling Renewables Reverse osmosis Smart grid Smart growth Stormwater Urban sprawl Traffic congestion Transit-oriented development Fuel efficiency Waste-to-energy Weatherization Wireless technology Fields of study Architecture Chemical engineering Civil Electrical Mechanical engineering Public economics Public policy Urban planning Examples Akashi Kaikyo Bridge Trans-Alaska pipeline Autobahn Bicycle parking station Brazilian energy independence Brooklyn Bridge Channel Tunnel Chicago wastewater China's high-speed rail Curtiba rapid bus transit Cycling infrastructure ( history , safety ) Danish wind-power British offshore wind-power Nuclear power in France Solar power in Germany Hoover Dam Hong Kong Int'l Airport Intercity Express Interstate highways Jamnagar Refinery Kansai Int'l Airport Levee Offshore wind port Panama Canal Port of Shanghai San Francisco–Oakland Bay Bridge Three Gorges Dam Shinkansen Spanish high-speed rail French TGV rail Spanish autovias and autopistas Transcontinental Railroad Power transmission in the USA Wind farm Category Engineering portal v t e Land use planning or land-use regulation is the process of regulating the use of land by a central authority. Usually, this is done to promote more desirable social and environmental outcomes as well as a more efficient use of resources . More specifically, the goals of modern land use planning often include environmental conservation , restraint of urban sprawl , minimization of transport costs, prevention of land use conflicts , and a reduction in exposure to pollutants . In the pursuit of these goals, planners assume that regulating the use of land will change the patterns of human behavior, and that these changes are beneficial. The first assumption, that regulating land use changes the patterns of human behavior is widely accepted. However, the second assumption – that these changes are beneficial – is contested, and depends on the location and regulations being discussed.

In urban planning , land use planning seeks to order and regulate land use in an efficient and ethical way, thus preventing land use conflicts . Governments use land use planning to manage the development of land within their jurisdictions. In doing so, the governmental unit can plan for the needs of the community while safeguarding natural resources. To this end, it is the systematic assessment of land and water potential, alternatives for land use, and economic and social conditions in order to select and adopt the best land use options.

[ 1 ] Often one element of a comprehensive plan , a land use plan provides a vision for the future possibilities of development in neighborhoods, districts, cities, or any defined planning area.

In the United States, the terms land use planning, regional planning , urban planning, and urban design are often used interchangeably, and will depend on the state, county, and/or project in question. Despite confusing nomenclature, the essential function of land use planning remains the same whatever term is applied. The Canadian Institute of Planners offers a definition that land use planning means the scientific, aesthetic, and orderly disposition of land, resources, facilities and services with a view to securing the physical, economic and social efficiency, health and well-being of urban and rural communities.

[ 2 ] The American Planning Association states that the goal of land use planning is to further the welfare of people and their communities by creating convenient, equitable, healthful, efficient, and attractive environments for present and future generations.

[ 3 ] Land-use planning in England and Wales is founded on the Town and Country Planning Act 1947 , with comparable legislation applicable in Scotland and Northern Ireland .

History [ edit ] Land use planning nearly always requires land use regulation, which typically encompasses zoning . Zoning regulates the types of activities that can be accommodated on a given piece of land, as well as the amount of space devoted to those activities, and the ways that buildings may be situated and shaped.

[ 4 ] The ambiguous nature of the term "planning", as it relates to land use, is historically tied to the practice of zoning. Zoning in the United States came about in the late 19th and early 20th centuries to protect the interests of property owners. The practice was found to be constitutionally sound by the Supreme Court decision of Village of Euclid v. Ambler Realty Co.

in 1926.

[ 3 ] Soon after, the model law known as the Standard State Zoning Enabling Act was enacted by many state legislatures , which gave authority to the states and its subdivisions to regulate land use. Even so, the practice remains controversial today, particularly in its impact on economic and racial segregation, as some critics argue that zoning has often been used to exclude certain populations from particular neighborhoods.

The "taking clause" of the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution prohibits the government from taking private property for public use without just compensation. The case of Dolan v. City of Tigard demonstrated the criteria that determine the threshold of what is considered taking.

[ 5 ] One interpretation of the taking clause is that any restriction on the development potential of land through zoning regulation is a "taking". A deep-rooted anti-zoning sentiment exists in America, that no one has the right to tell another what he can or cannot do with his land. Ironically, although people are often averse to being told how to develop their own land, they tend to expect the government to intervene when a proposed land use is undesirable.

Conventional zoning has not typically regarded the manner in which buildings relate to one another or the public spaces around them, but rather has provided a pragmatic system for mapping jurisdictions according to permitted land use. This system, combined with the interstate highway system , widespread availability of mortgage loans , growth in the automobile industry, and the over-all post-World War II economic expansion , destroyed most of the character that gave distinctiveness to American cities. The urban sprawl that most US cities began to experience in the mid-twentieth century was, in part, created by a flat approach to land use regulations. Zoning without planning created unnecessarily exclusive zones. Thoughtless mapping of these zones over large areas was a big part of the recipe for suburban sprawl.

[ 4 ] It was from the deficiencies of this practice that land use planning developed, to envision the changes that development would cause and mitigate the negative effects of such change.

Suburban development near Colorado Springs, Colorado , United States Gravel quarry at Ottenhoefen im Schwarzwald, Germany. Residential and industrial usage abut with no buffer zone.

As America grew and urban sprawl was rampant, the much-loved America of the older towns, cities, or streetcar suburbs essentially became illegal through zoning.

[ 6 ] Unparalleled growth and unregulated development changed the look and feel of landscapes and communities. They strained commercial corridors and affected housing prices , causing citizens to fear a decline in the social, economic and environmental attributes that defined their quality of life .

[ 7 ] Zoning regulations became politically contentious as developers, legislators, and citizens struggled over altering zoning maps in a way that was acceptable to all parties.  Land use planning practices evolved as an attempt to overcome these challenges. It engages citizens and policy-makers to plan for development with more intention, foresight, and community focus than had been previously used.

Description and application [ edit ] Description [ edit ] Land use planning is defined as: the process by which optimum forms of land use and management are indicated, considering the biophysical , technological, social, economic and political conditions of a particular territory. The objective of planning land use is to influence, control or direct changes in the use of land so that it is dedicated to the most beneficial use and maintains the quality of the environment and promoting conservation of the land resources. The territorial diagnosis and the generation of alternatives of management and environmental protection for the planning of the use of the land produces the indispensable knowledge necessary for the formulation of the policies of use, contributing to the search of competitive and sustainable productive and extractive activities and systems. The methodological process of land use planning contributes to: orienting the location of economic and social activities regarding the aptitude of the land and providing solutions to conflicts of use; indicate the base of natural resources that should remain and protected areas ; point out the areas exposed to natural hazards and their management; identify sustainable productive and extractive activities and systems; guide the planning of land uses and indicate the areas that require land adaptation or recovery projects.

[ 8 ] Planning process and parties involved [ edit ] In most countries, the local municipal council/local government, the body responsible of the environment and oftentimes the national government assume all the functions of land use planning; among them the corresponding function to territorial ordering (OT). For this reason, the highlighted bodies have among other responsibilities the promotion of the conservation and sustainable use of natural resources, establishing policies, criteria, tools and procedures of the most appropriate efficient and sustainable territorial order in coordination with any other relevant corresponding entities such as construction companies and the public.

[ 9 ] Application [ edit ] "Developing cities and towns": land use planning is an important component of city planning. The nature of cities required to the most beneficial use in terms of maximization of economic factors and promoting convenience, while maintaining the quality of the environment and promoting conservation of the land. The only way to achieve this is the utilization of the elements of land use planning.

[ 9 ] "The concept of Zoning ": Zoning is the process by which areas of land are split into zones by appropriate establishments within which several users are assigned to each zone. Therefore, this makes zoning very important modus operandi in land use planning where it is used to design urban areas in many countries (Lewis-Roger, 1987). The topic of zoning is considered within the context of land use planning and design as a systemic perception. Zoning is used as a fundamental component of territorial planning, which is incorporated in the stages of the logical model of regional development. In the process of zoning, the actor divides land into units of different sizes, shapes and locations, according to the characteristics of the terrain and the corporality of a culture. The actor who generates a multiplicity of spaces using zoning, based on global spatial unit and the preferences of user who uses these spaces in multiple use form, decomposes his vision of it into four different dimensions namely; deontic, cognitive, expressive and aesthetics functions. Each of these dimensions represents land in different forms, intensities, positions and areas, which may not coincide with each other. The deontic space is that of the transforming actions of the world, of the duty to be and to do. The cognitive space is apprehended by the faculties of knowledge from the senses to the reason, such as the ecological and technological spaces. The aesthetic space refers to the scopes of feel and beauty. The expressive or indexical space corresponds to the internal and cultural expression of the identity of the person who organizes the space. Often, a fifth space is included, that is, the administrative space, which concerns the positioning of the legal, authoritative and legislative base being planned. Zoning should not be considered as the end in itself, but only as a means of approximation in relation to geographical reality. Instead of imposing pre-established categories, it is about looking for landscape discontinuities. The category system ( taxonomy ) must allow a deepening (level) of the landscapes according to their scale. For each order of phenomena there are thresholds of manifestation and “extinction” that by themselves can justify the systematic differentiation of landscapes into hierarchical units. The study and zoning of the coverage and land use requires first defining the concepts of land, coverage and use in order to avoid the problems of interpretation associated with the management of these concepts. The concept of land is defined as an entity formed by the mutual interaction of living and non-living nature in a recognizable portion of the Earth's surface. It is a more geographical than edaphological definition. The earth is conceived as the result of the integration of biophysical and socioeconomic elements whose interrelation generates certain particular spatial units or landscapes, therefore, land and landscape are considered in this guide as synonyms.

Land cover , on the other hand, is defined as the different features that cover the land, such as water, forest, other types of vegetation, bare rocks or sand, man-made structures, etc. In general, these are the traits that can be directly observed in aerial photographs and frequently in satellite images. The concept of use, applies to the employment that man gives to different types of coverage, cyclically or permanently to meet his material or spiritual needs. Basically, this is where the need for zoning arises.

[ 10 ] Conditions necessary [ edit ] Community relations: for any land planning activity, the actors involved must involve the community or the public to put into consideration their opinions on the proposed land planning initiatives. After all, the land is being planned so that the public can enjoy the benefits that comes from land use planning.

Government and legal support: the government can support land use planning initiatives in a myriad of ways. The first is by financing or subsidizing a section of land use planning activities. The second way is by reducing bureaucracy and administration bottlenecks that comes with obtaining permits and licences.

[ 9 ] Pros and cons [ edit ] Pros [ edit ] Land use planning is an important growth framework: prosperous urban areas have a vision that they must follow through a framework to achieve a development in a well-ordered way. Hence, land use planning provides the framework.

[ 9 ] A well-planned urban area is a well-prepared urban area: anticipating the future allows for better preparedness.

[ 9 ] Indeed, the presence of natural phenomena that represent threats to human activities implies a limitation in land use. It is necessary to plan the use of the land taking into account its limitation in order to allow the containment of natural phenomena and its manifestations either by restricting the presence of human life and/or activities, adapting infrastructure conditions in a manner that reduces its vulnerability to natural phenomena or implementing plans conducive to risk mitigation . The absence of territorial planning plans, the lack of definition of areas exposed to threats and the lack of studies on natural phenomena that might bring threats, ensure an increase in the number and magnitude of natural disasters . The process of land use planning developed putting into consideration those aspects, allows the identification, location and evaluation of areas exposed to natural phenomena, which allows the implementation of measures that guarantee risk mitigation.

Good land use planning positively impacts the development of urban economy .

[ 9 ] Promote the national territorial order and economic ecological zoning as a support for the conservation, use and sustainable use of natural resources and biological diversity, as well as the orderly occupation of the territory.

The analysis of natural and anthropic risk in territorial planning processes is incorporated, as well as adaptation measures to climate change.

Mechanisms to prevent the settlement of populations and the development of socioeconomic activities are promoted in areas with high potential for risks in the face of natural and anthropic hazards.

Territorial planning is promoted as a basis for concerted development plans and border development, in the management of watersheds and coastal marine areas.

The actions of regional and local governments are guided for the efficient fulfillment of their functions in this area of land use planning.

Cons [ edit ] The cost of land use planning is usually high, generally because of poor investment and the lack of anticipation of technology.

Land use planning theory has largely been shaped by case studies of cities in the Global North. Countries all over the world, particularly in the Global South , are seeing population booms and rapid urbanization . Many of the methods, practices, and assumptions about land use planning from 20th Century Europe and the United States are not relevant to the Global South, where conditions are quite different. Many fundamental concepts associated with traditional land use planning, like zoning , have persisted despite a rapidly-changing urban landscape.

[ 11 ] Fragmented land-use planning codes can reduce construction productivity .

[ 12 ] Land use planning and environmental sustainability [ edit ] In view of sustainable development , land use planning is seen as a political and technical-administrative decision-making process agreed with social, economic, political and technical factors, for orderly occupation and sustainable use of the land under development. On the other hand, it seeks regulation and promotion of the location and sustainable development of human settlements, economic and social activities, and spatial physical development, based on the identification of potentialities and limitations that consider environmental, economic, sociocultural, institutional and geopolitical criteria.

[ 13 ] By and large, these parameters are put in place in order to make sure that the environment is protected during land use or land development. Indeed, based on the recommendations of the United Nations in its Habitat conference , land is assigned a high importance for the development of human life as it is the fundamental support for its permanence and development, this being the most important objective of the policy of human settlements. That is, the land resource is recognized as an essential element, which supports the social, political and economic formation of society. As mentioned earlier, the use of land refers to the occupation of a certain area according to its agrological capacity and therefore its development potential, it is classified according to its location as urban or rural, it represents a fundamental element for the development of the city and its inhabitants since it is from these that its urban structure is formed and therefore its functionality is defined. For this reason, there is a need to ensure sustainability in order to ensure the we continue to enjoy the benefits that come from urban planning and to ensure that future generations will continue enjoying these benefits.

To guarantee this, land use planning come into the fold. In a broader sense, this is a tool through which State defines the type of use land will have within a settlement, e.g. a city, while also determining the guidelines for its use in order to ensure effectiveness and sustainability. Land use, in this case, is assigned on the basis on its physical and functional characteristics that they have in the urban structure, and with the aim of occupying the space in an orderly manner and according to their physical capacity (occupation of areas suitable for urban development and environmental sustainability ), which finally it translates into a harmonious growth of the city. This tool is structured through a planning system at the national and local level, which establishes the general guidelines that should be taken into account for the development of urban development. Here, the authorities involved might formulate a number of restrictions to guarantee sustainability, for example, banning land development in riparian zones or in national parks. Basically, the goal here is to protect the environment.

Throughout the world, there are rising levels of environmental degradation due to unclean energy usage in the development and powering of cities and neighborhoods. In the 20th century, there was a global push to develop large cities quickly to accommodate the people who were migrating from rural areas to cities for jobs.

[ 14 ] The type of energy used for this was either coal or oil fuel, which meant that the environment was disregarded and damaged by numerous urban development projects.

[ 14 ] Today, the United Nations has found that over half of the world's population lives in cities that are still growing.

[ 15 ] In order to create environmentally viable urban landscapes, the UN advocated for green energy use, as well as urban development that encouraged green-friendly transportation. In the United States, about 75% of the energy used is allocated to power buildings and modes of transportation; land use planning can be a useful tool in changing these aspects of energy usage in a way that would be beneficial to both residents and the ecology.

[ 14 ] A sustainable urban development includes: Methods for reducing waste, such as recycling and composting programs that are easily accessible to residents.

[ 14 ] Limiting pollution, with techniques such as protecting universal access to necessities and encouraging access to facilities, goods, and services in ways that do not require the use of a car.

[ 16 ] Encouraging public transportation usage and spread within a city.

[ 17 ] The Partnership for Sustainable Communities, created by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development , the U.S. Department Of Transportation , and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency in 2009 was intended to encourage sustainable land use planning. This partnership helps to ensure that federal housing projects, transportation, and other neighborhood infrastructure would help residents live closer to jobs, while also reducing pollution since there would be less commute time. Over the past decade, this federal partnership has funded 1,066 projects across the 50 States, as well as Washington D.C. and Puerto Rico.

[ 17 ] The total amount of grant money given to these projects has reached approximately $4.6 billion.

[ 17 ] Some of the programs that the partnership sponsors are the Housing and Urban Development's “Sustainable Communities Regional Planning” and “Community Challenge Grant Programs”.

[ 17 ] These programs have made important strides in sustainable urban planning, with about 40 percent of U.S. citizens now having access to communities who were awarded these grants. Both of these programs make up $240 million in federal investment towards local land use planning efforts.

[ 16 ] Types of planning [ edit ] Various types of planning have emerged over the course of the 20th century. Below are the six main typologies of planning, as defined by David Walters in his book, Designing Communities (2007): Traditional or comprehensive planning : Common in the US after World War II, characterized by politically neutral experts with a rational view of the new urban development. Focused on producing clear statements about the form and content of new development.

Systems planning : 1950s–1970s, resulting from the failure of comprehensive planning to deal with the unforeseen growth of post World War II America. More analytical view of the planning area as a set of complex processes, less interested in a physical plan.

[ 18 ] Democratic planning : 1960s. Result of societal loosening of class and race barriers. Gave more citizens a voice in planning for future of community.

Advocacy and equity planning : 1960s & 70s. Strands of democratic planning that sought specifically to address social issues of inequality and injustice in community planning.

[ 19 ] Strategic planning : 1960s-present. Recognizes small-scale objectives and pragmatic real-world constraints.

Environmental planning : 1960s–present. Developed as many of the ecological and social implications of global development were first widely understood.

[ 6 ] Today, successful planning involves a balanced mix of analysis of the existing conditions and constraints; extensive public engagement; practical planning and design; and financially and politically feasible strategies for implementation.

[ 7 ] Current processes include a combination of strategic and environmental planning. It is becoming more widely understood that any sector of land has a certain capacity for supporting human, animal, and vegetative life in harmony, and that upsetting this balance has dire consequences on the environment. Planners and citizens often take on an advocacy role during the planning process in an attempt to influence public policy.

[ 6 ] Since the 1990s, the activist/environmentalist approach to planning has grown into the Smart Growth movement, characterized by the focus on more sustainable and less environmentally damaging forms of development.

[ 6 ] Moreover, there is changes on the requirements of land use planning overtime. For example, whilst most of the urban planners suggest the distance from the landfill that a housing estate should be built, they must also take wind direction into consideration.

[ 20 ] Aerial view of Rosslyn-Ballston corridor in Arlington, Virginia . High density, mixed use development is concentrated within ¼–½ mile from the Rosslyn , Court House and Clarendon Washington Metro stations (shown in red), with limited density outside that area.  This photograph is taken from the United States Environmental Protection Agency [ 21 ] website describing Arlington's award for overall excellence in smart growth in 2002 — the first ever granted by the agency.

Smart growth supports the integration of mixed land uses into communities as a critical component of achieving better places to live. Putting uses in close proximity to one another has benefits for transportation alternatives to driving, security, community cohesiveness, local economies, and general quality of life issues. Smart growth strives to provide a means for communities to alter the planning context which currently renders mixed land uses illegal in most of the country.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Methods [ edit ] Professional planners work in the public sector for governmental and non-profit agencies, and in the private sector for businesses related to land, community, and economic development. Through research, design, and analysis of data, a planner's work is to create a plan for some aspect of a community. This process typically involves gathering public input to develop the vision and goals for the community.

A charrette is a facilitated planning workshop often used by professional planners to gather information from their clients and the public about the project at hand. Charettes involve a diverse set of stakeholders in the planning process, to ensure that the final plan comprehensively addresses the study area.

Geographic information systems , or GIS, are very useful and important tools in land use planning. It uses aerial photography to show land parcels, topography, street names, and other pertinent information. GIS systems contain layers of graphic information and their relational databases that may be projected into maps that allow the user to view a composite of a specific area, adding an array of graphically oriented decision-making tools to the planning process.

[ 7 ] A transect , as used in planning, is a hierarchical scale of environmental zones that define a land area by its character, ranging from rural, preserved land to urban centers. As a planning methodology, the transect is used as a tool for managing growth and sustainability by planning land use around the physical character of the land. This allows a community to plan for growth while preserving the natural and historical nature of their environment.

[ 7 ] Natural ecology and historical identity of the city are matched to its topography in the Urban Landscape System approach that intends to mitigate effects of climate change and improve city branding through the ontology of place.

Another approach to land use planning is the use of " traditional and local knowledge ," or TLK, or local, Indigenous, and place-bound ways of knowing. Categories of TLK include 1) knowledge about the environment, 2) knowledge about the current use of areas, 3) knowledge of management systems, 4) values associate with the environment (i.e., spirituality and culture). There is growing literature about how to effectively incorporate and represent TLK in land use and management plans.

[ 24 ] Basis of land use planning authority in the United States [ edit ] Police power is the basis for land use planning authority in the United States. This authority is usually delegated by state governments to local governments, including counties and cities. It is these local governments that most frequently exercise police power in land use planning matters. The regulation of land use based on police power is distinct from the taking of private property by the government through the power of eminent domain. If the regulation of land use is done under the authority of the police power, the private property owner isn't typically entitled to compensation as they would be if property was taken under the power of eminent domain. The court decision in the case Commonwealth v. Alger was related to land use planning and dealt with the construction of a wharf on privately owned tidelands around Boston Harbor.

[ 25 ] Practical examples [ edit ] Milan [ edit ] Milan city is located in northern Italy. It is the second most populous city in the country after Rome with a population of over 4 million (The CBD and its metropolitan Boroughs).

Every area in Milan is a segment that starts from the center and reaches the city limits, so that central areas and peripheral areas are part of the same area.  In Milan, zones are not identified by names but numbers. The city hall area 1 of Milan includes the entire historical center, starting from the geographical center of Milan in Piazza Duomo up to the Cerchia dei Bastioni. The town hall area 2 goes from Piazza della Repubblica to Crescenzago, Turro, Greco and Precotto. The town hall 3 goes from Porta Venezia to Lambrate, passing through Città Studi.

[ 8 ] Milan, Italy.

The town hall area 4 goes from Porta Vittoria to the Forlanini park, also including Porta Romana, Corvetto and Santa Giulia.  The town hall 5 goes from Porta Ticinese to the Agricultural Park, passing through Chiesa Rossa and Gratosoglio. The town hall 6 goes from the Darsena, up to Barona, Lorenteggio and Giambellino. The city hall area 7 goes from Porta Magenta to Baggio and Figino passing through San Siro. The town hall zone 8 goes from Porta Volta to Quarto Oggiaro, passing through QT8 and Gallaratese. And lastly, the town hall area 9 goes from Porta Nuova to Niguarda and Bovisa. The idea here, is to allow members of the nine zones to get easy access to the CBD. Effective measures have been put in place to limit the impact of human activities on the many water bodies in this city such as restricting land development in riparian areas. In fact, the drive for the establishment of the city on the land where it stands was easy accessibility to water.

[ 8 ] Indigenous communities [ edit ] Land use planning is an important method for sustainable development for Indigenous communities. Indigenous peoples in the United States and Canada often have fragmented or diminishing land bases with limited uses. Oftentimes, these land bases are also far from urban centers and with limited expansion ability.

[ 26 ] Since European settlers first began colonizing the American Continent, Indigenous peoples have lost 98.9% of their land, a Yale study found. The lands indigenous peoples were forced onto are facing current and future climate-change related risks.

[ 27 ] This fact leads to the perpetuation of systematic inequity for Indigenous peoples, since livelihoods, preservation of culture and tradition, access to adequate housing, and access to resources are all factors that are deeply rooted in land. Many Indigenous groups are embracing land use planning to determine the future of their territories. In Canada, for example, the Dehcho First Nations have developed a land use plan that honors cultural traditions and Elders' knowledge, and incorporates conservation, development zones, and other categories.

[ 28 ] This plan, which has been extensively researched, can serve as an excellent model for other Indigenous Nations, and for cities and areas across North America.

[ 29 ] Examples in the Global South [ edit ] While most of the examples discussed in this article were drawn from cities in the Global North , land use planning has been employed in cities all over the world. The Global North has traditionally been dominant in planning theory and practice. However, as the world continues to quickly urbanize, and the global population increases, most of the new global population growth is occurring in cities in the developing world, or the Global South.

[ 11 ] Many of the assumptions about land use planning do not hold true elsewhere in the world, especially as developing nations face urbanization at a more rapid scale than most countries in the Global North. In India , for example, land use planning, specifically as it pertains to siting industries, has been incorporated into the nation's constitution, and is controlled by the State and Federal levels of government.

[ 30 ] The future of land use planning [ edit ] Due to the increasing discussions in the issues of climate change and global warming, the future of land use planning will be dominated by environmental sustainability themes more than economic convenience.

[ 31 ] Also, due to the fact that the world is quickly urbanizing, and this massive population growth is mostly occurring in cities in the Global South, some of the assumptions we have formed about land use planning must be reimagined, as common theory and practice is no longer always relevant to those cities that are currently practicing land use planning.

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Environmental planning – Considering environment in developing land Federal Land Use Policy Act of 1976 Geographic Information Systems – System to capture, manage, and present geographic data Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Inter-municipal land use planning Landscape architecture – Design of outdoor public areas, landmarks, and structures Landscape planning – Branch of architecture List of urban plans Regional planning – Land use planning above city or town level Smart growth – Urban planning philosophy Spatial planning – Technique for physical organisation of space Sustainable development – Mode of human development Transferable development rights – Concept in American planning law Transportation planning – Process of planning for movement of people and goods Urban design – Designing and shaping of human settlements Urban planning – Technical process of land use and urban design Village Development Committee (India) Academic journals [ edit ] Main article: List of planning journals Journal of Transport and Landuse Environment and Planning Journal of land use and Environmental Law Journal of the American Planning Association Planning Theory References [ edit ] ^ Young, A., 2003 [ page needed ] ^ Canadian Institute of Planners, 2011 [ page needed ] ^ a b American Planning Association, 2011 [ page needed ] ^ a b Barnett, J., 2004 [ page needed ] ^ Martha Derthick.

Dilemmas of Scale in America's Federal Democracy . p. 257.

^ a b c d Walters, D., 2007 [ page needed ] ^ a b c d Southwestern NC Planning and Economic Development Commission, Community Foundation of WNC, & the Lawrence Group Architects of NC, Inc., 2009 [ page needed ] ^ a b c Savini, Federico; Aalbers, Manuel B (2016-07-26). "The de-contextualisation of land use planning through financialisation: Urban redevelopment in Milan".

European Urban and Regional Studies .

23 (4): 878– 894.

Bibcode : 2016EURS...23..878S .

doi : 10.1177/0969776415585887 .

ISSN 0969-7764 .

S2CID 156938620 .

^ a b c d e f Long, Hualou; Qu, Yi (May 2018). "Land use transitions and land management: A mutual feedback perspective".

Land Use Policy .

74 : 111– 120.

doi : 10.1016/j.landusepol.2017.03.021 .

ISSN 0264-8377 .

S2CID 51938021 .

^ Lewis, Roger K. (1987) “The Powers and Pitfalls of Zoning,” and “From Zoning to Master Planning and Back.” In Shaping the City . Washington, DC: AIA Press, 1987, pp. 274–281.

ISBN 0913962880 .

^ a b c Watson, Vanessa (2009).

"Seeing from the South: Refocusing Urban Planning on the Globe's Central Urban Issues" .

Urban Studies .

46 (11): 2259– 2275.

Bibcode : 2009UrbSt..46.2259W .

doi : 10.1177/0042098009342598 .

ISSN 0042-0980 .

JSTOR 43198476 .

S2CID 154450251 .

^ D'Amico, Leonardo and Glaeser, Edward L. and Gyourko, Joseph and Kerr, William R. and Ponzetto, Giacomo A. M., "Why Has Construction Productivity Stagnated?" The Role of Land-Use Regulation (December 30, 2023) ^ (Lee & Yeo, 2018; Von Haaren et al., 2016) ^ a b c d Ziegler, Edward H. (2009-07-10). "The case for megapolitan growth management in the twenty-first century: Regional urban planning and sustainable development in the USA".

International Journal of Law in the Built Environment .

1 (2): 105– 129.

doi : 10.1108/17561450910974722 .

ISSN 1756-1450 .

^ Mercier, Jean (June 2009). "Equity, Social Justice, and Sustainable Urban Transportation in the Twenty-First Century".

Administrative Theory & Praxis .

31 (2): 145– 163.

doi : 10.2753/ATP1084-1806310201 .

ISSN 1084-1806 .

S2CID 153413752 .

^ a b Agyeman, Julian; Evans, Tom (November 2003). "Toward Just Sustainability in Urban Communities: Building Equity Rights with Sustainable Solutions".

The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science .

590 (1): 35– 53.

doi : 10.1177/0002716203256565 .

ISSN 0002-7162 .

S2CID 145274467 .

^ a b c d Baker, Shana (2015). "Changing the Landscape of Livability".

Public Roads .

[ page needed ] ^ House, R. W.; Warfield, J. N. (1969-03-01).

"What is system planning?" .

Automatica .

5 (2): 151– 157.

doi : 10.1016/0005-1098(69)90008-9 .

ISSN 0005-1098 .

^ Krumholz, Norman (2015), "Advocacy and Equity Planning" , International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences , Elsevier, pp.

218– 222, doi : 10.1016/b978-0-08-097086-8.74001-3 , ISBN 978-0-08-097087-5 , retrieved 2021-12-08 ^ Li, Rita Yi Man and Li, Herru Ching Yu (2018). "Have Housing Prices Gone with the Smelly Wind? Big Data Analysis on Landfill in Hong Kong".

Sustainability , 10(2), 341 ; doi : 10.3390/su10020341 ^ "Arlington County, Virginia – National Award for Smart Growth Achievement – 2002 Winners Presentation | Smart Growth | US EPA" . Epa.gov. 2006-06-28. Archived from the original on July 29, 2012 . Retrieved 2012-12-30 .

^ Smart Growth Network, 2011 ^ Raman, Rewati; Roy, Uttam Kumar (November 2019). "Taxonomy of urban mixed land use planning".

Land Use Policy .

88 : 104102.

doi : 10.1016/j.landusepol.2019.104102 .

S2CID 201338748 .

^ Markkula, Inkeri; Turunen, Minna T.; Kantola, Sini (2019).

"Traditional and local knowledge in land use planning: insights into the use of the Akwé: Kon Guidelines in Eanodat, Finnish Sápmi" .

Ecology and Society .

24 (1).

doi : 10.5751/ES-10735-240120 .

ISSN 1708-3087 .

JSTOR 26796911 .

S2CID 120166443 .

^ Understanding the Law of Zoning and Land Use Controls , Barlow Burke, Lexisnexis, Chapter 1, Published 2002 ^ "Home" .

www.oecd-ilibrary.org . Retrieved 2021-12-07 .

^ "Near Total Loss of Historical Lands Leaves Indigenous Nations in the U.S. More Vulnerable to Climate Change" .

Yale School of the Environment . 2021-10-28 . Retrieved 2021-12-08 .

^ "Land Use Planning" .

Indigenous Leadership Initiative . Retrieved 2021-12-07 .

^ "Dehcho Land Use Plan" .

Dehcho First Nations . Retrieved 2021-12-08 .

^ Gupta, J (2006-03-31).

"Land use planning in India" .

Journal of Hazardous Materials .

130 (3): 300– 306.

doi : 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2005.07.006 .

PMID 16111811 .

^ Stürck, J., Levers, C., van der Zanden, E. H., Schulp, C. J. E., Verkerk, P. J., Kuemmerle, T., ... & Schrammeijer, E. (2018). "Simulating and delineating future land change trajectories across Europe".

Regional Environmental Change , 18 (3), 733–749.

Bibliography [ edit ] Barnet, J. (2004).

Codifying New Urbanism: How to Reform Municipal Land Development Regulations , Chicago, IL.

Southwestern NC Planning and Economic Development Commission, Community Foundation of WNC, & the Lawrence Group Architects of NC, Inc. (2009).

Region A Toolbox, A Pilot of the Mountain Landscapes Initiative , Sylva, NC.

Walters, David. (2007).

Designing Community, Charrettes, Master plans and Form-based Codes , Oxford, UK.

Young, Anthony. (1993).

Guidelines for land use Planning , Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome, Italy.

External links [ edit ] American Planning Association , Chicago, IL "Planning Is ...", Canadian Institute of Planners , Ottawa, ON Smart Growth Online , National Center for Appropriate Technology, Butte, MT "Arlington County, Virginia" , U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC "An overview of spatial policy in Asian and European countries" , Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism (MILT) , Japan v t e Urban planning History Theories Index Outline General Urban area City Metropolitan area Suburb Land use Planning Planning and zoning commission Growth management World Urbanism Day Labor market area Major branches General Land-use planning Comprehensive planning (US) History of urban planning Spatial planning (Eur) Redevelopment Urban design Urban green space Urbanism Rural Conservation development Preservation development Rural housing Village design statement (UK) Regional planning Regional Planning Association of America Environmental planning Environmental design Environmental impact assessment Recreation resource planning Sustainable development Transportation planning Transportation forecasting Trip distribution Rational planning model Transit-oriented development Professional transportation planner Urban freight distribution Economic development Community economic development Concepts/ theories Movements Athens Charter Car-free movement City Beautiful movement Dark-sky movement Garden city movement Indigenous planning NIMBY New Urbanism Settlement movement Smart growth Structuralism Transition towns YIMBY Theories Collaborative planning Context theory Ekistics Intelligent urbanism Livable streets Market urbanism Radical planning Urban renewal Cities by type Company town / Monotown Commuter town Ghost town Global city Mining community Pit village Man camp Logging camp Model village Planned community (New town) Intentional community Arcology Urban village Boomtown Concepts Affordable housing Cityscape Cluster development Complete Communities Conservation community Creative city Eminent domain (US) Filtering (housing) Gentrification / Brusselization Infill Healthy cities / Healthy community design LEED-ND Leapfrog development Mixed-use development Permeability Placemaking Planning gain Planning Permission Rural flight Temporary use Third place Tract housing Transferable development rights Urban decay Urban growth boundary Urban sprawl / Peri-urbanisation Urban vitality Urbanization Verticalization / High-rise urbanism Zoning People Theorists/ practitioners Edward Bassett Andrés Duany Clarence Perry Clarence Stein Colin Buchanan Daniel Burnham Donald Appleyard Ebenezer Howard Edmund Bacon Guy Benveniste Ian McHarg James Rouse Konstantinos Doxiadis Kevin A. Lynch Le Corbusier Loretta Lees Peter Calthorpe Patrick Geddes Raymond Unwin Thomas Adams List of urban theorists List of urban planners Critics Elizabeth Farrelly Jane Jacobs James Howard Kunstler Lewis Mumford Randal O'Toole Training Planning education Planning Accreditation Board Real estate education Professional organizations Places Countries Australia China Czech Republic Russia Serbia Singapore United Kingdom Taiwan Cities Barcelona Shanghai Sydney Other Africa Communist countries Nazi Germany Ancient Egypt Related fields Architecture Civil engineering Development economics Environmental social science Geography Land development Landscape architecture Marine spatial planning Public health Public policy Real estate development Social sciences Urban ecology Urban economics Cities portal Category List of planned cities List of planning journals Commons v t e Environmental social science Fields Ecological anthropology Ecological economics Environmental anthropology Environmental crime Environmental economics Environmental communication Environmental history Environmental politics Environmental psychology Environmental sociology Human ecology Human geography Political ecology Regional science Related Agroecology Anthrozoology Behavioral geography Community studies Demography Design ecological environmental Ecological humanities Economics energy thermo Environmental education ethics law science studies justice racism Ethnobiology botany ecology zoology Forestry Industrial ecology Integrated geography Permaculture Political representation of nature Rural sociology Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Sustainability science studies Systems ecology Urban ecology geography metabolism studies Applied Architecture landscape sustainable Ecopsychology Engineering ecological environmental Green criminology Health environmental epidemiology occupational public Management environmental fisheries forest natural resource waste Planning environmental land use regional spatial urban Policy energy environmental Environment portal Category Concepts Degrees Journals Research institutes Scholars v t e Natural resources Air Pollution / quality Ambient standards (US) Index Indoor Law Clean Air Act (US) Ozone depletion Emissions Airshed Trading Deforestation (REDD) Energy Bio Law Resources Fossil fuels ( gas , peak coal , peak gas , peak oil ) Geothermal Hydro Nuclear Solar sunlight shade Wind Land Agricultural arable peak farmland Degradation Field Landscape cityscape seascape soundscape viewshed Law property Management habitat conservation Minerals gemstone industrial ore metal mining law sand peak copper phosphorus rights Soil conservation fertility health resilience Use planning reserve Life Biodiversity Bioprospecting biopiracy Biosphere Bushfood Bushmeat Fisheries climate change law management Forests genetic resources law management non-timber products Game law Marine conservation Meadow Pasture Plants FAO Plant Treaty food genetic resources gene banks herbal medicines UPOV Convention wood Rangeland Seed bank Wildlife conservation management Water Types / location Aquifer storage and recovery Drinking Fresh Groundwater pollution recharge remediation Hydrosphere Ice bergs glacial polar Irrigation huerta Marine Rain harvesting Stormwater Surface water Sewage reclaimed water Watershed Aspects Desalination Floods Law Leaching Sanitation improved Scarcity Security Supply Efficiency Conflict Conservation Peak water Pollution Privatization Quality Right Resources improved policy Related Commons enclosure global land tragedy of Economics ecological land Ecosystem services Exploitation overexploitation Earth Overshoot Day Management adaptive Natural capital accounting good Natural heritage Nature reserve remnant natural area Systems ecology Urban ecology Wilderness Resource Common-pool Conflict (perpetuation) Curse Depletion Extraction Nationalism Renewable / Non-renewable Politics Oil war Petroleum politics Petrostate Petro-Islam Resource war Category v t e Social sciences Outline History Index Primary Anthropology archaeology cultural social physical Economics microeconomics macroeconomics econometrics mathematical Geography physical human technical integrated History cultural auxiliary sciences economic human military political social Law jurisprudence legal history legal systems public law private law Linguistics semiotics Political science international relations comparative philosophy public policy public administration Psychology abnormal cognitive developmental personality social Sociology criminology demography internet rural urban Interdisciplinary Administration business public Anthrozoology Area studies Business studies Cognitive science Communication studies Community studies Criminology Critical animal studies Cultural studies Development studies Education Environmental social science studies Food studies Gender studies Global studies Historical sociology History of technology Human ecology Information science International studies Linguistics Management Media studies Philosophies science economics history psychology social science Planning land use regional urban Political ecology Political economy Political sociology Public health Regional science Science and technology studies Science studies historical Quantum social science Social work Vegan studies List List of social science journals Other categorizations Behavioural sciences Geisteswissenschaft Human science Humanities Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐vzcnb
Cached time: 20250816092528
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.767 seconds
Real time usage: 0.981 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6758/1000000
Revision size: 45357/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 234843/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5502/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 129701/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.464/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24509193/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  772.348      1 -total
 34.42%  265.834      1 Template:Reflist
 27.21%  210.119     16 Template:Annotated_link
 11.33%   87.532      1 Template:Public_Infrastructure
 11.26%   86.943     11 Template:Navbox
  9.79%   75.631      7 Template:Page_needed
  8.59%   66.310     11 Template:Cite_journal
  8.58%   66.230      7 Template:Fix
  8.27%   63.884      1 Template:Cite_book
  7.52%   58.112     14 Template:Delink Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:603913:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816092528 and revision id 1299004038. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Land-use_planning&oldid=1299004038 " Category : Land use Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2025 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from November 2011 United States-centric Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 01:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Land-use planning 5 languages Add topic

