Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 History 3 Notes 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Heliometer 21 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Ido Italiano Кыргызча Lëtzebuergesch Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Astronomical measuring instrument Heliometer at the Kuffner observatory (Vienna, Austria) Heliometer split lens, displayed at Custer Observatory, Long Island, New York.

A heliometer (from Greek ἥλιος hḗlios "sun" and measure ) is an instrument originally designed for measuring the variation of the Sun 's diameter at different seasons of the year, but applied now to the modern form of the instrument which is capable of much wider use.

[ 1 ] Description [ edit ] Heliometer by Carl Bamberg , Berlin, around 1880/1890. Diameter of the lens 4.2 cm.

Double image of the solar disk The basic concept is to introduce a split element into a telescope's optical path so as to produce a double image. If one element is moved using a screw micrometer , precise angle measurements can be made. The simplest arrangement is to split the object lens in half, with one half fixed and the other attached to the micrometer screw and slid along the cut diameter. To measure the diameter of the Sun, for example, the micrometer is first adjusted so that the two images of the solar disk coincide (the "zero" position where the split elements form essentially a single element). The micrometer is then adjusted so that diametrically opposite sides of the two images of the solar disk just touch each other. The difference in the two micrometer readings so obtained is the (angular) diameter of the Sun. Similarly, a precise measurement of the apparent separation between two nearby stars, A and B , is made by first superimposing the two images of the stars and then adjusting the double image so that star A in one image coincides with star B in the other. The difference in the two micrometer readings so obtained is the apparent separation or angular distance between the two stars.

History [ edit ] The Syrian Arab astronomer Mu'ayyad al-Din al-Urdi , in his book, described a device called "the instrument with the two holes," which he used to measure and observe the apparent diameters of the Sun and the Moon.

[ 2 ] : 43 The first application of the divided object-glass and the employment of double images in astronomical measures is due to Servington Savery of Shilstone in 1743.

Pierre Bouguer , in 1748, originated the true conception of measurement by double image without the auxiliary aid of a filar micrometer , that is by changing the distance between two object-glasses of equal focus.

[ 1 ] John Dollond , in 1754, combined Savary's idea of the divided object-glass with Bouguer's method of measurement, resulting in the construction of the first really practical heliometers. As far as we [ who?

] can ascertain, Joseph von Fraunhofer , some time not long before 1820, constructed the first heliometer with an achromatic divided object-glass, i.e. the first heliometer of the modern type.

[ 1 ] The first successful measurements of stellar parallax (to determine the distance to a star) were made by Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel in 1838 for the star 61 Cygni using a Fraunhofer heliometer.

[ 3 ] This was the 6.2-inch (157.5 mm) aperture Fraunhofer heliometer at Königsberg Observatory built by Joseph von Fraunhofer's firm, though he did not live to see it delivered to Bessel.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Although the heliometer was difficult to use, it had certain advantages for Bessel including a wider field of view compared to other great refractors of the period, and overcame atmospheric turbulence in measurements compared to a filar micrometer .

[ 5 ] Heliometer at Yale College, New Haven, US: c.

1910, built by Repsolds Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Gill, David (1911). " Heliometer ". In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 13 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

224– 230.

^ Fuat Sezgin (2010).

History Of Science And Technology In Islam . Institute for the History of Arabic–Islamic Science.

^ Zeilik, Michael A.; Gregory, Stephan A. (1998).

Introductory Astronomy & Astrophysics (4th ed.). Saunders College Publishing. p. 44.

ISBN 0-03-006228-4 .

.

^ "Photos" .

klima-luft.de .

Archived from the original on 29 December 2019 . Retrieved 16 August 2015 .

^ a b Alan W. Hirshfeld (2002).

Parallax: The Race to Measure the Cosmos . Henry Holt and Company. p. 253.

ISBN 978-0-8050-7133-7 .

Further reading [ edit ] Willach, Rolf.  "The Heliometer:  Instrument for Gauging Distances in Space." Journal of the Antique Telescope Society , number 26, pp. 5–16 (2004).

External links [ edit ] Look up heliometer in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Photos from the largest heliometer in the world  (Kuffner-Observatory, Vienna) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Heliometer&oldid=1302529835 " Categories : Telescope types Measuring instruments Sun Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2019 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2015 This page was last edited on 26 July 2025, at 00:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Heliometer 21 languages Add topic

