Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Analytic propositions 2 Other uses Toggle Other uses subsection 2.1 Informal speech 2.2 Moral propositions 2.3 Mathematics 3 See also 4 Notes Toggle the table of contents Self-evidence 5 languages Deutsch Eesti Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Self-evident ) Epistemologically probative proposition This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Self-evidence" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In epistemology (theory of knowledge), a self-evident proposition is a proposition that is known to be true by understanding its meaning without proof , [ citation needed ] and/or by ordinary human reason .

Some epistemologists deny that any proposition can be self-evident. For most others, one's belief that oneself is conscious and possesses free will are offered as examples of self-evidence. However, one's belief that someone else is conscious or has free will are not epistemically self-evident.

The following proposition is often said to be self-evident: "A finite whole is greater than, or equal to, any of its parts".

A logical argument for a self-evident conclusion would demonstrate only an ignorance of the purpose of persuasively arguing for the conclusion based on one or more premises that differ from it (see ignoratio elenchi and begging the question ).

Analytic propositions [ edit ] It is sometimes said that a self-evident proposition is one whose denial is self-contradictory. It is also sometimes said that an analytic proposition is one whose denial is self-contradictory. But the concepts mean different things, i.e., an analytic proposition is not always a self-evident proposition.

[ further explanation needed ] Provided that one understands and believes a self-evident proposition, self-evident propositions are not in need of proof. Likewise, that their denial is self-contradictory does not need to be proven. It is in this sense that the self-contradictions at work in self-evident and analytic propositions are different.

Not all analytic propositions are self-evident, and it is sometimes claimed that not all self-evident propositions are analytic: e.g. my knowledge that I am conscious.

Other uses [ edit ] Informal speech [ edit ] In informal speech, self-evident often merely means obvious , but the epistemological definition is stricter.

Moral propositions [ edit ] Moral propositions may also be regarded as self-evident, although the is–ought problem described by David Hume considers that there is no coherent way to transition from a positive statement to a normative one.

For example, Alexander Hamilton cited the following moral propositions as self-evident in the Federalist No. 23 : The means ought to be proportioned to the end.

Every power ought to be commensurate with its object.

There ought to be no limitation of a power destined to effect a purpose which is itself incapable of limitation.

A famous claim of the self-evidence of a moral truth is in the United States Declaration of Independence , which states, "We hold these Truths to be self-evident , that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights , that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness ."; philosophically, these propositions' self-evidence is debatable.

Mathematics [ edit ] In mathematics , self-evident refers to statements that need no proof. Sometimes axioms are described as self-evident.

[ 1 ] Other statements are self-evident because the statement is a proof for itself.

[ citation needed ] .

See also [ edit ] Look up self-evidence in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

2 + 2 = 5 § Self-evident truth and self-evident falsehood Axiom Contradiction Foundationalism Introspection Law of identity Primitive notion Self-reference Self-refuting idea infinite regress Notes [ edit ] ^ Maddy, Penelope (1988).

"Believing the Axioms" (PDF) .

Journal of Symbolic Logic .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Self-evidence&oldid=1267060063 " Categories : Sources of knowledge Evidence A priori Fallacies Barriers to critical thinking Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2023 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2014 Articles containing Latin-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2023 This page was last edited on 3 January 2025, at 12:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Self-evidence 5 languages Add topic

