Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 General principles Toggle General principles subsection 1.1 Principles of review 2 Types Toggle Types subsection 2.1 Review of administrative acts and secondary legislation 2.2 Review of primary legislation 2.2.1 No review by any courts 2.2.2 Review by general courts 2.2.3 Review by a specialized court 3 History 4 In specific jurisdictions 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Judicial review 22 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Hausa हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית मराठी 日本語 Português Română Русский Simple English Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ability of courts to review actions by executive and legislatures Not to be confused with Law review .

This article is about court power over non-judicial branches. For court power over lower courts, see Appellate review .

Judicial interpretation Forms Constitutional review Judicial opinion In Catholic canon law In Islamic jurisprudence Kritarchy Statutory interpretation Judicial misconduct Activism Chilling effect Discretion Immunity Restraint Ultra vires General rules of interpretation Accountability Adversarial system Appeal Conflict of laws Forum shopping Jurisdictional arbitrage Lex loci Golden rule Inquisitorial system Interpretation Act Jury nullification Justiciability Letter and spirit of the law Mischief rule Nondelegation doctrine Plain meaning rule Polycentric law Precedent Reasonableness Rule according to higher law Separation of powers Judicial independence Parliamentary sovereignty General theories of interpretation Common good constitutionalism Court administration Judicial reform Jurisprudence Indeterminacy debate Legal realism Legal process Legal formalism Legitimacy Living Constitution / Living tree / Living instrument Opinio juris sive necessitatis Originalism ( original meaning ) Original intent ( legislative intent , legislative history ) Purposive approach Strict constructionism Textualism International Anarchy Hard law International litigation International legal theories Monism and dualism Peremptory norm Soft law Universal jurisdiction v t e Administrative law General principles Administrative court Delegated legislation Exhaustion of remedies Justiciability Judicial interpretation Ministerial act Ouster clause Prerogative writ Certiorari Habeas corpus Mandamus Prohibition Quo warranto Rulemaking Ultra vires Grounds for judicial review Fettering of discretion Legitimate expectation Nondelegation doctrine Procedural justice Natural justice Due process Abuse Fundamental justice Speedy trial Proportionality Unreasonableness Wednesbury Patent unreasonableness Administrative law in common law jurisdictions Australia Canada Singapore South Africa United Kingdom Scotland United States Administrative law in civil law jurisdictions China Mongolia Ukraine Related topics Constitutional law v t e The High Court of Australia . Under the Constitution of Australia , the judiciary forms part of the separation of powers , with executive or legislative actions subject to review by the judiciary. Laws, acts and governmental actions that are incompatible with a higher authority (e.g. the Constitution) can be reviewed and overturned.

Judicial review is a process under which a government's executive , legislative , or administrative actions are subject to review by the judiciary .

[ 1 ] : 79 In a judicial review, a court may invalidate laws, acts, or governmental actions that are incompatible with a higher authority. For example, an executive decision may be invalidated for being unlawful, or a statute may be invalidated for violating the terms of a constitution . Judicial review is one of the checks and balances in the separation of powers —the power of the judiciary to supervise ( judicial supervision ) the legislative and executive branches when the latter exceed their authority.

The doctrine varies between jurisdictions, so the procedure and scope of judicial review may differ between and within countries. The judiciary in United States has been described as having unusually strong powers of judicial review from a comparative perspective.

[ 2 ] General principles [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( August 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Judicial review can be understood in the context of two distinct—but parallel—legal systems, civil law and common law , and also by two distinct theories of democracy regarding the manner in which government should be organized with respect to the principles and doctrines of legislative supremacy and the separation of powers.

First, two distinct legal systems, civil law and common law , have different views about judicial review. Common-law judges are seen as sources of law, capable of creating new legal principles, and also capable of rejecting legal principles that are no longer valid. In the civil-law tradition, judges are seen as those who apply the law, with no power to create (or destroy) legal principles.

Secondly, the idea of separation of powers is another theory about how a democratic society's government should be organized. In contrast to legislative supremacy, the idea of separation of powers was first introduced by Montesquieu ; [ 3 ] it was later institutionalized in the United States by the Supreme Court's ruling in Marbury v. Madison that the court had the power of judicial review to enforce the separation of powers stated in the US Constitution. This was left uncontested by the U.S. Congress and president Thomas Jefferson , despite his expressed opposition to the principle of judicial review by an unelected body.

Separation of powers is based on the idea that no branch of government should be able to exert power over any other branch without due process of law ; each branch of government should have a check on the powers of the other branches of government, thus creating a regulative balance among all branches of government. The key to this idea is checks and balances . In the United States, judicial review is considered a key check on the powers of the other two branches of government by the judiciary.

Differences in organizing democratic societies led to different views regarding judicial review, with societies based on common law and those stressing a separation of powers being the most likely to utilize judicial review.

[ citation needed ] Nevertheless, many countries whose legal systems are based on the idea of legislative supremacy have gradually adopted or expanded the scope of judicial review, including countries from both the civil law and common law traditions.

Another reason why judicial review should be understood in the context of both the development of two distinct legal systems ( civil law and common law ) and two theories of democracy (legislative supremacy and separation of powers) is that some countries with common-law systems do not have judicial review of primary legislation. Though a common-law system is present in the United Kingdom, the country still has a strong attachment to the idea of legislative supremacy; consequently, judges in the United Kingdom do not have the power to strike down primary legislation. However, when the United Kingdom became a member of the European Union there was tension between its tendency toward legislative supremacy and the EU's legal system, which specifically gives the Court of Justice of the European Union the power of judicial review.

Principles of review [ edit ] When carrying out judicial review a court may ensure that the principle of ultra vires are followed, that a public body's actions do not exceed the powers given to them by legislation.

[ 1 ] : 23 The decisions of administrative acts by public bodies under judicial review are not necessarily controlled in the same way that judicial decisions are, rather a court will enforce that principles of procedural fairness are followed when making judicial decisions.

[ 1 ] : 38 Types [ edit ] Review of administrative acts and secondary legislation [ edit ] Most modern legal systems allow the courts to review administrative "acts" (individual decisions of a public body, such as a decision to grant a subsidy or to withdraw a residence permit). In most systems, this also includes review of secondary legislation (legally enforceable rules of general applicability adopted by administrative bodies). Some countries (notably France and Germany) have implemented a system of administrative courts which are charged with resolving disputes between members of the public and the administration, regardless these courts are part of administration (France) or judiciary (Germany). In other countries (including the United States and United Kingdom), judicial review is carried out by regular civil courts although it may be delegated to specialized panels within these courts (such as the Administrative Court within the High Court of England and Wales ). The United States employs a mixed system in which some administrative decisions are reviewed by the United States district courts (which are the general trial courts), some are reviewed directly by the United States courts of appeals and others are reviewed by specialized tribunals such as the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (which, despite its name, is not technically part of the federal judicial branch). It is quite common that before a request for judicial review of an administrative act is filed with a court, certain preliminary conditions (such as a complaint to the authority itself) must be fulfilled. In most countries, the courts apply special procedures in administrative cases.

Review of primary legislation [ edit ] There are three broad approaches to judicial review of the constitutionality of primary legislation —that is, laws passed  directly by an elected legislature.

No review by any courts [ edit ] Some countries do not permit a review of the validity of primary legislation. In the United Kingdom, Acts of Parliament cannot be set aside under the doctrine of parliamentary sovereignty , whereas Orders in Council , another type of primary legislation not passed by Parliament, can (see Council of Civil Service Unions v Minister for the Civil Service (1985) and Miller / Cherry (2019)). Another example is the Netherlands , where the constitution expressly forbids the courts to rule on the question of constitutionality of primary legislation passed by the Dutch legislature or States-General .

[ 4 ] Review by general courts [ edit ] In countries which have inherited the English common law system of courts of general jurisdiction, judicial review is generally done by those courts, rather than specialised courts. Australia, Canada and the United States are all examples of this approach.

In the United States, federal and state courts (at all levels, both appellate and trial) are able to review and declare the " constitutionality ", or agreement with the Constitution (or lack thereof) of legislation by a process of judicial interpretation that is relevant to any case properly within their jurisdiction. In American legal language, "judicial review" refers primarily to the adjudication of the constitutionality of statutes, especially by the Supreme Court of the United States . Courts in the United States may also invoke judicial review in order to ensure that a statute is not depriving individuals of their constitutional rights.

[ 5 ] This is commonly held to have been established in the case of Marbury v. Madison , which was argued before the Supreme Court in 1803.

Judicial review in Canada and Australia pre-dates their establishment as countries, in 1867 and 1901, respectively. The British Colonial Laws Validity Act 1865 provided that a British colony could not enact laws which altered provisions of British laws which applied directly to the colony. Since the constitutions of Canada and Australia were enacted by the British Parliament, laws passed by governments in Australia and Canada had to be consistent with those constitutional provisions. More recently, the principle of judicial review flows from supremacy clauses in their constitutions.

[ 6 ] In Australia, the term 'judicial review' generally refers to reviews of the lawfulness of the actions of the executive and the public service, [ 7 ] while reviews of the compatibility of laws with the Australian Constitution is known as characterisation or constitutional challenges.

[ 8 ] Review by a specialized court [ edit ] Further information: Constitutional Court of the Czech Republic In 1920, Czechoslovakia adopted a system of judicial review by a specialized court, the Constitutional Court as written by Hans Kelsen , a leading jurist of the time. This system was also adopted the same time by Austria and became known as the Austrian System , also under the primary authorship of Hans Kelsen, being emulated by a number of other countries. In these systems, other courts are not competent to question the constitutionality of primary legislation; they often may, however, initiate the process of review by the Constitutional Court.

[ 9 ] Russia adopts a mixed model since (as in the US) courts at all levels, both federal and state, are empowered to review primary legislation and declare its constitutionality; as in the Czech Republic, there is a constitutional court in charge of reviewing the constitutionality of primary legislation. The difference is that in the first case, the decision about the law's adequacy to the Russian Constitution only binds the parties to the lawsuit; in the second, the Court's decision must be followed by judges and government officials at all levels.

History [ edit ] Judicial review as a contribution to political theory is sometimes said to be a "distinctively American contribution", [ 10 ] : 1020 argued to have been established in the US Supreme Court's decision in Marbury v. Madison (1803). However, "the American version of judicial review was the logical result of centuries of European thought and colonial experience which had made Western [societies] generally willing to admit the theoretical primacy of certain kinds of law and had made Americans in particular ready to provide a judicial means of enforcing that primacy." [ 10 ] : 1020 That is, the "belief in the need to subordinate certain acts of the law-making power to higher, more permanent principles" [ 10 ] : 1021 can be seen, for example, in medieval European scholastics , courts of equity in England, Parlements in France, and Enlightenment philosophers. Moreover, writing in 2005, Treanor argued that "judicial review was much better established in the years immediately after the adoption of the [United States] constitution than has previously been recognized, and it was far from rare ... [and] judicial invalidation of statutes fell into certain patterns." [ 11 ] : 560 US Chief Justice John Marshall, the author of Marbury v. Madison , "came from Virginia, the state in which [judicial review] was particularly well established by the case law and in which it was repeatedly endorsed during the debate over the Constitution", and thus, on a personal level, Marshall "must have experienced judicial review as long-established".

[ 11 ] : 556 Moreover, "The fact that judicial review was exercised much more frequently than previously recognized in the years before Marbury helps explain why Marshall's assertion of the power to exercise judicial review in the case elicited so little comment." [ 11 ] : 555 In specific jurisdictions [ edit ] Presence of review of constitutionality of laws by country Australian administrative law § Judicial review Judicial review in Austria Judicial review in Bangladesh Judicial review in Canada Constitutional Court of the Czech Republic Judicial review in Denmark Judicial review in English law Judicial review in Germany Judicial review in Hong Kong Judicial review in India Judicial review in Ireland Judicial review in Japan Judicial review in Malaysia Judicial review in New Zealand Judicial review in the Philippines Judicial review in Scotland Judicial review in South Africa Judicial review in South Korea Judicial review in Sweden Judicial review in Switzerland Judicial Yuan (Taiwan / Republic of China) Judicial review in the United States Judicial supervision (Soviet Union) See also [ edit ] Constitutional review Judicial Appeal Judicial activism Living Constitution Originalism Unconstitutional constitutional amendment Judicial reform References [ edit ] ^ a b c Elliott, Mark (2001).

The constitutional foundations of judicial review . Oxford [England]: Hart Pub.

ISBN 978-1-84731-051-4 .

OCLC 191746889 .

^ Highsmith, Brian; Sen, Maya; Thelen, Kathleen (2025).

"Off-Balance: How US Courts Privilege Conservative Policy Outcomes" .

Perspectives on Politics : 1– 13.

doi : 10.1017/S1537592724002706 .

ISSN 1537-5927 .

^ Montesquieu, Baron Charles de, The Spirit of the Laws ^ Article 120 of the Netherlands Constitution ^ Eskridge et al., supra note 532, at 1207 ("Presumption in favor of judicial review."); id .("Rule against interpreting statutes to deny a right to jury trial."); id .("Super-strong rule against implied congressional abrogation or repeal of habeas corpus."); id . at 1208 ("Presumption against exhaustion of remedies requirement for lawsuit to enforce constitutional rights."); id .("Presumption that judgements will not be binding upon persons not party to adjudication."); id .("Presumption against foreclosure of private enforcement of important federal rights.").

See, e.g ., Demote v. Hyung Joon Kim, 538 U.S. 510, 517 (2003).

But see Scalia & Garner, supra note 532, at 367 (describing as a "false notion" the idea "that a statute cannot oust courts of jurisdiction unless it does so expressly").

^ Australian Communist Party v Commonwealth (1951) 83 CLR 1 AustLII ^ Parliamentary Education Office.

"What is judicial review?" .

Parliamentary Education Office . Retrieved 9 March 2023 .

^ Keyzer, Patrick; Goff, Christopher; Fisher, Asaf (2016).

Principles of Australian Constitutional Law (5th ed.). Australia: LexisNexis Butterworths. p. 36.

ISBN 9780409341959 .

^ The strength of the combination Government – Parliament ... far from outperform the reasons of the Constitutional scrutiny, makes the judicial review more necessary than ever: Buonomo, Giampiero (2006).

"Peculato d'uso: perché il condannato non può fare il Sindaco. Dalla Consulta "no" ai Dl senza necessità e urgenza" .

Diritto&Giustizia Edizione Online . Archived from the original on 2012-08-01 . Retrieved 2016-04-09 .

^ a b c Cappelletti, Mauro (1970).

"Judicial Review in Comparative Perspective" .

California Law Review .

58 (5): 1017– 1053.

doi : 10.2307/3479676 .

JSTOR 3479676 .

^ a b c Treanor, William Michael (2005).

"Judicial Review before Marbury" .

Stanford Law Review .

58 (2): 455– 562.

Further reading [ edit ] Edward S. Corwin, The Doctrine of Judicial Review: Its Legal and Historical Basis and Other Essays.

Piscataway, New Jersey: Transaction Publishers, 2014.

ISBN 9781412853705 R. L. Maddex, Constitutions of the World , Washington, D.C.: CQ Press, 2008, ISBN 978-0-87289-556-0 .

External links [ edit ] This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines .

Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references .

( June 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Judicial Review: A Legal Guide Corrado, Michael Louis (2005).

Comparative Constitutional Law: Cases and Materials . Carolina Academic Press.

ISBN 0-89089-710-7 .

(Country by country case studies) N. Jayapalan (1999).

Modern Governments . Atlantic Publishers and Distributors.

ISBN 978-81-7156-837-6 .

(A comparison of modern constitutions) Beatty, David M (1994).

Human rights and judicial review . Martinus Nijhoff Publishers.

ISBN 978-0-7923-2968-8 .

(A comparison of national judicial review doctrines) Wolfe, Christopher (1994).

The American doctrine of judicial supremacy . Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 978-0-8226-3026-5 .

(This book traces the doctrine's history in an international/comparative fashion) Vanberg, Georg (2005). "Constitutional Review in Comparative Perspective".

The politics of constitutional review in Germany . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-83647-0 .

(The effects of politics in law in Germany) Galera, S. (ed.), Judicial Review. A Comparative Analysis inside the European Legal System, Council of Europe, 2010, ISBN 978-92-871-6723-1 , [1] v t e Separation of powers Typical branches Executive Legislature Judiciary Additional branches Fourth Estate Civil service commission Auditory Electoral Prosecutory By country Australia Hong Kong Singapore United Kingdom United States See also Dual mandate Fusion of powers Judicial independence Judicial review Parliamentary sovereignty Separation of duties Unified power Authority control databases National Germany United States Korea Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐fh9bn
Cached time: 20250814222057
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.490 seconds
Real time usage: 0.639 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3783/1000000
Revision size: 21075/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 71955/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2100/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 85260/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.326/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 26768679/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  547.172      1 -total
 19.33%  105.750      1 Template:Reflist
 16.35%   89.451      7 Template:Cite_book
 14.59%   79.825      1 Template:Lang
 12.73%   69.659      1 Template:Judicial_interpretation
 12.44%   68.060      1 Template:Sidebar
 10.61%   58.045      1 Template:Short_description
  8.72%   47.688      9 Template:Rp
  7.90%   43.219      9 Template:R/superscript
  7.83%   42.840      1 Template:More_citations_needed_section Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:23042843:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814222057 and revision id 1301094498. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Judicial_review&oldid=1301094498 " Category : Judicial review Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2020 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2019 Articles containing French-language text Wikipedia external links cleanup from June 2021 This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 02:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Judicial review 22 languages Add topic

