Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Scope 2 Print editions 3 Online edition 4 See also 5 References and sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Grove Art Online 1 language Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Online subscription database including the full text of the 34-volume The Dictionary of Art This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Grove Art Online" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Dictionary of Art Grove Art Online is the online edition of The Dictionary of Art , often referred to as the Grove Dictionary of Art , and part of Oxford Art Online , an internet gateway to online art reference publications of Oxford University Press , which also includes the online version of the Benezit Dictionary of Artists .

[ 1 ] It is a large encyclopedia of art , previously a 34-volume printed encyclopedia first published by Grove in 1996 and reprinted with minor corrections in 1998. A new edition was published in 2003 by Oxford University Press.

Scope [ edit ] Written by 6,700 experts from around the world, its 32,600 pages cover over 45,000 topics about art, artists, art critics , art collectors , or anything else connected to the world of art. According to The New York Times Book Review it is the "most ambitious art-publishing venture of the late 20th century".

[ 2 ] Almost half the content covers non-Western subjects, and contributors hail from 120 countries. Topics range from Julia Margaret Cameron to Shoji Hamada , Korea to Timbuktu , the Enlightenment to Marxism , and Yoruba masks to Abstract Expressionism . Entries include bibliographies and a vast number of images.

Print editions [ edit ] The dictionary is still available in a standard hardcover edition, though the leather-bound version appears to be out of print.

Various smaller specialized redactions have been published, such as The Grove Encyclopedia of Decorative Arts , (Editor, Gordon Campbell, OUP 2006, ISBN 0195189485 ), The Grove Dictionary of Materials and Techniques in Art (OUP 2008, ISBN 978-0-19-531391-8 ), From David to Ingres: Early 19th-Century French Artists (Grove Dictionary of Art) and so on.

The Grove Dictionary of Art is published by Oxford University Press , who acquired it from Macmillan Publishers in 2003.

Online edition [ edit ] The Dictionary of Art was first offered online on 12 November 1998 by Grove Dictionaries (New York) under the title The Grove Dictionary of Art Online .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The online version is now published by Oxford University Press, is updated three times a year, is available by subscription and includes some extra content. In the UK, many public libraries offer it free to their online users using their library membership number and a PIN to log in. An umbrella site, Oxford Art Online , also includes the Benezit Dictionary of Artists and other art reference works: The Oxford Companion to Western Art , the Encyclopedia of Aesthetics , and The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Art Terms .

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians References and sources [ edit ] References ^ Oxford Art Online website .

^ Kimmelman, Michael (24 August 1997).

" "Michelangelo Meets Buffalo Meat" " .

The New York Times .

^ " The Grove Dictionary of Art Online , press release" , saved at the Internet Archive on 13 April 2000.

^ "Grove Art Online Reviews" Retrieved January 24, 2008 ^ "About" at the Oxford Art Online website.

Sources Jane Turner (Editor).

The Dictionary of Art . 1996.

ISBN 1-884446-00-0 External links [ edit ] Official website Authority control databases : National Sweden Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Grove_Art_Online&oldid=1253633187 " Categories : 1996 non-fiction books Art history books Encyclopedias of art Art and architecture dictionaries British online encyclopedias Oxford University Press Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Articles needing additional references from October 2013 All articles needing additional references Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 27 October 2024, at 01:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Grove Art Online 1 language Add topic

