Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Partial bibliography 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Raoul Vaneigem 12 languages Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Italiano مصرى Nederlands Polski Português Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Belgian philosopher (born 1934) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( August 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Raoul Vaneigem Born ( 1934-03-21 ) 21 March 1934 (age 91) Lessines , Hainaut , Belgium Nationality Belgian Education Free University of Brussels (1952–1956) Notable work The Revolution of Everyday Life Movement The Situationist International This cartoon by Vaneigem, shown here on a page of the March 28, 1968 issue of Seattle underground paper Helix , was later published in Internationale Situationniste #12 (September 1969).

Raoul Vaneigem ( / v æ n eɪ ˈ ɡ ɛ m / ; French: [vanegɛm] ; Dutch: [raːˈʋul vɑnˈɛiɣəm, raːˈʔul] ; born 21 March 1934) is a Belgian writer known for his 1967 book The Revolution of Everyday Life .

Biography [ edit ] Vaneigem was born in Lessines (in Hainaut , Belgium) and studied romance philology at the Free University of Brussels from 1952 to 1956. He was a member of the Situationist International from 1961 to 1970.

[ 1 ] Vaneigem and Guy Debord were two of the principal theorists of the Situationist movement. Vaneigem's slogans frequently made it onto the walls of Paris during the May 1968 uprisings . His most famous book, and the one that contains the most famous slogans, is The Revolution of Everyday Life . In it, he challenged what he called "passive nihilism", a passive acceptance of the absurdities of modernism which he considered "an overture to conformism".

[ 2 ] According to the website nothingness.org , The voice of Raoul Vaneigem was one of the strongest of the Situationists. Counterpoised to Guy Debord's political and polemic style, Vaneigem offered a more poetic and spirited prose.

The Revolution of Everyday Life ( Traité de savoir-vivre à l'usage des jeunes générations ), published in the same year as [Debord's] The Society of the Spectacle , helped broaden and balance the presentation of the SI 's theories and practices. One of the longest SI members, and frequent editor of the journal Internationale Situationniste , Vaneigem finally left the SI in November 1970, citing their failures as well as his own in his letter of resignation. Soon after, Debord issued a typically scathing response denouncing both Vaneigem and his critique of the Situationist International.

[ 3 ] After leaving the Situationist International, Vaneigem wrote a series of polemical books defending the idea of a free and self-regulating social order . He frequently made use of pseudonyms, including "Ratgeb", "Julienne de Cherisy," "Robert Desessarts," "Jules-François Dupuis," "Tristan Hannaniel," "Anne de Launay," and "Michel Thorgal." Further on, he defended freedom of speech in Nothing is sacred, everything can be said , edited by Robert and Emmanuelle Ménard , to whom the philosopher Michel Onfray dedicated his Traité d'athéologie , and later on Bruno Gaccio and Dieudonné , responded in Can everything can be said ?

, prefaced again by Robert Ménard .

Further information: Consume, be silent, die Partial bibliography [ edit ] The Revolution of Everyday Life ( Traité de savoir-vivre à l'usage des jeunes générations ) Traité de savoir-vivre à l'usage des jeunes générations Le livre des plaisirs Archived 2020-03-05 at the Wayback Machine ( The Book of Pleasures ), 1979, reprinted 1993.

L'Ile aux delices ( The Island of Delights ), an erotic novel, 1979.

Le mouvement du libre-esprit ( The Movement of the Free Spirit ), 1986.

Adresse aux vivants sur la mort qui les gouverne et l'opportunité de s'en défaire , 1990 Lettre de Staline à ses enfants enfin réconciliés de l'Est et de l'Ouest , 1992 La résistance au christianisme. Les hérésies des origines au XVIIIe siècle , 1993 Les hérésies , 1994 Avertissement aux écoliers et lycéens , 1995 Nous qui désirons sans fin , 1996 La Paresse , 1996 Notes sans portée , 1997 Dictionnaire de citations pour servir au divertissement et à l'intelligence du temps , 1998 Déclaration des droits de l'être humain. De la souveraineté de la vie comme dépassement des droits de le l'homme , 2001 Pour une internationale du genre humain , 2001 Salut à Rabelais ! Une lecture au présent , 2003 Rien n'est sacré, tout peut se dire. Réflexions sur la liberté d'expression , 2003 Le Chevalier, la Dame, le Diable et la Mort , 2003 Modestes propositions aux grévistes , 2004 Journal imaginaire , 2005 References [ edit ] ^ "Raoul Vaneigem" .

www.notbored.org . Retrieved 2017-03-21 .

^ S. Critchley (2004), Very Little... Almost Nothing . p. 13.

^ www.nothingness.org , which also has additional biographical material. See also www.notbored.org .

Further reading [ edit ] Pol Charles, Vaneigem l'insatiable , L'Age d'Homme, Lausanne, Suisse, 2002, ISBN 2-8251-1647-5 Grégory Lambrette, Raoul Vaneigem , St-Georges d'Oléron-Bruxelles, Editions Libertaires/Editions d'Alternative Libertaire, coll. Graine d'ananar, 2002 Laurent Six, Raoul Vaneigem. L'éloge de la vie affinée , Avin, Luce Wilquin, coll. L'Oeuvre en Lumière, 2004 Christian Adam, « Oublier Vaneigem » (pp. 5–83), in Résignez-vous !

, Edilivre, Paris, 2015 (very critical pamphlet against Vaneigem's optimism).

External links [ edit ] English and French texts on nothingness.org library 24+ French and German texts availed as part of the Smirkers-of-the-World.org Translinguistics project English texts availed as part of the Lust-for-Life.org open library project Vaneigem archive at Libcom.org The Decline and Fall of Work free mp3 recording of Vaneigem's essay of the same name, from the Audio Anarchy project Raoul Vaneigem Papers . General Collection, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Yale University.

v t e Critique of work Historical persons Abbie Hoffman Edward Bellamy Alfredo M. Bonanno André Gorz Bob Black Günther Anders Guy Debord Heinrich Böll Ivan Illich Mikhail Bakunin Paul Lafargue Walter Benjamin Antonio Negri Bertrand Russell Friedrich Nietzsche Henry David Thoreau Herbert Marcuse Jerry Rubin Josef Pieper Karl Marx Max Stirner Max Weber Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Raoul Vaneigem Renzo Novatore Zo d'Axa Contemporary persons Franco Berardi L. Susan Brown Madeleine Bunting David Graeber Michael Hardt Maurizio Lazzarato Claus Peter Ortlieb Roland Paulsen Jeremy Rifkin Penelope Rosemont Mark Slouka Nick Srnicek Claire Wolfe John Zerzan Terminology and related topics 996 working hour system Absenteeism Abusive supervision Aktion Arbeitsscheu Reich All work and no play makes Jack a dull boy Autonomism Bare minimum Monday Bullshit job Career catfishing Coffee badging Corporatocracy Conscious quitting Cycle of poverty Dolce far niente Effects of overtime Eight-hour day Employee ghosting Extermination through labour Career cushioning Careerism Flextime Forced labour Four-day workweek Funemployment Ghost job Uberisation / Gig worker Glass cliff Happiness economics Honeymoon-hangover effect Hush trip Infinite workday Job crafting Job cuffing Jobless employed Karoshi Loud quitting Neijuan Microretirement Occupational burnout Occupational safety and health Occupational stress Orange S.A. suicides Overwork Performance punishment Post-work society Precariat Presenteeism Digital presenteeism Productivity theater Professional abuse Protestant work ethic Psychological safety Quick quitting Quiet hiring Quiet promotion Quiet quitting Quiet thriving Lazy girl job Rage applying Refusal of work Resenteeism Right to rest and leisure Sampo generation Sunday scaries Six-hour day Tang ping Technological unemployment Toxic workplace Narcissism Psychopathy Wage slavery Work ethic Workaholic Working poor Work–life interface Theater, movies, music and art À Nous la Liberté Office Space Swedish Public Freedom Service " Take This Job and Shove It " The Future of Work and Death The Main Thing Is Work!

The Working Class Goes to Heaven Yama—Attack to Attack Literature Anekdote zur Senkung der Arbeitsmoral Bartleby, the Scrivener Bonjour paresse Bullshit Jobs The Conquest of Bread Critique of Economic Reason Fight Club Future Primitive and Other Essays In Praise of Idleness and Other Essays Inventing the Future Manifesto Against Work New Escapologist On the Poverty of Student Life The Society of the Spectacle Steal This Book The Abolition of Work The End of Work The Human Use of Human Beings The Idler The Revolution of Everyday Life The Right to Be Lazy The Soul at Work: From Alienation to Autonomy Communities R/antiwork CrimethInc.

Situationist International See also Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Job strain Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic 2 Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Greece Korea Poland Israel Belgium Artists MusicBrainz People Trove DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Raoul_Vaneigem&oldid=1304677149 " Categories : 1934 births Living people People from Lessines Belgian writers in French Free University of Brussels (1834–1969) alumni Situationists Critics of work and the work ethic Refusal of work Anti-consumerists Walloon people Philosophers of technology Libertarian socialists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from August 2022 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with hCards Pages with French IPA Pages with Dutch IPA Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 13:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Raoul Vaneigem 12 languages Add topic

