Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Lunar rays 2 See also 3 References Toggle References subsection 3.1 Citations 3.2 Sources Toggle the table of contents Ray system 18 languages العربية Català Dansk Deutsch Español Français Italiano Lëtzebuergesch Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский Suomi Svenska Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Radial streaks of material thrown out during formation of an impact crater Fresh impact crater on Mars showing a prominent ray system of ejecta . This 30 m (98 ft) diameter crater formed between July 2010 and May 2012 (19 November 2013; 3°42′N 53°24′E ﻿ / ﻿ 3.7°N 53.4°E ﻿ / 3.7; 53.4 ).

[ 1 ] In planetary geology , a ray system comprises radial streaks of fine ejecta thrown out during the formation of an impact crater , looking somewhat like many thin spokes coming from the hub of a wheel. The rays may extend for lengths up to several times the diameter of their originating crater, and are often accompanied by small secondary craters formed by larger chunks of ejecta. Ray systems have been identified on the Moon , Earth ( Kamil Crater ), Mercury , and some moons of the outer planets. Originally it was thought that they existed only on planets or moons lacking an atmosphere , but more recently they have been identified on Mars in infrared images taken from orbit by 2001 Mars Odyssey ' s thermal imager .

Gratteri crater, a rayed crater on Mars that was imaged by THEMIS at night. An individual THEMIS image, of which this mosaic is comprised, is ~32 km across.

Rays appear at visible, and in some cases infrared wavelengths, when ejecta are made of material with different reflectivity (i.e., albedo ) or thermal properties from the surface on which they are deposited. Typically, visible rays have a higher albedo than the surrounding surface. More rarely an impact will excavate low albedo material, for example basaltic - lava deposits on the lunar maria . Thermal rays, as seen on Mars, are especially apparent at night when slopes and shadows do not influence the infrared energy emitted by the Martian surface.

The layering of rays across other surface features can be useful as an indicator of the relative age of the impact crater, because over time various processes obliterate the rays. On non-atmosphered bodies such as the Moon, space weathering from exposure to cosmic rays and micrometeorites causes a steady reduction of the differential between the ejecta's albedo and that of the underlying material. Micrometeorites in particular produce a glassy melt in the regolith that lowers the albedo . Rays can also become covered by lava flows (such as those of Lichtenberg on the moon), or by other impact craters or ejecta.

The rays of Kuiper , one of the freshest craters on Mercury Lunar rays [ edit ] The physical nature of lunar rays has historically been a subject of speculation. Early hypotheses suggested that they were deposits of salt from evaporated water. Later they were thought to be deposits of volcanic ash or streaks of dust. After the impact origin of craters became accepted, Eugene Shoemaker suggested during the 1960s that the rays were the result of fragmented ejecta material.

Recent studies suggest that the relative brightness of a lunar ray system is not always a reliable indicator of the age of a ray system. Instead the albedo also depends on the portion of iron oxide (FeO). Low portions of FeO result in brighter materials, so such a ray system can retain its lighter appearance for longer periods. Thus the material composition needs to be factored into the albedo analysis to determine age.

Among the lunar craters on the near side with pronounced ray systems are Aristarchus , Copernicus , Kepler , Proclus , Dionysius , Glushko , and Tycho . Smaller examples include Censorinus , Stella , and Linné .  Similar ray systems also occur on the far side of the Moon, such as the rays radiating from the craters Giordano Bruno , Necho , Ohm , Jackson , King , and the small but prominent Pierazzo .

Most lateral transport of primary ejecta from impact craters is limited to a distance of a few crater radii, but some larger impacts, such as the impacts that made the Copernicus and Tycho craters, launched primary ejecta halfway around the moon.

[ 2 ] North Ray and South Ray craters, each with a clear ray system, were observed from the ground by the astronauts of Apollo 16 in 1972.

Asymmetrical ray system about the lunar crater Proclus ( Apollo 15 image) Pierazzo crater (Mosaic of Clementine images) The rays of Giordano Bruno extend for hundreds of kilometers from the small crater ( Apollo 11 image) South Ray ( Apollo 16 image) See also [ edit ] List of craters with ray systems Reiner Gamma References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Spectacular new Martian impact crater spotted from orbit , Ars Technica , Feb 6 2014.

^ French, Bevan (1991).

Lunar SourceBook: A Users Guide to the Moon . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p.

287 .

Sources [ edit ] Martel, L.M.V. (Sept., 2004) Lunar Crater Rays Point to a New Lunar Time Scale , Planetary Science Research Discoveries.

http://www.psrd.hawaii.edu/Sept04/LunarRays.html . (Accessed 9/15/2005) Burnham, R. (March, 2005) Chipping pieces off Mars: Martian craters with rays may be the long-sought sources for the Mars meteorites found on Earth , Astronomy Magazine Online.

http://www.astronomy.com/asy/default.aspx?c=a&id=2980 (Accessed 8/07/2006) v t e Moon Outline Physical properties Internal structure Topography Atmosphere Gravity field Hill sphere Magnetic field Sodium tail Moonlight Earthlight Orbit Orbital elements Distance Perigee and apogee Libration Nodes Nodal period Precession Syzygy New moon Full moon Eclipses Lunar eclipse Total penumbral lunar eclipse Tetrad Solar eclipse Solar eclipses on the Moon Eclipse cycle Supermoon Tide Tidal force Tidal locking Tidal acceleration Tidal range Lunar station Surface and features Selenography Terminator Limb Hemispheres Near side Far side Poles North pole South pole Face Maria List Mountains Peak of eternal light Valleys Volcanic features Domes Calderas Lava tubes Craters List Ray systems Permanently shadowed craters South Pole–Aitken basin Regolith swirls Rilles Wrinkle ridges Rocks Lunar basalt 70017 Changesite-(Y) Water Space weathering Micrometeorite Sputtering Quakes Transient lunar phenomenon Selenographic coordinate system Science Observation Libration Lunar theory Origin Giant-impact hypothesis Theia Lunar magma ocean Geology Timescale Late Heavy Bombardment Lunar meteorites KREEP Volcanism Experiments Lunar laser ranging ALSEP Lunar sample displays Apollo 11 Apollo 17 Lunar seismology Exploration Missions Apollo program Explorers Probes Landing Colonization Moonbase Tourism Lunar resources Time-telling and navigation Lunar calendar Lunisolar calendar Month Lunar month Nodal period Fortnight Sennight Lunar station Lunar distance Phases and names New Full Names Crescent Super and micro Blood Blue Black Dark Wet Tetrad Daily phenomena Moonrise Meridian passage Moonset Related Lunar deities Lunar effect Earth phase Moon illusion Pareidolia Man in the Moon Moon rabbit Craters named after people Artificial objects on the Moon Memorials on the Moon Moon in science fiction list Apollo era futuristic exploration Hollow Moon Moon landing conspiracy theories Moon Treaty " Moon is made of green cheese " Natural satellite Double planet Lilith (hypothetical second moon) Splitting of the Moon Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ray_system&oldid=1270470352 " Category : Impact craters Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas This page was last edited on 19 January 2025, at 18:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ray system 18 languages Add topic

