Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Background 1.2 Shift in Belgian colonial rule 2 Formation 3 Under Habyarimana 4 Spokespersons 5 Opposition to miscegenation 6 Rwandan genocide 7 Similarities with Nazism (National Socialism) 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 Bibliography 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Hutu Power 11 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Français Hausa Bahasa Indonesia Italiano 日本語 Português Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ethnic supremacist ideology in Rwanda and Burundi Hutu Power Newspaper Kangura (formerly) RTLM (radio) Membership Rwanda: MRND Interahamwe Akazu CDR Impuzamugambi ALiR FDLR Parmehutu MDR [ a ] Burundi: FNL (formerly) NLF (formerly) Ideology Ultranationalism Extremism Ethnonationalism Totalitarianism Genocide denial Anti- Tutsi sentiment Anti- Twa sentiment Segregationism Racialism Ethnic supremacy Political position Far-right Politics of Rwanda Political parties Elections Politics of Burundi Political parties Elections Hutu Power , or Hutu Supremacy , is an ethnic supremacist ideology that asserts the ethnic superiority of Hutu , often in the context of being superior to Tutsi and Twa , and therefore, they are entitled to dominate and murder these two groups and other minorities. Espoused by Hutu extremists, widespread support for the ideology led to the 1994 Rwandan genocide against the Tutsi, the moderate Hutu who opposed the killings, and the Twa, who were considered traitors. Hutu Power political parties and movements included the Akazu , the Parmehutu , the Coalition for the Defence of the Republic and its Impuzamugambi militia, and the governing National Republican Movement for Democracy and Development and its Interahamwe militia. Hutu supremacy is most common in Rwanda and Burundi , where Hutu comprise most of the population. Due to its sheer destructiveness, the ideology has been compared to Nazism in the Western world .

[ 1 ] In 1990, Hassan Ngeze wrote the Hutu Ten Commandments , a document that served as the basis of the Hutu Power ideology.

[ 2 ] The Commandments called for the supremacy of Hutus in Rwanda, exclusive Hutu leadership over Rwanda's public institutions and public life, complete segregation of Hutus from Tutsis, and complete exclusion of Tutsis from public institutions and public life.

[ 3 ] Hutu Power ideology reviled Tutsis as outsiders bent on restoring a Tutsi-dominated monarchy , and idealized Hutu culture.

History [ edit ] Background [ edit ] The Rwandan kingdom was traditionally ruled by a Tutsi mwami (king). Historical evidence suggests that Hutu and Twa were included in the government, but the Twa were included in it significantly less so than the Hutu, who were more numerous. The Tutsi/Hutu divide has been referred to as a caste system . A Hutu could gain Tutsi status through marriage or through success. Tutsis, being primarily pastoralists , had a more valuable place in Rwandan society than the agriculturalist Hutu, and the hunter-gatherer and potter Twa.

The society created conceptions of social status which were based on the groups' traditional pursuits:  the Twa, working most directly with the earth (through pottery), were considered impure; the Hutu, still working with the ground but less so than the Twa, were in turn considered less pure than the above-ground Tutsi.

[ 4 ] When Germany, and later Belgium, colonized the kingdom, they interpreted the local division of races or ethnicity through the Hamitic hypothesis .

European authors such as John Hanning Speke wrote of the Tutsi as being of Hamitic origin, having originated from modern-day Ethiopia and migrating southwards, and having brought "civilization" to the Negroid races of Sub-Saharan Africa.

[ 5 ] As a result, the colonial administration favored the Tutsi at the expense of Hutu and Twa. In addition, they imposed a system of identity cards and ethnic classification in censuses, which reinforced an artificial ethnic division and contributed to tensions between groups. In reality, the Tutsi, Hutu, and Twa possessed little cultural or genetic distinction.

[ citation needed ] Human skulls at the Nyamata Genocide Memorial Centre Part of a series on the Rwandan genocide Background History of Rwanda Origins of Hutu, Tutsi and Twa Kingdom of Rwanda Rwandan Revolution Rwandan Civil War Hutu Power Assassination of Habyarimana and Ntaryamira Events Initial events Chronology Gikondo massacre Musha Church massacre Nyarubuye massacre Parties responsible People indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal Genocidaires Akazu Impuzamugambi militia Interahamwe militia Kangura RTLM radio Response Rwandan Patriotic Front International community United Nations Mission UN Security Council Resolution 935 Opération "Turquoise" Aftermath Great Lakes refugee crisis Gacaca court First Congo War ( Massacres of Hutus ) Second Congo War Resources Bibliography Filmography v t e Shift in Belgian colonial rule [ edit ] Toward the end of Belgian rule, the government began to favor the Hutu, who were organizing for more influence. More significantly, the Belgian administration feared the rise of communism and a pan-African socialist regime led by Congo-Léopoldville 's Patrice Lumumba . Then-Belgian High Resident Guy Logiest set up the first democratic elections in Rwanda to avoid more radical politics.

[ 6 ] As the majority population, the Hutu elected their candidates to most positions in the new government.

Formation [ edit ] The first elected president Grégoire Kayibanda , an ethnic Hutu, used ethnic tensions to preserve his own power. Hutu radicals, working with his group (and later against it), adopted the Hamitic hypothesis, portraying the Tutsi as outsiders, invaders, and oppressors of Rwanda. Some Hutu radicals called for the Tutsi to be "sent back to Abyssinia ", a reference to their supposed homeland. This early concept of Hutu Power idealized a "pre-invasion" Rwanda: an ethnically pure territory dominated by the Hutu.

Under Habyarimana [ edit ] In 1973, general and defense minister Juvénal Habyarimana , an ethnic Hutu supported by radical northern Rwandans, overthrew Kayibanda and had him and his wife killed while under house arrest. Many of his supporters were from his district in the north, descendants of Hutu kingdoms that had been semi-autonomous before the colonial period.

[ citation needed ] The resulting administration proved better for Tutsis, as government-sponsored violence was more sporadic than under Kayibanda.

[ citation needed ] With economic conditions difficult, and threatened by the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) invasion, Habyarimana turned to inflaming ethnic tensions.

Spokespersons [ edit ] Hutu Power acquired a variety of spokesmen.

Hassan Ngeze , an entrepreneur recruited by the government to combat the Tutsi publication Kanguka , created and edited Kangura , a radical Hutu Power newsletter.  He published the " Hutu Ten Commandments ", which included the following: Hutu and Tutsi should not intermarry; the education system must be composed of a Hutu majority (reflecting the population); and the Rwandan armed forces should be exclusively Hutu.

Radio Télévision Libre des Mille Collines broadcast radio shows suggesting the end to toleration of the Tutsi, repeating the Hutu Ten Commandments, and building support for the Hutu Power ideology. Two main voices of RTLM were announcers Valérie Bemeriki and Georges Ruggiu . The repetition of Hutu Ten Commandments was an attempt to incite and mobilize the population to commit genocide against the Tutsi, who were portrayed as threatening the social and political order achieved since independence, and as envisioned by the Akazu .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Politician Léon Mugesera gave a speech in November, 1992, allegedly stating, "Do not be afraid, know that anyone whose neck you do not cut is the one who will cut your neck...Let them pack their bags, let them get going, so that no one will return here to talk and no one will bring scraps claiming to be flags!" [ 9 ] The radio programs frequently referred to the Tutsi as inyenzi , a Kinyarwanda word meaning ' cockroach ', though the term had also been a self-description by members of the Tutsi Rwanda Patriotic Front .

[ 10 ] Opposition to miscegenation [ edit ] The Commandments declared that any form of relationship between Hutus and Tutsi women was forbidden; and that any Hutu who "marries a Tutsi woman", "befriends a Tutsi woman", or "employs a Tutsi woman as a secretary or a concubine" was a traitor to the Hutu people.

[ 3 ] It denounced Tutsis as dishonest in business whose "only aim is the supremacy of his ethnic group "; and declared that any Hutu who did business with a Tutsi was a traitor to the Hutu people.

[ 3 ] The Commandments declared that "The Hutu should stop having mercy on the Tutsi" and referred to the Tutsis as "common Tutsi enemy".

[ 3 ] Rwandan genocide [ edit ] During the attempted negotiations ( Arusha Accords ) between the Rwandan government and the RPF , radical Hutus began alleging that Habyarimana was being manipulated by Tutsis and non-radical Hutus.  They maligned then-Prime Minister Agathe Uwilingiyimana .

[ 11 ] Following Habyarimana's assassination , an act that at the time people speculated was done by Tutsi extremists, Hutu Power forces mobilized militia, most notably Interahamwe , and mobs to carry out the mass killings of the Rwandan genocide . The Presidential Guard of the army killed Prime Minister Uwilingiyimana and several other leading moderate government officials.

The defeat of the government by the RPF ended the genocide, and the Hutu Power movement was defeated and suppressed. Many Hutu Power spokesmen were arrested after the genocide, charged and put on trial. Ngeze was convicted and sentenced to 35 years' imprisonment. In 2005, Mugesera was deported from Canada to Rwanda to stand trial for his role in the killings.

[ 12 ] Similarities with Nazism (National Socialism) [ edit ] In Western society , the Hutu Power movement is frequently likened to National Socialism (Nazism).

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] The 1994 Rwandan Genocide has also been compared to the Nazi-perpetrated genocide of European Jews during World War II .

[ 16 ] On the left–right political spectrum , both ideologies are classified as far-right .

[ 17 ] The Hutu Power movement bears several key similarities to that of Nazism, including ethnic supremacy , dehumanization , and strategic use of propaganda to provoke violence.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] Hutu Power also advocated for a totalitarian Rwandan state, much like NSDAP had been able to achieve with Nazi Germany during its existence from 1933 to 1945.

In both cases, a dominant group defined itself as superior and depicted a minority as a threat that needed to be eliminated. Nazism was based on the belief in Aryan racial superiority , with Jews , Roma , Slavs , and others labeled as subhuman or enemies. In a similar fashion, Hutu Power promoted the idea that Hutus were the true, rightful people of Rwanda, and that Tutsis were foreigners, invaders, and/or oppressors.

Dehumanization was a prominent tactic used by advocates of the two ideologies. Nazis referred to Jews as vermin, disease, or parasites whereas Hutu Power propaganda labeled Tutsis as inyenzi (" cockroaches ") — a term used constantly in broadcasts encouraging violence.

Both ideologies framed their violence as a way to "purify" or "protect" the nation from internal corruption or threat.

The Final Solution and the anti-Tutsi extermination campaign were portrayed as patriotic acts. The Nazis used the SS and encouraged ordinary German citizens to report, betray, or even assist in deportations and killings. Likewise, Hutu Power armed and trained Interahamwe militias, but also involved neighbors, friends, and even priests in the killings. This created a culture where genocide was not just state policy — it became personal, intimate, and local.

See also [ edit ] Africa portal Ethnic nationalism Rwandan Civil War Hutu Power Radio Interahamwe Notes [ edit ] ^ extremist factions References [ edit ] ^ Becker, Heike (26 January 2017).

"Auschwitz to Rwanda: the link between science, colonialism and genocide" .

The Conversation . Retrieved 2022-05-16 .

^ Ethnicity and sociopolitcal change in Africa and other developing countries: a constructive discourse in state building. Lexington Books, 2008. Pp. 92.

^ a b c d John A. Berry and Carol Pott Berry (eds.) (1999).

Genocide in Rwanda: A Collective Memory (Washington, D.C.: Howard University Press) pp. 113–115.

^ Taylor, Christopher (2001).

Sacrifice as Terror . Berg Publishers.

^ Gourevitch 1998 .

^ "Belgian residents" , Rwanda , World Statesmen, accessed 15 Sep 2010 ^ Joan and Dixon Kamukama (2000). "Kakwenzire",  in The Path of a Genocide: The Rwanda Crisis from Uganda to Zaire , Howard Adelman and Astri Suhrke (eds).  London: Transaction Publishers, p. 75 ^ Chalk, Frank (2002).  "Hate Radio in Rwanda", in The Path of a Genocide: The Rwanda Crisis from Uganda to Zaire ,  Howard Adelman and Astri Suhrke (eds).  London: Transaction Publishers.

^ Supreme Court of Canada – Decisions – Mugesera v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) Archived 2007-03-11 at the Wayback Machine ^ In Rwanda, ex-Quebecker’s genocide trial stokes ethnic tensions ^ Jones, Bruce (2000). "The Arusha Peace Process", in The Path of a Genocide: The Rwanda Crisis from Uganda to Zaire , Howard Adelman and Astri Suhrke (eds). London: Transaction Publishers. Page 146 ^ CTV.ca | "Top court upholds Mugesera deportation order" , CTV Canada ^ "The Triumph of Hutu-Power Tropical Nazism" . 19 October 2021.

^ Drew, Phillip (2021).

"Rwanda, the Holocaust, and the Predictable Path to Genocide" .

Rwanda Revisited . pp.

159– 177.

doi : 10.1163/9789004430129_011 .

ISBN 978-90-04-43012-9 .

^ https://www.researchgate.net/publication/292979999_The_Politics_of_Intimacy_Nazi_and_Hutu_Propaganda_as_Case_Studies [ bare URL ] ^ "The sinister machinations of the Hutu power leaders in the 1994 Genocide against the Tutsi" . 19 April 2023.

^ "Human Rights Watch Rwanda Archives | Human Rights Watch: March 1993 – December 1994" . 2 April 2024.

^ Deutsch, David; Yanay, Niza (2016).

"The politics of intimacy: Nazi and Hutu propaganda as case studies" .

Journal of Genocide Research .

18 : 21– 39.

doi : 10.1080/14623528.2016.1120461 .

^ https://www.overcominghateportal.org/uploads/5/4/1/5/5415260/hitler_pol_pot_and_hutu_power.pdf [ bare URL PDF ] ^ https://repub.eur.nl/pub/21553/_Hintjens1999Rwandaexplaininggenocidearticle.pdf [ bare URL PDF ] Bibliography [ edit ] Gourevitch, Philip (1998).

We Wish to Inform You That Tomorrow We Will Be Killed with Our Families . Farrar, Straus and Giroux.

ISBN 0-312-24335-9 .

External links [ edit ] RwandaFile : Primary sources from the Rwandan genocide, including articles from Kangura and transcripts of broadcasts by RTLM Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hutu_Power&oldid=1305447065 " Categories : Rwandan genocide Nationalist movements in Africa Political ideologies Politics and race Hutu Racism in Africa Ethnic nationalism Discrimination in Rwanda Far-right politics in Rwanda Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with bare URLs for citations Articles with bare URLs for citations from July 2025 Articles with PDF format bare URLs for citations Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2010 This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 03:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hutu Power 11 languages Add topic

