Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Basic environmental theology 3 Discussions in environmental theology 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Environmental theology 3 languages فارسی Français Hausa Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( December 2013 ) This article has an unclear citation style .

The references used may be made clearer with a different or consistent style of citation and footnoting .

( December 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Environmental theology pertains to "the God-environment relationship and divine expectations of human behavior in relation to the environment".

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] The history of Environmental Theology is often regarded as a new age idea developed in the last one hundred years, however, evidence shows that its roots can be traced back to Saint Francis of Assisi .

[ 2 ] His sermon to the birds is referred to often when discussing early Environmental Theology.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] It is also discussed for its radical ideas for the time period.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] “The Historical Roots of our Ecological Crisis” [ 2 ] is the most prominent citation in a literature review on Environmental Theology. Written by Dr. Lynn White Jr.

in 1967, "The Historical Roots of our Ecological Crisis" remains one of the core pieces of literature to all environmental theologians. In this infamous publication, Dr. Lynn White Jr. proposed the idea that the current ecological crisis can trace its roots back to the Bible and man's interpretation of Gods words.

[ 2 ] He discusses his ideas that Western Christianity overemphasizes an anthropocentric view of the environment that has led to the destruction of the environment over millennia.

[ 2 ] He instead proposes that Christianity to move towards a more nurturing approach to nature.

[ 2 ] At the end of his essay, Dr. Lynn White Jr. nominated Saint Francis of Assisi to be the patron saint of ecologists.

[ 2 ] Writings in environmental theology normally cover two veins of thought, one sector being a belief system and the other sector being a behavior system. It is commonly found that documents closely associated with environmental theology do not directly define the term.

[ 1 ] A definition for environmental theology was finally proposed in 2001 – "a term used to describe the God-environment relationship and divine expectations of human behavior in relation to the environment".

[ 1 ] Basic environmental theology [ edit ] Environmental theology generally must include an understanding of God's relationship to the cosmos or Creation, a cosmology. Robert J. Jacobus divides the possibilities into three basic views of God ’s physical relationship with the environment .

[ 4 ] One, the Creator-God exists externally to the physical world (Timm, 1994). The second is God exists internally in the environment (McFague, 1993, Tobias, 1994). The third basic view stipulates God as an entity does not exist (Berry, 1994; Callicott, 1994; Swimme, 1994; Wei-ming, 1994). Three variations of these basic types can be identified in literature. The first is the person of God can be distinctly separate from the environment and also exist internally in the environment (White, 1994). A second variation purports that God and nature exist as separate deities (Griffin, 1994). The third variation denies God as a cognitive entity and views the environment as Creator/deity. If God is external to the environment God then the Creator-God interfaces with the environment as a distinct entity, while if God is internal to the environment, one may make no distinction between the person of God and the environment and the notion of Creator itself may become problematic. A mystical viewpoint common to several religious traditions that unites these categories is that God is continuously creating the universe, and that the universe is a direct expression of God's being, rather than an object created by God as the subject.

From the environmental perspective the corresponding worldviews would be (1) nature is created, (2) nature is divine and (3) nature is emergent.  Three environmental theologies emerge, (1) God exists eternally and the environment is God's creation, (2) the environment is God (Nelson, 1990) and (3) the environment emerged from physical conditions (Fraley, 2000). But Robert S. Corrington goes so far as to say that God is an emergent property of the cosmos itself.

[ 5 ] There is not a clear distinction between environmental theology and ecotheology , though the term environmental theology might indicate a theology in which environmental ethics is established prior to one's understanding of the meaning of God.

Discussions in environmental theology [ edit ] Many discussions have been held since the publication of "Historical Roots of Our Ecological Crisis".

[ 6 ] In fact the number of articles written regarding Environmental Theology increased substantially in the years after its publication.

[ 6 ] The peak number of publications occurred in 1971 with 80 articles written regarding Environmentalism in the Judeo-Christian traditions.

[ 6 ] A vast majority of publications focuses on the concept of anthropocentrism being the driving force of our ecological crisis.

[ 6 ] There are some articles that have been written that support the concept of anthropocentrism.

[ 6 ] Constance Cumbey [ 7 ] and David Hunt [ 8 ] both published books in 1983 that refuted the ideas of Dr. Lynn White jr. and other theologians, they instead discussed the idea that God did not care for the earth and that it was not up to man to care for it.

[ 6 ] [ 8 ] [ 7 ] There are also those who believe that the teachings of Environmental Theology are too radical to have real world effects.

[ 9 ] The Cornwall Alliance is a group that has formed to protest the ideology that anthropocentrism is the issue and instead teach it as the solution.

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Religion portal Environmental philosophy Spiritual ecology References [ edit ] ^ a b c J., Jacobus, Robert (2001).

Defining environmental theology : content analysis of associated literature . [West Virginia University Libraries].

OCLC 46986346 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b c d e f g h White, Lynn (1967-03-10).

"The Historical Roots of Our Ecologic Crisis" .

Science .

155 (3767): 1203– 1207.

Bibcode : 1967Sci...155.1203W .

doi : 10.1126/science.155.3767.1203 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 17847526 .

S2CID 8076858 .

^ a b Hughes, J. Donald; Center for Environmental Philosophy, The University of North Texas (1996).

"Francis of Assisi and the Diversity of Creation" .

Environmental Ethics .

18 (3): 311– 320.

doi : 10.5840/enviroethics199618321 .

ISSN 0163-4275 .

^ Defining Environmental Theology: Content Analysis of Associated Literature Archived 2016-03-04 at the Wayback Machine , thesis, West Virginia University ^ Nature and Spirit (New York: Fordham University Press, 1992) ^ a b c d e f Sheldon, Joseph (1989).

"Twenty-one years after "The historical roots of our ecologic crisis": how has the church responded" .

Perspectives on Science and Christian Faith .

41 (3): 152– 158 – via Atla Religion Database.

^ a b E., Cumbey, Constance (1986).

The hidden dangers of the rainbow : the new age movement and our coming age of barbarism . Bet-El.

ISBN 0-908421-14-1 .

OCLC 638702749 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b Hunt, Dave (November 2008).

Peace, prosperity, and the coming holocaust . Berean Call.

ISBN 978-1-928660-65-1 .

OCLC 907839681 .

^ a b J., Hill, Peter (2012-04-03).

Environmental Theology: A Judeo-Christian Defense . Acton Institute for the Study of Religion & Liberty.

OCLC 1141096525 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) Bibliography [ edit ] Berry, T. (1994). Ecological geography. In M. E. Tucker & J. A. Grim (Eds.), Worldviews and ecology (pp. 228–237). Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books.

Callicott, J. B. (1994). Toward a global environmental ethic. In M. E. Tucker & J. A. Grim (Eds.), Worldviews and ecology (pp. 30–40). Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books.

Fraley, L. E. (2000). General behaviorology. Morgantown, WV: NextPrint Griffin, D. R. (1994) Whitehead's deeply ecological worldview. In M. E. Tucker & J. A. Grim (Eds.), Worldviews and ecology (pp. 190–206). Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books.

Jacobus, R. J. (2001). Defining environmental theology: Content analysis of associated literature. Master's thesis. West Virginia University, Morgantown. [On-line].

http://kitkat.wvu.edu:8080/files/1885.1.Jacobus_R_Theisis.pdf [ permanent dead link ] .

Jacobus, R. J. (2004). Understanding environmental theology: A summary for environmental educators. The Journal of Environmental Education, 35(3) 35–42.

McFague, S. (1993). The Body of God. Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press Nelson, R. H. (1990). Unoriginal sin. Policy Review, 53, 52-60 Swimme, B. (1994). Cosmogenesis. In M. E. Tucker & J. A. Grim (Eds.), Worldviews and ecology (pp. 238–242). Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books.

Timm, R. E. (1994). The ecological fallout of Islamic creation theology. In M. E. Tucker & J. A. Grim (Eds.), Worldviews and ecology (pp. 83–95). Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books.

Tobias, M. (1994). Jainism and ecology. In M. E. Tucker & J. A. Grim (Eds.), Worldviews and ecology (pp. 138–149). Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books.

Wei-ming. T. (1994). Beyond the enlightenment mentality. In M. E. Tucker & J. A. Grim (Eds.), Worldviews and ecology (pp. 19–29). Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books.

White, L., Jr. (1967). The historical roots of our ecological crisis. Science, 155, 1203-1207 White, R.A. (1994). A Baha’i perspective on an ecologically sustainable society. In M. E. Tucker & J. A. Grim (Eds.), Worldviews and ecology (pp. 96–112). Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books.

v t e Theology Conceptions of God Theism Forms Deism Dystheism Henotheism Hermeticism Kathenotheism Nontheism Monolatry Monotheism Urmonotheismus Mysticism Panentheism Pandeism Pantheism Polydeism Polytheism Spiritualism Theistic finitism Theopanism Concepts Deity Divinity Gender of God and gods Goddess Numen Singular god theologies By faith Abrahamic religions Baháʼí Faith Judaism Christianity Islam Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Tenrikyo Zoroastrianism Concepts Absolute Brahman Emanationism Logos Supreme Being God as Time Good ( Ahura Mazda , Father of Greatness ) Trinitarianism Athanasian Creed Comma Johanneum Consubstantiality Homoousian Homoiousian Hypostasis Perichoresis Shield of the Trinity Trinitarian formula Trinity Trinity of the Church Fathers Trinitarian universalism Eschatology Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Fitra Heaven / Hell By religion Buddhist Christian Hindu Islamic Jewish Taoist Zoroastrian Feminist Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Judaism Mormonism Goddesses Other concepts Attributes of God in Christianity / in Islam Binitarianism Demiurge Divine simplicity Divine presence Egotheism Exotheology Hermeneutics Holocaust Godhead in Christianity Latter Day Saints Great Architect of the Universe Great Spirit Apophatic theology Olelbis Open theism Personal god Phenomenological definition Philo's view Process Tian Unmoved mover Names of God in Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism By faith Christian History Outline Biblical canon Glossary Paterology Christology Pneumatology Cosmology Ecclesiology Eschatology Ethics Hamartiology Messianism Philosophy Political Practical Public Sophiology Soteriology Hindu Ayyavazhi theology Krishnology Islamic Oneness of God Prophets Holy Scriptures Angels Predestination Last Judgment Jewish Abrahamic prophecy Aggadah Denominations Kabbalah Philosophy Pagan Slavic Native Faith Wiccan East Asian Tenrikyo Religion portal v t e Environmental humanities Art Crop art Environmental art Environmental sculpture Land art Landscape painting Photography conservation landscape nature wildlife Sculpture trail Site-specific art Sustainable art Culture Cultural ecology Cultural landscape Ecolinguistics Ecological anthropology Ecosemiotics Environmental anthropology Ethnoecology Traditional ecological knowledge Literature Ecocomposition Ecocriticism Ecopoetry Geocriticism Nature writing Outdoor literature Philosophy Aesthetics of nature Critical realism Deep ecology Ecofeminism Ecophenomenology Ecosophy Environmental ethics Environmental justice Environmental philosophy Predation problem Social ecology Religion Ecotheology Environmental theology Religion and environmentalism Spiritual ecology Stewardship Other Anthrozoology Ecomusicology Environmental communication Environmental education adult arts-based Environmental history Environmental interpretation Environmental journalism Environmental law Outdoor education Political representation of nature Psychogeography Thematic interpretation Related Animal studies Bioethics Biophilia hypothesis Do it yourself ( ethic ) Natural history ( museums ) Popular science Property theory ( common property ) Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Simple living Slow food Spirit of place Sustainability studies Applied Arts and Crafts movement Acoustic ecology Biomimicry Ecological design Ecomuseum Educational trail Environmental design Landscape architecture assessment planning Nature center New Urbanism Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable fashion Themed walk Environment portal Category Commons Journals Degrees Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Environmental_theology&oldid=1300569529 " Categories : Ecotheology Theology Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia introduction cleanup from December 2013 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from December 2013 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Wikipedia references cleanup from December 2013 All articles needing references cleanup Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 03:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Environmental theology 3 languages Add topic

