Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 God 2 Manifestations of God 3 Names of God 4 See also 5 Citations 6 Bibliography 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents God in the Baháʼí Faith 13 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Español فارسی Lietuvių Malagasy Nederlands Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Português Türkçe اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Baháʼí conception of God The Greatest Name is a Baháʼí symbol for God. It is the calligraphic rendering of the Arabic text : يا بهاء الأبهى , translated as " O Thou Glory of Glories ".

Part of a series on the Baháʼí Faith Central figures Baháʼu'lláh The Báb ʻAbdu'l-Bahá Basics Teachings Unity of God Unity of humanity Unity of religion Laws Prayer Calendar Nineteen Day Feast Key scripture Kitáb-i-Aqdas Kitáb-i-Íqán The Hidden Words Some Answered Questions Other Texts Institutions Covenant of Baháʼu'lláh Administrative Order The Guardianship Universal House of Justice Spiritual Assemblies History Baháʼí history Timeline Bábism Persecution People Shoghi Effendi Hands of the Cause Apostles Other Baháʼís Bábis Letters of the Living Mullá Husayn Táhirih Places House of Worship Shrine of Baháʼu'lláh Qiblih Shrine of the Báb Síyáh-Chál World Centre Pilgrimage Haifa Acre Other topics Socioeconomic development Progressive revelation Cosmology Symbols Criticism Homosexuality Gender Science Prophecies Statistics Orthography Category v t e Part of a series on Theism Types of faith Agnosticism Apatheism Atheism Classical theism Deism Henotheism Ietsism Ignosticism Monotheism Monism Dualism Monolatry Kathenotheism Omnism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Specific conceptions Brahman Creator Demiurge Deus Father Form of the Good God Great Architect Monad Mother Summum bonum Supreme The Lord Trinity Tawhid Ditheism Monism Personal Unitarianism In particular religions Abrahamic Judaism Christianity Islam Baháʼí Faith Mormonism Mandaeism Samaritanism Indo-Iranian Hinduism Buddhism Jainism Sikhism Yungdrung Bon Zoroastrianism Chinese Tian Shangdi Hongjun Laozu Attributes Eternalness Existence Gender Names ( "God" ) Omnibenevolence Omnipotence Omnipresence Omniscience Aseity Transcendence Experiences Practices Belief Esotericism Faith Fideism Gnosis Hermeticism Metaphysics Mysticism Prayer Revelation Worship Related topics Euthyphro dilemma God complex God gene Theology Ontology Problem of evil ( theodicy ) Religion philosophy texts Portrayals of God in popular media Religion portal v t e The Baháʼí conception of God is of an "unknowable essence" who is the source of all existence and known through the perception of human virtues. The Baháʼí Faith follows the tradition of monotheism and dispensationalism , believing that God has no physical form, but periodically provides divine messengers in human form that are the sources of spiritual education. In another sense, Baháʼí teachings on God are also panentheistic , seeing signs of God in all things, but the reality of God being exalted and above the physical world.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Shoghi Effendi , head of the religion from 1921 to 1957, described God as "a personal God, unknowable, inaccessible, the source of all Revelation, eternal, omniscient, omnipresent and almighty".

[ 3 ] According to Baháʼí teachings, God communicates his will and purpose for humanity through intermediaries known as Manifestations of God , who are the prophets and messengers who have founded religions throughout human history. Accepting these Manifestations allows individuals to draw nearer to God and attain spiritual progress.

Baháʼís do not believe God has any human or physical form; the use of male pronouns in Baháʼí scripture is by convention rather than implicating gender. Various names are used to refer to God in the writings, the one deemed greatest being "All-Glorious" or Bahá in Arabic.

God [ edit ] Baháʼís view God as the being responsible for the creation of all that exists.

[ 4 ] The teachings state there is only one God and that his essence is absolutely inaccessible from the physical realm of existence and that, therefore, his reality is completely unknowable.

[ 5 ] Thus, all of humanity's conceptions of God which have been derived throughout history are mere manifestations of the human mind and not at all reflective of his true nature.

[ 6 ] While God's essence is inaccessible, a subordinate form of knowledge is available by way of mediation by divine messengers, known as Manifestations of God .

[ 7 ] The Manifestations of God reveal teachings that reflect God's will and purpose for humanity at a particular time in history .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] By recognising these Manifestations, humanity can fulfil its inherent purpose to know and love its creator.

[ 10 ] The Baháʼí teachings state that one can develop a closer relationship with God through prayer, study of the holy writings, development of praiseworthy qualities, and service to humanity.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Although human cultures and religions differ in their conceptions of God and his nature, Baháʼís believe they nevertheless refer to one and the same being.

[ 4 ] The differences, instead of being regarded as irreconcilable, are seen as purposefully reflective of the varying needs of the societies in which different religions were revealed. No single faith, and associated conception of God, is thus considered essentially superior to another from the viewpoint of its original social context ; however, more recent religions may teach a more advanced conception of God as called for by the changing needs of local, regional or global civilization. Baháʼís thus regard the world's religions as chapters in the history of one single faith, revealed by God's Manifestations progressively and in stages.

[ 13 ] Baháʼu'lláh wrote: All praise to the unity of God, and all honor to Him, the sovereign Lord, the incomparable and all-glorious Ruler of the universe, Who, out of utter nothingness, hath created the reality of all things, Who, from naught, hath brought into being the most refined and subtle elements of His creation, and Who, rescuing His creatures from the abasement of remoteness and the perils of ultimate extinction, hath received them into His kingdom of incorruptible glory. Nothing short of His all-encompassing grace, His all-pervading mercy, could have possibly achieved it.

[ 14 ] While the Baháʼí writings teach of a personal god with faculties such as a mind, will, and purpose, they clearly state that this does not imply a human or physical form.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Although God is referred to in scripture with masculine pronouns, this is by convention rather than an indication of gender.

[ 17 ] Shoghi Effendi , the head of the Baháʼí Faith in the first half of the 20th century, described God as inaccessible, omniscient, almighty, personal, and rational, and rejected pantheistic , anthropomorphic , and incarnationist beliefs.

[ 15 ] Manifestations of God [ edit ] Main article: Manifestation of God (Baháʼí Faith) A ring engraved with the Ringstone Symbol , which symbolises the role of Manifestations in connecting God with his creation.

The Baháʼí teachings recognize the founders of the world's major religions as manifestations of the one same God, and regard them as the primary means of knowing God's attributes.

[ 18 ] Each revelation is thought to bring a greater degree of teachings and build upon those that came before, thus being essentially united in purpose.

[ 13 ] Several extant religions were mentioned by Baháʼu'lláh as being divinely revealed: Sabeanism (the religion of the Sabians ), Hinduism , Zoroastrianism , Judaism , Buddhism , Christianity , and Islam. The divine origin of various other religions, that have since been lost to history, is assumed.

[ 19 ] These Manifestations of God are regarded as mirrors that reflect God's divine attributes, revealing aspects of God without being incarnations . Through these educators, humans are able to attain spiritual progress and draw nearer to God.

[ 20 ] Names of God [ edit ] The Baháʼí scriptures refer to God by various titles and attributes, such as Almighty, All-Powerful, All-Wise, Incomparable, Gracious, Helper, All-Glorious, Omniscient and All-Loving.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] Bahá'is believe the greatest of all the names of God is "All-Glorious" or Bahá in Arabic.

Bahá is the root word of the following names and phrases: the greeting Alláh-u-Abhá (God is the All-Glorious), the invocation Yá Baháʼu'l-Abhá (O Thou Glory of the Most Glorious), Baháʼu'lláh (The Glory of God), and Baháʼí (Follower of the All-Glorious).

[ 23 ] These are expressed in Arabic regardless of the language in use (see Baháʼí symbols ).

[ 24 ] See also [ edit ] Religion portal Baháʼí Faith and the unity of religion Conceptions of God Ethical monotheism Existence of God God in Abrahamic religions God in Christianity God in Mormonism Jehovah's Witnesses beliefs § God God in Judaism God in Islam Sunni Islam § God Druze § God Prayer in the Baháʼí Faith Citations [ edit ] ^ Momen 2003 , p. 1.

^ Stockman 2013 , p. 33.

^ Effendi 1944 , p. 139.

^ a b Hatcher & Martin 1985 , p. 125 ^ Momen 1988 ^ Momen 1997 ^ Adamson 2007 , pp. 186–188 ^ Hatcher & Martin 1985 , pp. 21, 171 ^ Smith 2008 , pp. 107–108 ^ Smith 2008 , p. 111 ^ Smith 2008 , pp. 117–118.

^ Hayes et al. 2006 , p. 54.

^ a b Fathea'zam 2002 , pp. 14–21.

^ Hatcher & Martin 1985 , p. 126.

^ a b Smith 2008 , p. 106 ^ McLean & Lee 1997 , p. 67,78 ^ Research Department of the Universal House of Justice (2002).

The Use of the Masculine Gender in the Bahá'í Writings .

^ Smith 2000 , p. 164.

^ Smith 2000 , p. 291.

^ Hatcher & Martin 1985 , p. 190.

^ Adamson 2007 .

^ Smith 2000 , pp. 164–165 ^ Faizi 2002 ^ Smith 2000 , pp.

167–168 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Adamson, Hugh (2007).

Historical Dictionary of the Baháʼí Faith . Oxford, UK: Scarecrow Press.

ISBN 9780810864672 .

Effendi, Shoghi (1944).

God Passes By . Wilmette, Illinois, USA: Baháʼí Publishing Trust.

ISBN 9781508530732 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Faizi, Abu'l-Qasim (2002).

Conqueror of Hearts: Excerpts from Letters, Talks, and Writings of Hand of the Cause of God Abu'l-Qásim Faizí . Baháʼí Library Online.

Fathea'zam, Hushmand (2002).

The New Garden: An Introduction to the Bahá'í Faith . Juxta Publishing Limited.

ISBN 9788185091556 .

Hatcher, William S.

; Martin, Douglas (1985).

The Baháʼí Faith (PDF) . San Francisco: Harper & Row.

ISBN 9780060637934 .

Hayes, Terril G.; Fisher, Betty J.; Hill, Richard A.; et al., eds. (2006) [1994].

The Journey of the Soul: Life, Death & Immortality . Baháʼí Publishing.

ISBN 9781931847285 .

McLean, Jack; Lee, Anthony A. (1997), Revisioning the Sacred: New Perspectives on a Baha'i Theology , Kalimat Press, ISBN 0933770960 Momen, Moojan (2003).

"The God of Baháʼu'lláh" .

The Baha'i Faith and the World's Religions . Oxford, UK: George Ronald. pp.

1– 38.

Momen, Moojan (1997).

A Short Introduction to the Bahá'í Faith . Oneworld.

ISBN 9781851681204 .

Momen, Moojan (1988).

Studies in Honor of the Late Husayn M. Balyuzi . Kalimat Press. pp.

185– 217.

ISBN 9780933770720 .

Smith, Peter (2008).

An Introduction to the Baha'i Faith . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521862516 .

Smith, Peter (2000).

A Concise Encyclopedia of the Baháʼí Faith . Oxford, UK: Oneworld Press.

ISBN 9781851681846 .

Stockman, Robert (2013).

Baháʼí Faith: A Guide For The Perplexed . New York, NY: Bloomsbury Academic.

ISBN 978-1-4411-8781-9 .

Momen, Moojan (2003).

"The God of Baháʼu'lláh" .

The Baha'i Faith and the World's Religions . Oxford, UK: George Ronald. pp.

1– 38.

Further reading [ edit ] Hall, Joshua (2022).

"Bahá'u'lláh and the God of Avicenna" .

Journal of Bahá'í Studies .

31 (3). Ottawa: Association for Bahá'í Studies: 7– 90.

doi : 10.31581/jbs-31.3.307(2021) .

S2CID 247483735 .

Rabbani, Ruhiyyih , ed. (1982).

The Desire of the World: Materials for the contemplation of God and His Manifestation for this Day . New Delhi, India: Baha'i Publishing Trust.

ISBN 81-7896-053-2 .

External links [ edit ] Bahai.org: God and His Creation v t e Baháʼí Faith topics Outline of the Baháʼí Faith Central figures Baháʼu'lláh The Báb ʻAbdu'l-Bahá Baháʼí teachings Unity of God Unity of humanity Unity of religion New World Order Progressive revelation Covenant of Baháʼu'lláh Laws Prayer Pilgrimage Nineteen Day Feast Baháʼí literature Kitáb-i-Aqdas Kitáb-i-Íqán The Hidden Words Some Answered Questions Baháʼí administration Universal House of Justice Baháʼí International Community International Teaching Centre Institution of the Counsellors Spiritual Assemblies History Timeline Bábism Letters of the Living Mullá Husayn Táhirih Baháʼí–Azali split People Shoghi Effendi Hands of the Cause Apostles Others Converts Unenrolled Disenrolled Places World Centre Mashriqu'l-Adhkár ( List ) Haziratu'l-Quds Shrine of Baháʼu'lláh Shrine of the Báb Shrine of ʻAbdu'l-Bahá Síyáh-Chál Báb's house House of Bahá'u'lláh in Baghdad Garden of Ridván, Baghdad Other topics Socioeconomic development Cosmology Symbols Prophecies Homosexuality Gender Science Statistics Orthography Calendar Persecution Review Baháʼí Faith in fiction Attempted schisms Orthodox Baháʼí Faith Baháʼís Under the Provisions of the Covenant Category v t e Theology Conceptions of God Theism Forms Deism Dystheism Henotheism Hermeticism Kathenotheism Nontheism Monolatry Monotheism Urmonotheismus Mysticism Panentheism Pandeism Pantheism Polydeism Polytheism Spiritualism Theistic finitism Theopanism Concepts Deity Divinity Gender of God and gods Goddess Numen Singular god theologies By faith Abrahamic religions Baháʼí Faith Judaism Christianity Islam Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Tenrikyo Zoroastrianism Concepts Absolute Brahman Emanationism Logos Supreme Being God as Time Good ( Ahura Mazda , Father of Greatness ) Trinitarianism Athanasian Creed Comma Johanneum Consubstantiality Homoousian Homoiousian Hypostasis Perichoresis Shield of the Trinity Trinitarian formula Trinity Trinity of the Church Fathers Trinitarian universalism Eschatology Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Fitra Heaven / Hell By religion Buddhist Christian Hindu Islamic Jewish Taoist Zoroastrian Feminist Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Judaism Mormonism Goddesses Other concepts Attributes of God in Christianity / in Islam Binitarianism Demiurge Divine simplicity Divine presence Egotheism Exotheology Hermeneutics Holocaust Godhead in Christianity Latter Day Saints Great Architect of the Universe Great Spirit Apophatic theology Olelbis Open theism Personal god Phenomenological definition Philo's view Process Tian Unmoved mover Names of God in Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism By faith Christian History Outline Biblical canon Glossary Paterology Christology Pneumatology Cosmology Ecclesiology Eschatology Ethics Hamartiology Messianism Philosophy Political Practical Public Sophiology Soteriology Hindu Ayyavazhi theology Krishnology Islamic Oneness of God Prophets Holy Scriptures Angels Predestination Last Judgment Jewish Abrahamic prophecy Aggadah Denominations Kabbalah Philosophy Pagan Slavic Native Faith Wiccan East Asian Tenrikyo Religion portal Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=God_in_the_Baháʼí_Faith&oldid=1294022870 " Categories : Bahá'í belief and doctrine Conceptions of God Names of God in the Bahá'í Faith New religious movement deities Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Arabic-language text CS1 errors: ISBN date This page was last edited on 5 June 2025, at 03:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents God in the Baháʼí Faith 13 languages Add topic

