Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Editors-in-chief 2 Popular culture 3 See also 4 External links 5 References Toggle the table of contents The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 10 languages Català Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Journal of Physical Chemistry A ) American academic journal Academic journal The Journal of Physical Chemistry A April 2004 cover Discipline Physical chemistry Language English Edited by Joan-Emma Shea Publication details History 1896 to present Publisher American Chemical Society (United States) Frequency Weekly Impact factor 2.7 (2023) Standard abbreviations ISO 4 ( alt ) · Bluebook ( alt ) NLM ( alt ) · MathSciNet ( alt ) ISO 4 J. Phys. Chem. A Indexing CODEN ( alt · alt2 ) · JSTOR ( alt ) · LCCN ( alt ) MIAR · NLM ( alt ) · Scopus · W&L CODEN JPCAFH ISSN 1089-5639 (print) 1520-5215 (web) Links Journal homepage The Journal of Physical Chemistry A is a scientific journal which reports research on the chemistry of molecules - including their dynamics, spectroscopy , kinetics, structure, bonding , and quantum chemistry . It is published weekly by the American Chemical Society .

Before 1997 the title was simply Journal of Physical Chemistry .

[ 1 ] Owing to the ever-growing amount of research in the area, in 1997 the journal was split into Journal of Physical Chemistry A (molecular theoretical and experimental physical chemistry) and The Journal of Physical Chemistry B (solid state, soft matter, liquids, etc.). Beginning in 2007, the latter underwent a further split, with The Journal of Physical Chemistry C now being dedicated to nanotechnology , molecular electronics , and related subjects.

According to the Journal Citation Reports , the journal have an impact factor of 2.7 for 2023.

[ 2 ] Editors-in-chief [ edit ] 1896–1932 Wilder Dwight Bancroft , Joseph E. Trevor 1933–1951 S. C. Lind 1952–1964 William A. Noyes 1965–1969 F. T. Wall 1970–1980 Bryce Crawford 1980–2004 Mostafa El-Sayed 2005–2019 George C. Schatz [ 3 ] 2020–present Joan-Emma Shea [ 4 ] Popular culture [ edit ] Sheldon Cooper , a fictional physicist from the television series The Big Bang Theory , appeared on the cover of a fictional issue of the journal.

See also [ edit ] The Journal of Physical Chemistry B The Journal of Physical Chemistry C The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters Russian Journal of Physical Chemistry A Russian Journal of Physical Chemistry B External links [ edit ] Official website References [ edit ] ^ "Phys.org - News and Articles on Science and Technology" .

phys.org . Retrieved 2022-11-03 .

^ "The Journal of Physical Chemistry A".

2021 Journal Citation Reports .

Web of Science (Science ed.).

Thomson Reuters . 2022.

^ Schatz, George C. (2005).

"New Editor-in-Chief for The Journal of Physical Chemistry A and B" .

The Journal of Physical Chemistry A .

109 (1): 1.

Bibcode : 2005JPCA..109....1S .

doi : 10.1021/jp040657x .

^ Shea, Joan-Emma (2020).

"A New Editor-in-Chief for the Journal of Physical Chemistry" .

The Journal of Physical Chemistry A .

124 (1): 1.

Bibcode : 2020JPCA..124....1S .

doi : 10.1021/acs.jpca.9b11480 .

PMID 31914731 .

S2CID 210119694 .

v t e American Chemical Society journals Journals Accounts of Chemical Research Accounts of Materials Research ACS Agricultural Science & Technology ACS Applied Bio Materials ACS Applied Electronic Materials ACS Applied Energy Materials ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces ACS Applied Nano Materials ACS Applied Polymer Materials ACS Biomaterials Science & Engineering ACS Catalysis ACS Central Science ACS Chemical Biology ACS Chemical Neuroscience ACS Combinatorial Science ACS Earth and Space Chemistry ACS Energy Letters ACS Infectious Diseases ACS Macro Letters ACS Medicinal Chemistry Letters ACS Nano ACS Omega ACS Pharmacology & Translational Science ACS Photonics ACS Sensors ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering ACS Synthetic Biology Analytical Chemistry Biochemistry Bioconjugate Chemistry Biomacromolecules Bulletin for the History of Chemistry Biotechnology Progress Chemical Research in Toxicology Chemical Reviews Chemistry of Materials Crystal Growth & Design Energy & Fuels Environmental Science & Technology Environmental Science & Technology Letters Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research Inorganic Chemistry Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry Journal of the American Chemical Society Journal of Chemical Education Journal of Chemical & Engineering Data Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation Journal of Medicinal Chemistry Journal of Natural Products Journal of Organic Chemistry Journal of Physical Chemistry A B C Letters Journal of Proteome Research Langmuir Macromolecules Molecular Pharmaceutics Nano Letters Organic Letters Organic Process Research & Development Organometallics Au journals ACS Engineering Au ACS Environmental Au ACS Materials Au ACS Measurement Science Au ACS Nanoscience Au ACS Organic & Inorganic Au ACS Physical Chem Au ACS Polymers Au ACS Bio & Med Chem Au This article about a physical chemistry journal is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

See tips for writing articles about academic journals . Further suggestions might be found on the article's talk page .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Journal_of_Physical_Chemistry_A&oldid=1275841492 " Categories : American Chemical Society academic journals English-language journals Physical chemistry journals Weekly journals Academic journals established in 1997 Chemistry journal stubs Physics journal stubs Physical chemistry stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Weekly journals (infobox) Pages using infobox journal with unknown parameters Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia All stub articles This page was last edited on 15 February 2025, at 11:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 10 languages Add topic

