Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Public works programmes 3 Utility of investment 4 See also Toggle See also subsection 4.1 Individual programs 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Public works 27 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latina Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Shqip Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Broad category of infrastructure projects, financed and constructed by the government For the 2015 Dutch film, see Public Works (film) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Public works" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A US government poster from 1940 summarizing the Works Progress Administration 's achievements Public works are a broad category of infrastructure projects, financed and procured by a government body for recreational, employment, and health and safety uses in the greater community . They include public buildings ( municipal buildings , schools , and hospitals ), transport infrastructure ( roads , railroads , bridges , pipelines , canals , ports , and airports ), public spaces ( public squares , parks , and beaches ), public services ( water supply and treatment , sewage treatment , electrical grid , and dams ), environmental protection ( drinking water protection , soil erosion reduction, wildlife habitat preservation , 
preservation and restoration of forests and wetlands) and other, usually long-term, physical assets and facilities . Though often interchangeable with public infrastructure and public capital , public works does not necessarily carry an economic component, thereby being a broader term. Construction may be undertaken either by directly employed labour or by a private operator.

Public works has been encouraged since antiquity. The Roman emperor Nero encouraged the construction of various infrastructure projects during widespread deflation .

[ 1 ] Overview [ edit ] Public works is a multi-dimensional concept in economics and politics , touching on multiple arenas including: recreation (parks, beaches, trails), aesthetics (trees, green space), economy (goods and people movement, energy), law (police and courts), and neighborhood (community centers, social services buildings). It represents any constructed object that augments a nation's physical infrastructure.

Municipal infrastructure, urban infrastructure , and rural development usually represent the same concept but imply either large cities or developing nations ' concerns respectively.  The terms public infrastructure or critical infrastructure are at times used interchangeably. However, critical infrastructure includes public works (dams, waste water systems, bridges, etc.) as well as facilities like hospitals, banks, and telecommunications systems and views them from a national security viewpoint and the impact on the community that the loss of such facilities would entail.

Public works in Reggio Emilia, Emilia-Romagna, Italy Furthermore, the term public works has recently been expanded to include digital public infrastructure projects. For example, in the United States , the first nationwide digital public works project is an effort to create an open source software platform for e-voting (created and managed by the Open Source Digital Voting Foundation).

[ 2 ] Reflecting increased concern with sustainability , urban ecology and quality of life , efforts to move towards sustainable municipal infrastructure are common in developed nations , especially in the European Union and Canada (where the FCM InfraGuide provides an officially mandated best practice exchange to move municipalities in that direction).

Public works programmes [ edit ] A public employment programme or public works programme is the provision of employment by the creation of predominantly public goods at a prescribed wage for those unable to find alternative employment. This functions as a form of social safety net . Public works programmes are activities which entail the payment of a wage (in cash or in kind) by the state, or by an Agent (or cash-for work/CFW). One particular form of public works, that of offering a short-term period of employment, has come to dominate practice, particularly in regions such as Sub-Saharan Africa . Applied in the short term, this is appropriate as a response to transient shocks and acute labour market crises.

[ 3 ] Investing in public works projects in order to stimulate the general economy has been a popular policy measure since the economic crisis of the 1930s. Spearheaded by U.S. Secretary of Labor Frances Perkins , the first female Cabinet member in the United States, the New Deal resulted in the creation of programs such as the Civilian Conservation Corps , Public Works Administration , and the Works Progress Administration , among others, all of which created public goods through labor and infrastructure investments.

[ 4 ] More recent examples are the 2008–2009 Chinese economic stimulus program , India's National Infrastructure Pipeline of 2020, the 2008 European Union stimulus plan , and the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 .

Utility of investment [ edit ] While it is argued that capital investment in public works can be used to reduce unemployment, opponents of internal improvement programs argue that such projects should be undertaken by the private sector , not the public sector , because public works projects are often inefficient and costly to taxpayers. Further, some argue that public works, when used excessively by a government, are characteristic of socialism and other public or collectivist forms of government because of their 'tax and spend' policies to achieve long-term economic improvement. However, in the private sector, entrepreneurs bear their own losses [ citation needed ] and so private-sector firms are generally unwilling to undertake projects that could result in losses or would not develop a revenue stream. Governments will invest in public works because of the overall benefit to society when there is a lack of private sector benefit (a project that does generate revenue) or the risk is too great for a private company to accept on its own.

According to research conducted at the Aalborg University , 86% of public works projects end up with cost overruns. Some findings of the research were the following: Technically difficult projects were not more likely to exceed the budget than less difficult projects.

Projects in which more people were directly and indirectly affected by the project turned out to be more susceptible to cost overruns.

Project managers generally did not learn from similar projects attempted in the past.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Generally, contracts awarded by public tenders include a provision for unexpected expenses (cost overruns), which typically amount to 10% of the value of the contract.  This money is spent during the course of the project only if the construction managers judge that it is necessary, and the expenditure must typically be justified in writing.

See also [ edit ] Contingencies fund Department of transportation E-procurement Infrastructure Internal improvements Madaket Ditch , one of the first public works projects in America Make-work job Public good , an economic discussion Utility district Individual programs [ edit ] Egyptian Public Works New Deal Opera Publica Public Works Administration References [ edit ] ^ Thornton, Mary Elizabeth Kelly (1971). "Nero's New Deal".

Transactions and Proceedings of the American Philological Association .

102 . The Johns Hopkins University Press: 629.

doi : 10.2307/2935958 .

JSTOR 2935958 .

^ snelson (15 May 2009).

"The Project" .

TrustTheVote Project . Archived from the original on 12 March 2010 . Retrieved 6 January 2010 .

^ McCord, Anna (December 2008).

"A typology for Public Works Programming" .

Overseas Development Institute . Archived from the original on 30 April 2010.

^ Downey, Kirstin. (2009).

The woman behind the New Deal : the life of Frances Perkins, FDR's Secretary of Labor and his moral conscience . Nan A. Talese/Doubleday.

ISBN 978-0-385-51365-4 .

OCLC 231162915 .

^ Natuurwetenschap & Techniek Magazine April 2009 ^ Flyvbjerg, Bent; Skamris Holm, Mette; Buhl, Søren (Summer 2002).

"Underestimating Costs in Public Works Projects" (PDF) .

APA Journal .

68 (3). Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 September 2009 . Retrieved 4 June 2009 .

Hickman, John (November 1999).

"The Political Economy of Very Large Space Projects" .

Journal of Evolution and Technology .

4 .

External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of public works at Wiktionary Scholia has a topic profile for Public works .

American Public Works Association - Professional society v t e Public services Municipalization Nationalization Progressive tax Concepts Common good Free-culture movement Free newspaper Product sample Public administration Public bad Public domain Public good (economics) Public health Public interest Public land Public ownership Public policy Public rights Public sphere Public procurement Public trust Public value Universal access to education Universal basic services Basic services Civil service Fire department Housing First Law enforcement Postal service Savings system Public broadcasting Public transport Universal basic services Public utility Electric utility Oil & gas Telecommunication Municipal broadband Public infrastructure Public water system Waste management Public works Drinking fountain Drug checking Free clinic Free education Infrastructure Needle and syringe programmes Public art Public bank Public bookcase Public computer Public hospital Public library Public open space Public school Public space Public toilet Public university Reagent testing Supervised injection site Urban park Social services Publicly funded health care Public housing Job creation Job guarantee Single-payer health care National health insurance Social insurance Social pension Social security Youth services See also Commons Free public transport Government auction Public float Public holiday Public offering Public sector Public security Public use Public viewing area Category Commons Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Japan Spain Latvia Israel Other NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Public_works&oldid=1291434238 " Categories : Civil engineering Fiscal policy Infrastructure Public economics Public works ministries Domestic policy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2017 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from October 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2024 This page was last edited on 21 May 2025, at 06:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Public works 27 languages Add topic

