Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Scope 2 Structure 3 Online databases and apps 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Department of the Environment and Energy Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Australian government department, 2016–2020 Department of the Environment and Energy Department overview Formed 19 July 2016 Preceding Department Department of the Environment Dissolved 1 February 2020 Superseding agencies Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment Department of Industry, Science, Energy and Resources Jurisdiction Commonwealth of Australia Headquarters John Gorton Building, King Edward Terrace, Parkes ACT 2600, Canberra , Australia Ministers responsible Sussan Ley , Minister for the Environment Angus Taylor , Minister for Energy and Emissions Reduction Department executive Finn Pratt , Secretary Website www .environment .gov .au The Department of the Environment and Energy ( DEE ) was an Australian government department in existence between 2016 and 2020.

The department was responsible for matters including environment protection and conservation of biodiversity as well as energy policy . It was established in July 2016 by the Turnbull government after the 2016 federal election .

[ 1 ] Following the appointment of Scott Morrison as Prime Minister , Josh Frydenberg was elevated to Treasurer of Australia , whereby Frydenberg's previous ministerial positions were separated, with Melissa Price as Minister of the Environment and Angus Taylor as Minister for Energy. Price was reshuffled from her position in 2019, and was replaced by Sussan Ley .

By an administrative order issued on 5 December 2019 and effective from 1 February 2020, [ 2 ] the environment functions of the  department were merged with all functions of the Department of Agriculture , to form the Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment . The department's energy functions were transferred to the Department of Industry, Science, Energy and Resources .

[ 3 ] Scope [ edit ] The Administrative Arrangements Orders listed the department's responsibilities as follows: [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Administration of the Australian Antarctic Territory, and the Territory of Heard Island and McDonald Islands Air quality Climate change adaptation strategy and co-ordination Community and household climate action Co-ordination of climate change science activities Co-ordination of sustainable communities policy Development and co-ordination of domestic climate change policy Energy efficiency Energy policy Environment protection and conservation of biodiversity Environmental information and research Environmental water use and resources relating to the Commonwealth Environmental Water Holder Greenhouse emissions and energy consumption reporting Greenhouse gas abatement programs Industrial energy efficiency Ionospheric prediction Land contamination Meteorology National energy market, including electricity and gas National fuel quality standards Natural, built and cultural heritage Renewable energy Renewable energy target policy, regulation and co-ordination Renewable energy technology development Urban environment Structure [ edit ] The head of the department was its Secretary , Finn Pratt AO PSM , responsible to the Minister for the Environment and Energy , the Hon.

Melissa Price MP until 2019, and then the Hon.

Sussan Ley MP . The department was staffed by individuals from the Australian Public Service .

Online databases and apps [ edit ] As of 2019 [update] , the DEE website also hosted the Australasian Underwater Cultural Heritage Database (AUCHD), a searchable online database containing data about shipwrecks , aircraft and other cultural heritage artefacts which are or have been underwater. The AUCHD also served as the register of protected underwater cultural heritage for the Underwater Cultural Heritage Act 2018 (the UCH Act), providing a means whereby the public could submit notifications and permit applications required under the Act.

[ 6 ] The website also hosted a number of other databases and applications in the areas of biodiversity , climate change , heritage , the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (EPBC Act), environmental protection , land and water, as well as photo galleries of Australian plants, and environmental and cultural heritage subjects.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Director of National Parks Parks Australia Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority Waste management in Australia References [ edit ] ^ Anderson, Stephanie (20 July 2016).

"Election 2016: Malcolm Turnbull unveils ministry with Christopher Pyne, Greg Hunt on the move" . Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 24 August 2016.

^ "Administrative Arrangements Order - 5 December 2019" (PDF) .

Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet . Commonwealth of Australia. 5 December 2019.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 February 2020 . Retrieved 3 February 2020 .

^ Morrison, Scott .

"Media Release: 5 December 2019 - New structure of Government Departments" .

Prime Minister of Australia . Commonwealth of Australia.

Archived from the original on 14 December 2019 . Retrieved 3 February 2020 .

^ Administrative Arrangements Order – amendment made 19 July 2016 , Australian Government, archived from the original on 30 August 2016 ^ Administrative Arrangements Order , Australian Government, archived from the original on 13 September 2016 , retrieved 30 August 2016 ^ "Australasian Underwater Cultural Heritage Database" .

Australian Government. Dept of the Environment and Energy .

Archived from the original on 14 October 2019 . Retrieved 14 October 2019 .

^ "Databases and applications" .

Australian Government. Dept of the Environment and Energy .

Archived from the original on 16 October 2019 . Retrieved 15 October 2019 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Australian Government Department of the Environment and Energy at Wikimedia Commons v t e List of Australian Government departments Australian Government Portfolio departments Attorney-General's Department Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water Defence Education Employment and Workplace Relations Finance Foreign Affairs and Trade Health, Disability and Ageing Home Affairs Industry, Science and Resources Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development, Communications, Sport and the Arts Prime Minister and Cabinet Social Services Treasury Veterans' Affairs Parliamentary departments House of Representatives Parliamentary Budget Office Parliamentary Services Senate This Australian government-related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Department_of_the_Environment_and_Energy&oldid=1192604662 " Categories : Defunct government departments of Australia Ministries established in 2016 2016 establishments in Australia Ministries disestablished in 2020 2020 disestablishments in Australia Environment of Australia Energy in Australia Australia government stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Australian English from August 2016 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from August 2016 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2019 All articles containing potentially dated statements Commons category link is on Wikidata All stub articles This page was last edited on 30 December 2023, at 08:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Department of the Environment and Energy Add languages Add topic

