Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 International systems Toggle International systems subsection 1.1 IUCN Red List of Threatened Species 1.2 The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora 2 Multi-country systems 3 National systems 4 Consumer guides 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Conservation status 87 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Čeština Dansk Deutsch डोटेली Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego ГӀалгӀай ગુજરાતી 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Latina Latviešu Lietuvių La .lojban.

Magyar मैथिली Македонски മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Napulitano Papiamentu Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Taqbaylit తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 Zeêuws 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indication of the chance of extinction Conservation status by IUCN Red List category Extinct Extinct (EX) ( list ) Extinct in the Wild (EW) ( list ) Threatened Critically Endangered (CR) ( list ) Endangered (EN) ( list ) Vulnerable (VU) ( list ) Lower Risk Near Threatened (NT) ( list ) Conservation Dependent (CD) ( list ) Least Concern (LC) ( lists ) Other categories Data Deficient (DD) ( list ) Not Evaluated (NE) Related topics International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) IUCN Red List NatureServe status Lists of organisms by population Comparison of Red List classes above and NatureServe status below v t e The conservation status of a group of organisms (for instance, a species ) indicates whether the group still exists and how likely the group is to become extinct in the near future . Many factors are taken into account when assessing conservation status: not simply the number of individuals remaining, but the overall increase or decrease in the population over time, breeding success rates , and known threats. Various systems of conservation status are in use at international, multi-country, national and local levels, as well as for consumer use such as sustainable seafood advisory lists and certification . The two international systems are by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) and The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) .

International systems [ edit ] IUCN Red List of Threatened Species [ edit ] The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species by the International Union for Conservation of Nature is the best known worldwide conservation status listing and ranking system. Species are classified by the IUCN Red List into nine groups set through criteria such as rate of decline, population size, area of geographic distribution, and degree of population and distribution fragmentation.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Also included are species that have gone extinct since 1500 CE.

[ 3 ] When discussing the IUCN Red List, the official term " threatened " is a grouping of three categories: critically endangered, endangered, and vulnerable.

Extinct (EX) – There are no known living individuals Extinct in the wild (EW) – Known only to survive in captivity, or as a naturalized population outside its historic range Critically Endangered (CR) – Highest risk of extinction in the wild Endangered (EN) – Higher risk of extinction in the wild Vulnerable (VU) – High risk of extinction in the wild Near Threatened (NT) – Likely to become endangered in the near future Conservation Dependent (CD) – Low risk; is conserved to prevent being near threatened, certain events may lead it to being a higher risk level Least concern (LC) – Very low risk; does not qualify for a higher risk category and not likely to be threatened in the near future. Widespread and abundant taxa are included in this category.

Data deficient (DD) – Not enough data to make an assessment of its risk of extinction Not evaluated (NE) – Has not yet been evaluated against the criteria.

The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora [ edit ] The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) went into force in 1975. It aims to ensure that international trade in specimens of wild animals and plants does not threaten their survival. Many countries require CITES permits when importing plants and animals listed on CITES.

Multi-country systems [ edit ] In the European Union (EU), the Birds Directive and Habitats Directive are the legal instruments which evaluate the conservation status within the EU of species and habitats.

NatureServe conservation status focuses on Latin America , the United States, Canada, and the Caribbean . It has been developed by scientists from NatureServe , The Nature Conservancy , and a network of natural heritage programs and data centers. It is increasingly integrated with the IUCN Red List system. Its categories for species include: presumed extinct (GX), possibly extinct (GH), critically imperiled (G1), imperiled (G2), vulnerable (G3), apparently secure (G4), and secure (G5).

[ 4 ] The system also allows ambiguous or uncertain ranks including inexact numeric ranks (e.g. G2?), and range ranks (e.g. G2G3) for when the exact rank is uncertain. NatureServe adds a qualifier for captive or cultivated only (C), which has a similar meaning to the IUCN Red List extinct in the wild (EW) status.

The Red Data Book of the Russian Federation is used within the Russian Federation, and also accepted in parts of Africa.

National systems [ edit ] In Australia, the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (EPBC Act) describes lists of threatened species, ecological communities and threatening processes. The categories resemble those of the 1994 IUCN Red List Categories & Criteria (version 2.3). Prior to the EPBC Act, a simpler classification system was used by the Endangered Species Protection Act 1992 . Some state and territory governments also have their own systems for conservation status. The codes for the Western Australian conservation system are given at Declared Rare and Priority Flora List (abbreviated to DECF when using in a taxobox).

In Belgium, the Flemish Research Institute for Nature and Forest publishes an online set of more than 150 nature indicators in Dutch.

[ 5 ] In Canada, the Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada (COSEWIC) is a group of experts that assesses and designates which wild species are in some danger of disappearing from Canada.

[ 6 ] Under the Species at Risk Act (SARA), it is up to the federal government, which is politically accountable, to legally protect species assessed by COSEWIC.

In China, the State, provinces and some counties have determined their key protected wildlife species. There is the China red data book.

In Finland , many species are protected under the Nature Conservation Act, and through the EU Habitats Directive and EU Birds Directive.

[ 7 ] In Germany, the Federal Agency for Nature Conservation publishes "red lists of endangered species".

India has the Wild Life Protection Act, 1972, Amended 2003 and the Biological Diversity Act, 2002 .

In Japan, the Ministry of Environment publishes a Threatened Wildlife of Japan Red Data Book.

[ 8 ] In the Netherlands , the Dutch Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality publishes a list of threatened species, and conservation is enforced by the Nature Conservation Act 1998. Species are also protected through the Wild Birds and Habitats Directives.

In New Zealand, the Department of Conservation publishes the New Zealand Threat Classification System lists.  As of January 2008 [update] threatened species or subspecies are assigned one of seven categories: Nationally Critical, Nationally Endangered, Nationally Vulnerable, Declining, Recovering, Relict, or Naturally Uncommon.

[ 9 ] While the classification looks only at a national level, many species are unique to New Zealand, and species which are secure overseas are noted as such.

In Russia, the Red Book of The Russian Federation came out in 2001, it contains categories defining preservation status for different species. In it there are 8 taxa of amphibians, 21 taxa of reptiles, 128 taxa of birds, and 74 taxa of mammals, in total 231. There are also more than 30 regional red books, for example the red book of the Altaic region which came out in 1994.

In South Africa , the South African National Biodiversity Institute , established under the National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004, [ 10 ] is responsible for drawing up lists of affected species, and monitoring compliance with CITES decisions. It is envisaged that previously diverse Red lists would be more easily kept current, both technically and financially.

In Thailand , the Wild Animal Reservation and Protection Act of BE 2535 defines fifteen reserved animal species and two classes of protected species, of which hunting, breeding, possession, and trade are prohibited or restricted by law. The National Park, Wildlife and Plant Conservation Department of the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment is responsible for the regulation of these activities.

In Ukraine , the Ministry of Environment Protection maintains list of endangered species (divided into seven categories from "0" - extinct to "VI" - rehabilitated) and publishes it in the Red Book of Ukraine.

In the United States of America , the Endangered Species Act of 1973 created the Endangered Species List .

Consumer guides [ edit ] Main article: Sustainable seafood advisory lists and certification Some consumer guides for seafood , such as Seafood Watch , divide fish and other sea creatures into three categories, analogous to conservation status categories: Red (" say no " or " avoid ") Yellow or orange (" think twice ", " good alternatives " or " some concerns ") Green (" best seafood choices ") [ 11 ] The categories do not simply reflect the imperilment of individual species, but also consider the environmental impacts of how and where they are fished, such as through bycatch or ocean bottom trawlers . Often groups of species are assessed rather than individual species (e.g.

squid , prawns ).

The Marine Conservation Society has five levels of ratings for seafood species, as displayed on their FishOnline website.

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Conservation status of wolves in Europe Conservation biology Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals Lazarus taxon List of endangered species in North America Listing priority number Lists of extinct animals Lists of organisms by population Living Planet Index Red List Index Regional Red List Reintroduction References [ edit ] ^ Categories and Criteria The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Retrieved 18 September 2015.

^ IUCN. (2012) IUCN Red List Categories and Criteria: Version 3.1 Archived 2016-01-28 at the Wayback Machine Second edition. Gland, Switzerland and Cambridge, UK.

ISBN 9782831714356 .

^ IUCN Standards and Petitions Committee (2019), Guidelines for Using the IUCN Red List Categories and Criteria (PDF) (14 ed.), p. 7 ^ "InfoNatura: About the Data: Conservation Status" .

NatureServe.org . 2007-04-10. Archived from the original on 2013-09-21 . Retrieved 2013-07-22 .

^ "Research Institute for Nature and Forest" .

Inbo.be . Archived from the original on 2008-12-01 . Retrieved 2013-07-22 .

^ "Cosewic" . Government of Canada, Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada. Archived from the original on 2013-05-30 . Retrieved 2013-07-22 .

.

^ "Protecting species" .

Ymparisto.fi . Archived from the original on 2013-05-06 . Retrieved 2013-07-22 .

^ "Threatened Species" .

Biodic.go.jp . Retrieved 2013-07-22 .

^ Townsend, Andrew J.; de Lange, Peter J.; Duffy, Clinton A.J.; Miskelly, Colin M.; Molloy, Janice; Norton, David A. (January 2008).

New Zealand Threat Classification System manual (PDF) . Wellington, New Zealand: Science & Technical Publishing Department of Conservation.

ISBN 9780478143645 . Retrieved 2 February 2018 .

^ "Welcome to the official South African government online site! - South African Government" (PDF) .

Info.gov.za . Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 June 2007 . Retrieved 12 November 2017 .

^ "Seafood Recommendations: Our Seafood Ratings" .

Seafoodwatch.org . Archived from the original on 19 June 2014 . Retrieved 19 June 2014 .

^ "Fish ratings" .

FishOnline . Marine Conservation Society . Retrieved March 28, 2013 .

External links [ edit ] Search the IUCN Red List IUCN Red List Categories and Criteria Version 3.1 (archived 23 March 2014) "Wildlife Conservation – Initiatives – WWF" .

World Wildlife Fund . Retrieved 12 November 2017 .

v t e Threatened species Template: Threatened species by region IUCN Red List Categories 1 Extinct Extinct (EX) Extinct in the Wild (EW) Threatened Critically Endangered (CR) Endangered (EN) Vulnerable (VU) Lower risk Near Threatened (NT) Least Concern (LC) Lower Risk (LR) Conservation Dependent (LR/cd) Not fully assessed Data Deficient (DD) Not Evaluated (NE) Species Lists Extinct Extinct in the Wild Critically Endangered Endangered Vulnerable Near Threatened Least Concern Data Deficient WP categories Extinct Extinct in the Wild Critically Endangered Endangered Vulnerable Near Threatened Least Concern Data Deficient CITES Appendix I Appendix II Appendix III By taxa Threatened arthropods / Endangered arthropods / spiders / Decline in insect populations Decline in amphibian populations Threatened Banksia / rays / sharks / Fungi / Chromista The World's 25 Most Endangered Primates The world's 100 most threatened species Conservation Biodiversity action plan Biodiversity threats Conservation biology CITES ARKive Bird conservation Conservation status Conservation-reliant species Ecoregion conservation status Habitat destruction Latent extinction risk Rare species Vulnerability and susceptibility 1 Pre-2001 categories and subcategories shown in italics .

v t e Conservation of species Index of conservation articles Conservation biology Biodiversity Captive breeding Compassionate conservation Conservation behavior Conservation-dependent species Conservation genetics Conservation-induced extinction Conservation status Endemism Ex-situ conservation Extinction threshold In-situ conservation Latent extinction risk Marine conservation Mutualisms and conservation Nature conservation Nuisance wildlife Pest Vermin Conservation biology of parasites Species translocation Conservation welfare Threatened species Vulnerability and susceptibility Approaches Conservation agriculture Conservation development Conservation finance Conservation grazing Conservation management system Conservation movement Conservation photography Conservation psychology Conspicuous conservation Community-based conservation Ecoregion conservation status Environmental protection Evidence-based conservation Flagship species Forest management Forest protection Tropical rainforest conservation Integrated Conservation and Development Project Other effective area-based conservation measures Riparian buffer Roadless area conservation Roadside conservation Site-based conservation Wetland conservation Protected areas Conservation designation Conservation district Conservation easement Conservation reserve Gap analysis Habitat conservation High conservation value area Landscape-scale conservation Marine protected area Marxan Open space reserve Wildlife corridor 30 by 30 target Key issues Conservation refugee Fortress conservation Habitat fragmentation Human–wildlife conflict Restoration Assisted natural regeneration Ecosystem restoration Island restoration Reforestation afforestation Rewilding marine Species reintroduction By taxon Arthropod Bird Hawaiian honeycreeper Raptor Golden eagle Fungi Land mammal American bison Arabian oryx Bear Polar bear Cheetah Elephant Indian elephant Slow loris Tiger Bengal Tiger Wolf Marine Dolphin Gray nurse shark Manatee Painted turtle Salmon Sea otter Plant Seed bank Cryopreservation By country Angola Australia Belize Brazil Canada Central African Republic Costa Rica Hong Kong Iceland India Indonesia Ireland Italy Malaysia Mauritius Namibia New Zealand Pakistan Papua New Guinea South Sudan Sweden Uganda United Kingdom Scotland United States forests Related Conservation officer De-extinction Planetary boundaries IUCN Red List NatureServe conservation status Special Area of Conservation Soil conservation List of conservation issues List of organisations List of people Category Portals : Environment Ecology Biology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Conservation_status&oldid=1305691904 " Categories : Evolutionary biology terminology Biota by conservation status Conservation biology Environmental conservation Environmental terminology NatureServe Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing potentially dated statements from January 2008 All articles containing potentially dated statements This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 14:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Conservation status 87 languages Add topic

