Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Proper names and definite descriptions 3 Essentialism 4 Causal-historical theory of reference 5 Necessary identities 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Rigid designator 8 languages Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی 日本語 Polski Português Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Term with invariant possible designations In modal logic and the philosophy of language , a term is said to be a rigid designator or absolute substantial term when it designates (picks out, denotes, refers to) the same thing in all possible worlds in which that thing exists.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] A designator is persistently rigid if it also designates nothing in all other possible worlds. A designator is obstinately rigid if it designates the same thing in every possible world, period, whether or not that thing exists in that world. Rigid designators are contrasted with connotative terms , non-rigid or flaccid designators , which may designate different things in different possible worlds.

History [ edit ] The Scholastic philosophers in the Middle Ages developed a theory of properties of terms in which different classifications of concepts feature prominently.

Concepts, and the terms that signify them, can be divided into absolute or connotative , according to the mode in which they signify. If they signify something absolutely, that is, after the manner of substance, they are absolute , for example rock, lion, man, whiteness, wisdom, tallness. If they signify something connotatively, that is, with reference to a subject of inherence, i.e., after the manner of accidents, they are connotative , for example, white, wise, tall.

Both connotative and absolute concepts can be used to signify accidents, but since connotative concepts signify with a reference to a subject of inherence, they can refer to object with different definitions and properties (i.e. with different essences ). For example, large, as a connotative concept, can signify objects with many distinct essences: a man, a lion, a triangle can be large.

On the other hand, absolute concepts signify objects that have the same definitions and properties. For example, the concept of gold, as an absolute concept, can signify only objects with the same definitions and properties (i.e. with the same essence ).

Proper names and definite descriptions [ edit ] The notion of absolute concepts was then revived by Saul Kripke , with the name “rigid designation”, in the lectures that became Naming and Necessity , in the course of his argument against descriptivist theories of reference, building on the work of Ruth Barcan Marcus . At the time of Kripke's lectures, the dominant theory of reference in analytic philosophy (associated with the theories of Gottlob Frege and Bertrand Russell ) was that the meaning of sentences involving proper names could be given by substituting a contextually appropriate description for the name. Russell, [ 3 ] for example, famously held that someone who had never met Otto von Bismarck might know of him as the first Chancellor of the German Empire , and if so, his statement that (say) "Bismarck was a ruthless politician" should be understood to mean "The first Chancellor of the German Empire was a ruthless politician" (which could in turn be analysed into a series of more basic statements according to the method Russell introduced in his theory of definite descriptions ). Kripke argued—against both the Russellian analysis and several attempted refinements of it—that such descriptions could not possibly mean the same thing as the name "Bismarck," on the grounds that proper names such as "Bismarck" always designate rigidly , whereas descriptions such as "the first Chancellor of the German Empire" do not. Thus, for example, it might have been the case that Bismarck died in infancy. If so, he would not have ever satisfied the description "the first Chancellor of the German Empire," and (indeed) someone else probably would have. It does not follow that the first Chancellor of the German Empire may not have been the first Chancellor of the German Empire—that is (at least according to its surface-structure) a contradiction. Kripke argues that the way that proper names work is that when we make statements about what might or might not have been true of Bismarck, we are talking about what might or might not have been true of that particular person in various situations, whereas when we make statements about what might or might not have been true of, say, the first Chancellor of the German Empire we could be talking about what might or might not have been true of whoever would have happened to fill that office in those situations.

The "could" here is important to note: rigid designation is a property of the way terms are used , not a property of the terms themselves , and some philosophers, following Keith Donnellan , have argued that a phrase such as "the first Chancellor of the German Empire" could be used rigidly, in sentences such as "the first Chancellor of the German Empire could have decided never to go into politics." Kripke himself doubted that there was any need to recognize rigid uses of definite descriptions, and argued that Russell 's notion of scope offered all that was needed to account for such sentences. But in either case, Kripke argued, nothing important in his account depends on the question. Whether definite descriptions can be used rigidly or not, they can at least sometimes be used non-rigidly, but a proper name can only be used rigidly ; the asymmetry, Kripke argues, demonstrates that no definite description could give the meaning of a proper name—although it might be used to explain who a name refers to (that is, to "fix the referent" of the name).

Essentialism [ edit ] In Naming and Necessity , Kripke argues that proper names and certain natural kind terms—including biological taxa and types of natural substances (most famously, "water" and "H 2 O") designate rigidly. He argues for a form of scientific essentialism not unlike Aristotelian essentialism. Essential properties are common to an object in all possible worlds, and so they pick out the same objects in all possible worlds - they rigidly designate.

Causal-historical theory of reference [ edit ] See also: Causal-historical theory of reference Proper names rigidly designate for reasons that differ from natural kinds terms. The reason ' Johnny Depp ' refers to one particular person in all possible worlds is because some person initially gave the name to him by saying something like "Let's call our baby 'Johnny Depp'". This is called the initial baptism. This usage of 'Johnny Depp' for referring to some particular baby got passed on from person-to-person in a giant causal and historical chain of events . That is why everybody calls Johnny Depp 'Johnny Depp'. Johnny's mother passed it onto her friends who passed it onto their friends who passed it onto their friends, and so on.

Necessary identities [ edit ] Further information: Necessity of identity One puzzling consequence of Kripke semantics is that identities involving rigid designators are necessary. If water is H 2 O, then water is necessarily H 2 O. Since the terms 'water' and 'H 2 O' pick out the same object in every possible world, there is no possible world in which 'water' picks out something different from 'H 2 O'. Therefore, water is necessarily H 2 O. It is possible, of course, that we are mistaken about the chemical composition of water, but that does not affect the necessity of identities . What is not being claimed is that water is necessarily H 2 O, but conditionally , if water is H 2 O (though we may not know this, it does not change the fact if it is true), then water is necessarily H 2 O.

See also [ edit ] Causal theory of reference Class versus instance Counterpart theory Direct reference theory Non-rigid designator Vivid designator Scientific essentialism References [ edit ] ^ Oxford Dictionary of Philosophy , Revised Second Edition 2008, p. 318 ^ Saul Kripke , Arif Ahmed, p. 27 ^ Russell, Bertrand (1917), Knowledge by Acquaintance and Knowledge by Description v t e Formal semantics (natural language) Central concepts Compositionality Denotation Entailment Extension Generalized quantifier Intension Logical form Presupposition Proposition Reference Scope Speech act Syntax–semantics interface Truth conditions Topics Areas Anaphora Ambiguity Binding Conditionals Definiteness Disjunction Evidentiality Focus Indexicality Lexical semantics Modality Negation Propositional attitudes Tense–aspect–mood Quantification Vagueness Phenomena Antecedent-contained deletion Cataphora Coercion Conservativity Counterfactuals Crossover effects Cumulativity De dicto and de re De se Deontic modality Discourse relations Donkey anaphora Epistemic modality Exhaustivity Faultless disagreement Free choice inferences Givenness Homogeneity (linguistics) Hurford disjunction Inalienable possession Intersective modification Logophoricity Mirativity Modal subordination Opaque contexts Performatives Polarity items Privative adjectives Quantificational variability effect Responsive predicate Rising declaratives Scalar implicature Sloppy identity Subsective modification Subtrigging Telicity Temperature paradox Veridicality Formalism Formal systems Alternative semantics Categorial grammar Combinatory categorial grammar Discourse representation theory (DRT) Dynamic semantics Generative grammar Glue semantics Inquisitive semantics Intensional logic Lambda calculus Mereology Montague grammar Segmented discourse representation theory (SDRT) Situation semantics Supervaluationism Type theory TTR Concepts Autonomy of syntax Context set Continuation Conversational scoreboard Downward entailing Existential closure Function application Meaning postulate Monads Plural quantification Possible world Quantifier raising Quantization Question under discussion Semantic parsing Squiggle operator Strawson entailment Strict conditional Type shifter Universal grinder See also Cognitive semantics Computational semantics Distributional semantics Formal grammar Inferentialism Logic translation Linguistics wars Philosophy of language Pragmatics Semantics of logic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐ddkwl
Cached time: 20250812011149
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.154 seconds
Real time usage: 0.225 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 369/1000000
Revision size: 8562/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 27061/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 466/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 8/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 10180/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.098/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 1807952/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  182.110      1 -total
 51.90%   94.514      3 Template:Navbox
 51.19%   93.219      1 Template:Formal_semantics
 35.18%   64.066      1 Template:Short_description
 19.06%   34.718      2 Template:Pagetype
 10.26%   18.679      2 Template:Main_other
  9.63%   17.535      1 Template:See_also
  9.40%   17.122      1 Template:SDcat
  2.21%    4.024      1 Template:See
  1.45%    2.643      1 Template:Short_description/lowercasecheck Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:596795:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812011149 and revision id 1183858978. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rigid_designator&oldid=1183858978 " Categories : Possible world Philosophy of language Formal semantics (natural language) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 November 2023, at 23:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rigid designator 8 languages Add topic

