Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Classification of stylolites Toggle Classification of stylolites subsection 1.1 Geometric classification 1.2 Relationship to bedding 2 Development 3 Significance 4 Gallery 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Stylolite 12 languages Català Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands Norsk nynorsk Polski Српски / srpski ไทย Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Serrated surface within a rock mass Stylolites in limestone Stylolites (Greek: stylos , pillar; lithos , stone) are serrated surfaces within a rock mass at which mineral material has been removed by pressure dissolution , in a deformation process that decreases the total volume of rock. Minerals which are insoluble in water, such as clays , pyrite and oxides , as well as insoluble organic matter , [ 1 ] remain within the stylolites and make them visible. Sometimes host rocks contain no insoluble minerals, in which case stylolites can be recognized by change in texture of the rock.

[ 2 ] They occur most commonly in homogeneous rocks, [ 3 ] carbonates , cherts , sandstones , but they can be found in certain igneous rocks and ice . Their size vary from microscopic contacts between two grains (microstylolites) to large structures up to 20 m in length and up to 10 m in amplitude in ice.

[ 4 ] Stylolites usually form parallel to bedding , because of overburden pressure , but they can be oblique or even perpendicular to bedding, as a result of tectonic activity.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Classification of stylolites [ edit ] In structural geology and diagenesis , pressure solution or pressure dissolution is a deformation mechanism that involves the dissolution of minerals at grain-to-grain contacts into an aqueous pore fluid in areas of relatively high stress and either deposition in regions of relatively low stress within the same rock or their complete removal from the rock within the fluid. It is an example of diffusive mass transfer . Stylolites are formed by this process.

Stylolites can be classified according to their geometry or their orientation and relationship to bedding.

[ 4 ] Geometric classification [ edit ] Park and Schot (1968) recognized six different geometries in stylolites: [ 4 ] Simple or primitive wave-like Sutured type Up-peak type (rectangular type) Down-peak type (rectangular type) Sharp-peak type (tapered and pointed) Seismogram type Relationship to bedding [ edit ] Horizontal stylolites This is the most commonly observed stylolite type. They occur parallel or nearly parallel to the bedding of rocks. This type is most frequently found in layered sedimentary rocks , mostly in carbonate rocks , which have not been affected by intensive tectonic structural activity or metamorphism .

Inclined stylolites or slickolites This type occurs oblique to bedding. It appears in rocks which are both affected or unaffected by tectonic activity, and can also be found in metamorphic and layered igneous rocks.

Horizontal-inclined (vertical) or crosscutting stylolites This type is a combination of horizontal and inclined types of stylolites.  Horizontal stylolites usually have a higher amplitude than inclined stylolites. Horizontal-inclined can be found in rocks affected by pressure parallel to the bedding plane followed by pressure perpendicular to bedding.

Vertical stylolites This type of stylolite is related to the bedding at right angles. It may or may not be associated with tectonic activity . It is caused by pressure acting perpendicularly to the bedding.

Interconnecting network stylolites This type is a network of stylolites, which are related to each other with relatively small angles. This type can be divided into two subtypes. Stylolites of subtype A are characterized by higher amplitudes. They are related to the bedding either horizontally, or at a small angle. Stylolites of subtype B usually appear in rocks which have been affected by tectonic and/or metamorphic activity. These stylolites have a low amplitude with undulations. Their relation to the bedding can vary from horizontal to vertical.

Vertical-inclined (horizontal) or crosscutting stylolites This type is a combination of horizontal or inclined and vertical stylolite types. In this case the inclined or horizontal stylolites were formed first and the vertical later. This type can be divided into two subtypes by directions of displacement of the inclined stylolites. In subtype A, the displacements could have happened during vertical stylolization, while in subtype B, the displacements could have happened before vertical stylolization.

Development [ edit ] A stylolite is not a structural fracture , although they have been described as a form of 'anticrack', with the sides moving together rather than apart.

[ 7 ] Proof exists in the form of fossiliferous limestone where fossils are crosscut by a stylolite and only one half still exists; the other half has been dissolved away. Rye & Bradbury (1988) [ 8 ] investigated 13/12 C and 18/16 O stable isotope systematics in limestone on either side of a stylolite plane and found differences confirming different degrees of fluid-rock interaction.

In order for a stylolite to develop, a solution into which minerals can dissolve needs to be present, along with a pore network through which dissolved solids can migrate by advection or diffusion from the developing stylolite. Stylolite development can be improved with porosity , as it localizes stress on grains, increasing the stress there. Therefore, it is suggested that bedding-parallel stylolites form in areas of high porosity , [ 9 ] and most of the transverse stylolites form along preexisting fractures .

[ 2 ] Significance [ edit ] Stylolites are significant in several fields. In petrology , stylolites are important because they alter rock fabrics and dissolve solids that precipitate as cement . In stratigraphy , weathering of stylolites generates apparent bedding in many stratigraphic sections and loss of material along stylolites can have a result similar to erosion , with significant stratigraphic thinning. In hydrology , stylolites prevent fluid flow and, in other settings, serve for fluid flow. Also, stylolites are indicators of compressive stress in tectonic studies, and development of transverse stylolites contributes to crustal shortening parallel to the direction of their column.

[ 2 ] Gallery [ edit ] A stylolite viewed in thin section in plane polarized light in a packstone , Oehrlikalk formation of the Axen nappe, Wellenberg, Switzerland Stylolite in a Slovakian limestone Stylolites affecting deformed coral limestone from Devon, England See also [ edit ] Fold (geology) Rock microstructure References [ edit ] ^ Dunham J.B.; Larter S. (1981).

"Association of Stylolitic Carbonates and Organic Matter: Implications for Temperature Control on Stylolite Formation" .

AAPG Bulletin .

65 .

^ a b c Middleton, Gerard V., Encyclopedia of sediments and sedimentary rocks , 2003, p. 90-92 ^ Golding, H. G.; Conolly, J. R. (1962). "Stylolites in volcanic rocks".

Journal of Sedimentary Petrology .

32 (3): 534– 538.

doi : 10.1306/74D70D12-2B21-11D7-8648000102C1865D .

^ a b c Park, Won C.; Schot, Erik H. (1968). "Stylolites: their nature and origin".

Journal of Sedimentary Petrology .

38 (1): 175– 191.

doi : 10.1306/74D71910-2B21-11D7-8648000102C1865D .

^ Andrews, Lynn M.; Railsbak, L. Bruce (1997). "Controls on stylolite development: morphologic, lithologic, and temporal evidence form bedding-parallel and transverse stylolites from the U.S. Appalachians".

Journal of Geology .

105 (1): 59– 73.

Bibcode : 1997JG....105...59A .

doi : 10.1086/606147 .

JSTOR 30079885 .

S2CID 128917505 .

^ Petrology of the sedimentary rocks , F.H. Hatch, R.H. Rastall p. 382 ^ Fletcher, C.C. and Pollard, D.D. 1981 Anticrack model for pressure solution surfaces. Geology, 9, 419-24.

^ Rye, DM, and Bradbury, HJ (1988): Fluid flow in the crust: an example from a Pyrenean thrust ramp. American Journal of Science (288): 197-235.

^ Merino, E., Ortoleva, P., and Strickholm, P., 1983. Generation of evenly-spaced pressure-solution seams during (late) diagenesis: a kinetic theory. Contributions to Mineralogy and Petrology, 82: 360-370.

Schlumberger Oilfield Glossary S. Sinha-Roy, Kinetics of differentiated stylolite formation , Current Science, V. 82, No. 8, 25 April 2002 v t e Structural geology Underlying theory Deformation mechanism Lamé's stress ellipsoid Mohr–Coulomb theory Mohr's circle Overburden pressure Rock mechanics Strain Strain partitioning Stress Stress field Tension Measurement conventions Brunton compass Inclinometer Orthographic projection Rake Stereographic projection Strike and dip Large-scale tectonics Accretionary wedge Allochthon Autochthon Back-arc basin Continental collision Convergent boundary Décollement Divergent boundary Extensional tectonics Fault block Fenster Fold and thrust belt Fold mountains Foreland basin Graben Half-graben Horse Horst Horst and graben Intra-arc basin Inversion Klippe List of tectonic plate interactions Mélange Mountain formation Nappe Obduction Orogeny Passive margin Plate tectonics Pull-apart basin Rift valley Rift Saddle Strike-slip tectonics Structural basin Suture Syneclise Terrane Thick-skinned deformation Thin-skinned deformation Thrust tectonics Fracturing Columnar jointing Dike Exfoliation joint Fissure Joint Vein Faulting Asperity Cataclasite Cataclastic rock Detachment fault Disturbance Fault friction Fault mechanics Fault scarp Fault trace Thrust fault Transfer zone Transform fault Foliation and lineation Cleavage Compaction Crenulation Fissility Oblique foliation Pressure solution Rock microstructure Slickenside Stylolite Tectonic phase Tectonite Folding Anticline Chevron Detachment fold Dome Homocline Monocline Syncline Vergence Boudinage Competence Kinematic analysis 3D fold evolution Paleostress inversion Paleostress Section restoration Shear zone Mylonite Pure shear Shear Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Stylolite&oldid=1240516597 " Categories : Limestone Petrology Sedimentary rocks Structural geology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 August 2024, at 20:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Stylolite 12 languages Add topic

