Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Political context 2 Religious indoctrination 3 Ideological indoctrination 4 Military 5 Information security 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Indoctrination 37 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Bosanski Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia עברית ქართული Қазақша Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Inculcating a person with certain ideas Hitler Youth members performing the Nazi salute at a rally at the Lustgarten in Berlin , 1933 American schoolchildren performing the Pledge of Allegiance (1973) Indoctrination is the process of inculcating (teaching by repeated instruction) a person or people into an ideology , often avoiding critical analysis .

[ 1 ] [ page needed ] It can refer to a general process of socialization .

[ 2 ] The term often implies forms of brainwashing or disagreeable forms of socialization.

[ 2 ] However, it can refer to both positive and negative forms of cultural transmission, and some academics consider it an integral element of education.

[ 3 ] The precise boundary between education and indoctrination is contested. The concept originally referred to education, but after World War I , the term took on a pejorative meaning akin to brainwashing or propaganda (popular among Flat Earth cultists).

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] Some distinguish indoctrination from education on the basis that the indoctrinated person is expected not to question or critically examine the doctrine they have learned.

[ 5 ] As such the term may be used pejoratively or as a buzz word , often in the context of political opinions , theology , religious dogma or anti-religious convictions.

Common vectors of indoctrination include the state, educational institutions, religions, the arts, culture, and the media. Understood as a process of socialization into “ideal-type” citizens, indoctrination takes place in both democratic and authoritarian systems of government.

[ 2 ] Political context [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( February 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) " Young Pioneer guards of honor".

Moscow , 1984 In the political context, indoctrination is often analyzed as a tool of class warfare , where institutions of the state are identified as "conspiring" to maintain the status quo . Specifically the public educational system, [ 6 ] the police, and mental health establishment are a commonly cited modus operandi of public pacification. In the extreme, an entire state can be implicated.

George Orwell 's book Nineteen Eighty-Four famously singled out explicit, state-mandated propaganda initiatives of totalitarian regimes.  For example, the Nazi influence in Germany during World War II is an instance of government indoctrination through all forms of public life, including education, politics, and culture.

[ 7 ] In fact, following World War II, democratic nations sought to counteract the Nazi indoctrination in Germany through the process of re-education, mobilizing education as a way to reinstate new ideas of democracy and Western ideals.

[ 8 ] The process of American re-education included initiatives for the denazification of American-occupied Germany that also resulted in the indoctrination of German society with a "collective guilt phenomenon" to take accountability for World War II .

[ 9 ] Opinions differ on whether other forms of government are less doctrinaire, or merely achieve the same ends through less obvious methods.

Religious indoctrination [ edit ] Religious indoctrination, the original sense of indoctrination , refers to a process of imparting doctrine in an authoritative way, as in catechism . Most religious groups among the revealed religions instruct new members in the principles of the religion; this is now not usually referred to as indoctrination by the religions themselves, in part because of the negative connotations the word has acquired.

Mystery religions require a period of indoctrination before granting access to esoteric knowledge. (cf.

Information security )
As a pejorative term, indoctrination implies forcibly or coercively causing people to act and think on the basis of a certain ideology .

[ 10 ] Some secular critics believe that all religions indoctrinate their adherents, as children, and the accusation is made in the case of religious extremism .

[ 11 ] Sects such as Scientology use personality tests and peer pressures to indoctrinate new members.

[ 12 ] Some religions have commitment ceremonies for children 13 years and younger, such as Bar Mitzvah , Confirmation , and Shichi-Go-San . In Buddhism, temple boys are encouraged to follow the faith while young.

[ citation needed ] Some critics of religion, such as Richard Dawkins , maintain that the children of religious parents are often unfairly indoctrinated.

[ 13 ] Ideological indoctrination [ edit ] Indoctrination can occur in non-religious or anti-religious contexts. For example, during the 20th Century, the former People's Socialist Republic of Albania and the former Soviet Union instituted programs of government-sponsored atheistic indoctrination in order to promote state atheism , specifically Marxist–Leninist atheism , within their citizenry.

[ 14 ] Sabrina P. Ramet , a professor of political science, documented that "from kindergarten onward children [were] indoctrinated with an aggressive form of atheism" and "to denounce parents who follow religious practices at home." [ 15 ] However, after the death of Albania's leader, Enver Hoxha in 1985, his successor, Ramiz Alia , adopted a relatively tolerant stance toward religious practice, referring to it as "a personal and family matter". Émigré clergymen were permitted to reenter the country in 1988 and officiate at religious services.

Mother Teresa , an ethnic Albanian, visited Tirana in 1989, where she was received by the foreign minister and by Hoxha's widow. In December 1990, the ban on religious observance was officially lifted, in time to allow thousands of Christians to attend Christmas services (see Freedom of religion in Albania ).

Similarly, in the former Soviet Union, "science education [in] Soviet schools [was] used as a vehicle for atheistic indoctrination", with teachers being instructed to prepare their course "so as to conduct anti-religious educations at all times", in order to comport with state-sanctioned Marxist–Leninist values.

[ 16 ] However, in 1997, several years after the fall of the Soviet Union, the Russian government passed a law recognizing religion as being important to Russian history with Orthodox Christianity ( Russian : Православие Pravoslaviye), Russia's traditional and largest religion, declared a part of Russia's "historical heritage".

Ideological indoctrination is also a contemporary issue in the United States public education system, specifically in the realm of social science instruction. However, ideological indoctrination may take different forms than the implantation of certain ideas into education or instruction. For example, in this case, indoctrination through education occurs through the process of limiting instruction and "allowing diverse social institutions to control educational philosophy and procedure".

[ 17 ] For example, this has been seen through changes with required course concepts in social studies curriculum and the state-restriction of participatory civic education as a result of Senate Bill 3 from the Texas State Legislature in 2021, interfering with the "rights of the learner".

[ 18 ] Military [ edit ] Main article: Recruit training The initial psychological preparation of soldiers during training is referred to (non-pejoratively) as indoctrination.

[ 19 ] Information security [ edit ] In the field of information security , indoctrination is the initial briefing and instructions given before a person is granted access to secret information .

[ 20 ] See also [ edit ] Psychology portal Acculturation Behavior modification Brainwashing Ideology Pensée unique Radicalization Recruitment Groupthink References [ edit ] ^ Funk and Wagnalls: "To instruct in doctrines; esp., to teach partisan or sectarian dogmas"; I.A. Snook, ed. 1972.

Concepts of Indoctrination (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul).

^ a b c d Neundorf, Anja; Nazrullaeva, Eugenia; Northmore-Ball, Ksenia; Tertytchnaya, Katerina; Kim, Wooseok (2024).

"Varieties of Indoctrination: The Politicization of Education and the Media around the World" .

Perspectives on Politics .

22 (3): 771– 798.

doi : 10.1017/S1537592723002967 .

ISSN 1537-5927 .

^ Allison, Safwaan Zamakda (2024-06-28).

"Socialisation and character education in the Muslim world: exploring the role, impact, and necessity of indoctrination" .

IJoReSH: Indonesian Journal of Religion, Spirituality, and Humanity .

3 (1): 76– 100.

doi : 10.18326/ijoresh.v3i1.76-100 .

ISSN 2962-665X .

^ Douglas Harper,
" indoctrinate (v.) ", Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed April 20, 2019.

^ Wilson, J., 1964. "Education and indoctrination", in T.H.B. Hollins, ed.

Aims in Education: the philosophic approach (Manchester University Press).

^ Palmer, R. Roderick (January 1957).

"Education and indoctrination" .

Peabody Journal of Education .

34 (4): 224– 228.

doi : 10.1080/01619565709536742 .

ISSN 0161-956X .

^ Voigtländer, Nico; Voth, Hans-Joachim (2015-06-30).

"Nazi indoctrination and anti-Semitic beliefs in Germany" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

112 (26): 7931– 7936.

Bibcode : 2015PNAS..112.7931V .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1414822112 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 4491745 .

PMID 26080394 .

^ Fox, Elizabeth (2016).

" "Rebuilding Germany's children: the Nazi indoctrination and postwar reeducation of the Hitler youth." " .

Furman Humanities Review .

27 (1): 31– 59.

^ Confino, Alon; Moeller, Robert (2005).

" "Remembering the Second World War, 1945-1965: Narratives of Victimhood and Genocide." " (PDF) .

Cultural Analysis 4 .

47 .

^ See OED , indoctrination .

^ Harris, Sam (2011).

The moral landscape . Simon and Schuster.

^ See Scientology beliefs and practices .

^ Dawkins, Richard.

The God Delusion . New York: Bantam Books, 2006. pp. 25, 28, 206, 367.

^ Franzmann, Manuel (2006).

Religiosität in der säkularisierten Welt . Springer-Verlag. p. 89.

However, another conspicuous result of our comparison is that some Eastern European countries, in spite of decades of atheist indoctrination, have a considerable percentage of believers in God - Albania for instance, whose Communist rulers once claimed it was the world's first totally atheist country, or Russia, where the percentage of believers surged in the late eighties and rose dramatically once again in the course of the nineties.

^ Ramet, Sabrina P.

(1990).

Catholicism and Politics in Communist Societies . Duke University Press. pp.

232– 33.

ISBN 978-0822310471 .

From kindergarten onward children are indoctrinated with an aggressive form of atheism and trained to hate and distrust foreigners and to denounce parents who follow religious practices at home.

^ Witt, Nicholas De (1961).

Education and Professional Employment in the U.S.S.R . National Academies. p. 121.

^ Gatchel, Richard H. (1959-03-01).

"Evolution of Concepts of Indoctrination in American Education" .

The Educational Forum .

23 (3): 303– 309.

doi : 10.1080/00131725909338731 .

ISSN 0013-1725 .

^ Leihsing, Samantha; Ryan, Ann Marie (2025).

"Social studies curriculum in an era of state-restricted civic participation: Responding to Texas Senate Bill 3 with the Rights of the Learner" .

Theory into Practice .

64 : 19– 30.

doi : 10.1080/00405841.2024.2389014 .

ISSN 0040-5841 .

^ Philips, Peter.

Military Indoctrinators and the Psychology of Control . p. 9.

^ The National Industrial Security Program Operating Manual defines indoctrination as "the initial security instructions/briefing given a person prior to granting access to classified information." External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Indoctrination .

Look up indoctrination in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Habermas and the Problem of Indoctrination Encyclopedia of Philosophy of Education Library resources about Indoctrination Resources in your library v t e Conformity Enforcement Proscription Damnatio memoriae Dissident / Dissenter Exile Émigré Homo sacer Ostracism Blacklisting Cancel culture Censorship Deplatforming Outcast Outlaw Civil death Vogelfrei Persona non grata Public enemy Enemy of the people Enemy of the state Scapegoating Shunning Governmental pressure Authoritarianism Harmonisation of law Nationalism Left-wing nationalism National conservatism Totalitarianism Tyranny of the majority Group pressure Bandwagon effect Brainwashing Closure (sociology) Collectivism Consensus reality Culture shock Dogma Echo chamber False consensus effect Fear of missing out Groupthink Hazing Herd mentality Identification (psychology) Indoctrination Invented tradition Memory conformity Mere-exposure effect Milieu control Mobbing Normalization Normative social influence Passing (sociology) Patriotism Peer pressure Pluralistic ignorance Propaganda Psychosocial issue Purity spiral Operant conditioning Rally 'round the flag effect Social construction of gender Social contagion Addiction Behavioral Crime Hysterical Suicide Emotional Social influence Social integration Socialization Spiral of silence Teasing Toxic positivity Untouchability Individual pressure Authoritarian personality Authoritarian leadership style Right-wing authoritarianism Control freak Obsessive–compulsive personality disorder Conformity Compliance Communal reinforcement Countersignaling Creeping normality Herd behavior Internalization Normalization of deviance Obedience Preference falsification Social proof Social reality Experiments Asch conformity experiments Breaching experiment Milgram experiment Stanford prison experiment Anticonformity Alternative media Anti-authoritarianism Anti-social behaviour Self-segregation Civil disobedience Cosmopolitanism Counterculture Culture jamming Deviance Devil's advocate Dissent / Defection Political Eccentricity Eclecticism Hermit Idiosyncrasy Individualism Insubordination Pueblo clown Rebellion Red team Satire Shock value v t e Propaganda techniques Accusation in a mirror Ad hominem Appeal to fear Appeal to emotion Atrocity propaganda Bandwagon effect Big lie Black propaganda Blood libel Buzzword Cartographic propaganda Computational propaganda Censorship Cherry picking Cult of personality Demonizing the enemy Disinformation Dog whistle Doublespeak Emotive conjugation Exaggeration False accusation False balance False dilemma Fake news Fear, uncertainty, and doubt Firehose of falsehood Flag-waving Framing Gish gallop Glittering generality Half-truth Historical negationism Ideograph Indoctrination Lawfare Loaded language Newspeak Managing the news Minimisation Monumental propaganda Moralistic fallacy New generation warfare Obscurantism Overcomplication Oversimplification Plain folks Psychological warfare Propaganda of the deed Public relations Rally 'round the flag effect Scapegoating Senbu Shooting and crying Slogan Spin Weasel word Whataboutism White propaganda Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Indoctrination&oldid=1299702825 " Categories : Propaganda techniques Control (social and political) Human activities Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from August 2024 Articles needing additional references from February 2023 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2010 This page was last edited on 9 July 2025, at 23:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Indoctrination 37 languages Add topic

