Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and work 2 Gauss zum Gedächtnis 3 Commemorations 4 Notes 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Wolfgang Sartorius von Waltershausen 11 languages Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Italiano עברית مصرى Nederlands Português Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German geologist Wolfgang Sartorius von Waltershausen Wolfgang Sartorius von Waltershausen drawn in May 22nd 1843 in Rome by August Kestner Wolfgang Sartorius von Waltershausen by Friedrich Küsthardt 1876 Wolfgang Sartorius Freiherr von Waltershausen (17 December 1809 – 16 March 1876) was a German geologist .

Life and work [ edit ] Waltershausen was born at Göttingen and educated at this city's university . There he devoted his attention to physical and natural science, and in particular to mineralogy .

[ 1 ] Waltershausen was named after Johann Wolfgang von Goethe , who was close friends with his parents.

[ 2 ] Waltershausen's father, Georg, was a writer, lecturer and professor of economics and history at Göttingen.

Georg Sartorius (later Sartorius von Waltershausen) is best known in his role of translator and popularizer of Adam Smith's Wealth of Nations . His son, August , was a well known economist who specialized in American economy, and had at least one of his books translated into English.

Front page of Der Aetna During a tour in 1834–1835 Waltershausen carried out a series of magnetic observations in various parts of Europe. He then gave his attention to an exhaustive investigation of the volcano of Mount Etna , in Sicily ,  and carried on the work with some interruptions until 1843 including with Christian Heinrich Friedrich Peters . The chief result of this undertaking was his great Atlas des Ätna (1858–1861), in which he distinguished the lava streams formed during the later centuries.

After his return from Mount Etna, Waltershausen visited Iceland , and subsequently published Physisch-geographische Skizze von Island (1847), Über die vulkanischen Gesteine in Sizilien und Island (1853), and Geologischer Atlas von Island (1853). Meanwhile, he was appointed professor of mineralogy and geology at Göttingen, and held this post for about thirty years, until his death.

In 1866 Waltershausen  published an important essay entitled Recherches sur les climats de l'époque actuelle et des époques anciennes ; in this he expressed his belief that the Ice age was due to changes in the configuration of the Earth's surface. He died in Göttingen.

[ 1 ] In 1880, Arnold von Lasaulx edited Waltershausen's notes and published the book Der Aetna (cover page pictured).

Gauss zum Gedächtnis [ edit ] Sartorius was the author of Gauss zum Gedächtnis (Gauss in Remembrance), a biographical profile of Satorius's friend and colleague Carl Friedrich Gauss , published in 1856 following Gauss's death in 1855.  It is also the source of one of the most famous mathematical quotes, "Mathematics is the queen of the sciences", in full "Mathematics is the queen of the sciences and number theory is the queen of mathematics", [ 3 ] and the famous story of Gauss as a young boy quickly finding the sum of an arithmetic series.

[ 4 ] When Gauss died in Göttingen, two individuals gave eulogies at his funeral: Gauss's son-in-law Heinrich Ewald , and Waltershausen who represented the faculty in Göttingen.

Gauss zum Gedächtnis was translated into English as "Carl Friedrich Gauss - A Memorial" in 1966, by Gauss's great-granddaughter Helen Worthington Gauss.

[ 5 ] Commemorations [ edit ] The mineral Sartorite [ 6 ] as well as the Waltershausen Glacier in Northeast Greenland 73°52′N 24°20′W ﻿ / ﻿ 73.867°N 24.333°W ﻿ / 73.867; -24.333 were named in his honour.

Notes [ edit ] ^ a b One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Waltershausen, Wolfgang Sartorius, Baron von ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 28 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 297.

^ See link to see title page of book of their correspondence.

^ Die Mathematik ist die Königin der Wissenschaften und die Zahlentheorie ist die Königin der Mathematik.

Variants include: "Mathematics is the queen of the sciences and number theory is the queen of mathematics. She often condescends to render service to astronomy and other natural sciences, but in all relations she is entitled to the first rank".

^ See [1] for discussion of original sourcing by Wolfgang Sartorius von Waltershausen.

^ Carl Friedrich Gauss, a memorial ^ de:Sartorit External links [ edit ] Works by or about Wolfgang Sartorius von Waltershausen at the Internet Archive Works by Wolfgang Sartorius von Waltershausen at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Digitized English Translation of Waltershausen book on Gauss, Gauss zum Gedächtnis , 1856.

[2] - Satorite Mineral Page [3] - 2nd Satorite Mineral Page [4] - Discussion of Waltershausen as source on Gauss numbers story including partial translation of Waltershausen book on Gauss [American Scientist online    Volume 94 Number: 3 Page 200 Gauss's Day of Reckoning: A famous story about the boy wonder of mathematics has taken on a life of its own , Brian Hayes] [5] Peters' information [6] - Waltershausen's parents' page and information on Waltershausen family website [7] - Waltershausen's son's page and information on Waltershausen family website Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Israel Academics Leopoldina People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wolfgang_Sartorius_von_Waltershausen&oldid=1305620984 " Categories : 1809 births 1876 deaths University of Göttingen alumni German barons German mineralogists German volcanologists Scientists from Göttingen Academic staff of the University of Göttingen Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 04:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wolfgang Sartorius von Waltershausen 11 languages Add topic

