Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History 3 Rear derailleurs Toggle Rear derailleurs subsection 3.1 Relaxed position 3.2 Cage length 3.3 Cage positioning 3.4 Actuation and shift ratios 3.5 Clutch 4 Front derailleurs 5 Use 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Derailleur 15 languages Català Dansk Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Русский Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Derailleur gears ) This article is about the gearing system of a bicycle. For the railroad derailer, see Derail . For the act of derailment itself, see Derailment .

Variable-ratio transmission system commonly used on bicycles This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( April 2021 ) Shimano 600 front derailleur (1980) A derailleur ( French pronunciation: [deʁajœʁ] ) is a variable-ratio bicycle gearing system consisting of a chain , multiple sprockets of different sizes, and a mechanism to move the chain from one sprocket to another.

[ 1 ] Modern front and rear derailleurs typically consist of a moveable chain-guide that is operated remotely by a Bowden cable attached to a shifter mounted on the down tube , handlebar stem , or handlebar . When a rider operates the lever while pedalling, the change in cable tension moves the chain-guide from side to side, "derailing" the chain onto different sprockets.

Etymology [ edit ] Dérailleur ( [ d e ʁ a j œ ʁ ] ) is a French word, [ 1 ] derived from the derailment of a train from its tracks.

[ 2 ] Its first recorded use was 1930.

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] History [ edit ] A modern road bicycle drivetrain with front and rear derailleurs Various derailleur systems were designed and built in the late 19th century. One example is the Protean two-speed derailleur available on the Whippet safety bicycle.

[ 4 ] The French bicycle tourist, writer and cycling promoter Paul de Vivie (1853–1930), who wrote under the name Vélocio , invented a two speed rear derailleur in 1905 which he used on forays into the Alps .

[ 5 ] Some early designs used rods to move the chain onto various gears. 1928 saw the introduction of the "Super Champion Gear" (or "Osgear") [ 6 ] from the company founded by champion cyclist Oscar Egg , as well as the Vittoria Margherita* both employed chainstay mounted 'paddles' and single lever chain tensioners mounted near or on the downtube. However, these systems, along with the rod-operated Campagnolo Cambio Corsa [ 7 ] were eventually superseded by parallelogram derailleurs .

In 1937, the derailleur system was introduced to the Tour de France , allowing riders to change gears without having to remove wheels. Previously, riders would have to dismount in order to change their wheel from downhill to uphill mode.

[ 8 ] Derailleurs did not become common road racing equipment until 1938 when Simplex introduced a cable-shifted derailleur.

In 1949 Campagnolo introduced the Gran Sport, a more refined version of the already existing, yet less commercially successful, cable-operated parallelogram rear derailleurs.

[ 9 ] In 1964, Suntour invented the slant-parallelogram rear derailleur, which let the jockey pulley maintain a more constant distance from the different sized sprockets, resulting in easier shifting. Once the patents expired, other manufacturers adopted this design, at least for their better models, [ 10 ] and the "slant parallelogram" remains the current rear derailleur pattern.

Before the 1990s many manufacturers made derailleurs, including Simplex , Huret , Galli, Mavic , Gipiemme, Zeus, Suntour, and Shimano . However, the successful introduction and promotion of indexed shifting by Shimano in 1985 required a compatible system of shift levers, derailleur, sprockets, chainrings, chain, shift cable, and shift housing.

[ 11 ] The major innovations since the 1990s have been the switch from friction to indexed shifting and the gradual increase in the number of gears. With friction shifting, a lever directly controls the continuously variable position of the derailleur. To shift gears, the rider first moves the lever enough for the chain to jump to the next sprocket, and then adjusts the lever a slight amount to center the chain on that sprocket. An indexed shifter has a detent or ratchet mechanism which stops the gear lever, and hence the cable and the derailleur, after moving a specific distance with each press or pull. Indexed shifters require re-calibration when cables stretch and parts get damaged or swapped. On racing bicycles , 10-gear rear cassettes appeared in 2000, and 11-gear cassettes appeared in 2009. Most current mountain bicycles have either. Many modern, high-end mountain bikes have begun using entirely one chain ring drivetrains, with the industry constantly pushing the number of rear cogs up and up, as shown by SRAM's Eagle groupsets (1 by 12) and Rotor's recent 1 by 13 drive-train.

[ 12 ] Most road bicycles have two chainrings, and touring bicycles commonly have three.

An electronic gear-shifting system enables riders to shift with electronic switches instead of using conventional control levers. The switches are connected by wire or wirelessly to a battery pack and to a small electric motor that drives the derailleur. Although expensive, an electronic system could save a racing cyclist time when changing gears.

[ 13 ] The three main manufacturers of derailleurs are Shimano (Japan), SRAM (USA), and Campagnolo (Italy).

Rear derailleurs [ edit ] Campagnolo Super Record rear derailleur (1983) Shimano XT rear derailleur on a mountain bike Pulley wheels for a rear derailleur The rear derailleur has two functions: it moves the chain between rear sprockets while taking up chain slack caused by moving to a smaller sprocket at the rear or a smaller chainring by the front derailleur. In order to accomplish this second task, it is positioned in the path of the bottom, slack portion of chain. Sometimes the rear derailleurs are re-purposed as chain tensioners for single-speed bicycles that cannot adjust chain tension by a different method.

Although variations exist, most rear derailleurs have several components in common. They have a cage that holds two pulleys that guide the chain in an S -shaped pattern. The pulleys are known as the jockey pulley or guide pulley (top) and the tension pulley (bottom).

[ 14 ] The cage rotates in its plane and is spring-loaded to take up chain slack. The cage is positioned under the desired sprocket by an arm that can swing back and forth under the sprockets. The arm is usually implemented with a parallelogram mechanism to keep the cage properly aligned with the chain as it swings back and forth. The other end of the arm mounts to a pivot point attached to the bicycle frame . The arm pivots about this point to maintain the cage at a nearly constant distance from the different sized sprockets. There may be one or more adjustment screws that control the amount of lateral travel allowed and the spring tension.

The components may be constructed of aluminium alloy , steel , plastic , or carbon fibre composite. The pivot points may be bushings or ball bearings . These will require moderate lubrication.

Relaxed position [ edit ] High normal or top normal rear derailleurs return the chain to the smallest sprocket on the cassette when no cable tension is applied.

[ 15 ] This is the regular pattern used on most Shimano mountain, all Shimano road, and all SRAM and Campagnolo derailleurs. In this condition, spring pressure takes care of the easier change to smaller sprockets. In road racing, the swiftest gear changes are required on the sprints to the finish line. Therefore high-normal types, which allow a quick change to a higher gear, remain the preference.

[ citation needed ] Low normal or rapid rise rear derailleurs return the chain to the largest sprocket on the cassette when no cable tension is applied. While this was once a common design for rear derailleurs, it has become relatively uncommon.

[ 16 ] In mountain biking and off-road cycling, the most critical gear changes occur on uphill sections, where riders must cope with obstacles and difficult turns while pedalling under heavy load. This derailleur type provides an advantage over high normal derailleurs because gear changes to lower gears occur in the direction of the loaded spring, making these shifts easier during high load pedalling.

Cage length [ edit ] The distance between the upper and lower pulleys of a rear derailleur is known as the cage length. Cage length, when combined with the pulley size, determines the capacity of a derailleur to take up chain slack. Cage length determines the total capacity of the derailleur, that is the size difference between the largest and smallest chainrings, and the size difference between the largest and smallest sprockets on the cogset added together. A larger sum requires a longer cage length. Typical cross country mountain bikes with three front chainrings will use a long cage rear derailleur.

[ citation needed ] A road bike with only two front chainrings and close ratio sprockets can operate with either a short or long cage derailleur, but will work better with a short cage.

Manufacturer stated derailleur capacities are as follows: Shimano: long = 45T*, medium = 33T SRAM: long = 43T*, medium = 37T*, short = 30T Benefits of a shorter cage length: more positive gear-changing due to less flex in the parallelogram better gear-changing with good cable leverage better obstruction clearance less danger of catching spokes.

slight weight savings.

Cage positioning [ edit ] There are at least two methods employed by rear derailleurs to maintain the appropriate gap between the upper jockey wheel and the rear sprockets as the derailleur moves between the large sprockets and the small sprockets. One method, used by Shimano, is to use chain tension to pivot the cage. This has the advantage of working with most sets of sprockets, if the chain has the proper length. A disadvantage is that rapid shifts from small sprockets to large over multiple sprockets at once can cause the cage to strike the sprockets before the chain moves onto the larger sprockets and pivots the cage as necessary. Another method, used by SRAM, is to design the spacing into the parallelogram mechanism of the derailleur itself. The advantage is that no amount of rapid, multi-sprocket shifting can cause the cage to strike the sprockets. The disadvantage is that there are limited options for sprocket sizes that can be used with a particular derailleur.

Actuation and shift ratios [ edit ] This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( September 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This section needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( June 2017 ) The actuation ratio is the ratio between the amount of shifter cable length and the amount of transverse derailleur travel that it generates. Shift ratio is the reciprocal of actuation ratio and is more easily expressed for derailleurs than actuation. There are currently several standards in use, and in each the product of the derailleur's shift ratio and the length of cable pulled must equal the pitch of the rear sprockets. The following standards exist.

The Shimano compatible family of derailleurs is stated as having a shift ratio of two-to-one (2:1), and since SRAM makes two families of components, the term has been widely adopted to distinguish it from SRAM's own one-to-one (1:1) ratio family of derailleurs. Notice that these family names do not give the exact shift ratios: the 2:1 shift ratio is in fact about 1.7 (Or 1.9 on the Dura Ace series up to 7400) rather than 2, and the native SRAM shift ratio is about 1.1. The family names of these standards are reversed by some in actuation ratio notation as opposed to that of the more common shift ratio.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Thus, in Shimano systems a unit of cable shifted causes about twice as much movement of the derailleur.

The native SRAM convention is called one-to-one (1:1). These have actual shift ratios of 1.1. A unit of cable retracted at the shifter causes about an equal amount of movement in the derailleur.

[ 18 ] SRAM claims that standard makes their systems more robust: more resistant to the effects of contamination.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Some SRAM shifters are made to be 2:1 Shimano-compatible, but these clearly will not work with SRAM's 1:1 derailleurs.

[ 22 ] The Campagnolo convention. The shift ratios are 1.5 for modern units but their old units had 1.4 ratios.

[ 23 ] The Suntour 's convention.

[ 23 ] Shifters employing one convention are generally not compatible with derailleurs employing another, although exceptions exist, [ 24 ] and adaptors are available.

[ 25 ] SLX Derailleur with the front plate removed, making the clutch assembly visible Clutch [ edit ] Some rear derailleurs, especially for mountain bikes, incorporate a clutch to keep the lower length of chain in sufficient tension to prevent the chain from striking the bottom of the chain stay : this is called chain slap and can damage the chain stay. Clutches are also helpful in preventing the chain from derailing from the chain ring on systems without a front derailleur.

[ 26 ] Front derailleurs [ edit ] Shimano XT front derailleur (top pull, bottom swing, triple cage) Shimano E-type front derailleur (top pull, top swing, triple cage) SRAM Red Black Edition front derailleur with clamp-band The front derailleur only has to move the chain side to side between the front chainrings, but it has to do this with the top, taut portion of the chain. It also needs to accommodate large differences in chainring size: from as many as 53 teeth to as few as 20 teeth.

As with the rear derailleur, the front derailleur has a cage through which the chain passes. On a properly adjusted derailleur, the chain will only touch the cage while shifting. The cage is held in place by a movable arm which is usually implemented with a parallelogram mechanism to keep the cage properly aligned with the chain as it swings back and forth. There are usually two adjustment screws controlling the limits of lateral travel allowed. The components may be constructed of aluminium alloy, steel, plastic, or carbon fibre composite. The pivot points are usually bushings, and these will require lubrication.

Cable pull types Bottom pull: Commonly used on road and touring bikes, this type of derailleur is actuated by a cable pulling downwards. The cable is often routed across the top or along the bottom of the bottom bracket shell on a cable guide , which redirects the cable up the lower edge of the frame's down tube. Full-suspension mountain bikes often have bottom pull routing as the rear suspension prevents routing via the top tube.

Top pull: This type is more commonly seen on mountain bikes without rear-suspension. The derailleur is actuated by a cable pulling upwards, which is usually routed along the frame's top tube, using cable stops and a short length of housing to change the cable's direction. This arrangement keeps the cable away from the underside of the bottom bracket/down tube which get pelted with dirt when off-road.

Dual pull: There are some derailleurs available that have provisions for either top pull or bottom pull, and can be used in either application.

Cage types Double (Standard): These are intended to be used with cranksets having two chainrings. When viewed from the side of the bicycle, the inner and outer plates of the cage have roughly the same profile.

Triple (Alpine): Derailleurs designed to be used with cranksets having three chainrings, or with two chainrings that differ greatly in size. When viewed from the side of the bicycle, the inner cage plate extends further towards the bottom bracket's center of rotation than the outer cage plate does. This is to help shift the chain from the smallest ring onto the middle ring more easily.

Swing types Bottom swing: The derailleur cage is mounted to the bottom of the four-bar linkage that carries it. This is the most common type of derailleur.

Top swing: The derailleur cage is mounted to the top of the four-bar linkage that carries it. This alternate arrangement was created as a way to get the frame clamp of the derailleur closer to the bottom bracket to be able to clear larger suspension components and allow different frame shapes. The compact construction of a top swing derailleur can cause it to be less robust than its bottom swing counterpart. Top swing derailleurs are typically only used in applications where a bottom swing derailleur will not fit. An alternative solution would be to use an E-type front derailleur, which does not clamp around the seat tube at all.

Mount types Clamp: Until recently, most front derailleurs are mounted to the frame by a clamp around the frame's seat tube, and this style is still the standard on mountain bikes and is common on road bikes. Derailleurs are available with several different clamp diameters designed to fit different types of frame tubing. Recently, there has been a trend to make derailleurs with only one diameter clamp, and several sets of shims are included to space the clamp down to the appropriate size.

Braze-on: An alternative to the clamp is the braze-on derailleur hanger, where the derailleur is mounted by bolting a tab on the derailleur to a corresponding tab on the frame's seat tube. This avoids any clamp size issues, but requires either a frame with the appropriate braze-on, or an adapter clamp that simulates a braze-on derailleur tab. These have become common on newer road bikes, as carbon frames no longer have a round seat tube. They are rarely seen on mountain bikes.

E-type: This type front derailleurs do not clamp around the frame's seat tube, but instead are attached to the frame by a plate mounted under the drive side bottom bracket cup and a screw threaded into a boss on the seat tube. These derailleurs are usually found on mountain bikes with rear suspension components that do not allow space for a normal derailleur's clamp to go around the seat tube.

DMD: Direct-Mount-Derailleur — Initiated by Specialized Bicycles, this type of derailleur is bolted directly to bosses on the chainstay of the bike. They are mostly used on dual suspension mountain bikes, where suspension movement causes changes to the chain angle as it enters the front derailleur cage. By utilizing a DMD system, the chain and derailleur move together, allowing for better shifting when the suspension is active. A DMD derailleur should not be confused with Shimano's Direct Mount, which uses a different mounting system. However, SRAM's direct mount front derailleurs are compatible with DMD, and certain Shimano E-type derailleurs can be used with DMD if the e-type plate is removed.

Because of the possibility of the chain shifting past the smallest inner chainring, especially when the inner chainring is very small, even on bikes adjusted by professional race mechanics, and the problems such misshifts can cause, a small after-market of add-on products, called chain deflectors, exists to help prevent them from occurring.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] Some clamp around the seat tube, below the front derailleur, and at least one attaches to the front derailleur mount.

Use [ edit ] Derailleurs require the chain to be in movement in order to shift from one ring or sprocket to another. This usually requires the rider to be pedalling, but some systems have been developed with the freewheel in the crankset so that the chain moves even when the rider is not pedalling. The Shimano FFS (Front Freewheel System) circa 1980 was the most widespread such system.

Chain-drive systems such as the derailleur systems work best if the chain is aligned with the sprocket plane, especially avoiding the biggest (outermost) drive sprocket running with the biggest (innermost) driven sprocket (or the smallest with the smallest, i.e. innermost with outermost). The diagonal chain run produced by these practices is less efficient and shortens the life of all components, with no advantage from the middle of the range ratio obtained.

Derailleur gears generally have an efficiency around 95%, a few percentage points higher than other gear types [ 30 ] such as hub gears .

See also [ edit ] Bicycle drivetrain systems Gear inches Hub gear References [ edit ] ^ a b c Oxford English Dictionary (2nd ed.). 1989.

derailleur, n.

A bicycle gear in which the ratio is changed by switching the line of the chain (while pedalling) so that it jumps to a different sprocket on the rear wheel. Also derailleur gear.

^ Sheldon Brown (Nov 29, 2011).

"Derailer, Not Derailleur!" . Retrieved 2013-02-02 .

The word "derailer" (or "dérailleur") is actually a metaphor, relating the gear change to what happens when a railroad train goes off the tracks. In English, this is called a "derailment," not a "déraillement." ^ "derailer: The word you've entered isn't in the dictionary" .

Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 2013-02-02 .

^ Berto, Frank J. (2005) [2000].

The Dancing Chain: History and Development of the Derailleur Bicycle (2nd ? ed.).

San Francisco, CA , USA: Cycle Publishing/Van der Plas Publications. pp.

58– 61.

^ Graves, Clifford.

"Velocio, Grand Seigneur" . Retrieved 2007-03-17 .

^ Stone, Hilary (2007).

"Super Champion Osgear" .

Classic Lightweights . UK. Archived from the original on 17 April 2012 . Retrieved 1 June 2010 .

This site is all about rear derailleur gears...

^ Norris, Eric (2010).

"Campagnolo Cambio Corsa shifter" .

Campy Only!

. Retrieved 1 June 2010 .

^ History of the Tour de France: 1920–1939 - Les Forcats de la Route by Mitch Mueller ^ Berto, Frank J. (2005) [2000].

The Dancing Chain: History and Development of the Derailleur Bicycle (2nd ? ed.).

San Francisco, CA , USA: Cycle Publishing/Van der Plas Publications. p. 162.

^ Berto, Frank.

"Sunset for SunTour" . Archived from the original on 2008-12-05 . Retrieved 2007-03-17 .

^ Berto, Frank J. (2005) [2000].

The Dancing Chain: History and Development of the Derailleur Bicycle (2nd ? ed.).

San Francisco, CA , USA: Cycle Publishing/Van der Plas Publications. p. 286.

^ Rotor 1x13 ^ Best, Paul (2009-04-08).

"Shimano's Dura-Ace Di2 electronic shifting to give road racers a time advantage" . Gizmag . Retrieved 2010-02-10 .

^ "Sheldon Brown's Glossary:Pulley" . Retrieved 2009-09-26 .

^ "Shimano FAQs: What is a "Top normal" or a "Low normal" Rear Derailleur?" . Archived from the original on 2008-06-02 . Retrieved 2008-02-28 .

^ "Low-normal/High-normal" . Retrieved 2010-12-21 .

^ Frank J. Berto (2009).

The Dancing Chain (Third ed.). Van der Plas Publications. p. 374.

SRAM actively promotes their 1:1 shifters and derailleurs, which have about twice as much cable movement as those by other manufacturers.

^ a b "TESTED: SRAM X-9 Shifters and Derailleur" . Bike Magazine. January 19, 2006 . Retrieved 2011-08-13 .

Shimano, by contrast, utilizes a 2:1 ratio where the rear derailleur moves twice as far as the cable pull for every click on the shifter.

^ "Review: Shimano Deore XT MTB Component Group" . Bike198. Jan 19, 2010 . Retrieved 2011-08-29 .

Install and setup is the same as any other Shimano shifting system with their 2:1 pull ratio.

^ "Exact Actuation" .

SRAM Corporation . Archived from the original on 2011-08-23 . Retrieved 2011-08-13 .

When we launched our road technology from scratch we reapplied our MTB proven SRAM 1:1 actuation ratio (shifter cable travel : derailleur movement) for 10 speed rear shifting.

^ Lennard Zinn (Apr 10, 2006).

"Tech Talk: Mr. Zinn rides SRAM's new road groups" . VeloNews. Archived from the original on 2012-07-06 . Retrieved 2011-08-13 .

Both [road] derailleurs get "SRAM Exact Actuation," which is not quite the one-to-one actuation ratio of SRAM mountain derailleurs, so Force and Rival shifters are not compatible with SRAM X.0 rear derailleurs.

^ "SRAM MRX" .

SRAM Corporation . Archived from the original on 2011-09-29 . Retrieved 2011-08-13 .

^ a b John Allen.

"Mixing Brands and Models of Shifters, Rear Derailers and Cassettes" .

Sheldon Brown . Retrieved 2011-08-13 .

^ "Cycling UK: A guide to rear shifting" . Retrieved 2018-12-29 .

^ Lennard Zinn (Mar 17, 2008).

"Can you run Campy shifters with a SRAM drivetrain? Sure, why not?" . VeloNews. Archived from the original on 2011-08-30 . Retrieved 2011-08-29 .

For a simple solution involving an adaptor that you can by  [ sic ] and install easily, you can use a Jtek ShiftMate.

^ Simon Smythe (May 21, 2018).

"Do you need a clutch rear deraileur?" . Cycling Weekly . Retrieved 2018-10-22 .

^ Brown, Sheldon .

"Chain Deflector" . Sheldon Brown (bicycle mechanic) . Retrieved 2010-09-06 .

In some triple-chainring installations, typically when the "granny" gear is unusually small, it may be impossible to get good shifting to the "granny" chainring with the normal derailer adjustments.

^ "Third Eye Chain Watcher" .

Bicycling Magazine . Oct 2007. Archived from the original on 2009-06-08 . Retrieved 2010-07-12 .

^ Zack Vestal (Apr 14, 2009).

"Born for Beijing, the K-Edge chain catcher goes into production" . VeloNews. Archived from the original on 2010-07-23 . Retrieved 2010-07-12 .

^ "The mechanical efficiency of bicycle derailleur and hub-gear transmissions" (PDF) . 2001.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 July 2011 . Retrieved 2011-07-18 .

Further reading [ edit ] Berto, Frank J.; et al. (2016) [2000].

The Dancing Chain: History and Development of the Derailleur Bicycle (5th ed.). San Francisco, CA: Van der Plas Publications/Cycle Publications.

ISBN 978-1-892495-77-8 . Retrieved May 30, 2017 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bicycle derailleur gears .

Forester, John .

"A Brief History of the Derailleur" . probicycle.com . Retrieved 1 June 2010 .

Hadland, Tony.

"Evolution of Early British Derailleurs" . UK. Archived from the original on 4 March 2011 . Retrieved 1 June 2010 .

Covers a number of non-British designs as well.

Sweatman, Michael (2008).

"Disraeli Gears — A derailleur collection" . UK . Retrieved 1 June 2010 .

This site is all about rear derailleur gears...

RDs by period, manufacturer, etc. Many pics and scanned documents.

Mike Sweatman (7 June 2018).

"10 weird and wonderful derailleurs – and how they changed cycling" .

The Guardian .

List starting with Velocio's 1912 Le Chemineau derailleur.

Gerritsen, M. S. (2009).

"Oude techniek" (in Dutch) . Retrieved 1 June 2010 .

Pictures of several old derailleur mechanisms.

v t e Gears Systems Spur gear systems Worm drive Rack and pinion Epicyclic (planetary) gearing Sun and planet gear Harmonic drive Cycloidal drive Non-circular gear Shapes Spur Bevel Crown Spiral bevel Helical Herringbone Geartooth profiles Involute Cycloid Mechanics Transmission Differential Coupling Train Bicycle gearing Continuously variable transmission Offset Examples Bicycles Cogset Derailleur Hub gear Shaft-driven bicycle Sprocket Horology Wheel train See also Ball screw Leadscrew Jackscrew Belt drive Chain drive Gear manufacturing Freewheel Spur gear corrected tooth v t e Bicycle parts Frame Handlebars Stem Head tube Headset Fork Seatpost Saddle Bottom bracket Fork end Suspension Wheels Tire Spoke Spoke nipple Valve stem Dustcap Quick release skewer Drivetrain Pedal Crankset Chain / Belt Master link Cogset Derailleur / Hub gears Gear case Sprocket Cabling Shifter Bowden cable Cable guide Brake Ferrule Peripherals Basket Bell Bottle cage Fairing Cyclocomputer Kickstand Lighting Luggage carrier Mudguards Panniers Saddlebag Spoke card Reflectors Skirt guard Fender Training wheels v t e Cycling Glossary Outlines Bicycles Cycling General and technical Bicycle Bicycle culture Bicycle dynamics Bicycle geometry Bicycle performance Electric bicycle History of the bicycle History of cycling infrastructure Balance bike Tandem bicycle Tricycle Unicycle National Bike Month (United States) World Bicycle Day Utility and slow recreation Bicycle commuting Bicycle messenger Bicycle rental/hire Bicycle-sharing system Bicycle touring Cargo bike Challenge riding Cold-weather biking Indoor cycling Rail trail Randonneuring Road cycling Utility bicycle Utility cycling Vehicular cycling Sports-related cycling and fast-paced recreation Artistic cycling BMX Cross-country cycling Cycle speedway Cycle sport Cyclo-cross Cyclosportive Fatbiking Freeride Goldsprint Gravel cycling Mountain biking Downhill Trials Pump track Road bicycle racing Track cycling Triathlon Unicycle hockey Unicycle trials Health, safety and infrastructure Active mobility Bicycle-friendly Bicycle law Bicycle parking Bicycle poverty reduction Bicycle rodeo Bicycle safety Bicycle transportation planning and engineering Bike rage Bike registry Bike-to-Work Day Bike Week (Bicycle Week) Cyclability Cycling advocacy Cycling infrastructure Hand signals Idaho stop Lane splitting Protected intersection Tegelijk groen Time's Up!

Vehicular cycling Other Bicycle collecting Bicycle locker Bicycle parking rack Bicycle parking station Bicycle tree Cycling kit Danish bicycle VIN-system Green transport hierarchy Pentacycle Quadracycle Sustainable transport Lists List of bicycle types List of bicycle brands and manufacturing companies List of BMX bicycle manufacturers List of bicycle-sharing systems List of cyclists List of films about bicycles and cycling List of doping cases in cycling Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐pgzqw
Cached time: 20250814215045
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.687 seconds
Real time usage: 0.833 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3670/1000000
Revision size: 33352/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 119060/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3074/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 143559/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.463/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16731738/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  711.820      1 -total
 35.09%  249.806      1 Template:Refs
 20.43%  145.406     28 Template:Cite_web
 15.22%  108.363      6 Template:Cite_book
 14.11%  100.453      1 Template:IPA
 12.57%   89.450      4 Template:Navbox
 10.88%   77.465      1 Template:Gears
  7.10%   50.541      1 Template:About
  6.63%   47.215      3 Template:Ambox
  5.78%   41.148      1 Template:Lead_too_short Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:195666:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215045 and revision id 1287994926. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Derailleur&oldid=1287994926 " Categories : Bicycle drivetrains Bicycle gears Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia introduction cleanup from April 2021 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from April 2021 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Pages with French IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 Articles that may contain original research from September 2012 All articles that may contain original research Wikipedia articles in need of updating from June 2017 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Commons category link is on Wikidata CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) This page was last edited on 29 April 2025, at 18:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Derailleur 15 languages Add topic

