Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology and usage 2 Forms Toggle Forms subsection 2.1 Denial and erasure 2.1.1 Allegations that bisexual men are homophobic 2.1.2 Claims of bisexuals adapting to heteronormativity 2.2 Negative stereotypes 2.2.1 Tensions with pansexuals 3 Effects 4 Intersectional perspectives Toggle Intersectional perspectives subsection 4.1 Intersections with feminism 4.2 Intersections with gender 4.2.1 Men 4.3 Intersections with race 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Biphobia 47 languages العربية অসমীয়া Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Эрзянь Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית ქართული Lietuvių Magyar മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Aversion to bisexual people An illustration of examples of various stigma against bisexuals Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Part of a series on LGBTQ people LGBTQ Lesbian Gay Bisexual Transgender Queer Sexual orientation and gender Aromantic Asexual Gray asexual Aegosexual Demisexual Biology Bisexual Pansexual Demographics Environment Fictosexual Gender fluid Gender identity Gender role Gender modality Gender nonconforming Homosexual Intersex Non-heterosexual Non-binary Queer Queer heterosexual Questioning Sexual identity Sex–gender distinction Trans man Trans woman Transgender Transsexual Two-spirit History General Timeline Same-sex marriage Homosexuality Movements Gay liberation Same-sex unions Stonewall riots Identities Lesbian Bisexual Transgender Intersex Culture Business Coming out Community African-American Dyke March Events Awareness periods Largest events Gay village Media Bury your gays Films New queer cinema Periodicals LGBTQ culture in New York City Pride Pride Month Parade Queer art QPR and QPP Same-sex relationship Cross-sex relationship Slang Polari Socialization Subcultures Transgender in NYC Symbols Flags Takatāpui Moe aikāne Tourism Rights Adoption Civil union Decriminalization Gender self-identification Intersex Legal recognition of non-binary gender Marriage Military service Parenting Rights by country or territory Sexuality Trans rights Yogyakarta Principles Health MSM and Blood donation restrictions / HIV LGBTQ medical organizations Reproduction Mental health Transgender health care Gender-affirming hormone therapy Gender-affirming surgery Gender transition Legal status of gender-affirming healthcare Misinformation Suicide Societal attitudes Allonormative amatonormative Cisnormative Heteronormative Comphet Opposition to LGBTQ rights 21st century UK anti-trans 2020s US anti-LGBTQ Grooming conspiracy theory Media portrayal Religion & LGBTQ Homosexuality Trans people Sexual diversity Stereotypes Issues Acephobia Arophobia AIDS stigma Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric Biphobia Bullying Censorship Closeted Outing Criminalization Domestic violence Erasure Straightwashing Bisexual Lesbian Trans Gay bashing Gayphobia Heteropatriarchy Heterosexism Homophobia Liberal Intersex discrimination Legality of conversion therapy Lesbophobia Suicide Youth vulnerability Migration Mixed-orientation marriage Racism Sexualism Transphobia Non-binary people Trans men Trans women Violence Trans people Academic fields and discourse Communism & LGBTQ rights Gender studies Lesbian feminism Lavender linguistics LGBTQ conservatism In the US Queer anarchism Queer studies Queer theory Social construction of gender Socialism & LGBTQ rights Transfeminism Transgender studies Travesti LGBTQ portal v t e Part of a series on Bisexuality topics Sexual identities Bi-curious Heteroflexible / Homoflexible Pansexual / Omnisexual Polysexual Plurisexual / Multisexual Queer Sapphism Sexual fluidity Studies Bisexual theory Journal of Bisexuality Kinsey scale Klein grid Attitudes, slang and discrimination 2020s anti-LGBTQ movement in the United States Bambi effect Biphobia Bisexual chic Erasure Heteronormativity Lesbian until graduation Victimization of bisexual women Community and literature BECAUSE Bi Community News Bi Women Quarterly BiCon (UK) BiNet USA Bisexual Book Awards Bisexual literature Bisexual Resource Center Celebrate Bisexuality Day Lists Bisexual people LGBTQ-related films Media portrayals of bisexuality Organisations and conferences See also Bisexual flag Bisexuality in the United States Bisexual lighting Bisexual politics History of bisexuality LGBTQ portal v t e Biphobia or monosexism is aversion toward bisexuality or people who are identified or perceived as being bisexual. Similarly to homophobia , it refers to hatred and prejudice specifically against those identified or perceived as being in the bisexual community . It can take the form of denial that bisexuality is a genuine sexual orientation, or of negative stereotypes about people who are bisexual (such as the beliefs that they are promiscuous or dishonest). Other forms of biphobia include bisexual erasure .

[ 1 ] Biphobia may also avert towards other sexualities attracted to multiple genders such as pansexuality or polysexuality , as the idea of being attracted to multiple genders is generally the cause of stigma towards bisexuality.

The hatred of bisexual women and femmes , being a form of prejudice at the intersection of biphobia and misogyny, is referred to as bimisogyny [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] or less commonly bisexism.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] This is a gendered form of biphobia that accounts for intersectionality in discussions on bigotry.

Etymology and usage [ edit ] Biphobia is a blend word patterned on the term homophobia . It derives from the Latin prefix bi-(meaning "two, double") and the root -phobia (from the Greek : φόβος , phóbos , "fear") found in homophobia . Along with transphobia and homophobia , it is one of a family of terms used to describe intolerance and discrimination against LGBTQ people. The adjectival form biphobic describes things or qualities related to biphobia, and the less-common noun biphobe is a label for people thought to harbor biphobia.

[ 8 ] The term biphobia was first [ 9 ] [ 10 ] introduced in 1992 by researcher Kathleen Bennett to mean "prejudice against bisexuality" [ 11 ] and "the denigration of bisexuality as a life-choice." [ 11 ] It has subsequently been defined as "any portrayal or discourse denigrating or criticizing men or women on the sole ground of their belonging to this [bisexual] socio-sexual identity, or refusing them the right to claim it." [ 12 ] Biphobia need not be a phobia as defined in clinical psychology (i.e., an anxiety disorder). Its meaning and use typically parallel those of xenophobia .

Forms [ edit ] Denial and erasure [ edit ] Main article: Bisexual erasure Biphobia can lead people to deny that bisexuality is real, asserting that people who identify as bisexual are not genuinely bisexual, or that the phenomenon is far less common than they claim. One form of this denial is based on the heterosexist view that heterosexuality is the only true or natural sexual orientation. Thus anything that deviates from that is instead either a psychological pathology or an example of anti-social behavior.

Another form of denial stems from binary views of sexuality: that people are assumed monosexual , i.e. homosexual ( gay / lesbian ) or heterosexual ( straight ). Throughout the 1980s, modern research on sexuality was dominated by the idea that heterosexuality and homosexuality were the only legitimate orientations, dismissing bisexuality as "secondary homosexuality".

[ 13 ] In that model, bisexuals are presumed to be either closeted lesbian/gay people wishing to appear heterosexual, [ 14 ] or individuals (of "either" orientation) experimenting with sexuality outside of their "normal" interest.

[ 15 ] Maxims such as "people are either gay, straight, or lying" embody this dichotomous view of sexual orientation.

[ 16 ] Some people accept the theoretical existence of bisexuality but define it narrowly, as being only the equal sexual attraction towards both men and women.

[ 16 ] Thus the many bisexual individuals with unequal attractions are instead categorized as either homosexual or heterosexual. Others acknowledge the existence of bisexuality in women, but deny that men can be bisexual.

[ 17 ] Some denial asserts that bisexual behavior or identity is merely a social trend – as exemplified by " bisexual chic " or gender bending – and not an intrinsic personality trait.

[ 18 ] Same-gender sexual activity is dismissed as merely a substitute for sex with members of the opposite sex, or as a more accessible source of sexual gratification .

Situational homosexuality in sex-segregated environments is presented as an example of this behavior.

[ 19 ] Biphobia is common from the heterosexual community, but is frequently exhibited by gay and lesbian people as well, [ 20 ] usually with the notion that bisexuals are able to escape oppression from heterosexuals by conforming to social expectations of opposite-gender sex and romance. This leaves some that identify as bisexual to be perceived as "not enough of either" or "not real".

[ 21 ] An Australian study conducted by Roffee and Waling in 2016 established that bisexual people faced microaggressions, bullying, and other anti-social behaviors from people within the lesbian and gay community.

[ 22 ] Bisexual erasure (also referred to as bisexual invisibility ) is a phenomenon that tends to omit, falsify, or re-explain evidence of bisexuality in history , academia , the news media , and other primary sources , [ 23 ] [ 24 ] sometimes to the point of denying that bisexuality exists.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] Kenji Yoshino (2000) writes that there are three concepts that cause invisibility within bisexuality: "The three invisibilities can be seen as nested within each other; the first affects straights, gays, and bisexuals; the second affects only gays and bisexuals; and the third affects only bisexuals." [ 1 ] Forms of social standards and expectations, religion, and integrating the same-sex attraction aspect of bisexuality with homosexuality contribute to invisibility.

[ 1 ] Allegations that bisexual men are homophobic [ edit ] One cause of biphobia in the gay male community is that there is an identity political tradition to assume that acceptance of male homosexuality is linked to the belief that men's sexuality is specialized. This causes many members of the gay male community to assume that the very idea that men can be bisexual is homophobic to gay men. A number of bisexual men feel that such attitudes force them to keep their bisexuality in the closet and that it is even more oppressive than traditional heteronormativity . These men argue that the gay male community has something to learn about respect for the individual from the lesbian community, in which there is not a strong tradition to assume links between notions about the origins of sexual preferences and the acceptance thereof. These views are also supported by some gay men who do not like anal sex (sides, as opposed to both tops and bottoms) and report that they feel bullied by other gay men's assumption that their dislike for anal sex is "homophobic" and want more respect for the individuality in which a gay man who does not hate himself may simply not like anal sex and instead prefer other sex acts such as mutual fellatio and mutual male masturbation.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Claims of bisexuals adapting to heteronormativity [ edit ] Some forms of prejudice against bisexuals are claims that bisexuality is an attempt in persecuted homosexuals to adapt to heteronormative societies by adopting a bisexual identity. Such claims are criticized by bisexuals and researchers studying the situation of bisexuals for falsely assuming that same-sex relationships would somehow escape persecution in heteronormative cultures by simply identifying as bisexual instead of homosexual. These researchers cite that all countries with laws against sex between people of the same sex give the same punishment regardless of what sexual orientation the people found guilty identify as, that any countries where same-sex marriage is illegal never allow marriages between people of the same sex no matter if they identify as bisexual instead of homosexual, and that laws against "gay" male blood donors invariably prohibit any man who had sex with other men from donating blood no matter if he identifies as homosexual or as bisexual. The conclusion made by these researchers is that since there is no societal benefit in identifying as bisexual instead of identifying as homosexual, the claim that bisexuals are homosexuals trying to adapt to a heteronormative society is simply false and biphobic and causes bisexuals to suffer a two-way discrimination from both LGBTQ society and heteronormative society that is worse than the one-way discrimination from heteronormative society that is faced by homosexuals. It is also argued that such two-way discrimination causes many bisexuals to hide their bisexuality to an even greater extent than homosexuals hide their sexuality, leading to underestimations of the prevalence of bisexuality especially in men for whom such assumptions of "really being completely gay" are the most rampant.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] In the book Bi: Notes for a Bisexual Revolution , [ 31 ] Shiri Eisner (2013) mentions Miguel Obradors-Campos' argument that bisexual individuals endure stigma by heterosexuals as well as gay and lesbian individuals. Eisner (2013) also writes, "some forms of biphobic stigma frequently observed in gay and lesbian communities: that bisexuals are privileged, that bisexuals will ultimately choose heterosexual relationships and lifestyles, that bisexual women are reinforcing patriarchy, that bisexuality is not a political identity, that bisexual women carry HIV to lesbian communities, and so on." [ 31 ] Negative stereotypes [ edit ] Many stereotypes about people who identify as bisexual stem from denial or bisexual erasure. Because their orientation is not recognized as valid, they are stereotyped as confused, indecisive, insecure, experimenting, or "just going through a phase".

[ 32 ] The association of bisexuality with promiscuity stems from a variety of negative stereotypes targeting bisexuals as mentally or socially unstable people for whom sexual relations only with men, only with women, or only with one person at a time is not enough. These stereotypes may result from cultural assumptions that "men and women are so different that desire for one is an entirely different beast from desire for the other" ("a defining feature of heterosexism "), and that "verbalizing a sexual desire inevitably leads to attempts to satisfy that desire." [ 33 ] As a result, bisexuals may bear a social stigma from accusations of cheating on or betraying their partners, leading a double life , being "on the down-low ", and spreading sexually transmitted diseases such as HIV / AIDS . This presumed behavior is further generalized as dishonesty, secrecy, and deception. Bisexuals can be characterized as being "slutty", "easy", indiscriminate, and nymphomaniacs . Furthermore, they are strongly associated with polyamory , swinging , and polygamy , [ 34 ] the last being an established heterosexual tradition sanctioned by some religions and legal in several countries. This is despite the fact that bisexual people are as capable of monogamy or serial monogamy as homosexuals or heterosexuals.

[ 35 ] Tensions with pansexuals [ edit ] See also: Pansexuality § Tensions with bisexuals Bisexuals frequently struggle with myths and misconceptions about the definition of bisexuality, such as the idea that bisexuality conforms to the gender binary (thereby excluding attraction to nonbinary individuals), or excludes attraction to trans people in general. This sometimes creates tension between bisexuals and pansexuals, as pansexuals often see themselves as being more inclusive to a wider array of genders.

[ 36 ] A 2022 study by the Journal of Bisexuality suggested that the majority of women who identify as pansexual or queer defined bisexuality as limited to attraction to cisgender men and women and critiqued bisexuality as reinforcing the traditional gender binary. However, bisexual women defined bisexuality as attraction to two or more, or  "similar or dissimilar" genders, described bisexuality as inclusive of attractions to all genders, and reported negative psychological outcomes as a result of the debate around bisexual gender inclusivity.

[ 37 ] A 2017 study published in the Journal of Bisexuality found that when bisexuals and pansexuals described gender and defined bisexuality, "there were no differences in how pansexual and bisexual people ... discussed sex or gender", and that the findings "do not support the stereotype that bisexual people endorse a binary view of gender while pansexual people do not." [ 38 ] Effects [ edit ] The mental and sexual health effects of biphobia on bisexual people are numerous. One study showed that bisexuals are often trapped in between the binaries of heterosexuality and homosexuality, creating a form of invalidation around their sexual identity. This often leads to recognized indicators of mental health issues such as low self-esteem and self-worth. These indicators and pressures to "choose" a sexual identity can, in many cases, lead to depression as they may feel they live in a culture that does not recognize their existence.

[ 39 ] While doing research on women at high risk of HIV infection, one study, from the Journal of Bisexuality, concluded that bisexual women in the high-risk cohort studied were more likely to engage in various high-risk behaviors and were at a higher risk of contracting HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases.

[ 40 ] These behaviors have been attributed to the unlikeliness of bisexuals discussing their sexuality and proper protection with health professionals for fear of judgement or discrimination, causing them to become undereducated on the issue(s).

[ 41 ] In the book, Bi: Notes for a Bisexual Revolution , [ 31 ] Shiri Eisner (2013) discusses the suicidality statistics amongst bisexual identifying individuals as compared to heterosexuals, gays, and lesbians. Eisner (2013) referred to a Canadian study that found bisexual women had higher rates of suicidality as compared to heterosexual and lesbian women; the study also found that bisexual men also had increased rates of suicidality as compared to heterosexual and gay men.

[ 31 ] Bisexual-identified people may face disparities in harsher degrees than their gay and lesbian peers. In the U.S. in particular, for example, they may face: Lower success rates for refugee applications; may also be the case in Canada and Australia [ 42 ] Higher levels of intimate partner violence [ 43 ] Higher likelihood of youth risk behavior amongst high school students [ 44 ] Higher likelihood of anxiety and mood disorders amongst bisexual women and men who report having sex with both sexes [ 45 ] Higher likelihood of living on less than $30,000 a year [ 46 ] Lower levels of reporting feeling "very accepted" in the workplace [ 46 ] Lower likelihood of being out to the important people in their lives [ 46 ] "Bisexuals report higher rates of hypertension, poor or fair physical health, smoking, and risky drinking than heterosexuals or lesbians/gays" [ 31 ] "Bisexual women in relationships with monosexual partners have an increased rate of domestic violence compared to women in other demographic categories" [ 31 ] "Many, if not most, bisexual people do not come out to their healthcare providers. This means they are getting incomplete information (for example, about safer sex practices)" [ 31 ] "Bisexual women were more likely to be current smokers and acute drinkers" [ 31 ] Higher risk of self harm, and suicidal ideation or attempts [ 47 ] Feeling shame or discomfort with their sexual orientation or not feeling ready to be "out" to loved ones Intersectional perspectives [ edit ] Intersections with feminism [ edit ] Feminist positions on bisexuality range greatly, from acceptance of bisexuality as a feminist issue to rejection of bisexuality as a reactionary and anti-feminist backlash to lesbian feminism .

[ 48 ] A bisexual woman filed a lawsuit against the lesbian feminist magazine Common Lives/Lesbian Lives , alleging discrimination against bisexuals when her submission was not published.

[ 49 ] A widely studied example of lesbian-bisexual conflict within feminism was the Northampton Pride March during the years between 1989 and 1993, where many feminists involved debated over whether bisexuals should be included and whether or not bisexuality was compatible with feminism. Common lesbian-feminist critiques leveled at bisexuality were that bisexuality was anti-feminist , that bisexuality was a form of false consciousness , and that bisexual women who pursue relationships with men were "deluded and desperate". However, tensions between bisexual feminists and lesbian feminists have eased since the 1990s, as bisexual women have become more accepted within the feminist community.

[ 50 ] Nevertheless, some lesbian feminists such as Julie Bindel are still critical of bisexuality. Bindel has described female bisexuality as a "fashionable trend" being promoted due to "sexual hedonism" and broached the question of whether bisexuality even exists.

[ 51 ] She has also made tongue-in-cheek comparisons of bisexuals to cat fanciers and devil worshippers .

[ 52 ] Lesbian feminist Sheila Jeffreys writes in The Lesbian Heresy (1993) that while many feminists are comfortable working alongside gay men, they are uncomfortable interacting with bisexual men. Jeffreys states that while gay men are unlikely to sexually harass women, bisexual men are just as likely to be bothersome to women as heterosexual men.

[ 53 ] Donna Haraway was the inspiration and genesis for cyberfeminism with her 1985 essay "A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist-Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century" which was reprinted in Simians, Cyborgs and Women: The Reinvention of Nature (1991). Haraway's essay states that the cyborg "has no truck with bisexuality, pre-oedipal symbiosis, unalienated labor, or other seductions to organic wholeness through a final appropriation of all powers of the parts into a higher unity." [ 54 ] The lipstick lesbian flag was introduced in 2010 by Natalie McCray; this is a version with the kiss symbol changed.

The lipstick lesbian flag was introduced in 2010 by Natalie McCray, but has not been widely adopted; [ 55 ] some lesbians are against it because McCray's blog had biphobic (and racist and transphobic ) comments, and because it does not include butch lesbians .

[ 56 ] Intersections with gender [ edit ] Men [ edit ] Studies indicate that preferences against dating bisexual men are stronger than against bisexual women, even amongst bisexual women.

[ 57 ] Intersections with race [ edit ] While the general bisexual population as a whole faces biphobia, this oppression is also aggravated by other factors such as race. In a study conducted by Grady L. Garner Jr. titled Managing Heterosexism and Biphobia: A Revealing Black Bisexual Male Perspective , the author interviews 14 self-identified black bisexual men to examine how they cope with heterosexism and biphobia in order to formulate coping strategies. Data from the interviews revealed that 33% of the participants reported heterosexism and biphobia experiences, while 67% did not. He explains that the internalization of negative sociocultural messages, reactions, and attitudes can be incredibly distressing as bisexual black males attempted to translate or transform these negative experiences into positive bisexual identity sustaining ones.

[ 58 ] See also [ edit ] LGBTQ portal Gold star gay – Slang for a type of lesbian or gay man Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets International Day Against Homophobia, Transphobia and Biphobia List of phobias § Cultural prejudices and discrimination Victimization of bisexual women References [ edit ] ^ a b c Yoshino, Kenji (2000).

"The Epistemic Contract of Bisexual Erasure" .

Stanford Law Review .

52 (2): 353– 461.

doi : 10.2307/1229482 .

JSTOR 1229482 .

Archived from the original on February 1, 2021 . Retrieved November 12, 2020 .

^ Festival, Leeds LGBT+ Literature (2021-09-23).

"Bimisogyny and What it Means" .

mysite . Retrieved 2022-12-28 .

^ Pallotta-Chiarolli, Maria (2016-03-08).

Women in Relationships with Bisexual Men: Bi Men By Women . Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 978-0-7391-3459-7 .

^ Flood, Michael; Howson, Richard (2015-06-18).

Engaging Men in Building Gender Equality . Cambridge Scholars Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-4438-7895-1 .

^ McAllum, Mary-Anne (2014-01-01).

" "Bisexuality Is Just Semantics…": Young Bisexual Women's Experiences in New Zealand Secondary Schools" .

Journal of Bisexuality .

14 (1): 75– 93.

doi : 10.1080/15299716.2014.872467 .

ISSN 1529-9716 .

S2CID 144498576 .

^ Weiss, Jillian T. (2004-01-15).

"GL vs. BT: The Archaeology of Biphobia and Transphobia within the U.S. Gay and Lesbian Community" .

Journal of Bisexuality . Rochester, NY.

SSRN 1649428 .

^ Sung, Mi Ra (2014-12-01).

"Stress and Resilience: The Negative and Positive Aspects of Being an Asian American Lesbian or Bisexual Woman" .

Doctoral Dissertations .

^ Eliason, MJ (1997). "The prevalence and nature of biphobia in heterosexual undergraduate students".

Archives of Sexual Behavior .

26 (3): 317– 26.

doi : 10.1023/A:1024527032040 .

PMID 9146816 .

S2CID 30800831 .

^ Monro, Surya (2015).

Bisexuality: Identities, Politics, and Theories . Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 23.

ISBN 9781137007308 .

^ Greenesmith, Heron (April 25, 2018).

"We Know Biphobia Is Harmful. But Do We Know What's Behind It?" .

Rewire.News . Retrieved October 22, 2019 .

^ a b Weise, Elizabeth Reba (1992).

Closer to Home: Bisexuality and Feminism . Seattle: Seal Press. pp.

207 .

ISBN 1-878067-17-6 .

^ Welzer-Lang, Daniel (October 11, 2008). "Speaking Out Loud About Bisexuality: Biphobia in the Gay and Lesbian Community".

Journal of Bisexuality .

8 ( 1– 2): 82.

doi : 10.1080/15299710802142259 .

S2CID 144416441 .

^ Managing Heterosexism and Biphobia: A Revealing Black Bisexual Male Perspective . 2008-01-01.

ISBN 9780549622482 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Michael Musto, April 7, 2009.

Ever Meet a Real Bisexual?

Archived April 13, 2010, at the Wayback Machine , The Village Voice ^ Yoshino, Kenji (January 2000).

"The Epistemic Contract of Bisexual Erasure" (PDF) .

Stanford Law Review .

52 (2).

Stanford Law School : 353– 461.

doi : 10.2307/1229482 .

JSTOR 1229482 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2019-04-03 . Retrieved 2010-12-07 .

^ a b Dworkin, SH (2001). "Treating the bisexual client".

Journal of Clinical Psychology .

57 (5): 671– 80.

doi : 10.1002/jclp.1036 .

PMID 11304706 .

^ "Do Bisexual Men Really Exist?" .

Archived from the original on 2018-07-31 . Retrieved 2017-02-12 .

^ Ka'ahumanu, Lani; Yaeger, Rob.

"Biphobia" .

LGBT Resource Center UC San Diego . UC San Diego. Archived from the original on September 20, 2016 . Retrieved September 22, 2016 .

^ "Situational Homosexuality" .

American Psychological Association . Retrieved April 13, 2021 .

^ Matsick, Jes L.; Rubin, Jennifer D (June 2018).

"Bisexual prejudice among lesbian and gay people: Examining the roles of gender and perceived sexual orientation" .

Psychology of Sexual Orientation and Gender Diversity .

5 (2): 143– 155.

doi : 10.1037/sgd0000283 .

^ Fahs, Breanne (2009-11-13).

"Compulsory Bisexuality?: The Challenges of Modern Sexual Fluidity" .

Journal of Bisexuality .

9 ( 3– 4): 431– 449.

doi : 10.1080/15299710903316661 .

ISSN 1529-9716 .

^ Roffee, James A.; Waling, Andrea (2016-10-10). "Rethinking microaggressions and anti-social behaviour against LGBTIQ+ youth".

Safer Communities .

15 (4): 190– 201.

doi : 10.1108/SC-02-2016-0004 .

S2CID 151493252 .

^ Word Of The Gay: BisexualErasure Archived 2011-08-27 at Wikiwix May 16, 2008 "Queers United" ^ The B Word Archived 2021-06-19 at Wikiwix Suresha, Ron. "The B Word," Options (Rhode Island), November 2004 ^ Hutchins, Loraine (2005).

"Sexual Prejudice: The erasure of bisexuals in academia and the media" .

American Sexuality . Vol. 3, no. 4.

National Sexuality Resource Center . Archived from the original on 2007-12-16.

^ Hutchins, Loraine .

"Sexual Prejudice—The erasure of bisexuals in academia and the media" .

American Sexuality Magazine . San Francisco, CA: National Sexuality Resource Center, San Francisco State University. Archived from the original on 2007-12-16 . Retrieved 2007-07-19 .

^ Bi Men: Coming Out Every Which Way, Ron Jackson Suresha, Pete Chvany – 2013 ^ Social Work Practice with Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender People, Gerald P. Mallon—2017 ^ Fritz Klein, Karen Yescavage, Jonathan Alexander (2012) "Bisexuality and Transgenderism: InterSEXions of the Others" ^ Abbie E. Goldberg (2016) "The SAGE Encyclopedia of LGBTQ Studies" ^ a b c d e f g h Eisner, Shiri (2013).

Bi: Notes for a Bisexual Revolution (English ed.). Seal Press. p. 345.

ISBN 978-1580054751 . Archived from the original on April 15, 2023 . Retrieved November 12, 2020 .

^ "It's Just A Phase" Is Just A Phrase Archived 2018-11-18 at the Wayback Machine , The Bisexual Index ^ "Bisexuals and the Slut Myth" Archived 2023-05-10 at the Wayback Machine , presented at the 9th International Conference on Bisexuality ^ "GLAAD: Cultural Interest Media" .

GLAAD . Archived from the original on April 19, 2006.

^ Vrangalova, Zhana (September 27, 2014).

"Are Bisexuals Really Less Monogamous Than Everyone Else?" .

Psychology Today .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved February 12, 2017 .

^ Dodd, S. J. (2021-07-19).

The Routledge International Handbook of Social Work and Sexualities . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-000-40861-4 .

^ Cipriano, Allison E.; Nguyen, Daniel; Holland, Kathryn J. (2022-10-02).

" "Bisexuality Isn't Exclusionary": A Qualitative Examination of Bisexual Definitions and Gender Inclusivity Concerns among Plurisexual Women" .

Journal of Bisexuality .

22 (4): 557– 579.

doi : 10.1080/15299716.2022.2060892 .

ISSN 1529-9716 .

^ Flanders, Corey E. (January–March 2017). "Defining Bisexuality: Young Bisexual and Pansexual People's Voices".

Journal of Bisexuality .

17 (1): 39– 57.

doi : 10.1080/15299716.2016.1227016 .

S2CID 151944900 .

^ Dodge, Brian; Schnarrs, Phillip W.; Reece, Michael; Martinez, Omar; Goncalves, Gabriel; Malebranche, David; Van Der Pol, Barbara; Nix, Ryan; Fortenberry, J. Dennis (2012-01-01).

"Individual and Social Factors Related to Mental Health Concerns among Bisexual Men in the Midwestern United States" .

Journal of Bisexuality .

12 (2): 223– 245.

doi : 10.1080/15299716.2012.674862 .

ISSN 1529-9716 .

PMC 3383005 .

PMID 22745591 .

^ Gonzales, V; Washienko, K M; Krone, M R; Chapman, L I; Arredondo, E M; Huckeba, H J; Downer, A (1999).

"Sexual and drug-use risk factors for HIV and STDs: a comparison of women with and without bisexual experiences" .

American Journal of Public Health .

89 (12): 1841– 1846.

doi : 10.2105/ajph.89.12.1841 .

PMC 1509027 .

PMID 10589313 .

^ Makadon MD, Harvey J; Ard MD, MPH, Kevin L (2012-07-09).

"Improving the Health Care of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender People: Understanding and Eliminating Health Disparities" (PDF) .

Fenway Institute . U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2018-08-20 . Retrieved 2015-10-09 .

^ Rehaag, Sean (2009).

"Bisexuals need not apply: a comparative appraisal of refugee law and policy in Canada, the United States, and Australia" .

The International Journal of Human Rights .

13 ( 2– 3): 415– 436.

doi : 10.1080/13642980902758226 .

hdl : 10315/8022 .

S2CID 55379531 .

^ Mikel L. Walters, Jieru Chen, and Matthew J. Breiding, " The National Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence Survey: 2010 Findings on Victimization by Sexual Orientation Archived 2013-11-16 at the Wayback Machine " (Atlanta, GA: National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, January 2013).

^ Kann, Laura; Olsen, Emily O'Malley; McManus, Tim; Harris, William A.; Shanklin, Shari L.; Flint, Katherine H.; Queen, Barbara; Lowry, Richard; Chyen, David; Whittle, Lisa; Thornton, Jemekia; Lim, Connie; Yamakawa, Yoshimi; Brener, Nancy; Zaza, Stephanie (2016).

"Sexual Identity, Sex of Sexual Contacts, and Health-Related Behaviors Among Students in Grades 9–12 — United States and Selected Sites, 2015" .

MMWR. Surveillance Summaries .

65 (9): 1– 202.

doi : 10.15585/mmwr.ss6509a1 .

PMID 27513843 .

^ Bostwick, Wendy B.; Boyd, Carol J.; Hughes, Tonda L.; McCabe, Sean Esteban (2010).

"Dimensions of Sexual Orientation and the Prevalence of Mood and Anxiety Disorders in the United States" .

American Journal of Public Health .

100 (3): 468– 475.

doi : 10.2105/AJPH.2008.152942 .

PMC 2820045 .

PMID 19696380 .

^ a b c " A Survey of LGBT Americans: The LGBT Population and Its Sub-Groups Archived 2018-09-26 at the Wayback Machine " (Pew Research Center, June 13, 2013).

^ "Bisexuals and Health Risks" .

National LGBT Cancer Network . 11 July 2018.

Archived from the original on 5 December 2022.

^ Wilkinson, Sue (1996). "Bisexuality as Backlash". In Harne, Lynne (ed.).

All the Rage: Reasserting Radical Lesbian Feminism . Elaine Miller. New York City: Teacher's College Press . pp.

75– 89.

ISBN 978-0-807-76285-1 .

OCLC 35202923 .

^ "Common Lives/Lesbian Lives Records, Iowa Women's Archives, University of Iowa Libraries, Iowa City, Iowa" . Archived from the original on August 21, 2015.

^ Gerstner, David A. (2006).

Routledge International Encyclopedia of Queer Culture . United Kingdom: Routledge . pp.

82– 3.

ISBN 978-0-415-30651-5 . Retrieved October 3, 2012 .

^ Bindel, Julie (June 12, 2012).

"Where's the Politics in Sex?" .

The Huffington Post .

Archived from the original on 2018-11-18 . Retrieved 2012-10-03 .

^ Bindel, Julie (November 8, 2008).

"It's not me. It's you" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 2021-02-13 . Retrieved 2012-10-03 .

^ Jeffreys, Sheila (1993).

The Lesbian Heresy .

Melbourne , Australia : Spinifex Press Pty Ltf. p. 124.

ISBN 978-1-875559-17-6 . Retrieved October 4, 2012 .

^ "Donna Haraway – A Cyborg Manifesto" . Egs.edu. Archived from the original on 2013-09-22 . Retrieved 2015-09-15 .

^ Bendix, Trish (September 8, 2015).

"Why don't lesbians have a pride flag of our own?" .

AfterEllen . Archived from the original on September 9, 2015 . Retrieved 8 June 2019 .

^ Brabaw, Kasandra.

"A Complete Guide To All The LGBTQ+ Flags & What They Mean" .

www.refinery29.com .

Archived from the original on 2023-01-28 . Retrieved 2023-01-31 .

^ Ess, Mackenzie; Burke, Sara E.; LaFrance, Marianne (2023-07-03). "Gendered Anti-Bisexual Bias: Heterosexual, Bisexual, and Gay/Lesbian People's Willingness to Date Sexual Orientation Ingroup and Outgroup Members".

Journal of Homosexuality .

70 (8): 1461– 1478.

doi : 10.1080/00918369.2022.2030618 .

ISSN 1540-3602 .

PMID 35112988 .

^ Garner, Grady L. (2011-09-02).

Managing Heterosexism and Biphobia: A Revealing Black Bisexual Male Perspective . BiblioBazaar.

ISBN 9781243513434 .

Further reading [ edit ] Garber, Marjorie (1995).

Bisexuality and the Eroticism of Everyday Life , pp. 20–21, 28, 39.

Fraser, M., Identity Without Selfhood: Simone de Beauvoir and Bisexuality , Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press 1999. p. 124–140.

Rankin, Sam; Morton, James; Bell, Matthew (May 2015).

"Complicated? Bisexual people's experiences of and ideas for improving services" (PDF) .

Equality Network .

The fencesitters? Suspicions still haunt the bi/homo divide – article in Xtra, Gay & Lesbian news site, 2006 External links [ edit ] Bialogue/GLAAD Bisexuality Packet for Mental Health Professionals Curiouser and curiouser by Mark Simpson Bisexuality Basics, UC Riverside LGBT Resource Center, Riverside, CA Links to related articles v t e Bisexuality Sexual identities Bisexual Bicurious Heteroflexible / Homoflexible Monosexual Multisexual / Plurisexual Pansexual Polysexual History In the United States Media portrayals Politics Study Theory Journal of Bisexuality Kinsey scale Klein grid Female sexuality Male sexuality Attitudes Biphobia Chic Erasure Lesbian until graduation Community Anything That Moves BECAUSE Bi Community News BiCon (UK) Bisexual Awareness Week Celebrate Bisexuality Day Flag International Conference on Bisexuality Transcending Boundaries Conference Organizations American Institute of Bisexuality Bay Area Bi+ & Pan Network Bialogue BiNet USA Bisexual Resource Center National Bisexual Liberation Group New York Area Bisexual Network Lists Lists of bisexual people LGBTQ portal Sexuality portal v t e LGBTQ people ( topic outline ) Academic fields Discourse LGBTQ topics in education Gender studies Lesbian feminism Linguistics Literature Gay Lesbian Transgender Psychology Queer studies Queer theory Transfeminism Community Culture Anthems Awards Literary Bars Gay Lesbian Bisexual community Businesses Coming out Community centers Cross-dressing Drag king Drag queen Events Awareness periods Film festivals Gay village Gay-friendly Icons Literature Music Media Bury your gays Films New queer cinema Periodicals Portrayal Organizations People Pets Pride Pride Month Pride parade Queerplatonic relationships Religious groups Rodeos Same-sex relationships Slang Slogans Sports Pride Nights Takatāpui Theatre Companies Tourism Symbols Black triangle Gaysper Labrys Lambda Pink triangle Rainbow plaque Pride flags Aromantic Asexual Bear Bisexual Gay flag of South Africa Gay men Intersex Leather Lesbian Non-binary Pansexual Rainbow Rainbow crossing Transgender Gender identities Sexual identities Sexual diversities Gender identity Androgyny Boi Cisgender Gender bender Gender nonconformity Khanith Man Non-binary / genderqueer Queer heterosexuality Theyby Transgender Akava'ine Trans man Transsexual Trans woman Mak nyah Woman Womxn Womyn Xenogender Third sex / Third gender Bakla Balkan sworn virgins Bissu Faʻafafine Fakaleitī Femminiello Hijra Kathoey Köçek Māhū Mukhannath Muxe Travesti Two-spirit Winkte Sexual identities Sexual orientations Asexual Bisexual Homosexual Aromanticism Asexuality Gray asexuality Demisexuality Aegosexuality Attraction to transgender people Banjee Bi-curious Fictosexuality Gay Gay men Heteroflexible Lesbian Monosexual Non-heterosexual Pansexual Queer Questioning Romantic orientation Same gender loving Sexual minority Tom / Dee Related Acronyms LGBTQ Detransition Effeminacy Erotic target location error Ex-gay Ex-ex-gay Female Gender and sexual diversity Gender assignment Gender binary Gender essentialism Gender expression Gender modality Gender neutrality Gender roles Gender transition Health Organizations Hermaphrodite Human female sexuality Human male sexuality Intersex Androgynos Tumtum Legal status of transgender people Male Men who have sex with men / Sexual practices between men Sex–gender distinction Sexuality and gender identity-based cultures Social construction of gender Straight ally Tomboy Transgender health care Misinformation Women who have sex with women / Sexual practices between women History LGBTQ history History of homosexuality History of gay men in the United States History of lesbianism Transgender history Timeline of transgender history Timeline of asexual history LGBTQ history timeline Migration Social movements Students History of Christianity and homosexuality History of same-sex unions Pederasty Category:LGBTQ history Pre-modern era Adelphopoiesis Ancient Egypt Ancient Greece pre-Columbian Peru Ancient Rome Medieval Europe 16th to 19th century Molly house Section 377 First homosexual movement 20th century Dance of the Forty-One Institut für Sexualwissenschaft Persecution of homosexuals in Nazi Germany Cadet scandal Florida Legislative Investigation Committee Sea queens Compton's Cafeteria riot Stonewall riots Gay Liberation Front Handkerchief code Festival of Light action White Night riots Front homosexuel d'action révolutionnaire Florida orange juice boycott Operation Soap Epidemiology of HIV/AIDS ACT UP Section 28 Tasty nightclub raid Bar Abanicos police raid 21st century Timeline of same-sex marriage Lawrence v. Texas Russian anti-LGBTQ law Anti-Homosexuality Act, 2014 Rainbow wave Rainbow Night 2020s anti-LGBTQ movement in the United States Rights and legal issues LGBTQ rights by country or territory Africa Americas Asia Europe Oceania List of LGBTQ rights articles by region LGBTQ rights topics Capital punishment for homosexuality Censorship of LGBTQ issues Civil unions and partnerships Criminalization of homosexuality decriminalization Hate crime laws Intersex human rights Military service Same-sex parenting Adoption Assisted reproduction Same-sex marriage Timeline Socialism Legal status of transgender people Transgender rights movement United Nations / Yogyakarta Principles La Francophonie Commonwealth of Nations LGBTQ rights movements Homophile Gay liberation LGBTQ rights groups LGBTQ rights activists Rainbow capitalism Separatism Gay Lesbian Sexual orientation — Medicine, science and sexology Autism and LGBTQ identities Biology Birth order Demographics Disability and LGBTQ identities Environment Homosexuality and psychology Homosexuality in the DSM Kinsey scale Klein Grid Life expectancy Neuroscience Prenatal hormones Sexual inversion Conversion therapy Split attraction model Sexual orientation identity Timeline of sexual orientation and medicine Societal attitudes Prejudice Violence Societal attitudes Amatonormativity Heteronormativity Heteropatriarchy Homonationalism Pinkwashing Gay panic defense Opposition to LGBTQ rights Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric LGBTQ stereotypes Suicide among LGBTQ people list Monuments and memorials Queerbaiting Homosexuality and religion Transgender people and religion Prejudice and discrimination Arophobia Acephobia Anti-gender movement AIDS stigma Biphobia Gayphobia Grooming conspiracy theory Heterosexism Homophobia Liberal homophobia Discrimination against lesbians Discrimination against non-binary people Racism Riddle scale SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Transmisogyny Transphobia Violence against LGBTQ people Corrective rape Capital punishment for homosexuality Gay bashing Violence against LGBTQ people History in the UK in the US Transgender people Unlawful killings Persecution of homosexuals in Nazi Germany Stop Murder Music LGBTQ portal Category v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Authority control databases National United States Taiwan Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Biphobia&oldid=1305714005 " Categories : Biphobia Bisexuality Discrimination against LGBTQ people LGBTQ terminology Prejudice and discrimination by type Anti-LGBTQ sentiment LGBTQ and society Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template wayback links Webarchive template other archives Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts Articles containing Greek-language text Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 17:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Biphobia 47 languages Add topic

