Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Principles 2 Relation to similar geometries 3 History Toggle History subsection 3.1 Greek antiquity 3.2 Islamic world 3.3 Euler's work 4 Properties 5 Relation to Euclid's postulates 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 Sources 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Spherical geometry 40 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Català Чӑвашла Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Gàidhlig 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latviešu Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenščina Sunda Suomi Svenska ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Geometry Projecting a sphere to a plane Branches Euclidean Non-Euclidean Elliptic Spherical Hyperbolic Non-Archimedean geometry Projective Affine Synthetic Analytic Algebraic Arithmetic Diophantine Differential Riemannian Symplectic Discrete differential Complex Finite Discrete/Combinatorial Digital Convex Computational Fractal Incidence Noncommutative geometry Noncommutative algebraic geometry Concepts Features Dimension Straightedge and compass constructions Angle Curve Diagonal Orthogonality ( Perpendicular ) Parallel Vertex Congruence Similarity Symmetry Zero-dimensional Point One-dimensional Line segment ray Length Two-dimensional Plane Area Polygon Triangle Altitude Hypotenuse Pythagorean theorem Parallelogram Square Rectangle Rhombus Rhomboid Quadrilateral Trapezoid Kite Circle Diameter Circumference Area Three-dimensional Volume Cube cuboid Cylinder Dodecahedron Icosahedron Octahedron Pyramid Platonic Solid Sphere Tetrahedron Four -/other-dimensional Tesseract Hypersphere Geometers by name Aida Aryabhata Ahmes Alhazen Apollonius Archimedes Atiyah Baudhayana Bolyai Brahmagupta Cartan Chern Coxeter Descartes Euclid Euler Gauss Gromov Hilbert Huygens Jyeṣṭhadeva Kātyāyana Khayyám Klein Lobachevsky Manava Minkowski Minggatu Pascal Pythagoras Parameshvara Poincaré Riemann Sakabe Sijzi al-Tusi Veblen Virasena Yang Hui al-Yasamin Zhang List of geometers by period BCE Ahmes Baudhayana Manava Pythagoras Euclid Archimedes Apollonius 1–1400s Zhang Kātyāyana Aryabhata Brahmagupta Virasena Alhazen Sijzi Khayyám al-Yasamin al-Tusi Yang Hui Parameshvara 1400s–1700s Jyeṣṭhadeva Descartes Pascal Huygens Minggatu Euler Sakabe Aida 1700s–1900s Gauss Lobachevsky Bolyai Riemann Klein Poincaré Hilbert Minkowski Cartan Veblen Coxeter Chern Present day Atiyah Gromov v t e Geometry of the surface of a sphere The sum of the angles of a spherical triangle is not equal to 180°. A sphere is a curved surface, but locally the laws of the flat (planar) Euclidean geometry are good approximations. In a small triangle on the face of the earth, the sum of the angles is only slightly more than 180 degrees.

A sphere with a spherical triangle on it.

Spherical geometry or spherics (from Ancient Greek σφαιρικά ) is the geometry of the two- dimensional surface of a sphere [ a ] or the n -dimensional surface of higher dimensional spheres .

Long studied for its practical applications to astronomy , navigation , and geodesy , spherical geometry and the metrical tools of spherical trigonometry are in many respects analogous to Euclidean plane geometry and trigonometry , but also have some important differences.

The sphere can be studied either extrinsically as a surface embedded in 3-dimensional Euclidean space (part of the study of solid geometry ), or intrinsically using methods that only involve the surface itself without reference to any surrounding space.

Principles [ edit ] In plane (Euclidean) geometry , the basic concepts are points and (straight) lines . In spherical geometry, the basic concepts are points and great circles . However, two great circles on a plane intersect in two antipodal points, unlike coplanar lines in elliptic geometry .

In the extrinsic 3-dimensional picture, a great circle is the intersection of the sphere with any plane through the center.  In the intrinsic approach, a great circle is a geodesic ; a shortest path between any two of its points provided they are close enough. Or, in the (also intrinsic) axiomatic approach analogous to Euclid's axioms of plane geometry, "great circle" is simply an undefined term, together with postulates stipulating the basic relationships between great circles and the also-undefined "points".  This is the same as Euclid's method of treating point and line as undefined primitive notions and axiomatizing their relationships.

Great circles in many ways play the same logical role in spherical geometry as lines in Euclidean geometry, e.g., as the sides of (spherical) triangles.  This is more than an analogy; spherical and plane geometry and others can all be unified under the umbrella of geometry built from distance measurement , where "lines" are defined to mean shortest paths (geodesics). Many statements about the geometry of points and such "lines" are equally true in all those geometries provided lines are defined that way, and the theory can be readily extended to higher dimensions.   Nevertheless, because its applications and pedagogy are tied to solid geometry, and because the generalization loses some important properties of lines in the plane, spherical geometry ordinarily does not use the term "line" at all to refer to anything on the sphere itself. If developed as a part of solid geometry, use is made of points, straight lines and planes (in the Euclidean sense) in the surrounding space.

In spherical geometry, angles are defined between great circles, resulting in a spherical trigonometry that differs from ordinary trigonometry in many respects; for example, the sum of the interior angles of a spherical triangle exceeds 180 degrees.

Relation to similar geometries [ edit ] Because a sphere and a plane differ geometrically, (intrinsic) spherical geometry has some features of a non-Euclidean geometry and is sometimes described as being one.  However, spherical geometry was not considered a full-fledged non-Euclidean geometry sufficient to resolve the ancient problem of whether the parallel postulate is a logical consequence of the rest of Euclid's axioms of plane geometry, because it requires another axiom to be modified.  The resolution was found instead in elliptic geometry , to which spherical geometry is closely related, and hyperbolic geometry ; each of these new geometries makes a different change to the parallel postulate.

The principles of any of these geometries can be extended to any number of dimensions.

An important geometry related to that of the sphere is that of the real projective plane ; it is obtained by identifying antipodal points (pairs of opposite points) on the sphere. Locally, the projective plane has all the properties of spherical geometry, but it has different global properties. In particular, it is non-orientable , or one-sided, and unlike the sphere it cannot be drawn as a surface in 3-dimensional space without intersecting itself.

Concepts of spherical geometry may also be applied to the oblong sphere , though minor modifications must be implemented on certain formulas.

History [ edit ] Greek antiquity [ edit ] The earliest mathematical work of antiquity to come down to our time is On the rotating sphere (Περὶ κινουμένης σφαίρας, Peri kinoumenes sphairas ) by Autolycus of Pitane , who lived at the end of the fourth century BC.

[ 1 ] Spherical trigonometry was studied by early Greek mathematicians such as Theodosius of Bithynia , a Greek astronomer and mathematician who wrote Spherics , a book on the geometry of the sphere, [ 2 ] and Menelaus of Alexandria , who wrote a book on spherical trigonometry called Sphaerica and developed Menelaus' theorem .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Islamic world [ edit ] See also: Mathematics in medieval Islam The Book of Unknown Arcs of a Sphere written by the Islamic mathematician Al-Jayyani is considered to be the first treatise on spherical trigonometry. The book contains formulae for right-handed triangles, the general law of sines, and the solution of a spherical triangle by means of the polar triangle.

[ 5 ] The book On Triangles by Regiomontanus , written around 1463, is the first pure trigonometrical work in Europe. However, Gerolamo Cardano noted a century later that much of its material on spherical trigonometry was taken from the twelfth-century work of the Andalusi scholar Jabir ibn Aflah .

[ 6 ] Euler's work [ edit ] Leonhard Euler published a series of important memoirs on spherical geometry: L. Euler, Principes de la trigonométrie sphérique tirés de la méthode des plus grands et des plus petits, Mémoires de l'Académie des Sciences de Berlin 9 (1753), 1755, p. 233–257; Opera Omnia, Series 1, vol. XXVII, p. 277–308.

L. Euler, Eléments de la trigonométrie sphéroïdique tirés de la méthode des plus grands et des plus petits, Mémoires de l'Académie des Sciences de Berlin 9 (1754), 1755, p. 258–293; Opera Omnia, Series 1, vol. XXVII, p. 309–339.

L. Euler, De curva rectificabili in superficie sphaerica, Novi Commentarii academiae scientiarum Petropolitanae 15, 1771, pp. 195–216; Opera Omnia, Series 1, Volume 28, pp. 142–160.

L. Euler, De mensura angulorum solidorum, Acta academiae scientiarum imperialis Petropolitinae 2, 1781, p. 31–54; Opera Omnia, Series 1, vol. XXVI, p. 204–223.

L. Euler, Problematis cuiusdam Pappi Alexandrini constructio, Acta academiae scientiarum imperialis Petropolitinae 4, 1783, p. 91–96; Opera Omnia, Series 1, vol. XXVI, p. 237–242.

L. Euler, Geometrica et sphaerica quaedam, Mémoires de l'Académie des Sciences de Saint-Pétersbourg 5, 1815, p. 96–114; Opera Omnia, Series 1, vol. XXVI, p. 344–358.

L. Euler, Trigonometria sphaerica universa, ex primis principiis breviter et dilucide derivata, Acta academiae scientiarum imperialis Petropolitinae 3, 1782, p. 72–86; Opera Omnia, Series 1, vol. XXVI, p. 224–236.

L. Euler, Variae speculationes super area triangulorum sphaericorum, Nova Acta academiae scientiarum imperialis Petropolitinae 10, 1797, p. 47–62; Opera Omnia, Series 1, vol. XXIX, p. 253–266.

Properties [ edit ] Spherical geometry has the following properties: [ 7 ] Any two great circles intersect in two diametrically opposite points, called antipodal points .

Any two points that are not antipodal points determine a unique great circle.

There is a natural unit of angle measurement (based on a revolution), a natural unit of length (based on the circumference of a great circle) and a natural unit of area (based on the area of the sphere).

Each great circle is associated with a pair of antipodal points, called its poles which are the common intersections of the set of great circles perpendicular to it.  This shows that a great circle is, with respect to distance measurement on the surface of the sphere , a circle: the locus of points all at a specific distance from a center.

Each point is associated with a unique great circle, called the polar circle of the point, which is the great circle on the plane through the centre of the sphere and perpendicular to the diameter of the sphere through the given point.

As there are two arcs determined by a pair of points, which are not antipodal, on the great circle they determine, three non-collinear points do not determine a unique triangle. However, if we only consider triangles whose sides are minor arcs of great circles, we have the following properties: The angle sum of a triangle is greater than 180° and less than 540°.

The area of a triangle is proportional to the excess of its angle sum over 180°.

Two triangles with the same angle sum are equal in area.

There is an upper bound for the area of triangles.

The composition (product) of two reflections-across-a-great-circle may be considered as a rotation about either of the points of intersection of their axes.

Two triangles are congruent if and only if they correspond under a finite product of such reflections.

Two triangles with corresponding angles equal are congruent (i.e., all similar triangles are congruent).

Relation to Euclid's postulates [ edit ] If "line" is taken to mean great circle, spherical geometry only obeys two of Euclid's five postulates : the second postulate ("to produce [extend] a finite straight line continuously in a straight line") and the fourth postulate ("that all right angles are equal to one another"). However, it violates the other three. Contrary to the first postulate ("that between any two points, there is a unique line segment joining them"), there is not a unique shortest route between any two points ( antipodal points such as the north and south poles on a spherical globe are counterexamples); contrary to the third postulate, a sphere does not contain circles of arbitrarily great radius; and contrary to the fifth (parallel) postulate , there is no point through which a line can be drawn that never intersects a given line.

[ 8 ] A statement that is equivalent to the parallel postulate is that there exists a triangle whose angles add up to 180°. Since spherical geometry violates the parallel postulate, there exists no such triangle on the surface of a sphere. The sum of the angles of a triangle on a sphere is 180°(1 + 4 f ) , where f is the fraction of the sphere's surface that is enclosed by the triangle. For any positive value of f , this exceeds 180°.

See also [ edit ] Spherical astronomy Spherical conic Spherical distance Spherical polyhedron Spherics Half-side formula Lénárt sphere Versor Notes [ edit ] ^ In this context the word "sphere" refers only to the 2-dimensional surface and other terms like " ball " (or "solid sphere") are used for the surface together with its 3-dimensional interior.

References [ edit ] ^ Rosenfeld, B.A (1988).

A history of non-Euclidean geometry : evolution of the concept of a geometric space . New York: Springer-Verlag. p. 2.

ISBN 0-387-96458-4 .

^ "Theodosius of Bithynia – Dictionary definition of Theodosius of Bithynia" .

HighBeam Research . Retrieved 25 March 2015 .

^ O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Menelaus of Alexandria" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews ^ "Menelaus of Alexandria Facts, information, pictures" .

HighBeam Research . Retrieved 25 March 2015 .

^ School of Mathematical and Computational Sciences University of St Andrews ^ "Victor J. Katz-Princeton University Press" . Archived from the original on 2016-10-01 . Retrieved 2009-03-01 .

^ Meserve 1983 , pp. 281–282.

^ Gowers, Timothy , Mathematics: A Very Short Introduction , Oxford University Press, 2002: pp. 94 and 98.

Sources [ edit ] Meserve, Bruce E. (1983) [1959], Fundamental Concepts of Geometry , Dover, ISBN 0-486-63415-9 Further reading [ edit ] Papadopoulos, Athanase (2015), Euler, la géométrie sphérique et le calcul des variations. In: Leonhard Euler : Mathématicien, physicien et théoricien de la musique (dir. X. Hascher et A. Papadopoulos) , CNRS Editions, Paris, ISBN 978-2-271-08331-9 Van Brummelen, Glen (2013).

Heavenly Mathematics: The Forgotten Art of Spherical Trigonometry .

Princeton University Press .

ISBN 9780691148922 . Retrieved 31 December 2014 .

Roshdi Rashed and Athanase Papadopoulos (2017) Menelaus' Spherics: Early Translation and al-Mahani'/alHarawi's version. Critical edition of Menelaus' Spherics from the Arabic manuscripts, with historical and mathematical commentaries , De Gruyter Series: Scientia Graeco-Arabica 21 ISBN 978-3-11-057142-4 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Spherical geometry .

The Geometry of the Sphere Archived 2011-06-21 at the Wayback Machine Rice University Weisstein, Eric W.

"Spherical Geometry" .

MathWorld .

Sphaerica - geometry software for constructing on the sphere v t e Geometry History Timeline Lists of geometry topics Foundations of geometry Outline of geometry Euclidean geometry Convex Discrete Plane geometry Solid Affine Trigonometry Spherical Generalized Fundamental Concepts (Euclidean) Point Line Plane Space Distance Angle Parallel Perpendicular Triangle Circle Polygon Congruence Similarity Euclid's Elements Euclidean space Coordinate system Cartesian Polar Dimension 2D 3D Non-Euclidean geometry Non-Euclidean space Elliptic Hyperbolic Spherical Based on Methods or Structures Algebraic Arithmetic Diophantine Differential Riemannian Symplectic Absolute Analytic geometry Complex Computational Conformal Discrete Fractal Geometric group theory Information Non-Archimedean Noncommutative Projective Spectral Thurston Metric geometry Geometric measure theory Geometric analysis Topology Topology General Set-theoretic Continuum Algebraic Noncommutative Differential Geometric Low-dimensional Combinatorial Topological dynamics Knot Theory Symplectic Topology Lists Lists of geometry topics Combinatorial computational geometry topics Differential geometry topics Formulas in elementary geometry Formulas in Riemannian geometry Geometry topics Knot theory topics Numerical computational geometry topics Polygons Shapes Topologies General topology Outline of geometry Glossaries Algebraic geometry Algebraic topology Arithmetic and diophantine geometry Classical algebraic geometry Differential geometry and topology Topology Mathematical symbols Riemannian and metric geometry Shapes with metaphorical names Symplectic geometry Miscellaneous Finite geometry Incidence geometry Ordered geometry Related Geometric algebra Group theory Ring theory Field theory Calculus on manifolds Vector calculus Fractal analysis Harmonic analysis Geometry of numbers Lattice theory Elliptic curve Statistical shape analysis Spatial statistics Geometric data analysis Foundations of geometry Axiomatic system Constructive geometry Anabelian geometry Categories: Geometry Trigonometry Topology Category:History of geometry Authority control databases : National Germany Japan NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐lflb6
Cached time: 20250812000726
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.415 seconds
Real time usage: 0.541 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1745/1000000
Revision size: 15120/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 73030/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1741/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 84035/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.267/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8247000/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  444.439      1 -total
 22.79%  101.275      2 Template:Reflist
 20.99%   93.272      1 Template:General_geometry
 15.75%   69.988      2 Template:Cite_book
 10.33%   45.905      1 Template:Short_description
  8.96%   39.807      1 Template:Commons_category
  8.64%   38.395      1 Template:Sister_project
  8.26%   36.702      1 Template:Side_box
  7.91%   35.134      1 Template:Geometry-footer
  7.30%   32.457      1 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:174026:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812000726 and revision id 1298707740. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Spherical_geometry&oldid=1298707740 " Categories : Spherical geometry Classical geometry Spherical astronomy Greek mathematics Hidden categories: Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 4 July 2025, at 04:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Spherical geometry 40 languages Add topic

