Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Themes Toggle Themes subsection 1.1 Grievance 1.2 Vagueness 1.3 Right-wing authoritarian populism 1.4 Gender and masculinity 1.5 Christian Trumpism 2 Methods of persuasion Toggle Methods of persuasion subsection 2.1 Money-Kyrle pattern 2.2 Trump rallies 2.3 Rhetoric 2.4 Branding 2.5 Appeal to emotions 2.6 Emotion, trust, and media 2.7 Falsehoods 3 Social psychology Toggle Social psychology subsection 3.1 Dominance orientation 3.2 Comparisons to animal social behavior 3.3 Collective narcissism 3.3.1 Conspiracy theories 3.4 Cult of personality 4 Relationship with media Toggle Relationship with media subsection 4.1 Culture industry and pillarization 4.2 Profitability of spectacle and outrage 4.3 Social media 5 Similar movements, politicians and personalities Toggle Similar movements, politicians and personalities subsection 5.1 Historical background in the United States 5.2 Parallels with fascism and trend towards illiberal democracy 5.3 Rush Limbaugh 5.4 Future impact 6 Policies Toggle Policies subsection 6.1 Economic policy 6.2 Foreign policy 6.3 Religious policy 7 Beyond the United States Toggle Beyond the United States subsection 7.1 Argentina 7.2 Australia 7.3 Brazil 7.4 Canada 7.5 Europe 7.6 India 7.7 Iran 7.8 Japan 7.9 Nigeria 7.10 Philippines 7.11 Russia 7.12 South Korea 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 11.1 Books 11.2 Journal articles 11.3 News articles Toggle the table of contents Trumpism 31 languages العربية Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American right-wing populist political movement Not to be confused with Rhetoric of Donald Trump or Political positions of Donald Trump .

Trumpism From left to right, top to bottom : Trump at a 2016 rally in Arizona A Trump supporter in 2017 wearing a Make America Great Again hat Trump supporters storming the Capitol Building on January 6, 2021 [ note 1 ] Armed Trump supporters at a Minnesota demonstration in 2020 [ note 2 ] Donald Trump 2020 presidential campaign rally in Greenville, North Carolina Leader Donald Trump Founded June 16, 2015 ; 10 years ago ( June 16, 2015 ) Ideology Right-wing populism Nativism ( US ) [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Protectionism Right-wing antiglobalism Neo-nationalism Anti-environmentalism Neo-fascism ( debated ) [ a ] Factions : Libertarian conservatism [ 11 ] National conservatism [ 12 ] Paleoconservatism [ 13 ] Isolationism [ 14 ] Ultraconservatism [ 15 ] Christian right [ 18 ] Political position Right-wing to far-right National affiliation Republican Party Slogan Make America Great Again Politics of the United States Political parties Elections This article is part of a series about Donald Trump Business and personal Age and health Business career The Trump Organization wealth tax returns cryptocurrency Conspiracy theories Endorsements Eponyms Family Foundation grants American football Golf Honors John McCain comments Legal affairs indictments Media career The Apprentice bibliography filmography Nicknames Voters Obama–Trump voters Sanders–Trump voters Public image in popular culture in music SNL parodies baby balloon dance handshakes pseudonyms Racial views antisemitism Religious views Residences Rhetoric Security incidents Sexual misconduct allegations Epstein ties Trump–Musk feud 45th and 47th President of the United States Presidencies first second timeline Transitions first second Inaugurations first second Portraits Presidential library Tenure First 100 days first term second term Executive actions executive orders first term second term proclamations pardons first term second term Trips foreign first term '17 '18 '19 '20–'21 Riyadh summit North Korea summits Singapore Hanoi DMZ Helsinki summit Namaste Trump second term '25 Middle East visit Shutdowns January 2018 2018–2019 Opinion polls first term second term Legal affairs as president first term second term Protests federal law enforcement deployment St. John's Church photo op No Kings Social media Twitter False or misleading statements Trumpism TikTok controversy American Civil War Attempts to overturn the 2020 presidential election fake electors plot Eastman memos lawsuits Texas v. Pennsylvania Jeffrey Clark letter Fascism Mar-a-Lago face Policies Domestic first term second term Economy first term tax cuts tariffs USMCA farmer bailouts second term One Big Beautiful Bill Act tariffs China Canada and Mexico Liberation Day TACO Environment Paris Agreement withdrawal America's Water Infrastructure Act of 2018 Foreign policy first term Syria strikes 2017 2018 Kosovo–Serbia agreements second term Russian invasion of Ukraine Putin call Saudi Arabia summit Zelenskyy Oval Office meeting minerals agreement peace talks Putin summit in Alaska Armenia–Azerbaijan agreement America First Saudi Arabia arms deal Iran first term nuclear deal withdrawal second term Iran negotiations Iran–Israel war June 2025 strikes Iran–Israel war ceasefire Israel Jerusalem recognition Golan Heights recognition Palestine peace plan Abraham Accords Killings al-Baghdadi Soleimani Afghanistan withdrawal Taliban deal American expansionism Proposed Venezuela invasion Immigration first term second term travel ban border wall family separation policy migrant detentions troop deployments national emergency Infrastructure Social issues First Step Act cannabis Space COVID-19 pandemic Taskforce Communication Government response stimulus bills CARES Act Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 Operation Warp Speed Interference with science agencies Targeting of political opponents and civil society AI Appointments ( first second ) Cabinets first second Ambassadors first second Federal judges inferior courts Supreme Court candidates Gorsuch Kavanaugh Barrett Executives first second U.S. Attorneys first second Presidential campaigns 2000 primaries 2016 election primaries endorsements rallies Las Vegas incident convention debates foreign policy Make America Great Again Never Trump movement people Access Hollywood tape wiretapping allegations Spygate 2020 election primaries endorsements political non-political opposition rallies convention debates GOP reactions to election fraud claims Raffensperger phone call 2024 election primaries endorsements opposition eligibility Agenda 47 rallies convention debates assassination attempts PA perpetrator photographs FL suspect Impeachments Efforts to impeach Donald Trump resolutions First impeachment Zelenskyy phone call Ukraine scandal House inquiry Senate trial Second impeachment Capitol attack Senate trial Proposed expungements Legal proceedings 2020 election federal indictment Classified documents federal indictment Special counsel investigation FBI investigation FBI search of Mar-a-Lago Trump v. United States New York felony conviction for falsifying business records Stormy Daniels scandal New York investigations Georgia election indictment Georgia election investigation mug shot v t e This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e January 6 United States Capitol attack Timeline • Planning Background 2020 presidential election and other causes Previous claims of election fraud by President Trump in 2012 in 2016 Republican reactions Michigan State Capitol storming 2020–21 presidential election protests 2021 Electoral College vote count Attempts to overturn the presidential election Trump fake electors plot Chesebro memos Eastman memos Jeffrey Clark letter Democratic backsliding in the US Social media use by Donald Trump Trumpism QAnon Donald Trump and fascism Related groups and persons Ali Alexander Ray Epps Nick Fuentes Rudy Giuliani Jericho March Alex Jones Sedition Caucus Enrique Tarrio Donald Trump Donald Trump Jr.

Participants Notable people Ashli Babbitt Joe Biggs Richard Barnett Jacob "QAnon Shaman" Chansley Derrick Evans Tim "Baked Alaska" Gionet Simone Gold Klete Keller Ethan Nordean Rick Saccone Jon Schaffer John Earle Sullivan Organizations Boogaloo movement Groypers Oath Keepers Proud Boys Three Percenters Law enforcement response Capitol Police Harry Dunn Aquilino Gonell Eugene Goodman Brian Sicknick Howard Liebengood Steven Sund Department of Defense Michael C. Stenger Paul D. Irving Christopher C. Miller Ryan D. McCarthy Walter E. Piatt Charles A. Flynn Daniel Hokanson William J. Walker D.C. National Guard DC Muriel Bowser Robert Contee Michael Fanone Daniel Hodges Jeffrey L. Smith Virginia Ralph Northam Aftermath Biden inauguration 2021 inauguration week protests Security preparations Investigations and charges Justice Department investigation Criminal proceedings list Fischer v. United States January 6 commission House Select Committee public hearings Smith special counsel investigation federal prosecution of Donald Trump Trump's pardon of defendants Corporate actions List of companies that halted political contributions Social media suspensions of Donald Trump permanent suspension Suspensions of other social media accounts shutdown of Parler Facebook Reactions Domestic Antifa culpability conspiracy theory International Impeachment and 2024 presidential election Second impeachment of Donald Trump trial Presidential eligibility of Donald Trump Trump v. Anderson v t e Trumpism is the ideology behind U.S. president Donald Trump and his political base . It is commonly used in close conjunction with the Make America Great Again (MAGA) and America First political movements . It comprises ideologies such as right-wing populism , right-wing antiglobalism , national conservatism , neo-nationalism , and features significant illiberal , authoritarian and at times autocratic beliefs.

[ b ] Trumpists and Trumpians are terms that refer to individuals exhibiting its characteristics. There is significant academic debate over the prevalence of neo-fascist [ a ] elements of Trumpism.

Trumpism has authoritarian leanings and is associated with the belief that the president is above the rule of law .

[ c ] It has been referred to as an American political variant of the far-right [ 19 ] [ 15 ] [ 20 ] and the national-populist and neo-nationalist sentiment seen in multiple nations starting in the mid–late 2010s.

[ 21 ] Trump's political base has been compared to a cult of personality .

[ d ] Trump supporters became the largest faction of the United States Republican Party , with the remainder often characterized as "the elite", "the establishment", or " Republican in name only " (RINO) in contrast. In response to the rise of Trump, there has arisen a Never Trump movement .

Themes See also: Rhetoric of Donald Trump Trumpism emerged during Trump's 2016 presidential campaign . Trump's rhetoric has its roots in a populist political method that suggests nationalistic answers to political, economic, and social problems.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] They are more specifically described as right-wing populist .

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] Policies include immigration restrictionism , trade protectionism , isolationism , and opposition to entitlement reform .

[ 27 ] Former National Security Advisor and close Trump advisor John Bolton disputes that Trumpism exists in any meaningful sense, adding that "[t]he man does not have a philosophy. And people can try and draw lines between the dots of his decisions. They will fail." [ 28 ] Writing for the Routledge Handbook of Global Populism (2019), Olivier Jutel notes, "What Donald Trump reveals is that the various iterations of right-wing American populism have less to do with a programmatic social conservatism or libertarian economics than with enjoyment." [ 29 ] Trump has been described as a demagogue , and there exists significant scholarly study on the use of demagogy and related themes within Trumpism.

[ 30 ] Trump explicitly and routinely disparages racial, religious, and ethnic minorities, [ 31 ] and scholars consistently find that racial animus regarding blacks, immigrants, and Muslims are the best predictors of support for Trump.

[ 32 ] Trumpist rhetoric heavily features anti-immigrant , [ 33 ] xenophobic , [ 34 ] and nativist [ 35 ] attacks against minority groups.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] Other identified aspects include conspiracist , [ 38 ] [ 39 ] isolationist , [ 35 ] [ 40 ] Christian nationalist , [ 41 ] evangelical Christian , [ 42 ] protectionist , [ 43 ] [ 44 ] anti-feminist , [ 45 ] [ page needed ] [ 46 ] and anti-LGBT [ 47 ] beliefs.

Grievance Sociologist Michael Kimmel states that Trump's populism is "an emotion. And the emotion is righteous indignation that the government is screwing 'us.

' " [ 48 ] Kimmel posits that Trump manifests "aggrieved entitlement", [ 49 ] a "sense that those benefits to which you believed yourself entitled have been snatched away from you by unseen forces larger and more powerful. You feel yourself to be the heir to a great promise, the American Dream , which has turned into an impossible fantasy ..." [ 50 ] Vagueness Communications scholar Zizi Papacharissi explains the utility of being ideologically vague and using terms and slogans that can mean anything the supporter wants them to mean. "When these publics thrive in affective engagement it's because they've found an affective hook that's built around an open signifier that they get to use and reuse and re-employ ...

MAGA ; that's an open signifier ... it allows them all to assign different meanings to it. So MAGA works for connecting publics that are different, because it is open enough to permit people to ascribe their own meaning to it." [ 51 ] [ relevant?

] [ note 3 ] Exit polling data suggests the campaign was successful at mobilizing the " white disenfranchised ", [ 52 ] the lower- to working-class European-Americans who are experiencing growing social inequality and who often have stated opposition to the American political establishment .

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] Some prominent conservatives formed a Never Trump movement, seen as a rebellion of conservative elites against the base.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] [ 57 ] [ 58 ] Right-wing authoritarian populism Former Chief Strategist for the first Trump administration Steve Bannon supported many national populist political movements including creating a network of far-right groups in Europe .

Trumpism has been described as right-wing authoritarian populist, [ 59 ] and is broadly seen among scholars as posing an existential threat to American democracy.

[ 60 ] His presidency sparked renewed focus and research on restraining presidential power and the threats of a criminal presidency that had died down since the Nixon administration.

[ 61 ] Trump advocated for an extreme position of unitary executive theory , arguing that Article II gave him the right to "do whatever I want".

[ 62 ] The theory is a maximalist interpretation of presidential power formulated during the Reagan administration and pushed by the Federalist Society to undo post-Nixon reforms. Future presidents ran with "unitary-adjacent ideas" and aspects of theory held bipartisan support as part of the growing powers of the presidency.

[ 63 ] In February 2025, Trump wrote and pinned a comment on Truth Social and X : "He who saves his Country does not violate any Law", which the White House later reposted on X that day. The phrase itself is a variation of one attributed to Napoleon Bonaparte , and was noted to be in line with his administration's aggressive push for expanding presidential power under the theory.

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] Yale sociologist Philip S. Gorski warned against the threat of Trumpism, writing that "the election of Donald Trump constitutes perhaps the greatest threat to American democracy since the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. There is a real and growing danger that representative government will be slowly but effectively supplanted by a populist form of authoritarian rule in the years to come. Media intimidation, mass propaganda, voter suppression, court packing, and even armed paramilitaries—many of the necessary and sufficient conditions for an authoritarian devolution are gradually falling into place." [ 66 ] Some academics regard such authoritarian backlash as a feature of liberal democracies.

[ 67 ] Disputing the view that the surge of support for Trumpism and Brexit is a new phenomenon, political scientist Karen Stenner and social psychologist Jonathan Haidt state that the far-right populist wave ... did not in fact come out of nowhere. It is not a sudden madness, or virus, or tide, or even just a copycat phenomenon—the emboldening of bigots and despots by others' electoral successes. Rather, it is something that sits just beneath the surface of any human society—including in the advanced liberal democracies at the heart of the Western world—and can be activated by core elements of liberal democracy itself.

Stenner and Haidt regard authoritarian waves as a feature of liberal democracies noting that the findings of their 2016 study of Trump and Brexit supporters was not unexpected, as they wrote: ... normative threat tends either to leave non-authoritarians utterly unmoved by the things that catalyze authoritarians or to propel them toward being (what one might conceive as) their 'best selves.' In previous investigations, this has seen non-authoritarians move toward positions of greater tolerance and respect for diversity under the very conditions that seem to propel authoritarians toward increasing intolerance.

[ 67 ] Author and authoritarianism critic Masha Gessen contrasted the "democratic" strategy of the Republican establishment making policy arguments appealing to the public, with the "autocratic" strategy of appealing to an "audience of one" in Donald Trump.

[ 68 ] Gessen noted the fear of Republicans that Trump would endorse a primary election opponent or otherwise use his political power to undermine any fellow party members that he felt had betrayed him.

The 2020 Republican Party platform simply endorsed "the President's America-first agenda", prompting comparisons to contemporary leader-focused party platforms in Russia and China.

[ 69 ] In January 2025, a CNN-SSRS poll found that 53% of Republicans viewed loyalty to Trump as central to their political identity and very important to what being a Republican is, beating values such as "a less powerful federal government (46%), supporting congressional Republicans (42%) or opposing Democratic policies (32%)".

[ 70 ] Gender and masculinity See also: Social policy of Donald Trump § Women's rights , and Social policy of Donald Trump § LGBTQ rights Opposition to aspects of transgender rights is a theme of Trumpism.

[ 71 ] Google Trends search term for " Toxic masculinity " began a substantial increase in 2016, at the time of the campaign for the U.S. presidential election.

[ 72 ] After the December 2020 introduction of COVID vaccines, a partisan gap in death rates developed, indicating the effects of vaccine skepticism.

[ 73 ] As of March 2024, more than 30 percent of Republicans had not received a COVID vaccine, compared with less than 10 percent of Democrats.

[ 73 ] Aversion to wearing masks has been associated with Trumpism's celebration of masculinity.

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] According to Philip Gorski , in Trumpian nostalgia "decline is brought about by docility and femininity and the return to greatness requires little more than a reassertion of dominance and masculinity. In this way, 'virtue' is reduced to its root etymology of manly bravado." [ 66 ] Michael Kimmel describes male Trump supporters who despaired "over whether or not anything could enable them to find a place with some dignity in this new, multicultural, and more egalitarian world. ... These men were angry, but they all looked back nostalgically to a time when their sense of masculine entitlement went unchallenged. They wanted to reclaim their country, restore their rightful place in it, and retrieve their manhood in the process." [ 76 ] Social psychologists Theresa Vescio and Nathaniel Schermerhorn note that "In his 2016 presidential campaign, Trump embodied HM [ hegemonic masculinity ] while waxing nostalgic for a racially homogenous past that maintained an unequal gender order. Trump performed HM by repeatedly referencing his status as a successful businessman (" blue-collar businessman") and alluding to how tough he would be as president. ... Trump was openly hostile to gender-atypical women, objectified gender-typical women, and mocked the masculinity of male peers and opponents." In their studies involving 2,007 people, they found that endorsement of hegemonic masculinity better predicted support for Trump than other factors, such as support for antiestablishment, antielitist, nativist, racist, sexist, homophobic or xenophobic perspectives.

[ 77 ] Kimmel was surprised at the sexual turn the 2016 election took and thinks that Trump is for many men a fantasy figure, an uber-male free to indulge every desire. "Many of these guys feel that the current order of things has emasculated them, by which I mean it has taken away their ability to support a family and have great life. Here's a guy who says: 'I can build anything I want. I can do anything I want. I can have the women I want.' They're going, 'This guy is awesome!

' " [ 78 ] Trump supporters in Manchester, New Hampshire attending a rally, August 15, 2019 Neville Hoad, an expert on gender issues in South Africa , sees this as a common theme with another strongman leader, Jacob Zuma , comparing his " Zulu Big Man version of toxic masculinity versus a dog whistle white supremacist version; the putative real estate billionaire turned reality television star". Both men express a "masculinist fantasy of freedom", similar to Jacques Lacan 's mythic leader of the primal horde whose power to satisfy every pleasure or whim has not been castrated. By activating such fantasies, toxic masculine behaviors from opulent displays of greed (the dream palaces of Mar-a-Lago and Nkandla ), violent rhetoric, " grab them by the pussy " " locker room " "jokes" to misogynist insults, philandering, and even sexual predatory behavior including allegations of groping and raping become political assets not liabilities.

[ 79 ] [ better source needed ] Gender role scholar Colleen Clemens describes toxic masculinity as "a narrow and repressive description of manhood, designating manhood as defined by violence, sex, status and aggression ... where strength is everything while emotions are a weakness; where sex and brutality are yardsticks by which men are measured, while supposedly 'feminine' traits—which can range from emotional vulnerability to simply not being hypersexual—are the means by which your status as "man" can be taken away." [ 80 ] Writing in the Journal of Human Rights , Kimberly Theidon notes the COVID-19 pandemic 's irony of Trumpian toxic masculinity: "Being a tough guy means wearing the mask of masculinity: Being a tough guy means refusing to don a mask that might preserve one's life and the lives of others." [ 75 ] Tough guy bravado appeared on the internet prior to attack on Congress on January 6, 2021, with one poster writing, "Be ready to fight. Congress needs to hear glass breaking, doors being kicked in ... . Get violent. Stop calling this a march, or rally, or a protest. Go there ready for war. We get our President or we die." [ 81 ] Of the rioters arrested for the attack on the U.S. Capitol, 88% were men, and 67% were 35 years or older.

[ 82 ] [ note 4 ] Christian Trumpism For the Trump's personal history with religion, see Donald Trump and religion .

This section is an excerpt from Christian support of Donald Trump .

[ edit ] During the 2020 George Floyd protests , Trump held a photo-op at St. John's Episcopal Church , which had been defaced the night before. Law enforcement controversially cleared a path, using riot control tactics, for Trump to walk from the White House to the church. For more information, see Donald Trump photo op at St. John's Church .

This article is part of a series about Donald Trump Business and personal Age and health Business career The Trump Organization wealth tax returns cryptocurrency Conspiracy theories Endorsements Eponyms Family Foundation grants American football Golf Honors John McCain comments Legal affairs indictments Media career The Apprentice bibliography filmography Nicknames Voters Obama–Trump voters Sanders–Trump voters Public image in popular culture in music SNL parodies baby balloon dance handshakes pseudonyms Racial views antisemitism Religious views Residences Rhetoric Security incidents Sexual misconduct allegations Epstein ties Trump–Musk feud 45th and 47th President of the United States Presidencies first second timeline Transitions first second Inaugurations first second Portraits Presidential library Tenure First 100 days first term second term Executive actions executive orders first term second term proclamations pardons first term second term Trips foreign first term '17 '18 '19 '20–'21 Riyadh summit North Korea summits Singapore Hanoi DMZ Helsinki summit Namaste Trump second term '25 Middle East visit Shutdowns January 2018 2018–2019 Opinion polls first term second term Legal affairs as president first term second term Protests federal law enforcement deployment St. John's Church photo op No Kings Social media Twitter False or misleading statements Trumpism TikTok controversy American Civil War Attempts to overturn the 2020 presidential election fake electors plot Eastman memos lawsuits Texas v. Pennsylvania Jeffrey Clark letter Fascism Mar-a-Lago face Policies Domestic first term second term Economy first term tax cuts tariffs USMCA farmer bailouts second term One Big Beautiful Bill Act tariffs China Canada and Mexico Liberation Day TACO Environment Paris Agreement withdrawal America's Water Infrastructure Act of 2018 Foreign policy first term Syria strikes 2017 2018 Kosovo–Serbia agreements second term Russian invasion of Ukraine Putin call Saudi Arabia summit Zelenskyy Oval Office meeting minerals agreement peace talks Putin summit in Alaska Armenia–Azerbaijan agreement America First Saudi Arabia arms deal Iran first term nuclear deal withdrawal second term Iran negotiations Iran–Israel war June 2025 strikes Iran–Israel war ceasefire Israel Jerusalem recognition Golan Heights recognition Palestine peace plan Abraham Accords Killings al-Baghdadi Soleimani Afghanistan withdrawal Taliban deal American expansionism Proposed Venezuela invasion Immigration first term second term travel ban border wall family separation policy migrant detentions troop deployments national emergency Infrastructure Social issues First Step Act cannabis Space COVID-19 pandemic Taskforce Communication Government response stimulus bills CARES Act Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 Operation Warp Speed Interference with science agencies Targeting of political opponents and civil society AI Appointments ( first second ) Cabinets first second Ambassadors first second Federal judges inferior courts Supreme Court candidates Gorsuch Kavanaugh Barrett Executives first second U.S. Attorneys first second Presidential campaigns 2000 primaries 2016 election primaries endorsements rallies Las Vegas incident convention debates foreign policy Make America Great Again Never Trump movement people Access Hollywood tape wiretapping allegations Spygate 2020 election primaries endorsements political non-political opposition rallies convention debates GOP reactions to election fraud claims Raffensperger phone call 2024 election primaries endorsements opposition eligibility Agenda 47 rallies convention debates assassination attempts PA perpetrator photographs FL suspect Impeachments Efforts to impeach Donald Trump resolutions First impeachment Zelenskyy phone call Ukraine scandal House inquiry Senate trial Second impeachment Capitol attack Senate trial Proposed expungements Legal proceedings 2020 election federal indictment Classified documents federal indictment Special counsel investigation FBI investigation FBI search of Mar-a-Lago Trump v. United States New York felony conviction for falsifying business records Stormy Daniels scandal New York investigations Georgia election indictment Georgia election investigation mug shot v t e Donald Trump has strong support among white evangelical Christians , particularly among those who do not attend church regularly.

[ 84 ] Trump also maintains strong support with Christian nationalists , [ 85 ] and his rallies take on the symbols, rhetoric and agenda of Christian nationalism.

[ 86 ] Trump described his 2024 presidential campaign as a "righteous crusade" against " atheists , globalists and the Marxists ".

[ 87 ] Some Christian Trump supporters view him as divinely ordained and "chosen by God", and some compare him to Jesus , with opposition to him seen as spiritual warfare .

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] Trump shared and played a video entitled "God Made Trump" at several of his rallies explicitly comparing him to a messianic figure in religious terms.

[ 90 ] Trump is frequently described among some of his Christian supporters as an Old Testament hero, with Cyrus the Great or David frequently mentioned.

The New York Times describes his supporters seeing him as one of several "morally flawed figures handpicked by God to lead profound missions aimed at achieving overdue justice or resisting existential evil".

[ 16 ] This framing has been described as "vessel theology" which allows for support of Trump and excuses his prior sexual misconduct and adultery.

[ 91 ] Trump has strong support with members of the dominionist New Apostolic Reformation , and many Trump administration officials are aligned with the group.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] Methods of persuasion Further information: Big lie , Personal branding , and Truthiness Children wearing "Make America Great Again" hats at the 2017 inauguration , a theme earlier established by Reagan to elicit a sense of restoration of hope Sociologist Arlie Hochschild writes that Trump's "speeches—evoking dominance, bravado, clarity, national pride, and personal uplift—inspire an emotional transformation" in followers, deeply resonating with their "emotional self-interest". Hochschild states that Trump is an "emotions candidate", appealing to the emotional self-interests of voters. To Hochschild, this explains the paradox raised by Thomas Frank 's book What's the Matter with Kansas?

, an anomaly which motivated her five-year immersive research into the emotional dynamics of the Tea Party movement which she believes has mutated into Trumpism.

[ 94 ] [ 95 ] Her book Strangers in Their Own Land was named one of the "6 books to understand Trump's Win" by The New York Times .

[ 96 ] Hochschild claims that voters were not persuaded by rhetoric to vote against their self-interest through appeals to the "bad angels" of their nature: [ note 5 ] "their greed, selfishness, racial intolerance, homophobia , and desire to get out of paying taxes that go to the unfortunate." She grants that the appeal to bad angels is made by Trump, but states that it "obscures another—to the right wing's good angels—their patience in waiting in line in scary economic times, their capacity for loyalty, sacrifice, and endurance", qualities she describes as a part of a motivating narrative she calls their "deep story", a social contract narrative that appears to be widely shared in other countries as well.

[ 97 ] She thinks Trump's approach towards his audience creates group cohesiveness by exploiting a crowd phenomenon Emile Durkheim called " collective effervescence ", "a state of emotional excitation felt by those who join with others they take to be fellow members of a moral or biological tribe ... to affirm their unity and, united, they feel secure and respected." [ 98 ] [ note 6 ] Trumpian rhetoric employs absolutist framings and threat narratives [ 100 ] rejecting the political establishment.

[ 101 ] The absolutist rhetoric emphasizes non-negotiable boundaries and moral outrage at their supposed violation.

[ 102 ] [ note 7 ] Money-Kyrle pattern A particular pattern is common for authoritarian movements. First, elicit a sense of depression, humiliation and victimhood. Second, separate the world into two opposing groups: a demonized set of others versus those who have the power and will to overcome them.

[ 105 ] This involves identifying the enemy supposedly causing the current state of affairs and then promoting conspiracy theories and fearmongering to inflame fear and anger. After cycling these first two patterns through the populace, the final message aims to produce a cathartic release of pent-up ochlocracy and mob energy, with a promise that salvation is at hand because the leader will deliver the nation back to its former glory.

[ 106 ] This three-part pattern was identified in 1932 by Roger Money-Kyrle who wrote Psychology of Propaganda .

[ 107 ] Reporting on Trumpist rallies has documented expressions of the Money-Kyrle pattern and associated stagecraft .

[ 108 ] [ 109 ] Trump rallies Trump at a Make America Great Again rally in Arizona, 2018 Critical theory scholar Douglas Kellner compares the elaborate staging of Leni Riefenstahl 's Triumph of the Will with that used in Trump rallies using the example of the preparation of photo op sequences and aggressive hyping of huge attendance expected for Trump's 2015 primary event in Mobile, Alabama, when the media coverage repeatedly cuts between the Trump jet circling the stadium, the rising excitement of rapturous admirers below, the motorcade and the final triumphal entrance of the individual Kellner claims is being presented as the "political savior to help them out with their problems and address their grievances".

[ 110 ] Connolly thinks the performance draws energy from the crowd's anger as it channels it, drawing it into a collage of anxieties, frustrations and resentments about malaise themes, such as deindustrialization , offshoring , racial tensions, political correctness, a more humble position for the United States in global security, economics and so on. Connolly observes that animated gestures, pantomiming, facial expressions, strutting and finger pointing are incorporated as part of the theater, transforming the anxiety into anger directed at particular targets, concluding that "each element in a Trump performance flows and folds into the others until an aggressive resonance machine is formed that is more intense than its parts." [ 111 ] Some compare the symbiotic dynamics of crowd pleasing to that of the professional wrestling style of events which Trump was involved with since the 1980s.

[ 112 ] [ 113 ] Some academics point out that the narrative common in the popular press describing the psychology of such crowds is a repetition of a 19th-century theory by Gustave Le Bon when organized crowds were seen by political elites as potential threats to the social order. In his book The Crowd: A Study of the Popular Mind (1895), Le Bon described a sort of collective contagion uniting a crowd into a near religious frenzy, reducing members to barbaric, if not subhuman levels of consciousness with mindless goals.

[ 114 ] Since such a description depersonalizes supporters, this type of Le Bon analysis is criticized because the would-be defenders of liberal democracy simultaneously are dodging responsibility for investigating grievances while also unwittingly accepting the same us vs. them framing of illiberalism.

[ 115 ] [ 116 ] Connolly acknowledges the risks but considers it more risky to ignore that Trumpian persuasion is successful due to deliberate use of techniques evoking more mild forms of affective contagion .

[ 117 ] Trump relies on theatrical devices to market his messages, including animated gestures, pantomiming and facial expressions.

[ 111 ] Photo is from the 2019 Conservative Political Action Conference .

Rhetoric A constant barrage of rhetoric rivets media attention while obscuring actions such as neoliberal deregulation . One study concluded that significant environmental deregulation occurred during the first year of the Trump administration but, due to its concurrent use of racist rhetoric, escaped much media attention. According to the authors, the rhetoric served political objectives of dehumanizing its targets, eroding democratic norms, and consolidating power by emotionally connecting with and inflaming resentments among the base of followers and distracted media attention from deregulatory policymaking by igniting media coverage of the distractions.

[ 118 ] Trump was the most prominent promoter of the birther conspiracy theory used to delegitimize his political rival by employing a political tactic known as the big lie [ 119 ] [ 120 ] According to civil rights lawyer Burt Neuborne and political theorist William E. Connolly , Trumpist rhetoric employs tropes similar to those used by fascists in Germany [ 121 ] to persuade citizens (at first a minority) to give up democracy, by using a barrage of falsehoods, half-truths, personal invective, threats, xenophobia , national-security scares, religious bigotry, white racism , exploitation of economic insecurity, and a never-ending search for scapegoats .

[ 122 ] Neuborne found twenty parallel practices, [ 123 ] such as creating what amounts to an "alternate reality" in adherents' minds, through direct communications, by nurturing a fawning mass media and by deriding scientists to erode the notion of objective truth ; [ 124 ] organizing carefully orchestrated mass rallies; [ 125 ] attacking judges when legal cases are lost; [ 126 ] using lies, half-truths, insults, vituperation and innuendo to marginalize, demonize and destroy opponents; [ 125 ] making jingoistic appeals to ultranationalist fervor; [ 125 ] and promising to stop the flow of "undesirable" ethnic groups who are made scapegoats for the nation's ills.

[ 127 ] Connolly presents a similar list in his book Aspirational Fascism (2017), adding comparisons of the integration of theatrics and crowd participation with rhetoric, involving grandiose bodily gestures, grimaces, hysterical charges, dramatic repetitions of alternate reality falsehoods, and totalistic assertions incorporated into signature phrases that audiences are encouraged to join in chanting.

[ 128 ] Despite the similarities, Connolly stresses that Trump is no Nazi but is "an aspirational fascist who pursues crowd adulation, hyperaggressive nationalism, white triumphalism, and militarism, pursues a law-and-order regime giving unaccountable power to the police, and is a practitioner of a rhetorical style that regularly creates fake news and smears opponents to mobilize support for the Big Lies he advances." [ 121 ] In his 2024 book Trump and Hitler: A Comparative Study in Lying , cultural theorist Henk de Berg points to a number of further parallels between Trump's and Hitler's rhetoric; namely, the use of jokes and personal insults; the deliberate creation of controversy; interpretative openness, allowing different groups to recognize themselves in the argument; and oratorical meandering in cases where a coherent narrative would draw attention to the argument's inconsistencies.

[ 129 ] De Berg also points out that extremist language used by Trump's followers is often perceived as authentic, because in real life we also tend to overstate things (e.g., "My new boss is worse than Stalin").

[ 130 ] Branding Trump used personal branding to market himself as an extraordinary leader by using his celebrity status and name recognition. As one of the communications director for the MAGA super PAC put it in 2016, "Like Hercules , Donald Trump is a work of fiction." [ 131 ] Journalism professor Mark Danner explains that "week after week for a dozen years millions of Americans saw Donald J. Trump portraying the business magus [in The Apprentice ], the grand vizier of capitalism, the wise man of the boardroom, a living confection whose every step and word bespoke gravitas and experience and power and authority and ... money. Endless amounts of money." [ 132 ] Political science scholar Andrea Schneiker regards the branding strategy of the Trump public persona as that of a superhero who "uses his superpowers to save others, that is, his country. ... a superhero is needed to solve the problems of ordinary Americans ... Hence, the superhero per definition is an anti-politician. Due to his celebrity status and his identity as entertainer, Donald Trump can thereby be considered to be allowed to take extraordinary measures and even to break rules." [ 133 ] [ 134 ] Appeal to emotions Historian Peter E. Gordon observes that "Trump, far from being a violation of the norm, actually signifies an emergent norm of the social order" where the categories of the psychological and political have dissolved.

[ 135 ] [ note 8 ] In accounting for Trump's election and ability to sustain high approval ratings among voters, Erika Tucker writes in the book Trump and Political Philosophy that though all presidential campaigns have strong emotions associated with them, Trump was able to recognize, and then to gain the trust and loyalty of those who felt strong emotions about perceived changes in the United States. She notes, "Political psychologist Drew Westen has argued that Democrats are less successful at gauging and responding to affective politics—issues that arouse strong emotional states." [ 137 ] Examining the populist appeal of Trump, Hidalgo-Tenorio and Benítez-Castro draw on the theories of Ernesto Laclau , writing, "The emotional appeal of populist discourse is key to its polarising effects, this being so much so that populism 'would be unintelligible without the affective component.' (Laclau 2005, 11)" [ 138 ] [ 139 ] Trump uses rhetoric that political scientists have deemed to be both dehumanizing and connected to physical violence by Trump's followers.

[ 140 ] Emotion, trust, and media Communications scholar Michael Carpini states that "Trumpism is a culmination of trends that have been occurring for several decades. What we are witnessing is nothing short of a fundamental shift in the relationships between journalism, politics, and democracy." Among the shifts, Carpini identifies "the collapsing of the prior [media] regime's presumed and enforced distinctions between news and entertainment." [ 141 ] Examining Trump's use of media for the book Language in the Trump Era , communication professor Marco Jacquemet writes that this approach "assumes (correctly, it appears) that his audiences care more about shock and entertainment value in their media consumption than almost anything else." [ 142 ] Plasser & Ulram (2003) describe a media logic which emphasizes "personalization ... a political star system ... [and] sports based dramatization." [ 143 ] Olivier Jutel notes that "Donald Trump's celebrity status and reality-TV rhetoric of 'winning' and 'losing' corresponds perfectly to these values", asserting that " Fox News and conservative personalities from Rush Limbaugh , Glenn Beck and Alex Jones do not simply represent a new political and media voice but embody the convergence of politics and media in which affect and enjoyment are the central values of media production." [ 144 ] Studying paranoia in media, anthropologist Jessica Johnson writes, "Rather than finding accurate news meaningful, Facebook users find the affective pleasure of connectivity addictive, whether or not the information they share is factual, and that is how communicative capitalism captivates subjects as it holds them captive." [ 145 ] Looking back at the world prior to social media, communications researcher Brian L. Ott writes: "I'm nostalgic for the world of television that [Neil] Postman (1985) argued , produced the 'least well-informed people in the Western world' by packaging news as entertainment. (pp. 106–107) [ 146 ] Twitter is producing the most self-involved people in history by treating everything one does or thinks as newsworthy. Television may have assaulted journalism, but Twitter killed it." [ 147 ] Commenting on Trump's support among Fox News viewers, Hofstra University Communication Dean Mark Lukasiewicz has a similar perspective, writing, " Tristan Harris famously said that social networks are about ' affirmation , not information'—and the same can be said about cable news , especially in prime time." [ 148 ] Arlie Russell Hochschild holds that Trump supporters trust their preferred sources of information due to the affective bond they have with them. As media scholar Daniel Kreiss summarizes Hochschild, "Trump, along with Fox News, gave these strangers in their own land the hope that they would be restored to their rightful place at the center of the nation, and provided a very real emotional release from the fetters of political correctness that dictated they respect people of color, lesbians and gays , and those of other faiths ... that the network's personalities share the same 'deep story' of political and social life, and therefore they learn from them 'what to feel afraid, angry, and anxious about.'" [ 149 ] From Kreiss's 2018 account of conservative personalities and media, information became less important than providing a sense of familial bonding, where "family provides a sense of identity, place, and belonging; emotional, social, and cultural support and security; and gives rise to political and social affiliations and beliefs." [ 150 ] Hochschild gives the example of a woman who states, " Bill O'Reilly is like a steady, reliable dad.

Sean Hannity is like a difficult uncle who rises to anger too quickly.

Megyn Kelly [ note 9 ] is like a smart sister. Then there's Greta Van Susteren . And Juan Williams , who came over from NPR , which was too left for him, the adoptee. They're all different, just like in a family." [ 151 ] Media scholar Olivier Jutel notes that, " Affect is central to the brand strategy of Fox which imagined its journalism not in terms of servicing the rational citizen in the public sphere but in 'craft[ing] intensive relationships with their viewers' (Jones, 2012: 180) in order to sustain audience share across platforms." [ note 10 ] In this segmented market, Trump "offers himself as an ego-ideal to an individuated public of enjoyment that coalesce around his media brand as part of their own performance of identity." Jutel states that news media companies benefit from offering spectacle and drama. "Trump is a definitive product of mediatized politics providing the spectacle that drives ratings and affective media consumption, either as part of his populist movement or as the liberal resistance." [ 152 ] Researchers give differing emphasis to which emotions are important to followers. Michael Richardson argues in the Journal of Media and Cultural Studies that "affirmation, amplification and circulation of disgust is one of the primary affective drivers of Trump's political success." Richardson agrees with Ott about the "entanglement of Trumpian affect and social media crowds" who seek "affective affirmation, confirmation and amplification. Social media postings of crowd experiences accumulate as 'archives of feelings' that are both dynamic in nature and affirmative of social values (Pybus 2015, 239)." [ 153 ] [ 154 ] Using Trump as an example, social trust expert Karen Jones follows philosopher Annette Baier in explaining that the masters of the art of creating trust and distrust are populist politicians and criminals, who "show a masterful appreciation of the ways in which certain emotional states drive out trust and replace it with distrust." [ 155 ] Jones sees Trump as an exemplar of this class who recognize that fear and contempt are tools that can reorient networks of trust and distrust in social networks in order to alter how a potential supporter "interprets the words, deeds, and motives of the other ." [ note 11 ] She holds that "A core strategy of Donald Trump, both as candidate and president, has been to manufacture fear and contempt towards some undocumented migrants (among other groups)", a strategy which "has gone global ... in Australia, Austria, Hungary, Poland, Italy and the United Kingdom." [ 155 ] Falsehoods See also: Stop the Steal and False or misleading statements by Donald Trump Fact-checkers from The Washington Post , [ 157 ] the Toronto Star , [ 158 ] and CNN [ 159 ] [ 160 ] compiled data on "false or misleading claims", and "false claims", respectively. The Post reported 30,573 false or misleading claims in four years, [ 157 ] an average of more than 20.9 per day.

To sow election doubt, Trump escalated use of "rigged election" and "election interference" statements in advance of the 2024 election compared to the previous two elections—the statements described as part of a "heads I win; tails you cheated" rhetorical strategy.

[ 161 ] Google Trends topic searches for " Gaslighting " began a substantial increase in 2016, at the time of the campaign for the U.S. presidential election.

[ 162 ] Google Trends topic searches for " Fake news " began a substantial increase in late 2016, about the time of the U.S. presidential election.

[ 163 ] Though Trump repeatedly promoted his 2024 victory as a mandate —to inflate the actual degree of voter support—he failed to receive 50% of the popular vote.

[ 164 ] His 1.5 percentage point margin of victory in 2024 (shown in chart) place it in only the 20th percentile of presidential elections since 1828.

[ 165 ] Trump's opposition to wind power involves repeated claims that " windmills " "kill the birds".

[ 166 ] However, cats in the U.S. actually kill about 10,000 times as many birds as wind turbines .

[ 167 ] There are many falsehoods which Trump presents as facts.

[ 168 ] Drawing on Harry G. Frankfurt 's book On Bullshit , political science professor Matthew McManus argues that Trump is a bullshitter whose sole interest is to persuade, and not a liar (e.g.

Richard Nixon ) who takes the power of truth seriously and so deceitfully attempts to conceal it. Trump by contrast is indifferent to the truth or unaware of it.

[ 169 ] Unlike conventional lies of politicians exaggerating their accomplishments, Trump's lies are egregious, making lies about easily verifiable facts. At one rally Trump stated his father "came from Germany", even though Fred Trump was born in New York City.

[ 170 ] Leaders at the 2018 United Nations General Assembly burst into laughter at his boast that he had accomplished more in his first two years than any other United States president. Visibly startled, Trump responded to the audience: "I didn't expect that reaction." [ 170 ] Trump lies about the trivial, such as claiming that there was no rain on the day of his inauguration when in fact it did rain, as well as making grandiose "Big Lies", such as claiming that Obama founded ISIS , or promoting the birther movement , a conspiracy theory which claims that Obama was born in Kenya, not Hawaii.

[ 171 ] Connolly points to the similarities of such reality-bending gaslighting with fascist and post Soviet techniques of propaganda including Kompromat (scandalous material), stating that "Trumpian persuasion draws significantly upon the repetition of Big Lies." [ 172 ] Robert Jay Lifton , a scholar of psychohistory and authority on the nature of cults , emphasizes the importance of understanding Trumpism "as an assault on reality". A leader has more power if he is in any part successful at making truth irrelevant to his followers.

[ 173 ] Trump biographer Timothy L. O'Brien agrees, stating: "It is a core operating principle of Trumpism. If you constantly attack objective reality, you are left as the only trustworthy source of information, which is one of his goals for his relationship with his supporters—that they should believe no one else but him." [ 174 ] Lifton believes Trump is a purveyor of a solipsistic reality [ 175 ] which is hostile to facts and is made collective by amplifying frustrations and fears held by his community of zealous believers.

Research published in the American Sociological Review found that Trump's lying helped boost his "authentic appeal". It argued that in systems viewed as flawed or with low political legitimacy, a "flagrant violator of established norms" is seen "as an authentic champion" by being perceived as "bravely speaking a deep and otherwise suppressed truth" against a political establishment that does not appear to be working on behalf of the people. While a perceived establishment candidate "may be more likable or perceived to be more competent", voters question the candidates opposition to "the injustice that is said to have permeated the established political system".

[ 176 ] Andrew Gumbel, writing for The Guardian after the 2024 presidential election, wrote that many Trump voters in Youngstown, Ohio saw both parties as filled with crooks and liars, but that Trump "comes across as someone who doesn't pretend to be anything other than what he is, and that perceived authenticity counts for more with many Youngstown voters than his character flaws or even his policy positions". Gumbel argued that voters preferred "gut instincts" to "carefully scripted messaging of a Democrat like Kamala Harris or even a mainstream Republican".

[ 177 ] Social psychology Dominance orientation Trump supporters employed a variety of dominance imagery in flags, clothing and a mock gallows on January 6, 2021, when violent Trumpist rioters attempted to overturn the 2020 election, temporarily succeeding in preventing Congress from certifying Trump's loss.

The American way of upward mobility for the deserving is, according to Kimmel and Hochschild, a promise that many Americans feel has been denied them due to forces described within a shared "deep story" commonly held among Trump supporters.

Social psychology research into the Trump movement, such as that of Bob Altemeyer , Thomas F. Pettigrew , and Karen Stenner , views the Trump movement as primarily being driven by the psychological predispositions of its followers, [ 178 ] [ 179 ] [ 180 ] although political and historical factors (reviewed elsewhere in this article) are also involved.

[ 180 ] An article in Social Psychological and Personality Science described a study concluding that Trump followers prefer hierarchical and ethnocentric social orders that favor their in-group .

[ 181 ] In the non-academic book, Authoritarian Nightmare: Trump and His Followers , Altemeyer and John Dean describe research which reaches the same conclusions. Despite disparate and inconsistent beliefs and ideologies, a coalition of such followers can become cohesive and broad in part because each individual " compartmentalizes " their thoughts [ 182 ] and they are free to define their sense of the threatened tribal in-group [ 183 ] in their own terms, whether it is predominantly related to their cultural or religious views [ 184 ] (e.g. the mystery of evangelical support for Trump), nationalism [ 185 ] (e.g. the Make America Great Again slogan), or their race (maintaining a white majority).

[ 186 ] Mock gallows and Trump supporters attacking Congress on January 6, 2021 Altemeyer, MacWilliams, Feldman, Choma, Hancock, Van Assche and Pettigrew claim that instead of directly attempting to measure such ideological, racial or policy views, supporters of such movements can be reliably predicted by using two social psychology scales (singly or in combination), namely right-wing authoritarian (RWA) measures which were developed in the 1980s by Altemeyer and other authoritarian personality researchers, [ note 12 ] and the social dominance orientation (SDO) scale developed in the 1990s by social dominance theorists .

In May 2019, Monmouth University Polling Institute conducted a study in collaboration with Altemeyer in order to empirically test the hypothesis using the SDO and RWA measures. The finding was that social dominance orientation and affinity for authoritarian leadership are highly correlated with followers of Trumpism.

[ 187 ] This study further confirmed of the studies discussed in MacWilliams (2016), Feldman (2020), Choma and Hancock (2017), and Van Assche & Pettigrew (2016).

[ 188 ] The research does not imply that the followers always behave in an authoritarian manner but that expression is contingent, which means there is reduced influence if it is not triggered by fear and what the subject perceives as threats.

[ 179 ] [ 189 ] [ 190 ] Similar social psychological techniques for analyzing Trumpism have been effective in identifying adherents of similar movements in Europe, including in Belgium and France (Lubbers & Scheepers, 2002; Swyngedouw & Giles, 2007; Van Hiel & Mervielde, 2002; Van Hiel, 2012), the Netherlands (Cornelis & Van Hiel, 2014) and Italy (Leone, Desimoni & Chirumbolo, 2014).

[ 191 ] Quoting comments from participants in focus groups made up of people who had voted for Democrat Obama in 2012 but flipped to Trump in 2016, pollster Diane Feldman noted the anti-government, anti-coastal-elite anger: "'They think they're better than us, they're P.C.

, they're virtue-signallers .' '[Trump] doesn't come across as one of those people who think they're better than us and are screwing us.' 'They lecture us.' 'They don't even go to church.' 'They're in charge, and they're ripping us off.'" [ 192 ] Comparisons to animal social behavior Former speaker of the House Newt Gingrich explained the central role of dominance in his speech "Principles of Trumpism", comparing the needed leadership style to that of a violent bear. Psychology researcher Dan P. McAdams thinks a better comparison is to the dominance behavior of alpha male chimpanzees such as Yeroen, the subject of an extensive study of chimp social behavior conducted by renowned primatologist Frans de Waal .

[ 193 ] Christopher Boehm , a professor of biology and anthropology agrees, writing, "his model of political posturing has echoes of what I saw in the wild in six years in Tanzania studying the Gombe chimpanzees," and "seems like a classic alpha display." [ 194 ] Using the example of Yeroen, McAdams describes the similarities: "On Twitter, Trump's incendiary tweets are like Yeroen's charging displays. In chimp colonies, the alpha male occasionally goes berserk and starts screaming, hooting, and gesticulating wildly as he charges toward other males nearby. Pandemonium ensues as rival males cower in fear ... Once the chaos ends, there is a period of peace and order, wherein rival males pay homage to the alpha, visiting him, grooming him, and expressing various forms of submission. In Trump's case, his tweets are designed to intimidate his foes and rally his submissive base ... These verbal outbursts reinforce the president's dominance by reminding everybody of his wrath and his force." [ 195 ] Primatologist Dame Jane Goodall explains that like the dominance performances of Trump, "In order to impress rivals, males seeking to rise in the dominance hierarchy perform spectacular displays: Stamping, slapping the ground, dragging branches, throwing rocks. The more vigorous and imaginative the display, the faster the individual is likely to rise in the hierarchy, and the longer he is likely to maintain that position." The comparison has been echoed by political observers sympathetic to Trump.

Nigel Farage , an enthusiastic backer of Trump, stated that in the 2016 United States presidential debates where Trump loomed up on Clinton, he "looked like a big silverback gorilla ", and added that "he is that big alpha male. The leader of the pack!" [ 196 ] McAdams points out the audience gets to vicariously share in the sense of dominance due to the parasocial bonding that his performance produces for his fans, as shown by Shira Gabriel's research studying the phenomenon in Trump's role in The Apprentice .

[ 197 ] McAdams writes that the "television audience vicariously experienced the world according to Donald Trump", a world where Trump says "Man is the most vicious of all animals, and life is a series of battles ending in victory or defeat." [ 198 ] Collective narcissism Further information: Collective narcissism , Donald Trump on social media , and Post-truth politics Cultural anthropologist Paul Stoller thinks Trump employed celebrity culture-glitz, illusion and fantasy to construct a shared alternate reality where lies become truth and reality's resistance to one's own dreams is overcome by the right attitude and bold self-confidence.

[ 199 ] Trump's father indoctrinated his children from an early age into the positive thinking approach to reality advocated by the family's pastor Norman Vincent Peale .

[ 200 ] Trump said that Peale considered him the greatest student of his philosophy that regards facts as not important, because positive attitudes will instead cause what you "image" to materialize.

[ 201 ] Trump biographer Gwenda Blair thinks Trump "weaponized" Peale's self-help philosophy.

[ 202 ] Collective narcissism measures have been shown to be a powerful predictor of membership in authoritarian movements including Trump's.

[ 203 ] External videos Presentation by John Fea on Believe Me: The Evangelical Road to Donald Trump , July 7, 2018 , C-SPAN Washington Journal interview with Fea on Believe Me , July 8, 2018 , C-SPAN In his book Believe Me which details Trump's exploitation of white evangelical politics of fear, Messiah College history professor John Fea points out the narcissistic nature of the fanciful appeals to nostalgia, noting that "In the end, the practice of nostalgia is inherently selfish because it focuses entirely on our own experience of the past and not on the experience of others. For example, people nostalgic for the world of Leave It to Beaver may fail to recognize that other people, perhaps even some of the people living in the Cleaver's suburban "paradise" of the 1950s, were not experiencing the world in a way that they would describe as 'great.' Nostalgia can give us tunnel vision. Its selective use of the past fails to recognize the complexity and breadth of the human experience ... ." [ 204 ] According to historian John Fea, many Trump followers seek refuge from change by urging return to a utopian Leave it to Beaver version of America.

[ 205 ] According to Fea, the hopelessness of achieving an idealized past "causes us to imagine a future filled with horror" leading to conspiratorial narratives that easily mobilize white evangelicals.

[ 206 ] As a result, they are easily captivated by a strongman such as Trump who repeats and amplifies their fears while posing as the deliverer from them. In his review of Fea's analysis of the impact of conspiracy theories on white evangelical Trump supporters, scholar of religious politics David Gutterman writes: "The greater the threat, the more powerful the deliverance." Gutterman's view is that "Donald J. Trump did not invent this formula; evangelicals have, in their lack of spiritual courage, demanded and gloried in this message for generations. Despite the literal biblical reassurance to 'fear not,' white evangelicals are primed for fear, their identity is stoked by fear, and the sources of fear are around every unfamiliar turn.

[ 207 ] Social theory scholar John Cash notes that disaster narratives of impending horrors have a broad audience, pointing to a 2010 Pew study which found that 41 percent of those in the US think that the world will probably be destroyed by the middle of the century. Cash points out that certainties may be found in other narratives which also have the effect of uniting like minded individuals into shared " us versus them " narratives.

[ 208 ] Cash thinks that psychoanalytic theorist Joel Whitebook is correct that "Trumpism as a social experience can be understood as a psychotic like phenomenon, that "[Trumpism is] an intentional [...] attack on our relation to reality." Whitebook thinks Trump's playbook is like that of Putin's strategist Vladislav Surkov who employs "ceaseless shapeshifting , appealing to nationalist skinheads one moment and human rights groups the next." [ 208 ] Cash compares Alice in Wonderland to Trump's ability to seemingly embrace disparate fantasies in a series of contradictory tweets and pronouncements, for example appearing to encourage the "neo-Nazi protestors" after Charlottesville or for audiences with felt grievances about America's first black president, the claim that Obama wiretapped him. Cash writes: "Unlike the resilient Alice, who ... insists on truth and accuracy when confronted by a world of reversals, contradictions, nonsense and irrationality, Trump reverses this process. ... Trump has dragged the uninhibited and distorted world of the other side of the looking-glass into our shared world." [ 209 ] Lifton sees important differences between Trumpism and typical cults, such as not advancing a totalist ideology and lack of isolation from the outside world. Lifton identifies similarities with cults that disparage the "fake world" created by the cult's titanic enemies.

Cultlike persuasion techniques are used, such as echoing of catch phrases. Examples include the use of call and response ("Clinton" triggers "lock her up"; "immigrants" triggers "build that wall"; "who will pay for it?" triggers "Mexico"), deepening the sense of unity between the leader and the community.

[ 210 ] Participants and observers at rallies have remarked on a liberating feeling which Lifton calls a "high state" that "can even be called experiences of transcendence".

[ 211 ] Conspiracy theories See also: List of conspiracy theories promoted by Donald Trump Conspiracy theories such as QAnon are widely accepted among Trump supporters according to polling data from 2020.

[ 212 ] [ 213 ] Pictured are Vice President Mike Pence and members of the Broward County, Florida SWAT team assigned to a high-profile security detail, one of whom is wearing a QAnon patch.

Conservative culture commentator David Brooks observes that under Trump, this post-truth mindset, heavily reliant on conspiracy themes, came to dominate Republican identity, providing its believers a sense of superiority since such insiders possess important information most people do not have.

[ 214 ] This results in an empowering sense of agency [ 215 ] with the liberation, entitlement and group duty to reject "experts" and the influence of hidden cabals seeking to dominate them.

[ 214 ] Prior to 2015, Trump already had established a bond with followers due to television and media appearances.

[ 197 ] For those sharing his political views, Trump's use of Twitter to share his views caused those bonds to intensify, causing his supporters to feel a deepened empathetic bond as with a friend—sharing his anger and outrage, taking pride in his successes, sharing in his denial of failures and his oftentimes conspiratorial views.

[ 216 ] Dominance imagery using the Stop the Steal conspiracy theme erected on the day of the Capitol assault. 76 percent of Republicans believe the conspiracy theory [ 217 ] with nearly half approving of the Capitol assault.

[ 218 ] [ note 13 ] Brooks thinks sharing of conspiracy theories has become the most powerful community bonding mechanism of the 21st century.

[ 214 ] Hofstadter's The Paranoid Style in American Politics describes the political efficacy of conspiracy theories. Some attribute Trump's political success to making such narratives a rhetorical staple.

[ 221 ] The conspiracy theory QAnon asserts that top Democrats run a child sex-trafficking ring and Trump is trying to dismantle it. An October 2020 Yahoo - YouGov poll showed that elements of the QAnon claims are said to be true by half of Trump supporters polled.

[ 212 ] [ 213 ] Some social psychologists see the predisposition of Trumpists towards interpreting social interactions in terms of dominance frameworks as extending to their relationship towards facts. A study by Felix Sussenbach and Adam B. Moore found that the dominance motive strongly correlated with hostility towards disconfirming facts and affinity for conspiracies among 2016 Trump voters but not among Clinton voters.

[ 222 ] Many critics note Trump's skill in exploiting narrative, emotion, and a whole host of rhetorical ploys to draw supporters into the group's common adventure [ 223 ] as characters in a story much bigger than themselves.

[ 224 ] It is a story that involves not just a community-building call to arms to defeat titanic threats, [ 100 ] or of the leader's heroic deeds restoring American greatness, but of a restoration of each supporter's individual sense of liberty and control.

[ 225 ] Trump channels and amplifies these aspirations, explaining in one of his books that his bending of the truth is effective because it plays to people's greatest fantasies.

[ 226 ] By contrast, Clinton was dismissive of such emotion-filled storytelling and ignored the emotional dynamics of the Trumpist narrative.

[ 227 ] Cult of personality Trump's support has been compared to a cult of personality .

[ e ] Trump's message and self-representation involved the creation of an identity as a non-politician, businessman , and great leader , distancing himself from traditional politicians and from the traditional Republican Party . His strategy involved the creation of an ethos of "saving America" through populist intentions and fighting imagined enemies with "I versus them" rhetoric that constituted the formation of a cult of personality.

[ 228 ] [ page needed ] Trump's contingent of hard-core supporters allowed him to maintain a grip on his political party even after several actions and controversies that would have discredited other politicians.

[ 229 ] News media and commentators have widely characterized Trump as the object of a personality cult .

[ 230 ] [ 231 ] [ 232 ] His support was found to satisfy all parameters needed to determine a personality cult based on Max Weber 's concept of charismatic authority .

[ 233 ] Research found examples of asymmetric bias by his supporters in favor of Trump that did not exist among left-leaning individuals among alleged cases of " Trump derangement syndrome ".

[ 234 ] Other research has argued that Trump's personality cult revolves around an "all-powerful, charismatic figure, contributing to a social milieu at risk for the erosion of democratic principles and the rise of fascism " based on the analysis of psychoanalysts and sociopolitical historians.

[ 235 ] Research using the Big Five model of personality has found that his most loyal followers tend to score highly in conscientiousness / self-discipline, traits likely to be attracted to "personalistic, loyalty-demanding leaders" like Trump.

[ 229 ] Several aspects of cult-like loyalty to Trump have been found to have religious parallels among certain supporters, and certain evangelicals have referred to him in religious terms, casting him as a divinely ordained savior and " chosen one ".

[ 229 ] [ 236 ] Relationship with media Culture industry and pillarization Further information: Culture industry Peter E. Gordon , Alex Ross , sociologist David L. Andrews and Harvard political theorist David Lebow look on Theodor Adorno and Max Horkheimer 's concept of the " culture industry " as useful for comprehending Trumpism.

[ note 14 ] As Ross explains the concept, the culture industry replicates "fascist methods of mass hypnosis ... blurring the line between reality and fiction", explaining, "Trump is as much a pop-culture phenomenon as he is a political one." [ 238 ] Gordon observes that these purveyors of popular culture are not just leveraging outrage, [ 239 ] but are turning politics into a more commercially lucrative product, a "polarized, standardized reflection of opinion into forms of humor and theatricalized outrage within narrow niche markets ... within which one swoons to one's preferred slogan and already knows what one knows. Name just about any political position and what sociologists call ' pillarization '—or what the Frankfurt School called 'ticket' thinking—will predict, almost without fail, a full suite of opinions." [ 240 ] [ note 15 ] Trumpism is from Lebow's perspective, more of a result of this process than a cause.

[ 242 ] In the intervening years since Adorno's work, Lebow believes the culture industry has evolved into a politicizing culture market "based increasingly on the internet, constituting a self-referential hyperreality shorn from any reality of referants ...

sensationalism and insulation intensify intolerance of dissonance and magnify hostility against alternative hyperrealities. In a self-reinforcing logic of escalation, intolerance and hostility further encourage sensationalism and the retreat into insularity." [ 242 ] [ note 16 ] From Gordon's view, "Trumpism itself, one could argue, is just another name for the culture industry, where the performance of undoing repression serves as a means for carrying on precisely as before." [ 244 ] From this viewpoint, the susceptibility to psychological manipulation of individuals with social dominance inclinations is not at the center of Trumpism, but is instead the "culture industry" which exploits these and other susceptibilities by using mechanisms that condition people to think in standardized ways.

[ 135 ] The burgeoning culture industry respects no political boundaries as it develops these markets with Gordon emphasizing "This is true on the left as well as the right, and it is especially noteworthy once we countenance what passes for political discourse today. Instead of a public sphere, we have what Jürgen Habermas long ago called the refeudalization of society." [ 245 ] What Kreiss calls an "identity-based account of media" is important for understanding Trump's success because "citizens understand politics and accept information through the lens of partisan identity. ... The failure to come to grips with a socially embedded public and an identity group–based democracy has placed significant limits on our ability to imagine a way forward for journalism and media in the Trump era. As Fox News and Breitbart have discovered, there is power in the claim of representing and working for particular publics, quite apart from any abstract claims to present the truth." [ 246 ] Profitability of spectacle and outrage Further information: Outrage discourse Examining Trumpism as an entertainment product, some media research focuses on outrage discourse , relating the entertainment value of Trump's rhetoric to the commercial interests of media companies.

[ 247 ] Outrage narratives on political blogs, talk radio and cable news shows were, in the decades prior, a new genre which grew due to its profitability.

[ 248 ] [ 249 ] Media critic David Denby writes, "Like a good standup comic, Trump invites the audience to join him in the adventure of delivering his act—in this case, the barbarously entertaining adventure of running a Presidential campaign that insults everybody." Denby claims that Trump is good at delivering entertainment that consumers demand. He observes that "The movement's standard of allowable behavior has been formed by popular culture—by standup comedy and, recently, by reality TV and by the snarking, trolling habits of the Internet. ... it's exactly vulgar sensationalism and buffoonery that his audience is buying. Donald Trump has been produced by America." [ 223 ] Trump made false assertions, mean spirited attacks and dog whistle appeals to racial and religious intolerance. CBS's CEO Les Moonves remarked that "It may not be good for America, but it's damn good for CBS," [ 250 ] demonstrating how Trump's messaging is compatible with the financial goals of media companies.

[ 251 ] Peter Wehner , senior fellow at the Ethics and Public Policy Center considers Trump a political " shock jock " who "thrives on creating disorder, in violating rules, in provoking outrage." [ 252 ] The political profitability of incivility was demonstrated by the amount of airtime devoted to Trump's 2016 primary campaign—estimated at two billion [ 253 ] to almost five billion dollars.

[ 254 ] The advantage of incivility was as true in social media, where "a BuzzFeed analysis found that the top 20 fake election news stories emanating from hoax sites and hyperpartisan blogs generated more engagement on Facebook (as measured by shares, reactions, and comments) than the top 20 election stories produced by 19 major news outlets combined, including The New York Times , Washington Post, Huffington Post, and NBC News." [ 255 ] Social media Further information: Collective narcissism , Group polarization , and Social media use by Donald Trump Donald J. Trump @realDonaldTrump My use of social media is not Presidential – it's MODERN DAY PRESIDENTIAL. Make America Great Again!

July 1, 2017 [ 256 ] Surveying research of how Trumpist communication is well suited to social media, Brian Ott writes that, "commentators who have studied Trump's public discourse have observed speech patterns that correspond closely to what I identified as Twitter's three defining features [Simplicity, impulsivity, and incivility]." [ 257 ] Media critic Neal Gabler has a similar viewpoint writing that "What FDR was to radio and JFK to television, Trump is to Twitter." [ 258 ] Outrage discourse expert Patrick O'Callaghan argues that social media is most effective when it utilizes the particular type of communication which Trump relies on. O'Callaghan notes that sociologist Sarah Sobieraj and political scientist Jeffrey M. Berry almost perfectly described in 2011 the social media communication style used by Trump long before his presidential campaign.

[ 259 ] They explained that such discourse "[involves] efforts to provoke visceral responses (e.g., anger, righteousness, fear, moral indignation) from the audience through the use of overgeneralizations, sensationalism, misleading or patently inaccurate information, ad hominem attacks, and partial truths about opponents, who may be individuals, organizations, or entire communities of interest (e.g., progressives or conservatives) or circumstance (e.g., immigrants). Outrage sidesteps the messy nuances of complex political issues in favor of melodrama, misrepresentative exaggeration, mockery, and improbable forecasts of impending doom. Outrage talk is not so much discussion as it is verbal competition, political theater with a scorecard." [ 260 ] Trump's hourly tweet activity from his first tweet in May 2009 until his suspension from the website in 2021. His tweet activity pattern changed markedly in 2013.

Due to Facebook's and Twitter's narrowcasting environment in which outrage discourse thrives, [ note 17 ] Trump's employment of such messaging at almost every opportunity was from O'Callaghan's account extremely effective because tweets and posts were repeated in viral fashion among like minded supporters, thereby rapidly building a substantial information echo chamber, [ 262 ] a phenomenon Cass Sunstein identifies as group polarization , [ 263 ] and other researchers refer to as a kind of self re-enforcing homophily .

[ 264 ] [ note 18 ] Within these information cocoons, it matters little to social media companies whether much of the information spread in such pillarized information silos is false, because as digital culture critic Olivia Solon points out, "the truth of a piece of content is less important than whether it is shared, liked, and monetized." [ 267 ] Citing Pew Research's survey that found 62% of US adults get their news from social media, [ 268 ] Ott expresses alarm, "since the 'news' content on social media regularly features fake and misleading stories from sources devoid of editorial standards." [ 269 ] Media critic Alex Ross is similarly alarmed, observing, "Silicon Valley monopolies have taken a hands-off, ideologically vacant attitude toward the upswelling of ugliness on the Internet," and that "the failure of Facebook to halt the proliferation of fake news during the [Trump vs. Clinton] campaign season should have surprised no one. ... Traffic trumps ethics." [ 238 ] O'Callaghan's analysis of Trump's use of social media is that "outrage hits an emotional nerve and is therefore grist to the populist's or the social antagonist's mill. Secondly, the greater and the more widespread the outrage discourse, the more it has a detrimental effect on social capital . This is because it leads to mistrust and misunderstanding amongst individuals and groups, to entrenched positions, to a feeling of 'us versus them'. So understood, outrage discourse not only produces extreme and polarising views but also ensures that a cycle of such views continues. (Consider also in this context Wade Robison (2020) on the 'contagion of passion' [ 270 ] and Cass Sunstein (2001, pp. 98–136) [ note 19 ] on 'cybercascades'.)" [ 262 ] Ott agrees, stating that contagion is the best word to describe the viral nature of outrage discourse on social media, and writing that "Trump's simple, impulsive, and uncivil Tweets do more than merely reflect sexism, racism, homophobia, and xenophobia; they spread those ideologies like a social cancer." [ 37 ] Robison warns that emotional contagion should not be confused with the contagion of passions that James Madison and David Hume were concerned with.

[ note 20 ] Robison states they underestimated the contagion of passions mechanism at work in movements, whose modern expressions include the surprising phenomena of rapidly mobilized social media supporters behind both the Arab Spring and the Trump presidential campaign writing, "It is not that we experience something and then, assessing it, become passionate about it, or not", and implying that "we have the possibility of a check on our passions." Robison's view is that the contagion affects the way reality itself is experienced by supporters because it leverages how subjective certainty is triggered, so that those experiencing the contagiously shared alternate reality are unaware they have taken on a belief they should assess.

[ 272 ] Similar movements, politicians and personalities See also: List of politicians associated with Trumpism , List of Donald Trump 2024 presidential campaign political endorsements , and List of Donald Trump 2024 presidential campaign non-political endorsements Historical background in the United States An 1832 political cartoon depicting two-term President Andrew Jackson as an autocratic king, with the constitution trampled beneath his feet The roots of Trumpism in the United States can be traced to the Jacksonian era according to scholars Walter Russell Mead , [ 273 ] Peter Katzenstein, [ 274 ] and Edwin Kent Morris.

[ 275 ] Eric Rauchway says: "Trumpism— nativism and white supremacy —has deep roots in American history. But Trump himself put it to new and malignant purpose." [ 276 ] Andrew Jackson 's followers felt he was one of them, enthusiastically supporting his defiance of politically correct norms of the nineteenth century and even constitutional law when they stood in the way of public policy popular among his followers. Jackson ignored the U.S. Supreme Court ruling in Worcester v. Georgia and initiated the forced Cherokee removal from their treaty protected lands to benefit white locals at the cost of between 2,000 and 6,000 dead Cherokee men, women, and children. Notwithstanding such cases of Jacksonian inhumanity, [ clarification needed ] Mead's view is that Jacksonianism provides the historical precedent explaining the movement of followers of Trump, marrying grass-roots disdain for elites, deep suspicion of overseas entanglements, and obsession with American power and sovereignty, acknowledging that it has often been a xenophobic , "whites only" political movement. Mead thinks this "hunger in America for a Jacksonian figure" drives followers towards Trump but cautions that historically "he is not the second coming of Andrew Jackson," stating that Trump's "proposals tended to be pretty vague and often contradictory," exhibiting the common weakness of newly elected populist leaders, commenting early in his presidency that "now he has the difficulty of, you know, 'How do you govern?'" [ 273 ] Contradictorily, it has also been argued that Trump's historical precedent is in the Whig Party of Andrew Jackson's enemies. The Whigs and their successors the Know-Nothings were usually pro-tariff and anti-immigrant, and the party collapsed in the 1850s due to not taking a clear position on slavery.

[ 277 ] [ 278 ] [ 279 ] Morris agrees with Mead, locating Trumpism's roots in the Jacksonian era from 1828 to 1848 under the presidencies of Jackson, Martin Van Buren and James K. Polk . On Morris's view, Trumpism also shares similarities with the post-World War I faction of the progressive movement which catered to a conservative populist recoil from the looser morality of the cosmopolitan cities and America's changing racial complexion.

[ 275 ] In his book The Age of Reform (1955), historian Richard Hofstadter identified this faction's emergence when "a large part of the Progressive-Populist tradition had turned sour, became illiberal and ill-tempered." [ 280 ] An article by National Public Radio 's Ron Elving likens the populism of late-19th and early-20th century Populist politician William Jennings Bryan to the later right-wing populism of Trump.

[ 281 ] Bryan, while economically liberal, was socially and theologically conservative, supporting creationism, Prohibition and other aspects of Christian fundamentalism.

[ 281 ] [ 282 ] However, Trump also draws inspiration from Bryan's 1896 and 1900 Republican opponent, William McKinley , both in regard to protectionist tariffs and imperialism.

[ 283 ] A 1927 " America First " political advertisement advocating isolationism and establishing emotional ties of 1927 Chicago mayoral candidate William Hale Thompson with his German and Irish supporters by vilifying the United Kingdom Prior to World War II, conservative themes of Trumpism were expressed in the America First Committee movement in the early 20th century, and after World War II were attributed to a Republican Party faction known as the Old Right . By the 1990s, it became referred to as the paleoconservative movement, which according to Morris has now been rebranded as Trumpism.

[ 284 ] Leo Löwenthal 's book Prophets of Deceit (1949) summarized common narratives expressed in the post-World War II period of this populist fringe, specifically examining American demagogues of the period when modern mass media was married with the same destructive style of politics that historian Charles Clavey thinks Trumpism represents. According to Clavey, Löwenthal's book best explains the enduring appeal of Trumpism and offers the most striking historical insights into the movement.

[ 285 ] Writing in The New Yorker , journalist Nicholas Lemann states the post-war Republican Party ideology of fusionism , a fusion of pro-business party establishment with nativist , isolationist elements who gravitated towards the Republican and not the Democratic Party , later joined by Christian evangelicals "alarmed by the rise of secularism", was made possible by the Cold War and the "mutual fear and hatred of the spread of Communism". An article in Politico has referred to Trumpism as " McCarthyism on steroids".

[ 286 ] [ 192 ] Championed by William F. Buckley Jr.

and brought to fruition by Ronald Reagan in 1980, the fusion lost its glue with the dissolution of the Soviet Union , which was followed by a growth of income inequality in the United States and globalization that "created major discontent among middle and low income whites" within and without the Republican Party. After the 2012 United States presidential election saw the defeat of Mitt Romney by Barack Obama , the party establishment embraced an "autopsy" report, titled the Growth and Opportunity Project , which "called on the Party to reaffirm its identity as pro-market, government-skeptical, and ethnically and culturally inclusive." [ 192 ] Ignoring the findings of the report and the party establishment in his campaign, Trump was "opposed by more officials in his own Party ... than any Presidential nominee in recent American history," but at the same time he won "more votes" in the Republican primaries than any previous presidential candidate. By 2016, "people wanted somebody to throw a brick through a plate-glass window", in the words of political analyst Karl Rove .

[ 192 ] His success in the party was such that an October 2020 poll found 58% of Republicans and Republican-leaning independents surveyed considered themselves supporters of Trump rather than the Republican Party.

[ 287 ] Parallels with fascism and trend towards illiberal democracy Main article: Donald Trump and fascism Further information: Democratic backsliding and Democratic backsliding in the United States Historians and election experts have compared Trump's anti-democratic tendencies and egotistical personality to the sentiments and rhetoric of Benito Mussolini and Italian fascism .

[ 288 ] Trumpism has been likened to Benito Mussolini 's Italian fascism by critics of Trump, [ f ] and significant academic debate exists over the prevalence of fascism and neo-fascism within Trumpism.

[ g ] [ note 21 ] Historians and election experts have compared Trump's anti-democratic tendencies and egotistical personality to the sentiments and rhetoric of Benito Mussolini and Italian fascism.

[ 288 ] Several scholars have rejected comparisons with fascism, instead viewing Trump as authoritarian and populist.

[ 291 ] [ 292 ] Some commentators have rejected the populist designation for Trumpism and view it instead as part of a trend towards a new form of fascism or neo-fascism, with some referring to it as explicitly fascist and others as authoritarian and illiberal .

[ 293 ] [ 294 ] [ 295 ] [ note 21 ] Others have more identified it as a form of mild fascism specific to the United States .

[ 299 ] [ 300 ] Some historians, including many of those employing new fascism to describe Trumpism, [ note 22 ] write of the hazards of direct comparisons with European fascist regimes of the 1930s, stating that while there are parallels, there are also important dissimilarities.

[ 303 ] [ 304 ] [ note 23 ] American historian Robert Paxton changed his opinion about whether the democratic backsliding caused by Trumpism is in line with fascism . In 2017, Paxton believed it bore greater resemblance to plutocracy .

[ 306 ] Paxton changed his opinion following the 2021 storming of the United States Capitol , stating that it is "necessary" to understand Trumpism as a form of fascism.

[ 307 ] Drawing on Umberto Eco 's 1995 essay Ur-Fascism , which outlines 14 characteristics of fascism, historian Bret Devereaux discusses how Trumpism satisfies each of the 14.

[ 308 ] Sociology professor Dylan John Riley calls Trumpism " neo-Bonapartist patrimonialism " because it does not capture the same mass movement appeal of classical fascism.

[ 309 ] Activist group SumOfUs 's Projection of "Resist Trumpism Everywhere" on London's Marble Arch as part of protests during Trump's July 2018 visit Argentine historian Federico Finchelstein believes intersections exist between Peronism and Trumpism in terms of their disregard for the political system (in the areas of both domestic and foreign policy).

[ 310 ] American historian Christopher Browning considers the long-term consequences of Trump's policies and the support which he receives for them from the Republican Party to be potentially dangerous for democracy.

[ 311 ] In the German-speaking debate, the term "fascism" initially appeared sporadically, mostly in connection with the crisis of confidence in politics and the media and described the strategy of mostly right-wing political actors who wish to stir up this crisis in order to profit from it.

[ 312 ] German literature has a more diverse range of analysis of Trumpism.

[ note 24 ] Others have argued that Trump is a totalitarian capitalist exploiting the "fascist impulses of his ordinary supporters that hide in plain sight." [ 313 ] [ 314 ] [ 298 ] Michelle Goldberg , an opinion columnist for The New York Times , compares Trumpism to classical fascist themes.

[ note 25 ] The "mobilizing vision" of fascism is of "the national community rising phoenix-like after a period of encroaching decadence which all but destroyed it", which "sounds a lot like MAGA" ( Make America Great Again ) according to Goldberg. Similarly, like the Trump movement, fascism sees a "need for authority by natural chiefs (always male), culminating in a national chieftain who alone is capable of incarnating the group's historical destiny." They believe in "the superiority of the leader's instincts over abstract and universal reason".

[ 317 ] Image posted on February 19, 2025, by the official White House account likening Trump to a monarch with the phrase LONG LIVE THE KING . The post was made shortly after Trump had taken several actions that were apparent violations of federal law and the Constitution, and quoted Napoleon, saying "He who saves his Country does not violate any Law".

[ 318 ] Conservative columnist George Will considers Trumpism similar to fascism, stating that Trumpism is "a mood masquerading as a doctrine". Will argues that national unity is based "on shared domestic dreads"—for fascists the "Jews", for Trump the media ("enemies of the people"), " elites " and " globalists ". Solutions come not from tedious "incrementalism and conciliation", but from the leader (who claims "only I can fix it") unfettered by procedure. The political base is kept entertained with mass rallies, but inevitably the strongman develops a contempt for those he leads.

[ note 26 ] Will argues both are based on machismo , and in the case of Trumpism, "appeals to those in thrall to country-music manliness: 'We're truck-driving, beer-drinking, big-chested Americans too freedom-loving to let any itsy-bitsy [ COVID-19 ] virus make us wear masks.'" [ 74 ] [ note 27 ] In How to Lose a Country: The 7 Steps from Democracy to Dictatorship , Turkish author Ece Temelkuran describes Trumpism as similar to rhetoric and actions of the Turkish politician Recep Tayyip Erdoğan during his rise to power. Some of these tactics and views are right-wing populism , demonization of the press , subversion of well-established and proven facts through the big lie (both historical and scientific), democratic backsliding such as dismantling judicial and political mechanisms; portraying systematic issues such as sexism or racism as isolated incidents , and crafting an ideal citizen.

[ 322 ] Political scientist Mark Blyth and Jonathan Hopkin believe similarities exist between Trumpism and similar movements towards illiberal democracies worldwide, but that the Trumpist movement is not merely being driven by revulsion, loss, and racism. They argue that both on the right and on the left, the global economy is driving the growth of neo-nationalist coalitions which find followers who want to be free of the constraints which are being placed on them by establishment elites whose members advocate neoliberal economics and globalism .

[ 323 ] Others emphasize the lack of interest in finding real solutions to the social malaise which have been identified, and they also believe those individuals and groups who are executing policy are actually following a pattern which has been identified by sociology researchers like Leo Löwenthal and Norbert Guterman as originating in the post-World War II work of the Frankfurt School of social theory. Based on this perspective, books such as Löwenthal and Guterman's Prophets of Deceit offer the best insights into how movements like Trumpism dupe their followers by perpetuating their misery and preparing them to move further towards an illiberal form of government.

[ 285 ] Rush Limbaugh Rush Limbaugh speaking in West Palm Beach in 2019 Trump is considered by some analysts to be following a blueprint of leveraging outrage, which was developed on partisan cable TV and talk radio shows [ 262 ] such as the Rush Limbaugh radio show—a style that transformed talk radio and American conservative politics decades before Trump.

[ 324 ] Both shared "media fame" and "over-the-top showmanship", and built an enormous fan base with politics-as-entertainment, [ 324 ] attacking political and cultural targets in ways that would have been considered indefensible and beyond the pale in the years before them.

[ 325 ] Both featured "the insults, the nicknames", and conspiracy theories. Both maintained that global warming was a hoax, that Barack Obama was not a natural-born U.S. citizen , and that the danger of COVID-19 was vastly exaggerated.

[ 324 ] Both mocked people with disabilities.

[ 325 ] Limbaugh, to whom Trump awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2020, preceded Trump in moving the Republican Party away from "serious and substantive opinion leaders and politicians", towards political provocation, entertainment, and anti-intellectualism, and popularizing and normalizing for "many Republican politicians and voters" what before his rise "they might have thought" but would have "felt uncomfortable saying".

[ note 28 ] His millions of fans were intensely loyal and "developed a capacity to excuse ... and deflect" his statements no matter how offensive and outrageous, "saying liberals were merely being hysterical or hateful. And many loved him even more for it." [ 325 ] Future impact Writing in The Atlantic , Yaseem Serhan states Trump's post-impeachment claim that "our historic, patriotic, and beautiful movement to Make America Great Again has only just begun," should be taken seriously as Trumpism is a "personality-driven" populist movement, and other such movements—such as Berlusconism in Italy, Peronism in Argentina and Fujimorism in Peru, "rarely fade once their leaders have left office".

[ 326 ] Joseph Lowndes, a professor of political science at the University of Oregon, argued that while current far-right Republicans support Trump, the faction rose before and will likely exist after Trump.

[ 327 ] Bobby Jindal and Alex Castellanos wrote in Newsweek that separating Trumpism from Donald Trump himself was key to the Republican Party's future following his loss in the 2020 United States presidential election .

[ 328 ] However, Trump went on to win the 2024 United States presidential election with victories in all seven crucial swing states .

In 2024, President Kevin Roberts of The Heritage Foundation stated that he sees the role of Heritage as "institutionalizing Trumpism." [ 329 ] Policies Economic policy Further information: Economic policy of the first Donald Trump administration and Economic policy of the second Donald Trump administration Trumpism "promises new jobs and more domestic investment".

[ 330 ] Trump's hard line against export surpluses of American trading partners and protectionist trade policies led to a tense situation in 2018 with mutually imposed tariffs by the United States and the European Union versus China.

[ 331 ] Trump secures the support of his political base emphasizing neo-nationalism and criticism of globalization .

[ 332 ] One book suggested that Trump "radicalized economics" for white working- to middle-class voters by implying that "undeserving [minority] groups are getting ahead while their group is being left behind." [ 333 ] Foreign policy Further information: Foreign policy of the first Donald Trump administration and Foreign policy of the second Donald Trump administration In terms of foreign policy in the sense of Trump's "America First" , unilateralism and isolationism is preferred to a multilateral policy.

[ 334 ] National interests are particularly emphasized, especially in the context of economic treaties and alliance obligations.

[ 335 ] [ 336 ] Trump has shown a disdain for traditional American allies such as Canada as well as transatlantic partners NATO and the European Union .

[ 337 ] [ 338 ] Conversely, Trump has shown sympathy for autocratic rulers, such as Russian President Vladimir Putin , whom Trump often praised even before taking office, [ 339 ] and during the 2018 Russia–United States summit .

[ 340 ] The "America First" foreign policy includes promises by Trump to end American involvement in foreign wars, notably in the Middle East , while also issuing tighter foreign policy through sanctions against Iran , among other countries.

[ 341 ] [ 342 ] Trump's proposals during his second presidency to expand the United States by acquiring Canada , Greenland , and the Panama Canal were described by CNN as part of his nationalist "America First" agenda and having "modern echoes of the 19th century doctrine of Manifest Destiny ".

[ 343 ] In June 2025, some supporters of Donald Trump in the United States, including Steve Bannon , [ 344 ] Tucker Carlson , Rand Paul , Charlie Kirk , Saagar Enjeti , Mollie Hemingway and Marjorie Taylor Greene , criticized Trump's support for Israeli strikes against Iran and opposed possible United States involvement in the war.

[ 345 ] [ 346 ] There is a significant divide within the Republican Party and the MAGA movement on whether the United States should get involved in such a war overseas.

[ 347 ] [ 348 ] Religious policy Trump wove Christian religious imagery into his 2024 presidential campaign , characterizing it as a "righteous crusade" against "atheists, globalists and the Marxists". He stated that his aims included restoring the United States "as one nation under God with liberty and justice for all".

[ 349 ] Trump has been critical of what he sees as a persecution of Christians .

[ 350 ] On February 6, following the National Prayer Breakfast , he signed an executive order to create a task force to "immediately halt all forms of anti-Christian targeting and discrimination within the federal government, including at the DOJ, which was absolutely terrible, the IRS, the FBI — terrible — and other agencies".

[ 351 ] [ 352 ] Donald Trump appointed Attorney General Pam Bondi to lead the task force and appointed Paula White to direct the White House Faith Office.

[ 350 ] Beyond the United States Further information: Neo-nationalism Argentina President Trump shakes hands with President Milei (February 2025) Javier Milei , an Argentinian Austrian economist who was elected in 2023 as president of Argentina has sometimes been likened to Donald Trump.

[ 353 ] Many other commentators have stressed that the two men are different, however, describing Milei's views as mostly libertarian , such as rejecting protectionism and supporting free trade.

[ 354 ] Australia Trumpism is represented in Australia by the political party Trumpet of Patriots , founded in 2021. The party has pledged to "put Australians first and make Australia great again".

[ 355 ] It focuses on "gender, changing the immigration policy, bringing down the cost of living and free speech." [ 356 ] Brazil See also: Bolsonarism President Trump poses with President Bolsonaro (June 2019) In Brazil, Jair Bolsonaro , sometimes referred to as the "Brazilian Donald Trump", [ 357 ] who is often described as a right-wing extremist, [ 358 ] [ 359 ] sees Trump as a role model [ 360 ] and according to Jason Stanley uses the same fascist tactics.

[ 361 ] Like Trump, Bolsonaro finds support among evangelicals for his views on culture war issues.

[ 362 ] Along with allies he publicly questioned Joe Biden's vote tally after the 2020 United States presidential election .

[ 363 ] Canada This article is part of a series on Conservatism in Canada Schools Calgary School Christian right Clerico-nationalism Right-wing populism Trumpism Social conservatism Social credit Toryism Blue Red Pink Principles Canadian values Federalism Economic liberalism Limited government Loyalism Monarchism Nationalism Property rights Protectionism Rule of law Tradition History Château Clique Family Compact Lower Canada Tories National Policy Port Hope Conference Unite the Right United Empire Loyalist Upper Canada Tories Canada convoy protest Intellectuals Alexander Black Blackwood Bouchard Byfield Brodie Cooper Duchesne Dart Farthing Flanagan Furedi Gilley Granatstein Grant Groulx Gwyn Kaufmann Kirkconnell Leacock McLuhan Pageau Packer Peterson Stackhouse Jr.

Strachan Tiger Politicians Aberhart Bennett (Bill) Bennett (R. B.) Bennett (W. A. C.) Bernier Borden Campbell De Cosmos Diefenbaker Duplessis D. Ford R. Ford Haliburton Harper Harris Kenney Klein Legault Lougheed Macdonald Manning (Ernest) Manning (Preston) McGee Mulroney O'Toole Poilievre Rustad Scheer Smith Stanfield Vander Zalm Wall Commentators Camp Chen Crowder Frum Jivani Lester Levant Lilley McIntyre Murphy Segal Speer Steyn Literature Canada and the Canadian Question (1891) Lament for a Nation (1965) Who Killed Canadian History?

(1998) Maps of Meaning (1999) The Black Book of English Canada (Series; 2001–2003) The Uniqueness of Western Civilization (2011) Harperism (2014) " The Case for Colonialism " (2017) 12 Rules for Life (2018) Whiteshift (2018) Active parties Federal Christian Heritage Party of Canada Conservative Party of Canada Libertarian Party of Canada People's Party of Canada Provincial BC United Coalition Avenir Québec Conservative Party of British Columbia Conservative Party of Quebec Progressive Conservative Party of Manitoba Progressive Conservative Party of NB Progressive Conservative Party of NL Progressive Conservative Party of Nova Scotia Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario Progressive Conservative Party of PEI Progressive Conservative Party of Sask.

Saskatchewan Party Social Credit Party of Canada United Conservative Party Yukon Party Defunct parties Federal Canadian Alliance Conservative Party of Canada (1867–1942) Liberal-Conservative Party Progressive Conservative Party of Canada Reform Party of Canada Social Credit Party of Canada Unionist Party Provincial Action démocratique du Québec British Columbia Social Credit Party Conservative Party of Quebec (historical) Parti bleu Progressive Conservative Assoc. of Alberta Union Nationale Upper Canada Tories Wildrose Party Media CFRA Climate Audit Free Dominion LifeSiteNews National Post The Post Millennial Rebel News Sun News Network The Dorchester Review Toronto Sun Western Standard Winnipeg Sun Other organizations Campaign Life Coalition Canadian Centre for Bio-Ethical Reform Canadian Coalition for Democracies Canadian Taxpayers Federation Catholic Civil Rights League Focus on the Family Canada Fraser Institute Institute for Research on Public Policy LGBTory Macdonald–Laurier Institute Mackenzie Institute Montreal Economic Institute National Citizens Coalition Orange Order Progressive Group for Independent Business REAL Women of Canada Rumble Three Percenters True North Centre for Public Policy Voice of Canadians Related Common Sense Revolution Conservatism in the United Kingdom Conservatism in the United States Censorship under the Canadian Human Rights Act Illegal immigration to Canada Old Stock Canadians Pure laine Western alienation Alberta Agenda Alberta separatism Canada portal Conservatism portal v t e Trumpism exists as a political current in Canada.

[ h ] Law professor Allan Rock , Canada's former attorney general and ambassador to the U.N., said Trump had "given expression to an underlying frustration and anger, that arises from economic inequality, from the implications from globalisation." Rock stated that the "overtly racist behaviour" associated with Trumpism emboldened racists and white supremacists, resulting in a rise in the number of these organizations and hate crimes in Canada.

[ 364 ] According to an October 2020 poll of Canadian voters, the number of "pro-Trump conservatives" was growing in Canada. Maclean's said this was influencing Canadian political campaigns.

[ 365 ] Erin O'Toole , the leader of the Conservative Party of Canada, featured the slogan—"Take Back Canada"—in a video, stating "[j]oin our fight, let's take back Canada." [ 366 ] When asked if his "Canada First" policy was different from Trump's "America First" policy, O'Toole said, "No, it was not." [ 367 ] O'Toole criticized what he considered to be Trumpism following one of Liberal Deputy Prime Minister Chrystia Freeland 's tweets being flagged as "manipulated media" and compared her to Trump's flagged tweets , [ 368 ] [ 369 ] prior to Twitter's acquisition by Elon Musk .

[ 370 ] Writing for The Hill in 2021, Markik Von Rennenkampff stated that there are "striking differences" between the Conservative Party under Erin O'Toole and the Republican Party under Trump, notably O'Toole supporting access to abortion and his support for Canada's single-payer health care system .

[ 371 ] Rennenkampff also described Canadian Conservatives as "far more closely aligned with Democrats than Republicans".

[ 372 ] Following the 2022 Conservative Party leadership election , some journalists have compared Conservative Party leader Pierre Poilievre to American Republicans such as Donald Trump and Ted Cruz ; [ 373 ] [ 374 ] however many journalists have dismissed these comparisons due to Poilievre's pro-abortion access, pro-immigration, and pro-same-sex marriage positions.

[ i ] In 2024, Zack Beauchamp of Vox stated that while Poilievre's rhetoric draws Trump comparisons, in terms of policy "he's actually considerably more moderate than Trump or European radicals".

[ 375 ] Europe Further information: Radical right (Europe) Trumpism has also been said to be on the rise in Europe. Political parties such as the Finns Party , [ 376 ] France's National Rally [ 377 ] and Spain's far-right Vox party [ 378 ] have been described as Trumpist in nature. Trump's former advisor Steve Bannon called Hungarian prime minister Viktor Orbán "Trump before Trump".

[ 379 ] Isabel Díaz Ayuso has also received the Trumpism label.

[ 380 ] [ 381 ] George Simion , the founder of the Alliance for the Union of Romanians party and previous candidate in the 2025 Romanian presidential election is commonly referred to as the "Romanian Trump" due to his political style and ideological alignment being very similar to those of Donald Trump .

India Main article: Hindutva See also: Trads (Hindu nationalism) President Donald Trump in a meeting with Prime Minister Narendra Modi at the White House (February 2025) At the February 2025 meeting between Narendra Modi , Prime Minister of India, and Donald Trump, the former stated: [ 382 ] [ 383 ] Borrowing an expression from America, our vision for a developed India is to make India great again, or MIGA ... When America and India work together, that is, when it's MAGA plus MIGA, it becomes a mega partnership for prosperity. ... And it is this mega spirit that gives new scale and scope to our objectives.

[ 382 ] [ 383 ] Iran Main article: Restart (group) Donald Trump and his policy towards Iran has been praised by the Iranian opposition group 'Restart', led by Mohammad Hosseini , which also supports American military action against Iran and offered to fight alongside Americans to overthrow the Iranian government.

[ 384 ] The group has adopted the slogan "Make Iran Great Again".

[ 384 ] Restart has been compared to QAnon by Ariane Tabatabai , in terms of "conspiracist thinking going global".

[ 384 ] Among conspiracy theories advocated by the group is that Iran's Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei has died (or went into coma) in 2017 and a double plays his role in public.

[ 385 ] Japan Further information: Japanese nationalism Shinzo Abe and US President Trump in 2017 with " MAGA "-style hats reading "Donald & Shinzo, Make Alliance Even Greater" In Japan, in a speech to Liberal Democratic Party lawmakers in Tokyo on March 8, 2019, Steve Bannon said that Prime Minister Shinzo Abe was "Trump before Trump" and "a great hero to the grassroots, the populist, and the nationalist movement throughout the world." [ 386 ] Shinzo Abe was described as a "right-wing nationalist" or " ultra-nationalist ", [ 387 ] [ 388 ] but whether he was a "populist" is controversial.

[ 389 ] Netto-uyoku is the term used to refer to netizens who espouse ultranationalist far-right views on Japanese social media, as well as in English to those who are proficient.

Netto-uyoku are typically very friendly not only to Japanese nationalists but also to Donald Trump, and oppose liberal politics. They began spreading Trump's conspiracy theories in an attempt to overturn the 2020 American presidential election .

[ 390 ] Nigeria According to The Guardian and The Washington Post , there is a significant affinity towards Trump in Nigeria.

[ 391 ] [ 392 ] Donald Trump's comments on the ethno-religious conflicts between Christians and the predominantly Muslim Fulani tribe has contributed to his popularity among Christians in Nigeria, in which he stated: "We have had very serious problems with Christians who are being murdered in Nigeria. We are going to be working on that problem very, very hard because we cannot allow that to happen".

[ 391 ] Donald Trump is praised by the Indigenous People of Biafra (IPOB), a secessionist group that supports the independence of Biafra from Nigeria and is designated as a terrorist group by the Nigerian government. IPOB has claimed that he "believes in the inalienable right of an indigenous people to self-determination" and it also praised him for "the direct and serious manner he addressed and demanded immediate end to the serial slaughter of Christians in Nigeria, especially Biafran Christians".

[ 393 ] [ 394 ] After Trump's victory in the 2016 presidential election, IPOB leader Nnamdi Kanu wrote a letter to Trump stating he had a "historic and moral burden ... to liberate the enslaved nations in Africa".

[ 393 ] As Trump was inaugurated in January 2017, IPOB organized a rally in support of Trump that resulted in violent clashes with Nigerian security forces and resulted in multiple deaths and arrests.

[ 395 ] On January 30, 2020, IPOB leader Nnamdi Kanu attended a Trump rally in Iowa as a special VIP guest, at the invitation of the Republican Party of Iowa .

[ 396 ] According to a 2020 poll from Pew Research , 58% of Nigerians had favorable views of Donald Trump, the fourth highest percentage globally.

[ 397 ] According to John Campbell of Council on Foreign Relations , Trump's popularity in Nigeria can be explained by a "manifestation of the widespread disillusionment in a country characterized by growing poverty, multiple security threats, an expanding crime wave, and a government seen as unresponsive and corrupt", and his popularity is likely stronger among wealthier urban Nigerians rather than the majority of Nigerians who live in rural areas or urban slums and are unlikely to have strong opinions on Trump.

[ 398 ] Philippines President Trump shakes hands with President Duterte (November 2017) Sheila S. Coronel has argued that the political strategies of Ferdinand Marcos , who was president of the Philippines from 1965 to 1986, and Rodrigo Duterte , who held the same position from 2016 to 2022, share certain features with Trumpism, including disregard for facts, encouragement of fear, and a "loud, bombastic, hypermasculine" aesthetic; and that each has benefited from uncertain political environments.

[ 399 ] Russia Further information: Putinism Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin meeting in the 2025 Russia–United States Summit in Anchorage, Alaska .

Aleksandr Dugin , a Russian far-right political philosopher has described the political style of the incumbent Russian President Vladimir Putin as similar to Donald Trump due to their anti-globalist and anti-elite rhetoric in emphasizing nationalism and traditional values with Putin framing Russia as a defender against Western liberal elites, while Trump criticizes global institutions and claims they undermine American interests.

[ 400 ] South Korea The politics of Yoon Suk Yeol , the former president of South Korea , has been called "Trumpist" for his right-wing populist elements.

[ 401 ] See also Modern history portal Politics portal United States portal Trumpet of Patriots (Australian party) Authoritarian conservatism Blue MAGA Corporatocracy Enemy of the people Firehose of falsehood Flood the zone with shit God Emperor Trump (statue) List of conspiracy theories promoted by Donald Trump National conservatism Radical right (United States) Reality distortion field Right-wing authoritarianism Freedom Caucus Agenda 47 Political positions of Donald Trump Sedition Caucus Racial views of Donald Trump Organizations America First Policies Conservative Partnership Institute John Birch Society MAGA Inc.

Republican Accountability The Lincoln Project Republicans for the Rule of Law Notes ^ Believing the Stop the Steal conspiracy theory of electoral fraud , Trumpists acted after being told minutes prior by Trump to "fight like hell" to "take back our country", [ 1 ] [ 2 ] with his personal lawyer Rudy Giuliani calling for " trial by combat ", [ 3 ] and son Donald Trump Jr.

in the prior week warning "we are coming for you" and calling for "total war" over election results.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] ^ The Albert Lea Tribune ' s description of the scene at the September 13, 2020, "United We Stand & Patriots March for America" was that "[p]eople rallied outside the Minnesota Capitol in St. Paul on Saturday in support of President Trump, and against statewide pandemic policies they say are infringing on personal freedoms and damaging the economy. ... Some in the crowd carried long guns and wore body armor." There were physical confrontations resulting in the arrest of two counter-protesters.

[ 6 ] ^ Papacharissi notes that examples can also be found on the left for the use of open signifiers when affectively engaging their bases ("publics").

[ 51 ] ^ The 88% figure is based on the CBS news report that as of April 16, 2021, 45 out of the 370 arrested were arrested were women.

[ 83 ] ^ A reference to a metaphor found at the close of U.S. President Abraham Lincoln's first inaugural address . Cognitive scientist Steven Pinker explains the impact of these appeals in his book The Better Angels of Our Nature .

^ For a detailed description of this evocation of intense collective emotions in order to engineer group identity, see Cui 2018 . Cui writes: "The collective emotions that audiences feel during media events is the modern day equivalent of the collective effervescence in totemic worship (Dayan & Katz, 1992). In primitive societies, intense feelings about the collectivity are generated through the participants physically enacting rituals together. Possessed by these intense feelings, they experience themselves as sharing the collective identity represented by the symbolism in the rituals. In sophisticated industrial societies, people often participate in rituals through the media. Through the live broadcast of ceremonial events, a geographically dispersed population can be temporally synchronized through the symbolic representation of a higher reality. The intense collective emotions these events generate reinforce social identity (Jiménez-Martínez, 2014; Uimonen, 2015; Widholm, 2016)." [ 99 ] ^ Trump's scenic construction (introduction of characters and setting stage depicting an issue) use black and white terms to describe malevolent forces, or the coming victory.

John Kerry is a "total disaster" and Obamacare would "destroy American health care forever"; Kenneth Burke referred to this "all or none" staging as characteristic of " burlesque " rhetoric.

[ 103 ] Instead of a world involving a variety of complex situations requiring nuanced solutions acceptable to a multiplicity of interested groups, for the agitator the world is a simple stage populated by two irreconcilable groups and dramatic action involves decisions with simple either-or choices. Because all players and issues are painted using black and white terms, there is no possibility of working out a common solution.

[ 104 ] ^ Ann Stoler writes, "These are divisive cuts through our social, political, and affective landscapes that are not eruptions, as they are so often described. Rather, these figures [Trump, Le Pen , and Wilders ] register deep tectonic shifts not readily visible with the conceptual tools at hand, nor by the metrics we have used to measure durable sensibilities or to capture sonics to which we are so adverse, askew to our shared radars. Prevailing political categories and concepts may now seem inadequate or inoperative." [ 136 ] ^ Kelly left Fox in 2017 ^ The "(Jones, 2012: 180)" quote appears in Jones, Jeffry P. (2012). "Fox News and the Performance of Ideology".

Cinema Journal .

51 (4): 178– 185.

doi : 10.1353/cj.2012.0073 .

JSTOR 23253592 .

S2CID 145669733 .

^ Jones elaborates on her view that trust is central to epistemology in a chapter entitled "Trusting Interpretations" which appeared in the book "Trust – Analytic and Applied Perspectives".

[ 156 ] ^ The measure is a refinement of the authoritarian personality theory published in 1950 by researchers Theodor W. Adorno , Else Frenkel-Brunswik , Daniel Levinson and Nevitt Sanford . Despite its name, RWA measures predisposition towards authoritarianism regardless of political orientation.

^ The skull with Trump hair refers to the Punisher comic book vigilante serial killer who murders those he considers evil. More stylized Punisher images appeared on patches worn by some rioters in combat attire, multiple police at Black lives matter protests [ 219 ] and frequently as a Sean Hannity's lapel pin.

[ 220 ] ^ For instance in the introduction to his book Making Sport Great Again , Andrews writes, "The prescience of much Frankfurt School theorizing informs this analysis of the relationship between ubersport as a popular culture industry, the politics of neoliberal America, and Trump's cacophonous political-cultural-economic project." [ 237 ] ^ The idea is that while markets attempt to turn the population into unthinking mass consumers, political actors (from parties to politicians to interest groups) use the same mechanisms to turn us into unthinking mass citizens—a Frankfurt school concept which Marcuse explored further in his book One Dimensional Man . Horkheimer and Adorno's "ticket" metaphor refers to the political party sense of a slate of candidates and policies that followers expect to vote for in its entirety because they have come to believe that the ideas from the opposing political blocs are so irreconcilable their political power is simplified to a binary choice which despite the intense rhetoric reduces them to passive observers of the spectacle.

[ 241 ] ^ Political scientist Matthew McManus makes a similar observation writing that Trump is the culmination of this trend towards pillarized tribalistic market niches where the hyperpartisan discourses characteristic of Fox News in the US or Hír TV in Hungary have displaced nuanced analysis.

[ 243 ] ^ One of Sobieraj and Berry's key findings was that, "Outrage thrives in a narrowcasting environment." [ 261 ] ^ Homophily is the sociological term corresponding to the saying "Birds of a feather flock together." Pointing to a 2015 Pew Research Center study revealing that the average Facebook user has five politically like-minded friends for every one from the opposing end of the spectrum, [ 265 ] like Massachs et al.

(2020), Samantha Power takes note of the combination of social media and homophily's self-reinforcing impact on our perceived world writing, "The information that comes to us has increasingly been tailored to appeal to our prior prejudices, and it is unlikely to be challenged by the like-minded with whom we interact day-to-day." [ 266 ] ^ The 2001 reference is to an earlier edition of Sunstein's Republic.com. An updated chapter on cybercascades may be found in his Republic.com 2.0 (2007).

[ 271 ] ^ Hume argued that democracy in city-states of ancient Greece failed because in small cities, sentiments could rapidly spread in the population, meaning agitators were "more likely to succeed in sweeping aside the old order". Madison responded to this threat of tyrannical majority factions unified by a shared sentiment in Federalist paper number 10 with the argument (Robison's paraphrase): "In an extensive country, distance immunizes citizens from the contagion of passions and hinders their coordination even when passions are shared." [ 270 ] Robison thinks this portion of Madison's argument is obsolete due to the near instantaneous social media sharing of sentiments wherever we are due to the commonplace use of wirelessly connected handheld devices.

^ a b Cornel West uses the term neofascist . Badiou describes Trump signaling the birth of a "new fascism" or "democratic fascism", [ 296 ] while Traverso prefers the term post-fascist to describe "new faces of fascism" such as Trump who advance a model of democracy "that destroys any process of collective deliberation in favour of a relationship that merges people and leader, the nation and its chief." [ 297 ] By contrast, Tarizzo describes Trump as part of what Pier Paolo Pasolini called new fascism [ 298 ] employing a "political grammar" analysis which shares similar perspectives on ties between new fascism and dystopian economics argued in the analyses of Giroux, West, Hedges and Badiou. Chomsky instead uses the term authoritarianism.

^ Giroux notes that "Trump is not Hitler in that he has not created concentration camps, shut down the critical media or rounded up dissidents; moreover, the United States at the current historical moment is not the Weimar Republic ." [ 301 ] Tarizzo writes that both paleofascism and new fascism undermine the fundamentals of modern democracy, but the new mode of fascism "does not do this by absolutizing popular sovereignty at the expense of individual rights. New fascism celebrates our freedoms and absolutizes human rights to the detriment of our sense of belonging to a social-political community." [ 302 ] ^ For a wide ranging review and critique of the use of the term fascist to describe Trump as of late 2017, see Carl Boggs ' postscript chapter in his book Fascism Old and New .

[ 305 ] ^ Consider the titles of papers listed in Koch, Lars; Nanz, Tobias; Rogers, Christina, eds. (2020). "The Great Disruptor".

The Great Disruptor—Über Trump, die Medien und die Politik der Herabsetzung .

doi : 10.1007/978-3-476-04976-6 .

ISBN 978-3476049759 .

S2CID 226426921 .

^ Yale's Jason Stanley observed that while Trump is not a fascist, "I think you could legitimately call Trumpism a fascist social and political movement" and that "he's using fascist political tactics. I think there's no question about that. He is calling for national restoration in the face of humiliations brought on by immigrants, liberals, liberal minorities, and leftists. He's certainly playing the fascist playbook." [ 315 ] Philosopher Cornel West agrees that Trump has fascist proclivities and claims his popularity signals that neo-fascism is displacing neoliberalism in the United States.

[ 316 ] Harvard historian Charles Clavey thinks the authors of the Frankfurt School ( Max Horkheimer , Theodor Adorno and Herbert Marcuse ) who studied the sudden victory of fascism in Germany offer the best insights into Trumpism. These similarities include the rhetoric of self-aggrandizement, victimhood, accusation, and his solicitation of unconditional support to return the country from moral and political decay.

[ 285 ] ^ David Livingstone Smith , a scholar of history, psychology and anthropology, compares Trump and the fascist pattern of persuasion described by Roger Money-Kyrle , who witnessed fascist rallies in 1930s Germany. The psychological linkage between the leader and supporters in mass protests, the melancholia-paranoia-megalomania pattern, recitation of shared domestic dreads, promotion of fear-mongering conspiracy theories painting out-groups as the cause of the problems, simplified solutions presented in absolute terms and the promotion of singular leader capable of returning the country to its former greatness.

[ 319 ] ^ Described as "the sociologist who studied Trump's base before Trump", [ 320 ] Michael Kimmel examined the relationship between masculinity and radicalization of pre-Trump supporters. In his 2018 book Healing from Hate: How Young Men Get Into—and Out of—Violent Extremism Kimmel describes a theme he "came to call 'aggrieved entitlement', a sense of righteous indignation, of undeserved victimhood in a world suddenly dominated by political correctness. The rewards these white men felt had been promised for a lifetime of, as they saw it, playing by the rules that someone else had established had suddenly dried up—or, as they saw it, the water had been diverted to far less deserving 'others'" who "were not worthy of the rewards they were now reaping, because 'they' were not 'real men.'" [ 321 ] ^ Quotes are from Brian Rosenwald, described as "a Harvard scholar who tracks disinformation in talk radio." [ 325 ] ^ a b Attributed to multiple references: Homans 2024 : "No major American presidential candidate has talked like he now does at his rallies—not Richard Nixon, not George Wallace, not even Donald Trump himself." Bender & Gold 2023 Lehmann 2023 Basu 2023 Cassidy 2023 Lutz 2023 Browning 2023 Kim & Ibssa 2023 Ward 2024 : "It's a stark escalation over the last month of what some experts in political rhetoric, fascism, and immigration say is a strong echo of authoritarians and Nazi ideology." Applebaum 2024 : "In the 2024 campaign, that line has been crossed. ... The deliberate dehumanization of whole groups of people; the references to police, to violence, to the 'bloodbath' that Trump has said will unfold if he doesn't win; the cultivation of hatred not only against immigrants but also against political opponents—none of this has been used successfully in modern American politics. But neither has this rhetoric been tried in modern American politics." Rubin 2024 Brooks 2024 : "Trump, however, has also used the term fascist to describe Harris as he has doubled down on his insults against Harris and ratcheted up the intensity of his own rhetoric against political opponents. 'She's a marxist, communist, fascist, socialist', Trump said at a rally in Arizona in September. Johnson and McConnell made no mention of Trump's rhetoric in their statement, keeping the focus on their political rival." Schmidt 2024 Balk 2024 ^ a b Attributed to multiple sources: LeVine & Arnsdorf 2023 Bender & Gold 2023 Baker 2023 Arnsdorf, Dawsey & Barrett 2023 Colvin & Barrow 2023 Stone 2023 Beinart 2019 Breslin 2021 Baker 2022 Gessen 2020 ^ Attributed to multiple sources: Havercroft, Jonathan; Wiener, Antje; Kumm, Mattias; Dunoff, Jeffrey L (March 2018).

"Editorial: Donald Trump as global constitutional breaching experiment" .

Global Constitutionalism .

7 (1): 1– 13.

doi : 10.1017/S2045381718000035 .

ISSN 2045-3817 .

Fassassi, Idris (2020).

"Donald Trump et la Constitution" [Donald Trump and the Constitution].

Pouvoirs (in French).

172 (1): 29– 48.

doi : 10.3917/pouv.172.0029 .

ISSN 0152-0768 .

Darby, David (February 15, 2024).

"The Constitution versus Donald J. Trump • Daily Montanan" .

Daily Montanan . Retrieved June 20, 2024 .

Lusane, Clarence (February 15, 2024).

"Donald Trump Makes a Mockery of the Constitution" .

ISSN 0027-8378 . Retrieved June 20, 2024 .

^ Attributed to multiple sources: Sundahl 2022 Franks & Hesami 2021 Adams 2021 [ page needed ] Reyes 2020 [ page needed ] Goldsmith & Moen 2024 Diamond 2023 : [ page needed ] "The cult of Trumpism fosters and exploits paranoia and allegiance to an all-powerful, charismatic figure, contributing to a social milieu at risk for the erosion of democratic principles and the rise of fascism." Hassan 2019 [ page needed ] Butler 2020 [ page needed ] Haltiwanger 2021 Tharoor 2022 Ben-Ghiat 2020 ^ Attributed to multiple sources: Sundahl 2022 Franks & Hesami 2021 Adams 2021 [ page needed ] Reyes 2020 [ page needed ] Goldsmith & Moen 2024 Diamond 2023 : [ page needed ] "The cult of Trumpism fosters and exploits paranoia and allegiance to an all-powerful, charismatic figure, contributing to a social milieu at risk for the erosion of democratic principles and the rise of fascism." Hassan 2019 [ page needed ] Butler 2020 [ page needed ] Haltiwanger 2021 Tharoor 2022 Ben-Ghiat 2020 Horton 2020 ^ Attributed to multiple sources: Matthews 2021 Robertson 2020 Hasan 2020 Urbinati 2020 Shenk 2016 [ b ] [ 289 ] [ 68 ] [ 290 ] ^ Attributed to multiple sources: Adler et al.

2022 Shapiro, Intagliata & Venkat 2021 "Trump's world: The new nationalism" .

The Economist . November 19, 2016.

Archived from the original on August 24, 2018 . Retrieved January 20, 2024 .

"The growing peril of national conservatism" .

The Economist . February 15, 2024.

Archived from the original on February 15, 2024 . Retrieved March 14, 2024 .

Rushkoff 2016 Goldberg 2016 : "To listen to both his defenders and critics, Donald Trump represents the U.S. version of a new nationalism popping up around the world." Beauchamp 2019 Butler 2016 Chomsky 2020 Berkeley News 2020 Badiou 2019 , p. 19 Giroux 2021 Traverso 2017 , p. 30 Tarizzo 2021 , p. 163 Ibish 2020 Cockburn 2020 Drutman 2021 West 2020 Gorski 2019 Benjamin 2020 Morris 2019 , p. 10 McGaughey 2018 Tarizzo 2021 , p. 163 Jackson 2021 , p. 1-3 Maher 2023 , p. 392, 395 Kagan 2016 McGaughey 2018 Foster 2017 ^ Attributed to multiple sources: Delacourt 2020 Donolo 2021 Fawcett 2021 Donolo 2020 Global 2021 Fournier 2021 ^ Attributed to multiple sources: "NP View: The unstoppable Pierre Poilievre" .

National Post . August 5, 2022.

Trying to demonize Poilievre as a "populist" or as Canada's Trump, or implying that he is a white supremacist or opposed to women's rights is unlikely to succeed. He is pro-choice, pro-immigration and has forcefully denounced white replacement theory and all of "that kind of thinking." Forrest 2022 : "He has been compared to former President Donald Trump for his populist overtures, but in terms of substance, he has largely confined himself to pocketbook issues. He is pro-immigration — his wife is a Venezuelan immigrant — and now calls himself pro-choice." McConkey 2022 : "In several ways, Poilievre does not fit the mould of a new populist. For one, Poilievre is not new. He was a cabinet minister in the Stephen Harper government and he has been a member of Parliament for almost 20 years. For another, he is not your stereotypical reactionary. He is at ease with the non-traditional family, he is pro-choice, he is pro-immigration." Campbell 2022 : "But he is no Donald Trump in tenets or temperament. He doesn't echo the anti-immigrant rhetoric, and abhors Mr. Trump's gargantuan deficits. He is so calculated that he could never be the erratic bundle of impulses that rambles at a Trump rally." "Canada's Conservatives pick a brainy brawler as leader" .

The Economist . September 15, 2022.

His rhetorical style evokes populists such as Donald Trump. But his enemies list is more circumscribed. Unlike Mr Trump, he favours immigration.

Moore, Samuel (November 4, 2022).

"Pierre Poilievre: Canada's next Prime Minister?" .

Cherwell .

Moreover, in a way that distinguishes him from Trump and other right-wing populists, Poilievre's social policies are progressive. He is pro-choice and pro-LGBT rights and has actually criticised the Trudeau ministry for not being pro-immigration enough, belittling the inefficiencies of the current immigration system as yet another example of big government "gatekeeping".

Oliver 2022 : "The "Trump North" label has failed to stick because he has been consistently pro-choice, supports gay marriage and favours immigration." Thomson 2022 References ^ McCarthy, Ho & Greve 2021 .

^ Andersen 2021 .

^ Blake 2021 .

^ Haberman 2021 .

^ da Silva 2020 .

^ Hovland 2020 .

^ Yang 2018 .

^ "MAGA movement" . Britannica . Retrieved April 2, 2025 .

^ Richards, Barry (December 30, 2024).

"The authoritarian/libertarian hybrid" .

Free Associations (93): 3.

ISSN 2047-0622 .

Archived from the original on March 1, 2025 . Retrieved March 1, 2025 .

^ Doherty, Brian (November 4, 2024).

"The Peculiar Phenomenon of Libertarians Supporting Donald Trump" .

Reason .

Archived from the original on November 5, 2024 . Retrieved March 1, 2025 .

^ [ 9 ] [ 10 ] ^ Meaney, Thomas.

"Trumpism After Trump: Will the movement outlive the man?" .

Harper's Magazine . Vol. February 2020.

ISSN 0017-789X . Retrieved July 8, 2023 .

^ Bloodworth 2023 , pp. 201–202.

^ Kupchan, Charles (September 9, 2024).

"The Deep Roots of Trump's Isolationism | Foreign Affairs" .

www.foreignaffairs.com . Retrieved July 18, 2025 .

^ a b Bennhold, Katrin (September 7, 2020).

"Trump Emerges as Inspiration for Germany's Far Right" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on September 7, 2020.

^ a b Bender, Michael C.

(April 1, 2024).

"The Church of Trump: How He's Infusing Christianity Into His Movement" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on April 1, 2024.

^ "Many Trump supporters believe God has chosen him to rule" . The Economist. December 20, 2023.

Archived from the original on December 20, 2023 . Retrieved January 13, 2025 .

^ [ 16 ] [ 17 ] ^ Lowndes 2019 .

^ "Republican Party | Definition, History, & Beliefs | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . April 19, 2025 . Retrieved April 20, 2025 .

^ Isaac 2017 .

^ Ross 2024 , p. 298, "In 2016, a populist won the presidential election in the United States.".

^ Urbinati 2019 .

^ Rowland, Robert C. (2019).

"The Populist and Nationalist Roots of Trump's Rhetoric" (PDF) .

Rhetoric and Public Affairs .

22 (3): 343– 388.

doi : 10.14321/rhetpublaffa.22.3.0343 .

ISSN 1094-8392 .

JSTOR 10.14321/rhetpublaffa.22.3.0343 .

S2CID 211443408 . Retrieved November 13, 2023 .

^ Campani et al. 2022 .

^ Chotiner 2021 .

^ Continetti 2020 .

^ Brewster 2020 .

^ Jutel 2019 , p. 249.

^ Mercieca 2020 .

^ Stephens-Dougan 2021 , p. 302, "Trump, however, managed to achieve electoral success in 2016 despite routinely using racial appeals that openly and categorically disparaged racial, religious, and ethnic minorities, or what the racial priming literature refers to as explicit racial appeals. ... Throughout his campaign and subsequent presidency, Trump continued to traffic in similar explicit racial appeals".

^ Berman 2021 , p. 76, "In the United, States scholars consistently find that "racial animus," or attitudes regarding "blacks, immigrants, Muslims" are the best predictors of support for President Trump".

^ Gabriel, Trip (October 6, 2023).

"Trump Escalates Anti-Immigrant Rhetoric With 'Poisoning the Blood' Comment" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 17, 2024 . Retrieved December 19, 2023 .

^ Baker, Perry & Whitehead 2020 , p. 272.

^ a b Yang 2018 , p. 4.

^ Mason, Wronski & Kane 2021 , p. 1508.

^ a b Ott 2017 , p. 64.

^ Hamilton 2024 , Abstract.

^ Tollefson 2021 .

^ Lange 2024 .

^ Whitehead, Perry & Baker 2018 , p. 3.

^ Wilkinson, Francis (April 7, 2024).

"Trumpism Is Emptying Churches" .

www.bloomberg.com . Retrieved June 1, 2024 .

^ Irwin, Douglas A. (April 17, 2017).

"The False Promise of Protectionism" .

Foreign Affairs .

96 (May/June 2017).

Archived from the original on January 27, 2024 . Retrieved January 17, 2024 .

^ "Donald Trump's second term would be a protectionist nightmare" .

The Economist . October 31, 2023.

Archived from the original on January 16, 2024 . Retrieved January 17, 2024 .

^ Kaul 2021 .

^ Beinart 2019 .

^ "America's far right is increasingly protesting against LGBT people" .

The Economist . January 13, 2023.

Archived from the original on May 24, 2023 . Retrieved January 22, 2024 .

^ Kimmel 2017 , p. xi.

^ Kimmel & Wade 2018 , p. 243.

^ Kimmel 2017 , p. 18.

^ a b Boler & Davis 2021 , p. 62.

^ Fuchs 2018 , pp. 83–84.

^ Kuhn 2017 .

^ Serwer 2017 .

^ Stewart, Charles; Bobo, Lawrence D.; Hochschild, Jennifer L. (2017).

"Populism and the Future of American Politics" .

Bulletin of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences .

70 (2): 53– 61.

ISSN 0002-712X .

JSTOR 26407109 .

Archived from the original on November 12, 2023 . Retrieved November 12, 2023 .

^ Murty, Komanduri S.; Simonez, Tenora J. (2018).

"State of the Union under Donald Trump Presidency: Problems, Policies and Prospects" .

Race, Gender & Class .

25 (3/4): 162– 178.

ISSN 1082-8354 .

JSTOR 26802891 .

Archived from the original on November 12, 2023 . Retrieved November 12, 2023 .

^ Saldin, Robert P.; Teles, Steven M. (May 21, 2020), "Introduction" , Never Trump , Oxford University Press , pp.

1– 10, doi : 10.1093/oso/9780190880446.003.0001 , ISBN 978-0190880446 , retrieved November 12, 2023 ^ Espinoza, Michael (November 2, 2021).

"Donald Trump's impact on the Republican Party" .

Policy Studies .

42 ( 5– 6): 563– 579.

doi : 10.1080/01442872.2021.1950667 .

ISSN 0144-2872 .

S2CID 237770344 .

Archived from the original on November 12, 2023 . Retrieved November 12, 2023 .

^ Kellner 2018 .

^ Ross 2024 , p. 300, "Donald Trump is broadly seen as posing an existential threat to American democracy.".

^ Brettschneider & Calvelli 2024 , p. 206.

^ Swan, Savage & Haberman 2023 .

^ Brettschneider & Calvelli 2024 , p. 211-212.

^ Chiacu, Doina (February 16, 2025).

"Trump: If it saves the country, it's not illegal" .

Reuters . Retrieved February 17, 2025 .

^ Haberman, Maggie; Savage, Charlie; Swan, Jonathan (February 15, 2025).

"Trump Suggests No Laws Are Broken if He's 'Saving His Country' " .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on February 16, 2025 . Retrieved February 17, 2025 .

^ a b Gorski 2019 .

^ a b Stenner & Haidt 2018 .

^ a b Shapiro, Intagliata & Venkat 2021 .

^ Colvin 2020 .

^ Edwards-Levy, Ariel (January 19, 2025).

"CNN Poll: Most Democrats think their party needs major change, while the GOP coalesces around Trump" .

CNN . Retrieved January 20, 2025 .

^ Pepin-Neff, Christopher; Cohen, Aaron (2021).

"President Trump's transgender moral panic" .

Policy Studies .

42 ( 5– 6): 646– 661.

doi : 10.1080/01442872.2021.1952971 .

^ "Toxic masculinity / Search term" .

Google Trends . November 19, 2024.

Worldwide / 2004 - present / All categories / Web Search [ permanent dead link ] ^ a b Leonhardt, David (March 11, 2024).

"The Fourth Anniversary of the Covid Pandemic" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on March 11, 2024.

Data excludes Alaska. Sources: C.D.C. Wonder; Edison Research. (Chart) By The New York Times. Source credits chart to Ashley Wu.

^ a b Will 2020 .

^ a b Theidon 2020 .

^ Kimmel 2018 , p. xiii.

^ Vescio & Schermerhorn 2021 .

^ Jacobs 2016 .

^ Hoad 2020 .

^ Clemens 2017 .

^ Barrett & Zapotosky 2021 .

^ Pape 2021 .

^ Hymes, McDonald & Watson 2021 .

^ Graham, Ruth; Homans, Charles (January 8, 2024).

"Trump Is Connecting With a Different Type of Evangelical Voter" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved January 13, 2025 .

^ Perry, Samuel L.; Whitehead, Andrew L.; Grubbs, Joshua B. (April 21, 2021).

"The Devil That You Know: Christian Nationalism and Intent to Change One's Voting Behavior For or Against Trump in 2020" .

Politics and Religion .

15 (2): 229– 246.

doi : 10.1017/S175504832100002X .

hdl : 11244/334967 .

^ Peter, Smith (May 18, 2024).

"Jesus is their savior, Trump is their candidate. Ex-president's backers say he shares faith, values" .

AP News . Retrieved November 23, 2024 .

^ Vakil, Caroline (June 24, 2023).

"Trump paints 2024 campaign as 'righteous crusade' as he rallies evangelicals" .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on January 20, 2025 . Retrieved January 23, 2025 .

^ Carless, Will (March 7, 2024).

"As Trump support merges with Christian nationalism, experts warn of extremist risks" .

USA Today . Retrieved January 13, 2025 .

^ Klepper, David (April 5, 2023).

"Trump arrest prompts Jesus comparisons: 'Spiritual warfare' " .

USA Today . Retrieved January 13, 2025 .

^ Bensinger, Ken (January 11, 2024).

"Iowa Pastors Say Video Depicting Trump as Godly Is 'Very Concerning' " .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved January 13, 2025 .

^ Burton, Tara Isabella (March 5, 2018).

"The biblical story the Christian right uses to defend Trump" .

Vox . Retrieved January 13, 2025 .

^ Petrovic, Phoebe (October 26, 2024).

"The Genesis of Christian Nationalism" .

ProPublica . Retrieved January 13, 2025 .

^ "Many Trump supporters believe God has chosen him to rule" . The Economist. December 20, 2023.

Archived from the original on December 20, 2023 . Retrieved January 13, 2025 .

^ Hochschild 2016 , pp. 8, 14, 223.

^ Thompson 2020 .

^ NYTimes11_09 2016 .

^ Hochschild 2016 , pp. 230, 234.

^ Hochschild 2016 , p. 223.

^ Cui 2018 , p. 95.

^ a b Marietta et al. 2017 , p. 330.

^ Tarnoff 2016 .

^ Marietta et al. 2017 , pp. 313, 317.

^ Appel 2018 , pp. 162–163.

^ Löwenthal & Guterman 1949 , pp. 92–95.

^ Löwenthal & Guterman 1949 , p. 93.

^ Smith 2020 , p. 121.

^ Money-Kyrle 2015 , pp. 166–168.

^ Guilford 2016 .

^ Sexton 2017 , pp. 104–108.

^ Kellner 2020 , p. 93.

^ a b Connolly 2017 , p. 13.

^ Nessen 2016 .

^ Newkirk 2016 .

^ Le Bon 2002 , pp. xiii, 8, 91–92.

^ Zaretsky 2016 .

^ Reicher 2017 , pp. 2–4.

^ Connolly 2017 , p. 15.

^ Pulido et al. 2019 .

^ Kellner 2020 , p. 90.

^ Connolly 2017 , p. 19.

^ a b Connolly 2017 , p. 7.

^ Neuborne 2019 , p. 32.

^ Rosenfeld 2019 .

^ Neuborne 2019 , p. 34.

^ a b c Neuborne 2019 , p. 36.

^ Neuborne 2019 , p. 39.

^ Neuborne 2019 , p. 37.

^ Connolly 2017 , p. 11.

^ de Berg, Henk (2024).

Trump and Hitler: a comparative study in lying . London: Palgrave Macmillan. pp.

263– 306.

ISBN 978-3-031-51832-4 .

^ de Berg, Henk (2024).

"Fives Rules for Understanding Trump's Rhetorical Strategy" .

www.palgrave.com . Retrieved January 3, 2025 .

^ Cegielski 2016 .

^ Danner 2016 .

^ Schneiker 2018 .

^ Hall, Goldstein & Ingram 2016 .

^ a b Gordon 2018 , p. 79.

^ Stoler 2020 , p. 117.

^ Tucker 2018 , p. 134.

^ Hidalgo-Tenorio & Benítez-Castro 2021 .

^ Laclau 2005 , p. 11.

^ Nacos, Brigitte L.; Shapiro, Robert Y.; Bloch-Elkon, Yaeli (2020).

"Donald Trump: Aggressive Rhetoric and Political Violence" .

Perspectives on Terrorism .

14 (5): 2– 25.

ISSN 2334-3745 .

JSTOR 26940036 .

Archived from the original on November 12, 2023 . Retrieved November 12, 2023 .

^ Carpini 2018 , pp. 18–19.

^ Jacquemet 2020 , p. 187.

^ Plasser & Ulram 2003 .

^ Jutel 2019 , pp. 249, 255.

^ Johnson 2018 .

^ Postman 2005 , p. 106.

^ Ott 2017 , p. 66.

^ Beer 2021 .

^ Kreiss 2018 , pp. 93–94.

^ Kreiss 2018 , pp. 93, 94.

^ Hochschild 2016 , p. 126.

^ Jutel 2019 , pp. 250, 256.

^ Richardson 2017 .

^ Pybus 2015 , p. 239.

^ a b Jones 2019 .

^ Jones 2013 .

^ a b Fact Checker (January 20, 2021).

"In four years, President Trump made 30,573 false or misleading claims" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on January 20, 2021.

^ Dale, Daniel (June 5, 2019).

"Donald Trump has now said more than 5,000 false things as president" .

Toronto Star .

Archived from the original on October 3, 2019.

^ Dale, Daniel (March 9, 2020).

"Trump is averaging about 59 false claims per week since ... July 8, 2019" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on March 9, 2020 . Retrieved April 16, 2020 .

( direct link to chart image ) ^ Dale, Daniel; Subramaniam, Tara (March 9, 2020).

"Donald Trump made 115 false claims in the last two weeks of February" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on August 3, 2021 . Retrieved August 3, 2021 .

^ Yourish, Karen; Smart, Charlie (May 24, 2024).

"Trump's Pattern of Sowing Election Doubt Intensifies in 2024" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on May 24, 2024.

^ "Gaslighting / topic" .

Google Trends . November 16, 2024. Archived from the original on December 13, 2024 . Retrieved November 18, 2024 .

Worldwide / 2004 - present / All categories / Web Search ^ "Fake news / topic" .

Google Trends . November 16, 2024.

Worldwide / 2004 - present / All categories / Web Search [ permanent dead link ] ^ Bump, Philip (November 18, 2025).

"Trump's 2024 'mandate' isn't as robust as Biden's was in 2020" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on November 18, 2024.

^ Woolley, John T. and Peters, Gerhard, Eds.

"Presidential Election Margin of Victory" . The American Presidency Project (University of California). November 6, 2024.

Archived from the original on March 29, 2025.

^ Kaufman, Mark (August 17, 2024).

"Trump won't stop making a deceptive bird claim. Experts debunk it" .

Mashable .

Archived from the original on February 11, 2025.

^ "Threats to Birds / Top Threats to Birds (U.S. only. Ordered by Median Estimate of Bird Mortality Annually. As of 2017.)" . U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 2017.

Archived from the original on February 13, 2025.

^ Kessler & Kelly 2018 .

^ McManus 2020 , p. 178.

^ a b Kessler, Rizzo & Kelly 2020 , pp. 16, 24, 46, 47, (ebook edition).

^ Pfiffner 2020 , pp. 17–40.

^ Connolly 2017 , pp. 18–19.

^ Lifton 2019 , pp. 131–132.

^ Parker 2020 .

^ Lifton 2019 , p. 11, epub edition).

^ Hahl, Kim & Zuckerman Sivan 2018 .

^ Gumbel 2025 .

^ Dean & Altemeyer 2020 , p. 11.

^ a b Stenner & Haidt 2018 , p. 136.

^ a b Pettigrew 2017 , p. 107.

^ Womick et al. 2018 .

^ Dean & Altemeyer 2020 , p. 140.

^ Dean & Altemeyer 2020 , p. 154.

^ Dean & Altemeyer 2020 , p. 188.

^ Dean & Altemeyer 2020 , p. 218.

^ Dean & Altemeyer 2020 , p. 258.

^ Dean & Altemeyer 2020 , p. 227.

^ Pettigrew 2017 , pp. 5–6.

^ Pettigrew 2017 , p. 108.

^ Feldman 2020 .

^ Pettigrew 2017 , pp. 112–113.

^ a b c d Lemann 2020 .

^ McAdams 2020 , p. 329.

^ Boehm 2016 .

^ McAdams 2020 , p. 318.

^ Fallows 2016 .

^ a b Gabriel et al. 2018 .

^ McAdams 2020 , p. 298.

^ Stoller 2017 , p. 58.

^ Blair 2000 , p. 275, (epub edition).

^ Mansfield 2017 , p. 77.

^ Kruse 2017 .

^ Federico & Golec de Zavala 2018 , p. 1.

^ Fea 2018 , p. 140.

^ Fea 2018 , pp. 139–140.

^ Fea 2018 , pp. 45, 67.

^ Gutterman 2020 .

^ a b Whitebook 2017 .

^ Cash 2017 .

^ Lifton 2019 , p. 129.

^ Lifton 2019 , p. 128.

^ a b Bote 2020 .

^ a b Bump 2020 .

^ a b c Brooks 2020 .

^ Imhoff & Lamberty 2018 , p. 4.

^ Paravati et al. 2019 .

^ Cillizza 2021 .

^ Roper 2021 .

^ Alter 2021 .

^ Johnston 2020 .

^ van Prooijen 2018 , p. 65.

^ Suessenbach & Moore 2020 , abstract.

^ a b Denby 2015 .

^ Bader 2016 .

^ Trump 2019 .

^ Trump & Schwartz 2011 , p. 49, (epub edition).

^ Hart 2020 , p. 4.

^ Reyes 2020 .

^ a b c Goldsmith & Moen 2024 .

^ Haltiwanger 2021 .

^ Tharoor 2022 .

^ Ben-Ghiat 2020 .

^ Sundahl 2022 .

^ Franks & Hesami 2021 .

^ Diamond 2023 : [ page needed ] "The cult of Trumpism fosters and exploits paranoia and allegiance to an all-powerful, charismatic figure, contributing to a social milieu at risk for the erosion of democratic principles and the rise of fascism." ^ Horton 2020 .

^ Andrews 2019 , p. 14.

^ a b Ross 2016 .

^ Gordon 2018 , p. 70.

^ Gordon 2018 , pp. 69, 70.

^ Horkheimer & Adorno 2002 , pp. 169, 170.

^ a b Lebow 2019 , p. 381.

^ McManus 2020 , p. 68.

^ Gordon 2018 , p. 72.

^ Gordon 2018 , p. 69.

^ Kreiss 2018 , pp. 98, 99.

^ Waisbord, Tucker & Lichtenheld 2018 , pp. 29, 31.

^ Sobieraj & Berry 2011 .

^ Berry & Sobieraj 2014 .

^ Bond 2016 .

^ Waisbord, Tucker & Lichtenheld 2018 , p. 31.

^ Wehner 2017 .

^ Confessore & Yourish 2016 .

^ Waisbord, Tucker & Lichtenheld 2018 , p. 30.

^ Carpini 2018 , p. 17.

^ Donald J. Trump [@realDonaldTrump] (July 1, 2017).

"My use of social media is not Presidential – it's MODERN DAY PRESIDENTIAL. Make America Great Again!" ( Tweet ). Archived from the original on July 2, 2017 – via Twitter .

^ Ott 2017 , p. 63.

^ Gabler 2016 .

^ O'Callaghan 2020 , p. 115.

^ Sobieraj & Berry 2011 , p. 20.

^ Sobieraj & Berry 2011 , p. 22.

^ a b c O'Callaghan 2020 , p. 116.

^ Sunstein 2007 , p. 60.

^ Massachs et al. 2020 , p. 2.

^ Bleiberg & West 2015 .

^ Power 2018 , p. 77.

^ Solon 2016 .

^ Gottfried & Shearer 2016 .

^ Ott 2017 , p. 65.

^ a b Robison 2020 , p. 180.

^ Sunstein 2007 , pp. 46–96.

^ Robison 2020 , p. 182.

^ a b Glasser 2018 .

^ Katzenstein 2019 .

^ a b Morris 2019 , p. 20.

^ Lyall 2021 .

^ "President-Elect Trump: The New Whig President" .

^ "Donald Trump is Just an Old Whig, by R. Emmett Tyrrell" . January 12, 2017.

^ "Donald Trump: An Old-fashioned Whig" . June 2, 2016.

^ Greenberg 2016 .

^ a b Ron Elving (May 20, 2023).

"Ghost of William Jennings Bryan haunts Trump's next run for the White House" .

National Public Radio .

^ Longfield, Bradley J. (1993).

The Presbyterian Controversy . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-508674-4 . Retrieved August 17, 2018 .

^ "Sweeping tariffs: Why does Trump keep pointing to William McKinley?" .

^ Morris 2019 , p. 21.

^ a b c Clavey 2020 .

^ MacWilliams 2020 .

^ Peters 2020 .

^ a b Haltiwanger, John (September 25, 2020).

"Historians and election experts warn Trump is behaving like Mussolini and despots that the US usually condemns" .

Business Insider .

Archived from the original on October 18, 2023 . Retrieved October 4, 2023 .

^ Kaul 2021 Adler et al.

2022 : "The decoupling of the man from the movement suggests that authoritarianism can continue well beyond the authoritarian's rule. The most enduring vestige—apart from the democratic institutions attacked—is Trumpism. It has metastasized from Trump's delusional framing on his inauguration day in 2017—with the biggest crowds ever—to a widespread and ambient movement, amplified by disinformation and distortion, broadcast in social and right-wing media, aggressively militant, and framed with falsehoods." Kellner 2018 Badiou 2019 , p. 19 Giroux 2021 Ibish 2020 Cockburn 2020 West 2020 Gorski 2019 Benjamin 2020 Morris 2019 , p. 10 McGaughey 2018 Tarizzo 2021 , p. 163 Hopkin & Blyth 2020 Gordon 2018 , p. 68 ^ Lachmann, Richard (January 1, 2019).

"Trump: authoritarian, just another neoliberal republican, or both?" .

Sociologia, Problemas e Práticas (89): 9– 31.

ISSN 0873-6529 .

^ Boucher, Geoff M. (October 28, 2024).

"Is Donald Trump a fascist? No – he's a new brand of authoritarian" .

The Conversation . Retrieved November 12, 2024 .

^ Zeitz, Joshua (October 29, 2024).

"Trump and Fascism: A Pair of Historians Tackle the Big Question" .

Politico . Retrieved November 12, 2024 .

^ Foster 2017 .

^ Adler et al.

2022 .

^ Attributed to multiple sources: Butler 2016 Chomsky 2020 Berkeley News 2020 Badiou 2019 , p. 19 Giroux 2021 Traverso 2017 , p. 30 Tarizzo 2021 , p. 163 Ibish 2020 Cockburn 2020 Drutman 2021 West 2020 ^ Badiou 2019 , p. 15.

^ Traverso 2017 , p. 35.

^ a b Tarizzo 2021 , p. 178.

^ Kagan 2016 .

^ McGaughey 2018 .

^ Giroux 2017 .

^ Tarizzo 2021 , p. 163.

^ Evans 2021 .

^ Weber 2021 .

^ Boggs 2018 , pp. 195–205.

^ Finn 2017 .

^ Paxton 2021 .

^ Devereaux, Bret (October 26, 2024).

"New Acquisitions: 1933 and the Definition of Fascism" .

A Collection of Unmitigated Pedantry . Retrieved October 28, 2024 .

^ Devore 2019 .

^ Finchelstein 2017 , pp. 11–13.

^ Browning 2018 .

^ Seeßlen 2017 .

^ Benjamin 2020 .

^ Morris 2019 , p. 10.

^ Matthews 2020 .

^ West 2016 .

^ Goldberg 2020 .

^ Oreskes, Benjamin (February 19, 2025).

" 'Long Live the King': Trump Likens Himself to Royalty on Truth Social" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved February 20, 2025 .

^ Smith 2020 , pp. 119–121.

^ Conroy 2017 .

^ Kimmel 2018 , pp. xii–xiii.

^ Temelkuran 2019 .

^ Hopkin & Blyth 2020 .

^ a b c McFadden & Grynbaum 2021 .

^ a b c d Peters 2021 .

^ Serhan 2021 .

^ Lowndes 2021 .

^ Jindal & Castellanos 2021 .

^ Garcia-Navarro 2024 .

^ Harwood 2017 .

^ Partington 2018 .

^ Thompson 2017 .

^ O'Connor 2020 .

^ Yang 2018 Swan, Savage & Haberman 2023 Baker 2024 Lange 2024 ^ Rudolf 2017 .

^ Assheuer 2018 .

^ Smith & Townsend 2018 .

^ Tharoor 2018 .

^ Diamond 2016 .

^ Kuhn 2018 .

^ Zengerle 2019 .

^ Wintour 2020 .

^ Contorno, Steve (December 23, 2024).

"Trump is teasing US expansion into Panama, Greenland and Canada" .

CNN . Retrieved December 25, 2024 .

^ "Trump's Iran dilemma exposes bitter split among Maga faithful" .

BBC . June 18, 2025.

^ " 'Drop Israel': How military escalation with Iran divides Trump's base" .

Al Jazeera . June 14, 2025.

^ Bade, Rachael (June 12, 2025).

"MAGA Warned Trump on Iran. Now He's In An Impossible Position" .

Politico .

^ "Israel-Iran conflict splits Trump's MAGA backers" .

NBC News . June 13, 2025.

^ Samuels, Brett (June 14, 2025).

"Israel-Iran war spotlights MAGA divide" .

The Hill .

^ Vakil, Caroline (June 25, 2023).

"Trump paints 2024 campaign as 'righteous crusade' as he rallies evangelicals" .

Yahoo . Retrieved January 24, 2025 .

^ a b Bose, Nandita; Chiacu, Doina (February 6, 2025).

"Trump to create religious office in White House, target 'anti-Christian bias' " .

Reuters . Retrieved February 7, 2025 .

^ Madhani, Aamer; Smith, Peter (February 6, 2025).

"After prayer breakfast, Trump creates task force to root out 'anti-Christian bias' " .

Associated Press . Retrieved February 7, 2025 .

^ Lasher, James (February 6, 2025).

"President Trump Champions Faith and Freedom at National Prayer Breakfast - Charisma News" .

Charisma News . Retrieved February 7, 2025 .

^ Nicas, Jack (October 20, 2023).

"Javier Milei, a 'Mini-Trump,' Could Be Argentina's Next President" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved June 20, 2024 .

"Trump-admiring populist Javier Milei triumphs in Argentina presidential election" .

Le Monde.fr . November 20, 2023 . Retrieved June 20, 2024 .

"Trump has long praised autocrats and populists. He's now embracing Argentina's new president" .

AP News . November 21, 2023 . Retrieved June 20, 2024 .

Goñi, Uki (August 14, 2023).

"Far-right outsider takes shock lead in Argentina primary election" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved June 20, 2024 .

^ Nugent, Ciara; Stott, Michael (November 26, 2023).

"How similar is Argentina's Javier Milei to Donald Trump and Jair Bolsonaro?" .

Financial Times . Retrieved June 20, 2024 .

"Argentina's Milei no 'Trump of the Pampas', analysts say" .

France 24 . November 23, 2023 . Retrieved June 20, 2024 .

Raisbeck, Daniel (August 17, 2023).

"Don't Confuse Javier Milei with Jair Bolsonaro" .

Cato Institute . Retrieved June 20, 2024 .

Gabriel, Jon.

"Javier Milei is weird, but that doesn't make him 'Argentina's Trump' " .

The Arizona Republic . Retrieved June 20, 2024 .

"President Milei Is Very Different from President Trump" .

National Review . January 19, 2024 . Retrieved June 20, 2024 .

^ " 'Make Australia great again': Palmer returns, with Trumpist pledge" .

The New Daily . February 19, 2025. Archived from the original on February 19, 2025 . Retrieved February 19, 2025 .

^ Sharma, Yashee (February 19, 2025).

"Clive Palmer launches Trump-inspired political party Trumpet of Patriots" .

Nine News . Archived from the original on February 19, 2025 . Retrieved February 19, 2025 .

^ Haltiwanger 2018 .

^ Survival International 2020 .

^ Phillips & Phillips 2019 .

^ Weisbrot 2017 .

^ Brant 2018 .

^ Bailey 2017 .

^ Ilyushina 2020 .

^ The Current 2020 .

^ Fournier 2020 .

^ Woods 2020 .

^ CBC News , September 8, 2020 .

^ "O'Toole compares Freeland to Trump after tweet flagged as 'manipulated media' " .

Global News . December 16, 2021.

^ Burke, Ashley (August 21, 2021).

"Twitter adds 'manipulated' warning label to tweet from Liberal candidate Chrystia Freeland" .

CBC News .

^ Duffy, Clare (April 5, 2022).

"Elon Musk to join Twitter's board" .

CNN Business .

^ Von Rennenkampff 2021 : "A comparison between Canada's Conservative Party and the Republican Party illustrates these striking differences. In stark contrast to Republicans, the leader of Canada's Conservatives is pro-choice. [...] In another striking example, Canada's single-payer health care system is sacrosanct among voters (just as the UK's system is to Britons). Most Canadian Conservatives would never dream of shifting their popular, government-run health system towards the wasteful, bankruptcy-inducing, for-profit American insurance state." ^ Von Rennenkampff 2021 : "Ultimately, Canadian Conservatives – like mainstream conservative political parties in virtually all advanced, industrialized democracies – are far more closely aligned with Democrats than Republicans on many issues." ^ Harris, Michael (September 18, 2023).

"In Pierre Poilievre's world, we'd all be living in 'Leave it to Beaver' " .

The Hill Times .

^ "Canadian Conservatives elect "right-wing populist" Pierre Poilievre to lead fight against Justin Trudeau" .

CBS News . September 12, 2022 . Retrieved October 2, 2022 .

^ Beauchamp, Zack (April 26, 2024).

"Canada's polite Trumpism" .

Vox .

Vox Media .

But on policy substance, he's actually considerably more moderate than Trump or European radicals.

^ Helsinki Times , April 13, 2019 .

^ Schneider 2017 .

^ Pardo, Pablo (April 27, 2019).

"Make Spain Great Again" .

Foreign Policy .

Archived from the original on November 14, 2019 . Retrieved January 14, 2024 .

^ Kakissis 2019 .

^ "Isabel Díaz Ayuso, una 'estrella del pop' y la "alumna más aventajada del 'trumpismo' en España" " [Isabel Díaz Ayuso, a 'pop star' and the "most gifted student of 'Trumpism' in Spain"].

www.lasexta.com (in Spanish). February 25, 2022.

Archived from the original on February 25, 2024 . Retrieved February 25, 2024 .

^ "Ayuso: qué hay detrás de la Trump española" .

elDiario.es (in Spanish). May 22, 2023.

Archived from the original on February 25, 2024 . Retrieved February 25, 2024 .

^ a b Casiano, Louis (February 13, 2025).

"Indian Prime Minister Modi takes page from Trump, says 'make India great again,' or 'MIGA' " .

Fox News . Retrieved February 18, 2025 .

^ a b Sheerin, Jude; Lukiv, Jaroslav; Ewe, Koh (February 14, 2025).

"Modi hails US-India 'mega-partnership' in Trump meeting" .

BBC News . Retrieved February 18, 2025 .

^ a b c Tabatabai 2020 .

^ "The App Powering the Uprising in Iran, Where Some Channels Pushed for Violence" .

The Daily Beast . January 11, 2018.

Archived from the original on February 1, 2019 . Retrieved February 5, 2022 .

^ Osaki, Tomohiro (March 8, 2019).

"Ex-adviser Steve Bannon says Abe was 'Trump before Trump,' urges him to play hardball with China" .

The Japan Times .

Archived from the original on August 29, 2020 . Retrieved February 7, 2024 .

^ Yamaguchi, Mari; Tanaka, Chisato; Klug, Foster (July 9, 2022).

"Japan's ex-leader Shinzo Abe assassinated during a speech" .

Associated Press News .

Archived from the original on March 21, 2023.

Even though he was out of office, Abe was still highly influential in the governing Liberal Democratic Party and headed its largest faction, Seiwakai, but his ultra-nationalist views made him a divisive figure to many.

^ "Yoon visits Japan, seeking to restore ties amid N Korea threat" .

Al Jazeera . March 16, 2023.

Archived from the original on March 21, 2023.

But many in South Korea did not consider Japan's remorse as sufficiently sincere, especially as the ultranationalist former Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, who was assassinated last year, and his allies sought to whitewash Japan's colonial abuses, even suggesting there was no evidence to indicate Japanese authorities coerced Korean women into sexual slavery.

^ "Japan's rising right-wing nationalism" .

Vox . May 26, 2017.

Archived from the original on February 6, 2023 – via YouTube.

^ 倉山, 満 (December 14, 2020), ネトウヨ芸人も安倍信者も、社会から消えてもらうのみ , Yahoo News (in Japanese), archived from the original on December 14, 2020 , retrieved February 16, 2021 ^ a b Akinwotu 2020 .

^ Nwaubani 2020 .

^ a b Oduah 2016 .

^ Nwachukwu 2018 .

^ "Biafran pro-Trump rally turns violent in Nigeria" .

BBC News . January 20, 2017.

Archived from the original on August 24, 2022 . Retrieved August 29, 2022 .

^ Bankole 2020 .

^ Adebayo 2020 .

^ Campbell 2020 .

^ Coronel 2020 .

^ Reyes, Ronny (March 30, 2025).

" 'Putin's Rasputin' says Russia under Kremlin dictator and Trump's America have a lot in common" .

New York Post .

^ Moon, Rhys (January 15, 2023).

"Feminism is the New F-Word – Populism & Patriarchy Among Young South Korean Men: K-Trumpism is part of the global rise of right-wing populism, experts say" .

Harvard Political Review .

Archived from the original on February 3, 2023 . Retrieved February 3, 2023 .

The case of South Korea parallels the lasting effects of Trumpism on conservative nativism in the United States, which attributes economic troubles to asylum seekers and undocumented immigrants.

Bibliography Books Andrews, David L. (2019). "Making Sport Great Again".

Making Sport Great Again: The Uber-Sport Assemblage, Neoliberalism, and the Trump Conjuncture (e-book ed.). New York: Palgrave Macmillan .

doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-15002-0 .

ISBN 978-3030150020 .

S2CID 159089360 .

Badiou, Alain (2019).

Trump (e-book ed.). Cambridge, UK: Polity Press .

ISBN 978-1509536092 .

...we could speak of these new figures in terms of a kind of "democratic fascism", a paradoxical but effective designation. After all, the Berlusconis, the Sarkozys, the Le Pens, the Trumps, are operating inside the democratic apparatus, with its elections, its oppositions, its scandals, etc. But, within this apparatus, they are playing a different score, another music. This is certainly the case with Trump, who is racist, a male chauvinist, violent—all of which are fascist tendencies—but who, in addition, displays a contempt for logic and rationality and a muffled hatred of intellectuals. The music proper to this type of democratic fascism is a discourse that does not worry in the least bit about coherence, a discourse of impulse, comfortable with a few nighttime tweets, and that imposes a sort of dislocation of language, positively flaunting its ability to say everything and its opposite. For these new political figures, the aim of language is no longer to explain anything or to defend a point of view in an articulate manner. Its aim is to produce affects, which are used to create a fleetingly powerful unity, largely artificial but capable of being exploited in the moment.

Berry, Jeffrey M.; Sobieraj, Sarah (2014).

The Outrage Industry: Political Opinion Media and the New Incivility (e-book ed.). New York: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0199928972 .

Archived from the original on March 14, 2024 . Retrieved March 14, 2024 .

Blair, Gwenda (2000).

The Trumps: Three Generations of Builders and a Presidential Candidate . New York: Simon & Schuster .

ISBN 0684808498 .

Boggs, Carl (2018).

Fascism Old and New (e-book ed.). New York: Routledge . p. xii.

ISBN 978-1351049696 .

At this juncture [November 2017] it is worth noting that the 2016 ascendancy of Donald Trump to the White House does not occur to the author as a specifically fascist moment in U.S. history, contrary to what is commonly heard in liberal and progressive circles. To be sure, Trump does possess strong elements of a leadership cult, replete with narcissism and grandiose visions ('making American great again') ... I have chosen to view Trump as representing an interregnum between existing power arrangements—that is, a militarized state-capitalism—and potential American fascism.

Boler, Megan; Davis, Elizabeth (2021). "Affect, Media, Movement – Interview with Susanna Paasonen and Zizi Papacharissi". In Boler, Megan; Davis, Elizabeth (eds.).

Affective Politics of Digital Media (e-book ed.). New York: Routledge .

ISBN 978-1003052272 .

Boyd, Gregory (2005).

The Myth of a Christian Nation: How the Quest for Political Power Is Destroying the Church . Grand Rapids, Michigan: Zondervan .

ISBN 0310281245 .

Butler, Anthea (2020).

White Evangelical Racism: The Politics of Morality in America .

University of North Carolina Press .

ISBN 9781469661179 .

Carpini, Michael X. Delli (2018).

"Alternative Facts: Donald Trump and the Emergence of a New U.S. Media Regime" . In Boczkowski, Pablo; Papacharissi, Zizi (eds.).

Trump and the Media (e-book ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press .

ISBN 978-0262037969 .

Archived from the original on January 15, 2024 . Retrieved January 15, 2024 .

Connolly, William (2017).

Aspirational Fascism: The Struggle for Multifaceted Democracy under Trumpism . Minneapolis, Minnesota: University of Minnesota Press .

ISBN 978-1517905125 .

Dean, John ; Altemeyer, Robert A.

(2020). "Chapter 10: National Survey on Authoritarianism".

Authoritarian Nightmare: Trump and his Followers (e-book ed.). Brooklyn, New York: Melville House Publishing .

ISBN 978-1612199061 .

de Berg, Henk (2024).

Trump and Hitler: A Comparative Study in Lying . London: Palgrave Macmillan .

ISBN 978-3031518324 .

de la Torre, Carlos; Barr, Robert R.; Arato, Andrew; Cohen, Jean L.; Ruzza, Carlo (2019).

Routledge Handbook of Global Populism . Routledge International Handbooks. London & New York: Routledge .

ISBN 978-1315226446 .

Frum, David (2018).

Trumpocracy . New York: Harper . p. 336.

ISBN 978-0062796745 .

Dionne, E. J.

; Mann, Thomas E.

; Ornstein, Norman (2017).

One Nation After Trump: A Guide for the Perplexed, the Disillusioned, the Desperate, and the Not-yet Deported . New York: St. Martin's Press . p. 384.

ISBN 978-1250293633 .

Fea, John (2018).

Believe Me: The Evangelical Road to Donald Trump . Grand Rapids, Michigan: Eerdmans .

ISBN 978-1467450461 .

Feldman, Stanley (2020).

"Authoritarianism, threat, and intolerance" . In Borgida; Federico; Miller (eds.).

At the Forefront of Political Psychology: Essays in Honor of John L. Sullivan . Abingdon, England: Taylor & Francis .

ISBN 978-1000768275 .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved October 14, 2020 .

Finchelstein, Federico (2017).

From Fascism to Populism in History .

University of California Press . pp.

11– 13.

ISBN 978-0520968042 .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved October 29, 2020 .

Fuchs, Christian (2018).

Digital Demagogue: Authoritarian Capitalism in the Age of Trump and Twitter . London, England: Pluto Press.

JSTOR j.ctt21215dw.8 .

Archived from the original on October 10, 2022 . Retrieved August 29, 2020 .

Gordon, Peter E.

(2018). "The Authoritarian Personality Revisited: Reading Adorno in the Age of Trump". In Brown, Wendy; Gordon, Peter E.; Pensky, Max (eds.).

Authoritarianism: Three Inquiries in Critical Theory (e-book ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press .

doi : 10.7208/chicago/9780226597300.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0226597300 .

Gorski, Philip (2019). "Why Evangelicals Voted for Trump: A Critical Cultural Sociology". In Mast, Jason L.; Alexander, Jeffrey C. (eds.).

Politics of Meaning/Meaning of Politics . Cultural Sociology. Cham: Springer International Publishing. pp.

165– 183.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-95945-0_10 .

ISBN 978-3319959450 .

S2CID 239775845 .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2022 . Retrieved April 19, 2021 – via Springer Link.

Hart, Roderick P. (2020). "Trump's Arrival".

Trump and Us (What He Says and Why People Listen) . Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press . pp.

3– 22.

doi : 10.1017/9781108854979.001 .

ISBN 978-1108854979 .

S2CID 234899569 .

Hassan, Steven (2019).

The Cult of Trump . New York: Simon & Schuster .

ISBN 9781982127336 .

Hochschild, Arlie Russell (2016).

Strangers in Their Own Land: Anger and Mourning on the American Right (e-book ed.). New York: The New Press .

ISBN 978-1620972267 .

Hopkin, Jonathan ; Blyth, Mark (2020).

"Global Trumpism: Understanding Anti-System Politics in Western Democracies" . In Vormann, Boris; Weinman, Michael D. (eds.).

The Emergence of Illiberalism .

Routledge .

ISBN 978-0367366247 .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved October 11, 2020 .

Horkheimer, Max ; Adorno, Theodor W.

(2002) [1947]. Noerr, Gunzelin Schmid (ed.).

Dialectic of Enlightenment – Philosophical Fragments . Cultural Memory in the Present. Translated by Jephcott, Edmund (e-book ed.). Stanford, California: Stanford University Press .

ISBN 978-0804788090 .

Jacquemet, Marco (2020). "45 as a Bullshit Artist: Straining for Charisma". In McIntosh, Janet; Mendoza-Denton, Norma (eds.).

Language in the Trump Era: Scandals and Emergencies . Cambridge: Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1017/9781108887410 .

ISBN 978-1108745031 .

S2CID 241149659 .

Archived from the original on April 20, 2021 . Retrieved April 20, 2021 .

Jaeger, C. Stephen (1985).

The Origins of Courtliness: Civilizing Trends and the Formation of Courtly Ideals . Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: University of Pennsylvania Press .

ASIN B008UYP8H8 .

Jeffress, Robert (2011).

Twilight's Last Gleaming: How America's Last Days Can Be Your Best Days . Brentwood, Tennessee: Worthy Publishing.

ISBN 978-1936034581 .

Jones, Karen (2013). "Trusting Interpretations". In Mäkelä, Pekka; Townley, Cynthia (eds.).

Trust: Analytic and Applied Perspectives . Value Inquiry Book Series. Vol. 263. Rodopi.

ISBN 978-9401209410 .

Jutel, Olivier (2019). "Donald Trump, American Populism and Affective Media". In de la Torre, Carlos; Barr, Robert R.; Arato, Andrew; Cohen, Jean L.; Ruzza, Carlo (eds.).

Routledge Handbook of Global Populism . Routledge International Handbooks. London & New York: Routledge .

ISBN 978-1315226446 .

Kellner, Douglas (2018). "Donald Trump as Authoritarian Populist: A Frommian Analysis". In Morelock, Jeremiah (ed.).

Critical Theory and Authoritarian Populism . Vol. 9. London: University of Westminster Press . pp.

71– 82.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctv9hvtcf.8 .

ISBN 978-1912656059 .

JSTOR j.ctv9hvtcf.8 .

Kellner, Douglas (2020). "Donald Trump and the Politics of Lying". In Peters, Michael A.; Rider, Sharon; Hyvonen, Mats; Besley, Tina (eds.).

Post-Truth, Fake News: Viral Modernity & Higher Education . New York: Springer .

doi : 10.1007/978-981-10-8013-5 .

ISBN 978-9811080135 .

Kessler, Glenn ; Rizzo, Salvador; Kelly, Meg (2020).

Donald Trump and His Assault on Truth: The Presidents Falsehoods, Misleading Claims and Flat-Out Lie . The Washington Post Books. New York: Simon and Schuster .

ISBN 978-1982151089 .

Kimmel, Michael (2017) [2013].

Angry White Men: American Masculinity at the End of an Era (2017 ed.). New York: Perseus Books – PublicAffairs .

ISBN 978-1568589626 .

Kimmel, Michael (2018).

Healing from Hate: How Young Men Get Into – and Out of – Violent Extremism (e-book ed.). Davis, California: University of California Press .

ISBN 978-0520966086 .

Kreiss, Daniel (2018). "The Media Are about Identity, Not Information". In Boczkowski, Pablo J.; Papacharissi, Zizi (eds.).

Trump and the Media . Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press . pp.

93– 99.

doi : 10.7551/mitpress/11464.003.0016 .

ISBN 978-0262037969 .

Laclau, Ernesto (2005).

On Populist Reason . New York: Verso .

ISBN 978-1788731331 .

Le Bon, Gustave (2002) [1st pub. 1895].

The Crowd: A Study of the Popular Mind . Mineola, NY: Dover Publications.

ISBN 978-0486419565 .

Lifton, Robert Jay (2019).

Losing Reality: On Cults, Cultism, and the Mindset of Political and Religious Zealotry (ePub) ed.). New York: New Press .

ISBN 978-1620975121 .

(Page numbers correspond to the ePub edition.) Löwenthal, Leo ; Guterman, Norbert (1949).

Prophets of Deceit: A Study of the Techniques of the American Agitator (PDF) . New York: Harper & Brothers .

ISBN 978-0870151828 .

Archived from the original on November 1, 2020 . Retrieved November 8, 2020 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Lowndes, Joseph (2019). "Populism and race in the United States from George Wallace to Donald Trump". In de la Torre, Carlos (ed.).

Routledge Handbook of Global Populism . London & New York: Routledge . "Trumpism" section, pp. 197–200.

ISBN 978-1315226446 .

Trump unabashedly employed the language of white supremacy and misogyny, rage and even violence at Trump rallies was like nothing seen in decades.

Mansfield, Stephen (2017).

Choosing Donald Trump: God, Anger, Hope, and Why Christian Conservatives Supported Him . Grand Rapids, Michigan: Baker Books.

ISBN 978-1493412259 .

Archived from the original on March 14, 2024 . Retrieved March 14, 2024 .

Massachs, Joan; Monti, Corrado; Morales, Gianmarco De Francisci; Bonchi, Francesco (2020). "Roots of Trumpism: Homophily and Social Feedback in Donald Trump Support on Reddit".

12th ACM Conference on Web Science . 12th ACM Conference on Web Science. pp.

49– 58.

arXiv : 2005.01790 .

doi : 10.1145/3394231.3397894 .

ISBN 978-1450379892 .

S2CID 218502169 .

Mercieca, Jennifer R.

(2020).

Demagogue for President: The Rhetorical Genius of Donald Trump .

Texas A&M University Press .

ISBN 978-1-62349-906-8 .

McIntyre, Lee (2018).

Post-Truth . MIT Press Essential Knowledge Series. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press .

ISBN 978-0262535045 .

McAdams, Dan P.

(2020).

The Strange Case of Donald J. Trump: A Psychological Reckoning ( EPUB ed.). New York: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0197507469 .

McManus, Matthew (2020). "The Rise of Post-Modern Conservatism". In Hardwick, David; Marsh, Leslie (eds.).

The Rise Of Post-Modern Conservatism Neoliberalism, Post-Modern Culture, And Reactionary Politics (e-book ed.). New York: Palgrave MacMillan .

doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-24682-2 .

ISBN 978-3030246822 .

S2CID 241523759 .

Money-Kyrle, Roger (2015) [1941]. "The Psychology of Propaganda". In Meltzer, Donald; O'Shaughnessy, Edna (eds.).

The Collected Papers of Roger Money-Kyrle . Clunie Press.

Money – Kyle describes not a rhetorical pattern of problem–conflict–resolution, but a progression of psychoanalytic states of mind in the three steps: 1) melancholia , 2) paranoia and 3) megalomania .

Neuborne, Burt (2019).

When at Times the Mob Is Swayed: A Citizen's Guide to Defending Our Republic ( ePub ) ed.). New York: The New Press .

ISBN 978-1620973585 .

O'Callaghan, Patrick (2020). "Reflections on the Root Causes of Outrage Discourse on Social Media". In Navin, Mark Christopher; Nunan, Richard (eds.).

Democracy, Populism, and Truth . AMINTAPHIL: The Philosophical Foundations of Law and Justice. Vol. 9. Springer. pp.

115– 126.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-43424-3_9 .

ISBN 978-3030434243 .

S2CID 226512444 .

Oliver, Joe (September 7, 2022).

"Liberals risk drowning in the Poilievre wave" .

Financial Post .

Ophir, Adi (2020). "The Political". In Stoler, Ann Laura ; Gourgouris, Stathis; Lezra, Jacques (eds.).

Thinking With Balibar A Lexicon of Conceptual Practice . Idiom: Inventing Writing Theory. New York: Fordham University Press . pp.

158– 182.

doi : 10.1515/9780823288502-012 .

ISBN 978-0823288489 .

S2CID 150814728 .

Pfiffner, James (2020). "The Lies of Donald Trump: A Taxonomy".

Presidential Leadership and the Trump Presidency (PDF) . New York: Palgrave Macmillan . pp.

17– 40.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-18979-2_2 .

ISBN 978-3030189792 .

S2CID 235085363 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on December 27, 2020 . Retrieved November 24, 2020 .

Plasser, Fritz; Ulram, Peter A. (2003). "Striking a Responsive Chord: Mass Media and. Right-Wing Populism in Austria". In Mazzoleni, Gianpietro; Stewart, Julianne; Horsfield, Bruce (eds.).

The Media and Neo-Populism . Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger.

ISBN 978-0275974923 .

Postman, Neil (2005) [1985].

Amusing Ourselves to Death: Public Discourse in the Age of Show Business (20th Anniversary ed.). New York: Penguin .

ISBN 978-0143036531 .

Power, Samantha (2018). "Beyond Elections: Foreign Interference with American Democracy". In Sunstein, Cass R.

(ed.).

Can It Happen Here? Authoritarianism in America ( ePub ed.). New York: Dey Street Books. pp.

69– 80.

ISBN 978-0062696212 .

Pybus, Jennifer (2015). "Accumulating affect: social networks and their archives of feeling". In Hillis, Ken; Paasonen, Susanna ; Petit, Michael (eds.).

Networked affect . Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press .

ISBN 978-0262028646 .

Resano, Dolores (2017).

American Literature in the Era of Trumpism: Alternative Realities . Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-3030738570 .

Robison, Wade L. (2020).

"#ConstitutionalStability" . In Navin, Mark Christopher; Nunan, Richard (eds.).

Democracy, Populism, and Truth . AMINTAPHIL: The Philosophical Foundations of Law and Justice. Vol. 9. Springer. pp.

179– 191.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-43424-3_13 .

ISBN 978-3030434243 .

S2CID 243147537 .

Archived from the original on January 15, 2024 . Retrieved January 15, 2024 .

Rudolf, Peter (2017). "The US under Trump: Potential consequences for transatlantic relations". In Heinemann-Grüder, Andreas (ed.).

Peace Report 2017 (PDF) . Vol. 29. Berlin/Münster/Zürich: LIT-Verlag, International Politics.

ISBN 978-3643909329 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved October 15, 2020 .

Sexton, Jared Yates (2017).

The People Are Going to Rise Like the Waters Upon Your Shore: A Story of American Rage . Berkeley, California: Counterpoint Press.

ISBN 978-1619029569 .

Archived from the original on March 14, 2024 . Retrieved March 14, 2024 .

Schmidt, Michael S. (October 22, 2024).

"As Election Nears, Kelly Warns Trump Would Rule Like a Dictator" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved October 25, 2024 .

Shapiro, Ari; Intagliata, Christopher; Venkat, Mia (May 13, 2021).

"The U.S. Is Headed Away From The Ideals Of Democracy, Says Author Masha Gessen" .

All Things Considered .

NPR .

Archived from the original on September 14, 2021 . Retrieved September 15, 2021 .

Smith, David Livingstone (2020).

On Inhumanity: Dehumanization and How to Resist It ( ePub ed.). New York: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0190923020 .

Sunstein, Cass (2007).

Republic 2.0 (e-book ed.). Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press .

ISBN 978-0691133560 .

Stenner, Karen ; Haidt, Jonathan (2018). "Authoritarianism is not a momentary madness, but an eternal dynamic within liberal democracies". In Sunstein, Cass R.

(ed.).

Can It Happen Here? Authoritarianism in America ( ePub ed.). New York: Dey Street Books.

ISBN 978-0062696212 .

Stoler, Ann Laura (2020). "Interior Frontiers". In Stoler, Ann Laura; Gourgouris, Stathis; Lezra, Jacques (eds.).

Thinking With Balibar A Lexicon of Conceptual Practice . Idiom: Inventing Writing Theory. New York: Fordham University Press. pp.

117– 139.

doi : 10.1515/9780823288502-010 .

ISBN 978-0823288489 .

S2CID 243377812 .

Tarizzo, Davide (2021).

Political grammars : the unconscious foundations of modern democracy . Square One: First Order Questions in the Humanities. Stanford, California: Stanford University Press .

ISBN 978-1503615328 .

Temelkuran, Ece (2019).

How to Lose a Country: The 7 Steps from Democracy to Dictatorship . New York: HarperCollins .

ISBN 978-0008340612 .

Thomson, Stuart (July 28, 2022).

"One of the world's leading populism experts says Pierre Poilievre isn't quite a populist" .

The Hub .

Traverso, Enzo (2017).

The New Faces of Fascism . Brooklyn, New York: Verso Books .

ISBN 978-1788730464 .

'Populism' is a category used as a self-defence mechanism by political elites who stand ever further from the people. According to Jacques Rancière : "Populism is the convenient name under which is dissimulated the exacerbated contradiction between popular legitimacy and expert legitimacy, that is, the difficulty the government of science has in adapting itself to manifestations of democracy and even to the mixed form of representative system. This name at once masks and reveals the intense wish of the oligarch : to govern without people, in other words, without any dividing of the people; to govern without politics.

Trump, Donald J.

; Schwartz, Tony (2011) [1987].

Trump: The Art of the Deal . New York: Random House – Ballantine Books .

ISBN 978-0307575333 .

Tucker, Erika (2018).

"Hope, Hate and Indignation: Spinoza and Political Emotion in the Trump Era" . In Sable, Marc Benjamin; Torres, Angel Jaramillo (eds.).

Trump and Political Philosophy . London: Palgrave-Macmillan . pp.

131– 157.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-74427-8_8 .

ISBN 978-3319744278 .

S2CID 149997363 .

van Prooijen, Jan-Willem (2018).

The Psychology of Conspiracy Theories . The Psychology of Everything. New York: Routledge .

ISBN 978-1315525419 .

Waisbord, Silvio; Tucker, Tina; Lichtenheld, Zoey (2018). "Trump and the Great Disruption in Public Communication". In Boczkowski, Pablo; Papacharissi, Zizi (eds.).

Trump and the Media (e-book ed.). Cambridge: MIT Press .

ISBN 978-0262037969 .

Woodward, Bob (2018).

Fear: Trump in the White House . New York: Simon & Schuster . p. 448.

ISBN 978-1471181306 .

Journal articles Adams, Kenneth Alan (Spring 2021).

"The Trump Death Cult" .

Journal of Psychohistory .

48 (4): 256– 276.

ISSN 0145-3378 . Retrieved November 6, 2024 .

Adler, Paul S.; Adly, Amr; Armanios, Daniel Erian; Battilana, Julie; Bodrožić, Zlatko; Clegg, Stewart; Davis, Gerald F.; Gartenberg, Claudine; Glynn, Mary Ann; Gümüsay, Ali Aslan; Haveman, Heather A.; Leonardi, Paul; Lounsbury, Michael; McGahan, Anita M.; Meyer, Renate; Phillips, Nelson; Sheppard-Jones, Kara (2022).

"Authoritarianism, Populism, and the Global Retreat of Democracy: A Curated Discussion" (PDF) .

Journal of Management Inquiry .

32 (1): 3– 20.

doi : 10.1177/10564926221119395 .

S2CID 251870215 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on January 14, 2024 . Retrieved January 14, 2024 .

The decoupling of the man from the movement suggests that authoritarianism can continue well beyond the authoritarian's rule. The most enduring vestige—apart from the democratic institutions attacked—is Trumpism. It has metastasized from Trump's delusional framing on his inauguration day in 2017—with the biggest crowds ever—to a widespread and ambient movement, amplified by disinformation and distortion, broadcast in social and right-wing media, aggressively militant, and framed with falsehoods.

Appel, Edward C. (March 12, 2018). "Burlesque, Tragedy, and a (Potentially) 'Yuuuge' 'Breaking of a Frame': Donald Trump's Rhetoric as 'Early Warning'?".

Communication Quarterly .

66 (2): 157– 175.

doi : 10.1080/01463373.2018.1439515 .

S2CID 149031634 .

Bader, Michael (December 25, 2016).

"The Decline of Empathy and the Appeal of Right-Wing Politics – Child psychology can teach us about the current GOP" .

Psychology Today .

Archived from the original on March 17, 2021 . Retrieved December 6, 2020 .

Baker, Joseph O.; Perry, Samuel L.; Whitehead, Andrew L. (May 14, 2020). "Keep America Christian (and White): Christian Nationalism, Fear of Ethnoracial Outsiders, and Intention to Vote for Donald Trump in the 2020 Presidential Election".

Sociology of Religion .

81 (3): 272– 293.

doi : 10.1093/socrel/sraa015 .

hdl : 1805/26339 .

In the penultimate year before Trump's reelection campaign, the strongest predictors of supporting Trump, in order of magnitude, were political party, xenophobia, identifying as African American (negative), political ideology, Christian nationalism, and Islamophobia.

Berman, Sheri (May 2021).

"The Causes of Populism in the West" .

Annual Review of Political Science .

24 : 71– 88.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-polisci-041719-102503 .

ISSN 1094-2939 .

Bloodworth, Jeffrey (July 4, 2023).

"Trumpism's Paleoconservative Roots and Dealignment" (PDF) .

Journal of Right-Wing Studies .

1 (1).

doi : 10.5070/RW3.1502 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on May 8, 2024.

Blyth, Mark (November 15, 2016).

"Global Trumpism: Why Trump's Victory was 30 Years in the Making and Why It Won't Stop Here" .

Foreign Affairs .

Archived from the original on March 4, 2021 . Retrieved October 8, 2020 .

Boehm, Christopher (February 13, 2016). "Political Animals".

New Scientist .

229 (3060): 26– 27.

Bibcode : 2016NewSc.229...26B .

doi : 10.1016/S0262-4079(16)30320-7 .

Brettschneider, Corey; Calvelli, Aidan G. (July 2024).

"The US Presidency: Power and Constraint" .

Annual Review of Political Science .

27 : 205– 222.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-polisci-051120-113134 .

ISSN 1094-2939 .

Campani, Giovanna; Concepción, Sunamis Fabelo; Soler, Angel Rodriguez; Savín, Claudia Sánchez (November 2, 2022).

"The Rise of Donald Trump Right-Wing Populism in the United States: Middle American Radicalism and Anti-Immigration Discourse" .

Societies .

12 (6): 154.

doi : 10.3390/soc12060154 .

Choma, Becky L.; Hanoch, Yaniv (February 2017). "Cognitive ability and authoritarianism: Understanding support for Trump and Clinton".

Personality and Individual Differences .

106 (1): 287– 291.

doi : 10.1016/j.paid.2016.10.054 .

hdl : 10026.1/8451 .

Cornelis, Ilse; Van Hiel, Alain (2015).

"Extreme right-wing voting in Western Europe: The role of social-cultural and antiegalitarian attitudes" .

Political Psychology .

35 (6): 749– 760.

doi : 10.1111/pops.12187 .

hdl : 1854/LU-01H4EFGEE1S6ZQ7EBMD2PGNBCB .

Archived from the original on January 14, 2024 . Retrieved January 14, 2024 .

Cui, Xi (2018). "Emotional Contagion or Symbolic Cognition? A Social Identity Perspective on Media Events".

Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media .

62 (1): 91– 108.

doi : 10.1080/08838151.2017.1402906 .

S2CID 149162170 .

Diamond, Michael J. (February 22, 2023).

"Perverted Containment: Trumpism, Cult Creation, and the Rise of Destructive American Populism" .

Psychoanalytic Inquiry .

43 (2).

Taylor & Francis : 96– 109.

doi : 10.1080/07351690.2023.2163147 .

ISSN 0735-1690 .

Archived from the original on November 6, 2024 . Retrieved November 6, 2024 .

Federico, Christopher M.; Golec de Zavala, Agnieszka (March 6, 2018).

"Collective Narcissism and the 2016 US Presidential Vote" (PDF) .

Public Opinion Quarterly .

82 (1).

Oxford University Press : 110– 121.

doi : 10.1093/poq/nfx048 .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2022 . Retrieved December 17, 2020 .

Feldman, Stanley ; Stenner, Karen (June 28, 2008). "Perceived threat and authoritarianism".

Political Psychology .

18 (4): 741– 770.

doi : 10.1111/0162-895X.00077 .

Franks, Andrew S.; Hesami, Farhang (September 18, 2021).

"Seeking Evidence of The MAGA Cult and Trump Derangement Syndrome: An Examination of (A)symmetric Political Bias" .

Societies .

11 (3): 113.

doi : 10.3390/soc11030113 .

Trump supporters consistently showed bias in favor of the interests and ostensible positions of Trump, whereas Trump's detractors did not show an opposing bias ... Results of the current study do not support the broad existence of so-called 'Trump Derangement Syndrome' on the left, but they may lend credence to accusations that some Trump supporters have a cult-like loyalty to the 45th president.

Gabriel, Shira; Paravati, Elaine; Green, Melanie C.; Flomsbee, Jason (2018).

"From Apprentice to president: The role of parasocial connection in the election of Donald Trump" .

Social Psychological and Personality Science .

9 (3): 299– 307.

doi : 10.1177/1948550617722835 .

S2CID 149911195 .

Archived from the original on January 15, 2024 . Retrieved January 15, 2024 .

Giroux, Henry A.

(2021).

"Trumpism and the challenge of critical education" .

Educational Philosophy and Theory .

55 (6): 5.

doi : 10.1080/00131857.2021.1884066 .

S2CID 234851204 .

As the social state came under severe attack, the punishing state grew with its ongoing militarization of civil society and its increasing criminalization of social problems. War, dehumanization, divisiveness, hate, and the language of racial cleansing and sorting became central governing principles and set the stage for the rebirth of an updated fascist politics. Trumpism reached into every niche and crack of civil and political society and in doing so cross-pollinated politics, culture, and everyday life with a range of right-wing policies, authoritarian impulses, and the emerging presence of right-wing movements.

Goldsmith, Benajmin E.; Moen, Lars J. K. (May 14, 2024).

"The personality of a personality cult? Personality characteristics of Donald Trump's most loyal supporters" .

Political Psychology .

46 (Special Issue): 225– 243.

doi : 10.1111/pops.12991 . Retrieved November 6, 2024 .

We contend that, for his most committed followers, the attraction is personality-based — both in terms of Trump's self-presentation to citizens and in terms of the personality characteristics making some citizens attracted to such leadership. Trump's appeal appears to fit Sundahl's (2023) three characteristics of a personality cult. The phenomenon of a political personality cult may have arrived in full force in U.S. democracy — and could potentially be its undoing.

Golec de Zavala, Agnieszka; Cichocka, Aleksandra; Eidelson, Roy; Jayawickreme, Nuwan (2009).

"Collective Narcissism and Its Social Consequences" (PDF) .

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

97 (6): 1074– 1096.

doi : 10.1037/a0016904 .

PMID 19968420 . Archived from the original (PDF) on March 24, 2018 . Retrieved September 25, 2020 .

Graves, Frank; Smith, Jeff (June 30, 2020).

"Northern Populism: Causes and Consequences of the New Ordered Outlook" .

School of Public Policy .

13 .

doi : 10.11575/sppp.v13i0.69884 .

ISSN 2560-8320 .

Archived from the original on January 17, 2021 . Retrieved January 12, 2021 .

Gutterman, David (2020). "Book Review: Believe Me: The Evangelical Road to Donald Trump".

eJournal of Public Affairs .

9 (2).

doi : 10.1111/1467-9809.12592 .

S2CID 199267291 .

Hahl, Oliver; Kim, Minjae; Zuckerman Sivan, Ezra W. (2018).

"The Authentic Appeal of the Lying Demagogue: Proclaiming the Deeper Truth about Political Illegitimacy" .

American Sociological Review .

83 (1): 1– 33.

doi : 10.1177/0003122417749632 .

ISSN 0003-1224 .

Hall, Kira ; Goldstein, Donna M.; Ingram, Matthew Bruce (2016).

"The hands of Donald Trump: Entertainment, gesture, spectacle" .

HAU: Journal of Ethnographic Theory .

6 (2).

doi : 10.14318/hau6.2.009 .

S2CID 55012627 . Retrieved February 15, 2021 .

Hamilton, Lawrence C. (January 10, 2024). Ettinger, Aaron (ed.).

"Trumpism, climate and COVID: Social bases of the new science rejection" .

PLOS ONE .

19 (1): e0293059.

Bibcode : 2024PLoSO..1993059H .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0293059 .

ISSN 1932-6203 .

PMC 10781192 .

PMID 38198461 .

Trumpism itself is predicted by age, race, evangelical religion, ideology, and receptivity to seemingly non-political conspiracy beliefs. Considering direct as well as indirect effects (through Trumpism), climate change and vaccine rejection are similarly predicted by white and evangelical identity, conspiracism, and by education×ideology and friends×party interactions.

Hidalgo-Tenorio, Encarnación; Benítez-Castro, Miguel-Ángel (2021). "Trump's populist discourse and affective politics, or on how to move 'the People' through emotion".

Globalisation, Societies and Education .

20 (2): 86– 109.

doi : 10.1080/14767724.2020.1861540 .

hdl : 10481/86686 .

S2CID 234260705 .

Hoad, Neville (November 20, 2020). "Big man sovereignty and sexual politics in pandemic time".

Safundi the Journal of SouthAfrican and American Studies .

21 (4): 433– 455.

doi : 10.1080/17533171.2020.1832801 .

S2CID 228896339 .

Hogg, Michael ; van Knippenberg, Daan; Rast, David E. (2012). "The social identity theory of leadership: Theoretical origins, research findings, and conceptual developments".

European Review of Social Psychology .

23 : 258– 304.

doi : 10.1080/10463283.2012.741134 .

S2CID 143555737 .

Imhoff, Roland; Lamberty, Pia (2018).

"How paranoid are conspiracy believers? Toward a more fine-grained understanding of the connect and disconnect between paranoia and belief in conspiracy theories" .

European Journal of Social Psychology .

48 (7): 909– 926.

doi : 10.1002/ejsp.2494 .

S2CID 150284134 .

Archived from the original on April 14, 2021 . Retrieved April 20, 2021 .

Isaac, Jeffrey (November 2017).

"Making America Great Again?" .

Perspectives on Politics .

15 (3).

Cambridge University Press : 625– 631.

doi : 10.1017/S1537592717000871 .

Jackson, Paul Nicholas (2021).

"Debate: Donald Trump and Fascism Studies" .

Fascism .

10 (1): 1– 15.

doi : 10.1163/22116257-10010009 .

ISSN 2211-6257 .

Johnson, Jessica (2018).

"The Self-Radicalization of White Men" .

Communication, Culture & Critique .

11 (1).

doi : 10.1093/ccc/tcx014 .

Archived from the original on January 15, 2024 . Retrieved January 15, 2024 .

Jones, Karen (2019). "Trust, distrust, and affective looping".

Philosophical Studies .

176 (4). Springer Nature: 955– 968.

doi : 10.1007/s11098-018-1221-5 .

S2CID 171852867 .

Partial reprint: Jones, Karen (November 14, 2019).

"Understanding the emotions is key to breaking the cycle of distrust" .

ABC's Religion and Ethics .

Australian Broadcasting Corporation .

Archived from the original on November 24, 2020 . Retrieved April 10, 2021 .

Kahan, Dan ; Peters, Ellen; Dawson, Erica Cantrell; Slovic, Paul (2017). "Motivated numeracy and enlightened self-government".

Behavioural Public Policy .

1 (1).

Cambridge University Press : 54– 86.

doi : 10.1017/bpp.2016.2 .

hdl : 1794/18962 .

S2CID 231735365 .

Kaul, Nitasha (June 17, 2021).

"The Misogyny of Authoritarians in Contemporary Democracies" (PDF) .

International Studies Review .

23 (4): 1619– 1645.

doi : 10.1093/isr/viab028 .

Kimmel, Michael ; Wade, Lisa (2018). "Ask a Feminist: Michael Kimmel and Lisa Wade Discuss Toxic Masculinity".

Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society .

44 (1): 233– 254.

doi : 10.1086/698284 .

S2CID 149487672 .

Lebow, David (May 13, 2019).

"Trumpism and the Dialectic of Neoliberal Reason" .

Perspectives on Politics .

17 (2).

Cambridge University Press : 380– 398.

doi : 10.1017/S1537592719000434 .

S2CID 182013544 .

Leone, Luigi; Desimoni, Marta; Chirumbolo, Antonio (September 26, 2012). "Interest and expertise moderate the relationship between right-wing attitudes, ideological self-placement and voting".

European Journal of Personality .

28 (1): 2– 13.

doi : 10.1002/per.1880 .

S2CID 143037865 .

Lubbers, Marcel; Scheepers, Peer (December 7, 2010).

"French Front National voting: A micro and macro perspective" (PDF) .

Ethnic and Racial Studies .

25 (1): 120– 149.

doi : 10.1080/01419870120112085 .

hdl : 11370/a3226cec-30ee-4c69-bd24-ba49cbbb17cf .

S2CID 59362467 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved October 29, 2020 .

Maher, Henry (2023).

"Neoliberal fascism? Fascist trends in early neoliberal thought and echoes in the present" .

Contemporary Political Theory .

23 (3): 392– 410.

doi : 10.1057/s41296-023-00657-x .

ISSN 1470-8914 .

Marietta, Morgan; Farley, Tyler; Cote, Tyler; Murphy, Paul (2017). "The Rhetorical Psychology of Trumpism".

The Forum .

15 (2).

De Gruyter : 313– 312.

doi : 10.1515/for-2017-0019 .

S2CID 148986197 .

Mason, Liliana; Wronski, Julie; Kane, John V. (2021). "Activating Animus: The Uniquely Social Roots of Trump Support".

American Political Science Review .

115 (4).

Cambridge University Press : 1508– 1516.

doi : 10.1017/S0003055421000563 .

S2CID 237860170 .

Trump's support is thus uniquely tied to animus toward minority groups. Our findings provide insights into the social divisions underlying American politics and the role of elite rhetoric in translating animus into political support.

McGaughey, Ewan (2018).

"Fascism-Lite in America (or the Social Ideal of Donald Trump)" .

British Journal of American Legal Studies .

7 (2): 291– 315.

doi : 10.2478/bjals-2018-0012 .

S2CID 195842347 .

SSRN 2773217 .

Morris, Edwin Kent (2019). "Inversion, Paradox, and Liberal Disintegration: Towards a Conceptual Framework of Trumpism".

New Political Science .

41 (1): 17– 35.

doi : 10.1080/07393148.2018.1558037 .

S2CID 149978398 .

Trumpian fascism is a different kind of fascism. It is better understood as an inverted, American kind of fascism, distinct from European fascism, but not entirely dissimilar from it. Inverted American-style fascism differs from European fascist in one crucial way: the role of corporate power in the politics of the state.

Ott, Brian L.

(2017). "The age of Twitter: Donald J. Trump and the politics of debasement".

Critical Studies in Media Communication .

34 (1): 59– 68.

doi : 10.1080/15295036.2016.1266686 .

S2CID 152133074 .

Pape, Robert A. (April 6, 2021).

"Understanding American Domestic Terrorism-Mobilization Potential and Risk Factors of a New Threat Trajectory" (PDF) .

Chicago Project on Security and Threats .

University of Chicago .

Archived (PDF) from the original on April 17, 2021 . Retrieved April 17, 2021 .

Paravati, Elaine; Naidu, Esha; Gabriel, Shira; Wiedemann, Carl (December 23, 2019). "More than just a tweet: The unconscious impact of forming parasocial relationships through social media".

Psychology of Consciousness: Theory, Research, and Practice .

7 (4): 388– 403.

doi : 10.1037/cns0000214 .

S2CID 212834936 .

Pettigrew, Thomas F.

(March 2, 2017).

"Social Psychological Perspectives on Trump Supporters" .

Journal of Social and Political Psychology .

5 (1): 107– 116.

doi : 10.5964/jspp.v5i1.750 .

S2CID 56388590 .

Pulido, Lauro; Bruno, Tianna; Faiver-Serna, Cristina; Galentine, Cassandra (2019). "Environmental Deregulation, Spectacular Racism, and White Nationalism in the Trump Era".

Annals of the American Association of Geographers .

109 (2): 520– 532.

Bibcode : 2019AAAG..109..520P .

doi : 10.1080/24694452.2018.1549473 .

S2CID 159402163 .

Reicher, Stephen ; Haslam, S. Alexander (November 19, 2016).

"The politics of hope: Donald Trump as an entrepreneur of identity" .

Scientific American .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved October 15, 2020 .

Reyes, Antonio (May 4, 2020).

"I, Trump The cult of personality, anti-intellectualism and the Post-Truth era" .

Journal of Language and Politics .

19 (6): 869– 892.

doi : 10.1075/jlp.20002.rey .

ISSN 1569-2159 .

Archived from the original on March 5, 2024 . Retrieved November 6, 2024 .

Reicher, Stephen (May 4, 2017). " La beauté est dans la rue : Four reasons (or perhaps five) to study crowds".

Group and Intergroup Relations .

20 (5): 593– 605.

doi : 10.1177/1368430217712835 .

S2CID 148743518 .

Richardson, Michael (2017).

"The Disgust of Donald Trump" .

Continuum: Journal of Media and Cultural Studies .

31 (6): 747– 756.

doi : 10.1080/10304312.2017.1370077 .

hdl : 1959.4/unsworks_56318 .

S2CID 148803267 .

Ross, Bertrall L. (October 2024).

"Polarization, Populism, and the Crisis of American Democracy" .

Annual Review of Law and Social Science .

20 : 293– 308.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-lawsocsci-041922-035113 .

ISSN 1550-3631 . Retrieved January 11, 2025 .

Rubin, April (October 11, 2024).

"Trump's top general calls former president 'fascist' and 'dangerous' threat" .

Axios .

Archived from the original on November 9, 2024 . Retrieved October 19, 2024 .

Schneiker, Andrea (2018). "Telling the Story of the Superhero and the Anti-Politician as President: Donald Trump's Branding on Twitter".

Political Studies Association .

1 (14): 210– 223.

doi : 10.1177/1478929918807712 .

S2CID 150145298 .

Smith, Julianne; Townsend, Jim (July 9, 2018).

"NATO in the Age of Trump:What it Can't and Can't Accomplish Absent U.S. Leadership" .

Foreign Affairs .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved June 9, 2020 .

Sobieraj, Sarah; Berry, Jeffrey M. (2011). "From Incivility to Outrage: Political Discourse in Blogs, Talk Radio, and Cable News".

Political Communication .

28 (1): 19– 41.

doi : 10.1080/10584609.2010.542360 .

S2CID 143739086 .

Stephens-Dougan, LaFluer (May 2021).

"The Persistence of Racial Cues and Appeals in American Elections" .

Annual Review of Political Science .

24 : 301– 320.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-polisci-082619-015522 .

ISSN 1094-2939 .

Stoller, Paul (April 27, 2017).

"More on the Anthropology of Trump" .

Anthropology Now .

9 (1): 58– 60.

doi : 10.1080/19428200.2017.1291135 .

S2CID 149440462 .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved December 9, 2020 .

Suessenbach, Felix; Moore, Adam B. (2020).

"Dominance desires predicting conspiracy beliefs and Trump support in the 2016 U.S. Election" (PDF) .

Motivation Science .

6 (2): 171– 176.

doi : 10.1037/mot0000146 .

hdl : 20.500.11820/044b23e6-d62f-471c-8be4-4ad69e28a14e .

S2CID 189448130 . Retrieved December 9, 2020 .

Sundahl, Anne-Mette Holmgård (May 4, 2022).

"Personality Cult or a Mere Matter of Popularity?" .

International Journal of Politics, Culture, and Society .

36 (4): 431– 458.

doi : 10.1007/s10767-022-09423-0 .

PMC 9066393 .

PMID 35528318 .

Trump, Putin and Ardern are used as examples of the model's ability to distinguish between cult and non-cult phenomena. The comparison shows that only Trump and Putin have a cult on both dimensions ... This paper introduced a model for distinguishing between popularity and personality cults based on three parameters covering a representational and social practice dimension. Putin, Trump and Ardern were used to illustrate the model's ability to categorise phenomena with different degrees of charisma. The analysis shows that while Trump and Putin belong in the domain of personality cults, Ardern's alleged cult does not have a social practice dimension, as the few cultlike tendencies are strictly representational.

Swyngedouw, Marc; Ivaldi, Giles (December 2007). "The extreme right utopia in Belgium and France: The ideology of the Flemish Vlaams Blok and the French front national".

West European Politics .

24 (3): 1– 22.

doi : 10.1080/01402380108425450 .

S2CID 144383766 .

Theidon, Kimberly (November 11, 2020). "A forecasted failure: Intersectionality, COVID-19, and the perfect storm".

Journal of Human Rights .

95 (5): 528– 536.

doi : 10.1080/14754835.2020.1822156 .

S2CID 226308311 .

Thompson, Jack (June 12, 2017).

"Understanding Trumpism: The foreign policy of the new American president" (PDF) .

Sirius: Journal of Strategic Analysis .

1 (2).

De Gruyter : 109– 115.

doi : 10.1515/sirius-2017-0052 .

S2CID 157683957 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved October 15, 2020 .

Tollefson, Jeff (February 4, 2021).

"Tracking QAnon: how Trump turned conspiracy-theory research upside down" (PDF) .

Nature .

590 (7845).

Nature Research : 192– 193.

Bibcode : 2021Natur.590..192T .

doi : 10.1038/d41586-021-00257-y .

ISSN 1476-4687 .

LCCN 12037118 .

PMID 33542489 .

S2CID 231818589 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on April 27, 2021 . Retrieved January 31, 2024 .

Urbinati, Nadia (May 2019).

"Political Theory of Populism" .

Annual Review of Political Science .

22 : 111– 127.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-polisci-050317-070753 .

ISSN 1094-2939 . Retrieved December 20, 2024 .

Urbinati, Nadia (May 26, 2020).

"On Trumpism, or the End of American Exceptionalism" .

Teoria Politica, Nuova Serie Annali .

9 : 209– 226.

Archived from the original on January 31, 2021 . Retrieved January 25, 2021 .

Van Assche, Jasper; Dhont, Kristof; Pettigrew, Thomas F.

(April 2019).

"The social-psychological bases of far-right support in Europe and the United States" .

Journal of Community & Applied Social Psychology .

29 (5): 385– 401.

doi : 10.1002/casp.2407 .

hdl : 1854/LU-8639899 .

S2CID 155558324 .

Archived from the original on May 23, 2022 . Retrieved October 13, 2020 – via ResearchGate.

Van Hiel, Alain (March 2012).

"A psycho-political profile of party activists and left-wing and right-wing extremists" .

European Journal of Political Research .

51 (2): 166– 203.

doi : 10.1111/j.1475-6765.2011.01991.x .

hdl : 1854/LU-2109499 .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved October 29, 2020 .

Van Hiel, Alain; Mervielde, Ivan (July 2006). "Explaining conservative beliefs and political preferences: A comparison of social dominance orientation and authoritarianism".

Journal of Applied Social Psychology .

32 (5): 965– 976.

doi : 10.1111/j.1559-1816.2002.tb00250.x .

Vescio, Theresa K.; Schermerhorn, Nathaniel E. (2021).

"Hegemonic masculinity predicts 2016 and 2020 voting and candidate evaluations" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

118 (2): e2020589118.

Bibcode : 2021PNAS..11820589V .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.2020589118 .

PMC 7812802 .

PMID 33397724 .

Whitehead, Andrew L.; Perry, Samuel L.; Baker, Joseph O. (January 25, 2018).

"Make America Christian Again: Christian Nationalism and Voting for Donald Trump in the 2016 Presidential Election" (PDF) .

Sociology of Religion .

79 (2): 147– 171.

doi : 10.1093/socrel/srx070 .

Why did Americans vote for Donald Trump in the 2016 Presidential election? Social scientists have proposed a variety of explanations, including economic dissatisfaction, sexism, racism, Islamophobia, and xenophobia. The current study establishes that, independent of these influences, voting for Trump was, at least for many Americans, a symbolic defense of the United States' perceived Christian heritage. Data from a national probability sample of Americans surveyed soon after the 2016 election shows that greater adherence to Christian nationalist ideology was a robust predictor of voting for Trump, even after controlling for economic dissatisfaction, sexism, anti-black prejudice, anti-Muslim refugee attitudes, and anti-immigrant sentiment, as well as measures of religion, sociodemographics, and political identity more generally.

Womick, Jake; Rothmund, Tobias; Azevedo, Flavio; King, Laura A.; Jost, John T. (June 20, 2018).

"Group-Based Dominance and Authoritarian Aggression Predict Support for Donald Trump in the 2016 U.S. Presidential Election" (PDF) .

Social Psychological and Personality Science .

10 (5): 643– 652.

doi : 10.1177/1948550618778290 .

S2CID 55503314 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on December 24, 2021 . Retrieved December 16, 2020 .

Yang, Mimi (September 25, 2018).

"Trumpism: a disfigured Americanism" .

Palgrave Communications .

4 117: 1– 13.

doi : 10.1057/s41599-018-0170-0 .

Trump's "America First" is not exactly original but from a culturally genetic and historic make-up that builds the vertical America. The xenophobic and anti-immigration rhetoric has its origin in nativism that harbors white nationalism, populism, protectionism and isolationism ... Trumpism is not Americanism, but a masqueraded white supremacism and nativism; it is a disfigured Americanism in its vertical form.

News articles Adebayo, Bukola (January 9, 2020).

"A majority of Nigerians and Kenyans have confidence in President Trump, according to Pew research" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on August 29, 2022 . Retrieved October 1, 2022 .

Akinwotu, Emmanuel (October 31, 2020).

" 'He just says it as it is': why many Nigerians support Donald Trump" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on July 21, 2022 . Retrieved October 1, 2022 .

Alter, Ethan (January 14, 2021).

" 'The Punisher' star Jon Bernthal lashes out at 'misguided and lost' Capitol rioters for appropriating Marvel hero's famous skull symbol" .

Yahoo Entertainment .

Archived from the original on February 9, 2021 . Retrieved February 8, 2021 .

Andersen, Travis (January 6, 2021).

"Before mob stormed US Capitol, Trump told them to 'fight like hell' " .

The Boston Globe .

Archived from the original on January 7, 2021 . Retrieved January 7, 2021 .

Applebaum, Anne (October 18, 2024).

"Trump Is Speaking Like Hitler, Stalin, and Mussolini" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on October 24, 2024 . Retrieved October 18, 2024 .

Arnsdorf, Isaac; Dawsey, Josh; Barrett, Devlin (November 5, 2023).

"Trump and allies plot revenge, Justice Department control in a second term" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on November 5, 2023 . Retrieved January 8, 2024 .

Assheuer, Thomas (May 16, 2018).

"Donald Trump: Das Recht bin ich" .

Die Zeit (in German).

Archived from the original on January 26, 2021 . Retrieved June 9, 2020 .

Bailey, Sarah Pulliam (November 28, 2017).

"Acts of Faith. A Trump-like politician in Brazil could snag the support of a powerful religious group: evangelicals" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on February 18, 2018 . Retrieved March 1, 2018 .

Baker, Peter (June 10, 2022).

"Trump Is Depicted as a Would-Be Autocrat Seeking to Hang Onto Power at All Costs" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on June 10, 2022 . Retrieved September 25, 2023 .

Baker, Peter (December 9, 2023).

"Talk of a Trump Dictatorship Charges the American Political Debate" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on December 9, 2023 . Retrieved January 8, 2024 .

Baker, Peter (February 11, 2024).

"Favoring Foes Over Friends, Trump Threatens to Upend International Order" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 1553-8095 .

Archived from the original on February 20, 2024 . Retrieved February 21, 2024 .

Balk, Tim (October 25, 2024).

"13 Ex-Trump Aides Back Kelly's 'Dictator' Warning, Saying Trump Seeks 'Absolute, Unchecked Power' " .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on November 2, 2024 . Retrieved October 25, 2024 .

Bankole, Idowu (February 3, 2020).

"Trump's rally: IPOB commends US over Kanu's VIP invitation" .

Vanguard News .

Archived from the original on July 22, 2022 . Retrieved September 30, 2022 .

Barrett, David; Zapotosky, Matt (January 13, 2021).

"FBI report warned of 'war' at Capitol, contradicting claims there was no indication of looming violence" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on April 15, 2021 . Retrieved April 17, 2021 .

Basu, Zachary (November 13, 2023).

"Trump campaign defends "vermin" speech amid fascist comparisons" .

Axios .

Archived from the original on December 9, 2023 . Retrieved December 8, 2023 .

Beauchamp, Zack (July 17, 2019).

"Trump and the dead end of conservative nationalism" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on January 9, 2024 . Retrieved July 8, 2023 .

Bebout, Lee (January 7, 2021).

"Trump tapped into white victimhood – leaving fertile ground for white supremacists" .

The Conversation .

Archived from the original on January 10, 2021 . Retrieved January 14, 2021 .

Trumpism tapped into a long-standing sense of aggrievement that often—but not exclusively—manifests as white victimhood.

Beer, Tommy (January 16, 2021).

"Fox News Viewership Plummets: First Time Behind CNN And MSNBC In Two Decades" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on April 9, 2021 . Retrieved April 9, 2021 .

Beinart, Peter (January 2019).

"The New Authoritarians Are Waging War on Women" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on January 27, 2024 . Retrieved January 27, 2024 .

Bender, Michael C.; Gold, Michael (November 14, 2023).

"When Trump tells you he's an authoritarian, believe him" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on December 8, 2023 . Retrieved December 8, 2023 .

Bender, Michael C.; Gold, Michael (November 20, 2023).

"Trump's Dire Words Raise New Fears About His Authoritarian Bent" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on December 8, 2023 . Retrieved January 8, 2024 .

Benjamin, Rich (September 28, 2020).

"Democrats Need to Wake Up: The Trump Movement Is Shot Through With Fascism" .

The Intercept .

Archived from the original on January 31, 2021 . Retrieved May 19, 2020 .

Ben-Ghiat, Ruth (December 9, 2020).

"Op-Ed: Trump's formula for building a lasting personality cult" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on October 19, 2023 . Retrieved October 4, 2023 .

Lempinen, Edward (December 7, 2020).

"Despite drift toward authoritarianism, Trump voters stay loyal. Why?" .

University of California, Berkeley News.

Archived from the original on January 5, 2024 . Retrieved June 24, 2021 .

Bidgood, Jess; Ulloa, Jazmine (October 1, 2020).

"A debate and a rally show Trump's closing strategy: Tapping into the white grievance of his political bubble" .

The Boston Globe . Duluth, Minneapolis.

Archived from the original on January 22, 2021 . Retrieved January 16, 2021 .

Blair, Leonardo (December 15, 2020).

"Beth Moore draws flak and praise after warning Christians against 'dangerous' Trumpism" .

Christian Post .

Archived from the original on December 15, 2020 . Retrieved December 28, 2020 .

Blake, Aaron (January 7, 2021).

" 'Let's have trial by combat': How Trump and allies egged on the violent scenes Wednesday" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on January 7, 2021 . Retrieved January 8, 2021 .

Bleiberg, Joshua; West, Darrell M. (May 13, 2015).

"Political Polarization on Facebook" .

The Brookings Institution .

Archived from the original on October 10, 2017 . Retrieved March 2, 2021 .

Bond, Paul (February 29, 2016).

"Leslie Moonves on Donald Trump: "It May Not Be Good for America, but It's Damn Good for CBS" " .

The Hollywood Reporter .

Archived from the original on February 9, 2021 . Retrieved February 12, 2021 .

Bote, Joshua (October 22, 2020).

"Half of Trump supporters believe in QAnon conspiracy theory's baseless claims, poll finds" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on January 15, 2021 . Retrieved January 15, 2021 .

Brant, Danielle (October 4, 2018).

"Bolsonaro Uses Same Fascist Tactics As Trump, Says Yale Professor" .

Folha de São Paulo . São Paulo.

Archived from the original on March 27, 2019 . Retrieved February 22, 2021 .

Brazile, Donna (August 28, 2020).

"Convention shows Republican Party has died and been replaced by Trump Party" .

Fox News (Opinion).

Archived from the original on August 31, 2020 . Retrieved August 31, 2020 .

Breslin, Maureen (November 8, 2021).

"Former aide: Trump would 'absolutely' impose some form of autocracy in second term" .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on September 25, 2023 . Retrieved September 25, 2023 .

Brewster, Jack (November 22, 2020).

"Republicans Ask, Whether Or Not Trump Runs In 2024, What Will Come Of Trumpism?" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on January 10, 2021 . Retrieved November 22, 2020 .

Husser, Jason (April 6, 2020).

"Why Trump is reliant on white evangelicals" .

The Brookings Institution .

Archived from the original on March 2, 2021 . Retrieved March 6, 2021 .

Brooks, David (November 26, 2020).

"The rotting of the Republican mind" .

The New York Times (Opinion).

Archived from the original on December 5, 2020 . Retrieved December 9, 2020 .

Brooks, Emily (October 25, 2024).

"Johnson and McConnell: Harris calling Trump 'fascist' could invite assassination attempt" .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on November 9, 2024 . Retrieved October 25, 2024 .

Browning, Christopher R.

(October 25, 2018).

"The Suffocation of Democracy" .

The New York Review . Vol. 65, no. 16.

Archived from the original on June 9, 2020 . Retrieved June 9, 2020 .

Trump is not Hitler and Trumpism is not Nazism, but regardless of how the Trump presidency concludes, this is a story unlikely to have a happy ending.

Browning, Christopher R. (July 25, 2023).

"A New Kind of Fascism" .

The Atlantic . Washington, D.C.: Laurene Powell Jobs.

Archived from the original on September 26, 2024 . Retrieved December 8, 2023 .

Bump, Philip (October 20, 2020).

"Even if they haven't heard of QAnon, most Trump voters believe its wild allegations" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on December 13, 2020 . Retrieved December 13, 2020 .

Butler, Judith ; Salmon, Christian (December 29, 2016).

"Trump, fascism, and the construction of "the people": An interview with Judith Butler" .

VersoBooks . Translated by Broder, David. Verso.

Archived from the original on May 14, 2021 . Retrieved May 14, 2021 .

The Verso published English translation is of the article: Butler, Judith; Salmon, Christian (December 18, 2016).

"Judith Butler: pourquoi "Trump est un phénomène fasciste" " [Judith Butler: Why "Trump is a fascist phenomenon"].

Mediapart (in French).

Archived from the original on May 18, 2021 . Retrieved May 14, 2021 .

Campbell, John (February 11, 2020).

"Despite Travel Ban, Trump Remains Popular in Nigeria" .

Council on Foreign Relations .

Archived from the original on August 29, 2022 . Retrieved September 30, 2022 .

Campbell, Clark (September 16, 2022).

"The making of Pierre Poilievre, conservative proselytizer" .

The Globe and Mail .

Cash, John (2017). Fitzroy, Vic (ed.).

"Trumped in the Looking-glass" (pdf) .

Arena Magazine . No. 151.

Archived from the original on May 24, 2021 . Retrieved May 14, 2021 .

Cassidy, John (November 14, 2023).

"Trump's Fascistic Rhetoric Only Emphasizes the Stakes in 2024" .

The New Yorker . New York City: Condé Nast .

Archived from the original on October 9, 2024 . Retrieved December 8, 2023 .

"Andrew Scheer praises Erin O'Toole as next leader of Conservative Party" .

CBC . August 24, 2020.

Archived from the original on January 18, 2021 . Retrieved January 12, 2021 .

Erin O'Toole (newly-elected leader of the CPC) (September 8, 2020).

O'Toole on his 'Canada First' policy . Power & Politics.

Archived from the original on January 16, 2021 . Retrieved January 12, 2021 .

Rahn, Will; Patterson, Dan (September 29, 2020).

"What is the QAnon conspiracy theory?" .

CBS News .

Archived from the original on October 2, 2020 . Retrieved October 2, 2020 .

Cegielski, Stephanie (March 29, 2016).

"An Open Letter to Trump Voters from His Top Strategist-Turned-Defector" .

xoJane . Archived from the original on August 25, 2018 . Retrieved February 9, 2021 .

Chomsky, Noam; Polychroniou, Chronis J. (November 26, 2020).

"Noam Chomsky: Trump Has Revealed the Extreme Fragility of American Democracy" .

Global Policy . Wiley-Blackwell.

Archived from the original on May 18, 2021 . Retrieved May 18, 2021 .

Chotiner, Isaac (July 29, 2021).

"Redefining Populism" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved October 14, 2021 .

Cillizza, Chris (February 4, 2021).

"Three-quarters of Republicans believe a lie about the 2020 election" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on February 7, 2021 . Retrieved February 8, 2021 .

Clavey, Charles H. (October 20, 2020).

"Donald Trump, Our Prophet of Deceit" .

Boston Review .

Archived from the original on October 21, 2020 . Retrieved October 20, 2020 .

Clemens, Colleen (December 11, 2017).

"What We Mean When We Say 'Toxic Masculinity.' " .

Learning for Justice . Southern Poverty Law Center.

Archived from the original on April 18, 2021 . Retrieved April 17, 2021 .

Cockburn, Patrick (November 4, 2020).

"Trump's bid to stop the count risks turning America into an 'illiberal democracy' like Turkey" .

The Independent (U.K.) .

Archived from the original on June 25, 2021 . Retrieved June 25, 2021 .

Confessore, Nicholas; Yourish, Karen (March 25, 2016).

"$2 Billion Worth of Free Media for Donald Trump" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 27, 2021 . Retrieved February 13, 2021 .

Colvin, Geoff (August 25, 2020).

"The Republican Party turns its platform into a person: Donald Trump" .

Fortune .

Archived from the original on September 14, 2021 . Retrieved September 15, 2021 .

Colvin, Jill; Barrow, Bill (December 8, 2023).

"Trump's vow to only be a dictator on 'day one' follows growing worry over his authoritarian rhetoric" .

AP News .

Archived from the original on December 8, 2023 . Retrieved January 8, 2024 .

Conroy, J Oliver (February 7, 2017).

" 'Angry white men': the sociologist who studied Trump's base before Trump" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on January 31, 2021 . Retrieved February 14, 2021 .

Continetti, Matthew (December 22, 2020).

"Is Trump Really All That Holds the G.O.P. Together?" .

The New York Times (Opinion).

Archived from the original on January 1, 2021 . Retrieved January 4, 2021 .

Coronel, Sheila S.

(November 9, 2020).

"A warning from the Philippines on how a demagogue can haunt politics for decades" .

The Washington Post (Opinion).

Archived from the original on June 29, 2022 . Retrieved January 15, 2024 .

Cox, Ana Marie (October 12, 2016).

"Russell Moore Can't Support Either Candidate" .

The New York Times . New York.

Archived from the original on April 18, 2021 . Retrieved April 18, 2021 .

da Silva, Chantal (November 6, 2020).

" 'Reckless' and 'stupid': Trump Jr calls for 'total war' over election results" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on January 14, 2021 . Retrieved January 10, 2021 .

Danner, Mark (May 26, 2016).

"The Magic of Donald Trump" (PDF) .

The New York Review of Books .

Archived (PDF) from the original on September 20, 2020 . Retrieved February 8, 2021 .

de Berg, Henk (2024).

"Fives Rules for Understanding Trump's Rhetorical Strategy" . Retrieved January 3, 2025 .

Delacourt, Susan (November 8, 2020).

"Donald Trump lost, but Trumpism is still thriving. Could it take hold in Canada, too?" .

Toronto Star (Opinion).

Archived from the original on January 14, 2021 . Retrieved January 12, 2021 .

Denby, David (December 15, 2015).

"The Plot Against America: Donald Trump's Rhetoric" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on November 8, 2020 . Retrieved December 6, 2020 .

Devore, Molly (April 3, 2019).

" 'Trumpism' is not enough of a mass movement to be fascism, visiting professor says" .

The Badger Herald .

Archived from the original on August 14, 2021 . Retrieved August 14, 2021 .

Dreher, Rod (December 17, 2020).

"Church Of Trumpianity" .

The American Conservative . Washington, D.C.

Archived from the original on March 4, 2021 . Retrieved March 28, 2021 .

Diamond, Jeremy (July 29, 2016).

"Timeline: Donald Trump's praise for Vladimir Putin" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on August 9, 2020 . Retrieved July 24, 2020 .

Donolo, Peter (August 21, 2020).

"Trumpism won't happen in Canada – but not because of our politics" .

The Globe and Mail (Opinion).

Archived from the original on January 7, 2021 . Retrieved January 12, 2021 .

Donolo, Peter (January 9, 2021).

"What will become of Trump's Canadian fan base?" .

Toronto Star (Opinion). Toronto.

Archived from the original on January 11, 2021 . Retrieved January 12, 2021 .

Drutman, Lee (June 8, 2021).

"The Republican party is now an explicitly illiberal party" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on June 30, 2021 . Retrieved June 25, 2021 .

Enjeti, Saagar (March 3, 2021).

"Trump defines Trumpism" .

Rising .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on March 9, 2021 . Retrieved March 5, 2021 .

Evans, Richard J.

(January 13, 2021).

"Why Trump isn't a fascist – The storming of the Capitol on 6 January was not a coup. But American democracy is still in danger" .

New Statesman .

Archived from the original on March 12, 2021 . Retrieved March 14, 2021 .

Fallows, James (October 10, 2016).

"Trump Time Capsule #137: Primate Dominance Moves at the Debate" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on February 19, 2021 . Retrieved February 23, 2021 .

Fawcett, Max (January 12, 2021).

"Rigged Canadian election? Why Canada's Conservatives can't seem to quit Donald Trump" .

National Observer (Opinion).

Archived from the original on January 12, 2021 . Retrieved January 12, 2021 .

Finn, Ed (May 13, 2017).

"Is Trump a fascist?" .

The Independent . Newfoundland.

Archived from the original on June 4, 2020 . Retrieved June 9, 2020 .

Fisher, Marc (May 16, 2019).

"After a two-decade friendship and waves of lavish praise, Trump pardons newspaper magnate Conrad Black" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on January 16, 2021 . Retrieved January 12, 2021 .

Forrest, Maura (September 12, 2022).

"The quick take on Canada's new Conservative leader" .

Politico .

Foster, John Bellamy (June 1, 2017).

"This Is Not Populism" .

Monthly Review (Editorial).

Archived from the original on July 1, 2017 . Retrieved May 14, 2015 .

Commenting on the hegemonic framing of the radical right as populist, and the analytical problems that it presents, Andrea Mammone observes in his Transnational Neofascism in France and Italy that "the terms populism and national populism" were deliberately introduced in recent decades by liberal European commentators in order to "replace fascism/neofascism as the used terminology." This move was designed to "provide a sort of political and democratic legitimization of right-wing extremism." Fournier, Philippe J. (October 1, 2020).

"How much do Canadians dislike Donald Trump? A lot" .

Maclean's .

Archived from the original on January 11, 2021 . Retrieved January 12, 2021 .

Fournier, Philippe J. (January 10, 2021).

"Canada is not immune to Trumpism" .

Maclean's .

Archived from the original on January 12, 2021 . Retrieved January 12, 2021 .

Gabler, Neal (April 29, 2016).

"Donald Trump, the Emperor of Social Media" .

Moyers On Democracy . Schumann Media Center.

Archived from the original on March 2, 2021 . Retrieved March 2, 2021 .

Galli, Mark (December 19, 2019).

"Trump Should Be Removed from Office" .

Christianity Today (Editorial).

Archived from the original on December 23, 2019 . Retrieved December 30, 2020 .

Garcia-Navarro, Lulu (January 21, 2024).

"Inside the Heritage Foundation's Plans for 'Institutionalizing Trumpism' " .

The New York Times Magazine .

New York City : The New York Times Company .

ISSN 0028-7822 . Archived from the original on February 13, 2024 . Retrieved February 21, 2024 .

Gessen, Masha (June 27, 2020).

"Since day one, Donald Trump has been an autocrat in the making" .

The Observer .

ISSN 0029-7712 .

Archived from the original on September 25, 2023 . Retrieved September 25, 2023 .

Giroux, Henry A.

(December 14, 2017).

"Fascism's return and Trump's war on youth" .

The Conversation .

Archived from the original on April 16, 2021 . Retrieved May 14, 2021 .

Glasser, Susan (January 22, 2018).

"The Man Who Put Andrew Jackson in Trump's Oval Office" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on November 22, 2020 . Retrieved November 15, 2020 .

"Trumpism in Canada" .

Global News .

Archived from the original on January 13, 2021 . Retrieved January 12, 2021 .

Goldberg, Jonah (August 16, 2016).

" 'New nationalism' amounts to generic white identity politics" .

Newsday .

Archived from the original on November 26, 2016 . Retrieved January 20, 2024 .

Goldberg, Michelle (December 15, 2020).

"Just how dangerous was Trump?" .

The New York Times (Opinion).

Archived from the original on December 16, 2020 . Retrieved December 17, 2020 .

An earlier version appeared in peer-reviewed journal Boundary 2 : Gordon, Peter E. (June 15, 2016).

"Authoritarianism: Three Inquiries in Critical Theory" .

Boundary 2 .

Archived from the original on December 8, 2020 . Retrieved February 21, 2021 .

Gottfried, Jeffrey; Shearer, Elisa (May 26, 2016).

"News use across social media platforms 2016" . Pew Research Center.

Archived from the original on April 14, 2021 . Retrieved March 2, 2021 .

Green, Emma (January 8, 2021).

"A Christian Insurrection" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on January 25, 2021 . Retrieved January 23, 2021 .

Greenberg, David (December 11, 2016).

"An Intellectual History of Trumpism" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on November 15, 2020 . Retrieved November 15, 2020 .

Gryboski, Michael (November 8, 2012).

"Texas Megachurch Pastor Says Obama Will 'Pave Way' for Antichrist" .

The Christian Post .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2022 . Retrieved April 15, 2021 .

Guilford, Gwynn (April 1, 2016).

"Inside the Trump machine: The bizarre psychology of America's newest political movement" .

Quartz .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved November 17, 2020 .

Gumbel, Andrew (January 11, 2025).

" 'There are a lot of bitter people here, I'm one of them': rust belt voters on why they backed Trump again despite his broken promises" .

The Guardian . Retrieved January 12, 2025 .

Haberman, Maggie (January 6, 2021).

"Trump Told Crowd 'You Will Never Take Back Our Country With Weakness' " .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 9, 2021 . Retrieved January 9, 2021 .

Haltiwanger, John (October 9, 2018).

"The 'Brazilian Donald Trump,' Jair Bolsonaro, is visiting the White House. He was elected president despite saying he couldn't love a gay son and that a colleague was too 'ugly' to be raped" .

Business Insider .

Archived from the original on December 10, 2020 . Retrieved February 22, 2021 .

Haltiwanger, John (March 4, 2021).

"Republicans have built a cult of personality around Trump that glosses over his disgraced presidency" .

Business Insider .

Archived from the original on January 15, 2022 . Retrieved October 4, 2023 .

Harwood, John (January 20, 2017).

"Why Trumpism May Not Endure" .

The New York Times (Opinion).

Archived from the original on November 16, 2020 . Retrieved June 9, 2020 .

Hasan, Mehdi (June 4, 2020).

"Is This Trump's Reichstag Fire Moment?" .

The Intercept .

Archived from the original on February 2, 2021 . Retrieved January 26, 2021 .

Hedges, Chris (January 3, 2020).

"Onward, Christian fascists" .

Salon.com .

Archived from the original on December 28, 2020 . Retrieved December 28, 2020 .

"Trumpism comes to Finland, exporting happiness, and Kardashians in Lapland – Finland in the World Press" .

Helsinki Times . April 13, 2019.

Archived from the original on January 24, 2021 . Retrieved January 23, 2021 .

Henderson, Bruce (August 24, 2017).

"Evangelical Leader Stays on Trump Advisory Council Despite Charlottesville Response" .

The Charlotte Observer .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved December 28, 2020 .

Henninger, Daniel (March 3, 2021).

"Trumpism According to Trump" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on March 14, 2021 . Retrieved March 17, 2021 .

Hilditch, Cameron (December 18, 2020).

"Christianity as Ideology: The Cautionary Tale of the Jericho March" .

National Review .

Archived from the original on December 20, 2020 . Retrieved January 19, 2021 .

Homans, Charles (April 27, 2024).

"Donald Trump Has Never Sounded Like This" .

New York Magazine .

Archived from the original on July 19, 2024 . Retrieved April 27, 2024 .

Horton, Michael (December 16, 2020).

"The Cult of Christian Trumpism" .

The Gospel Coalition .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved December 28, 2020 .

Hovland, Ben (September 13, 2020).

"Capitol rally targets Minnesota's COVID-19 state of emergency" .

Albert Lea Tribune and Minnesota Public Radio .

Archived from the original on December 24, 2021 . Retrieved December 11, 2020 .

Hymes, Clare; McDonald, Cassidy; Watson, Elanor (April 16, 2021).

"What we know about the "unprecedented" U.S. Capitol riot arrests" .

CBS News .

Archived from the original on April 17, 2021 . Retrieved April 17, 2021 .

Ibish, Hussain (April 12, 2020).

"Is Donald Trump's US sliding towards illiberal democracy?" .

The National (Abu Dhabi) (Opinion).

Archived from the original on June 29, 2021 . Retrieved June 25, 2021 .

Ilyushina, Mary (December 15, 2020).

"Putin, Bolsonaro and AMLO finally congratulate Biden on US election victory" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on January 24, 2021 . Retrieved February 22, 2021 .

Jacobs, Thomas (October 21, 2016).

"Masculinity in the Time of Trump" .

Pacific Standard . Grist Magazine, Inc.

Archived from the original on February 14, 2022 . Retrieved April 17, 2021 .

Jeffress, Robert ; Fea, John (May 26, 2016).

"The Evangelical Debate Over Trump" (audio) .

Interfaith Voices .

Archived from the original on December 24, 2021 . Retrieved December 28, 2020 .

Jeffress, Robert ; Wehner, Peter (July 12, 2016).

"Dr. Robert Jeffress and Peter Wehner Join Mike for Important Debate over Evangelical Christian Support of Trump" (audio) .

The Mike Gallagher Show .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved December 28, 2020 .

Jindal, Bobby; Castellanos, Alex (January 3, 2021).

"Separating Trump from Trumpism is key to the GOP's future" .

Newsweek (Opinion).

Archived from the original on April 16, 2021 . Retrieved March 2, 2021 .

Johnston, Rich (July 3, 2020).

"Why Did Sean Hannity Lose His Punisher Skull Pin On Fox News?" .

Bleeding Cool .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved February 8, 2021 .

Kagan, Robert (May 16, 2016).

"This is how fascism comes to America" .

The Washington Post (Opinion).

Archived from the original on February 13, 2021 . Retrieved April 20, 2021 .

Kakissis, Joanna (May 13, 2019).

"In Trump, Hungary's Viktor Orban Has A Rare Ally In The Oval Office" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved January 23, 2021 .

Katzenstein, Peter J.

(March 20, 2019).

"Trumpism is Us" .

WZB Mitteilungen . Berlin: Social Science Research Center.

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved October 15, 2020 .

Kessler, Glenn ; Kelly, Meg (January 10, 2018).

"President Trump has made more than 2,000 false or misleading claims over 355 days" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved June 9, 2020 .

Kim, Soo Rin; Ibssa, Lalee (November 13, 2023).

"Trump compares political opponents to 'vermin' who he will 'root out,' alarming historians" .

ABC News .

Archived from the original on December 8, 2023 . Retrieved December 8, 2023 .

Kruse, Michael (October 13, 2017).

"The Power of Trump's Positive Thinking" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved December 9, 2020 .

Kuhn, Johannes (September 2, 2017).

"Who moved America to the right" .

Süddeutsche Zeitung .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved July 30, 2020 .

Kuhn, Johannes (July 17, 2018).

"Trump und Putin: Republikaner üben leichte Kritik" .

Süddeutsche Zeitung (in German).

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved June 9, 2020 .

Lange, Jason (January 17, 2024).

"Trump's rise sparks isolationist worries abroad, but voters unfazed" .

Reuters . Retrieved January 17, 2024 .

Lehmann, Chris (November 14, 2023).

"The "Is Donald Trump a Fascist?" Debate Has Been Ended—by Donald Trump" .

The Nation . New York City: Katrina vanden Heuvel.

Archived from the original on September 26, 2024 . Retrieved December 8, 2023 .

Lemann, Nicholas (November 2, 2020).

"The Republican Identity Crisis After Trump" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved November 10, 2020 .

LeVine, Marianne; Arnsdorf, Isaac (December 13, 2023).

"Trump backers laugh off, cheer 'dictator' comments, as scholars voice alarm" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on December 15, 2023 . Retrieved January 8, 2024 .

Lewis, Matt (December 12, 2020).

"Bad News for Evangelicals – God Doesn't Need Donald Trump in the White House" .

The Daily Beast (Opinion).

Archived from the original on March 9, 2021 . Retrieved January 23, 2021 – via www.msn.com.

Liu, William Ming (April 14, 2016).

"How Trump's 'Toxic Masculinity' Is Bad for Other Men" .

Motto (Time) . New York.

Archived from the original on January 21, 2018 . Retrieved January 21, 2018 .

Lowndes, Joseph (November 8, 2021).

"Far-right extremism dominates the GOP. It didn't start — and won't end — with Trump" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on November 23, 2021 . Retrieved December 31, 2023 .

Lutz, Eric (November 10, 2023).

"Donald Trump Isn't Even Trying to Hide His Authoritarian Second-Term Plans" .

Vanity Fair . United States: Condé Nast.

Archived from the original on September 26, 2024 . Retrieved December 8, 2023 .

Lyall, Sarah (January 23, 2021).

"The Trump Presidency Is Now History. So How Will It Rank?" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved January 23, 2021 .

MacWilliams, Matthew (January 17, 2016).

"The one weird trait that predicts whether you're a Trump supporter" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on January 29, 2021 . Retrieved October 13, 2020 .

MacWilliams, Matthew C. (September 23, 2020).

"Trump Is an Authoritarian. So Are Millions of Americans" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on February 9, 2021 . Retrieved February 9, 2021 .

Matthews, Dylan (January 14, 2021).

"The F Word" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on January 24, 2021 . Retrieved January 26, 2021 .

Matthews, Dylan (October 23, 2020).

"Is Trump a fascist? 8 experts weigh in" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on January 4, 2022 . Retrieved December 23, 2020 .

McFadden, Robert D.; Grynbaum, Michael M. (February 18, 2021).

"Rush Limbaugh Dies at 70; Turned Talk Radio Into a Right-Wing Attack Machine" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on March 9, 2021 . Retrieved February 17, 2021 .

McCarthy, Tom; Ho, Vivian; Greve, Joan E. (January 7, 2021).

"Schumer calls pro-Trump mob 'domestic terrorists' as Senate resumes election certification – live" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on January 6, 2021 . Retrieved January 6, 2021 .

McConkey, David (October 23, 2022).

"Pierre Poilievre, populist politician?" .

The Brandon Sun .

Moore, Johnnie (August 24, 2017).

"Evangelical Trump Adviser: Why I Won't Bail on the White House" .

Religion News Service .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved December 28, 2020 .

Mullen, Lincoln (June 16, 2018).

"The Fight to Define Romans 13" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved December 28, 2020 .

Platt, Brian (June 5, 2018).

"Ontario Proud, the right-wing Facebook giant in Ontario's election, eyes federal election involvement" .

National Post .

Archived from the original on August 18, 2019 . Retrieved January 12, 2021 .

Nessen, Stephen (April 30, 2016).

"4 Ways Donald Trump's Pro Wrestling Experience Is Like His Campaign Today" .

National Public Radio .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved November 17, 2020 .

Newkirk, Vann R. (March 15, 2016).

"Donald Trump, Wrestling Heel" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on December 1, 2020 . Retrieved October 18, 2020 .

"6 Books to Help Understand Trump's Win" .

The New York Times . November 9, 2016.

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved January 31, 2021 .

Nwachukwu, John Owen (May 1, 2018).

"Biafra: IPOB reacts to Trump's warning to Buhari on killing of Christians" .

Daily Post .

Archived from the original on September 5, 2022 . Retrieved September 30, 2022 .

Nwaubani, Adaobi Tricia (February 7, 2020).

"Trump trashes Nigeria and bans its immigrants. Nigerians love him for it" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on February 24, 2021 . Retrieved September 30, 2022 .

O'Connor, Brendon (October 29, 2020).

"Who exactly is Trump's 'base'? Why white, working-class voters could be key to the US election" .

The Conversation .

Archived from the original on January 29, 2021 . Retrieved March 2, 2021 .

Oduah, Chika (November 14, 2016).

"Nigeria's Biafra Separatists See Hope in Trump" .

VOA .

Archived from the original on August 29, 2022 . Retrieved September 30, 2022 .

Parker, Ashley (November 16, 2020).

"The ending of Trump's presidency echoes the beginning – with a lie" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved November 22, 2020 .

Paxton, Robert O. (January 11, 2021).

"I've Hesitated to Call Donald Trump a Fascist. Until Now" .

Newsweek .

Archived from the original on February 4, 2021 . Retrieved February 3, 2021 .

Partington, Richard (July 7, 2018).

"Trump's trade war: What is it and which products are affected?" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved July 19, 2020 .

Peters, Jeremy W. (November 9, 2020).

"Trump Lost the Race. But Republicans Know It's Still His Party" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved November 10, 2020 .

Peters, Jeremy W. (February 17, 2021).

"Rush Limbaugh's Legacy of Venom: As Trump Rose, 'It All Sounded Familiar' " .

The New York Times .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on March 9, 2021 . Retrieved February 18, 2021 .

Smith, Gregory A. (April 26, 2017).

"Among white evangelicals, regular churchgoers are the most supportive of Trump" .

Pew Research Center .

Archived from the original on March 12, 2021 . Retrieved March 6, 2021 .

Swan, Jonathan; Savage, Charlie; Haberman, Maggie (July 17, 2023).

"Trump and Allies Forge Plans to Increase Presidential Power in 2025" .

The New York Times . Retrieved March 14, 2025 .

Swan, Jonathan; Savage, Charlie; Haberman, Maggie (December 9, 2023).

"Fears of a NATO Withdrawal Rise as Trump Seeks a Return to Power" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 10, 2023 . Retrieved December 10, 2023 .

Phillips, Dom; Phillips, Tom (December 20, 2019).

"Brazil: Bolsonaro in homophobic outburst as corruption scandal swirls" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on February 2, 2021 . Retrieved February 22, 2021 .

Pillar, Paul R. (September 17, 2020).

"The Donald Trump and Benjamin Netanyahu Alliance: Simply Bad News" .

The National Interest .

Archived from the original on March 1, 2021 . Retrieved May 10, 2021 .

Plott, Elaina (October 27, 2020).

"Win or Lose, It's Donald Trump's Republican Party" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on October 29, 2020 . Retrieved October 29, 2020 .

Raupp, Eric (December 12, 2020).

"Will Bolsonaro Leave Trumpism Behind to Embrace a Biden-led US?" .

Fair Observer .

Archived from the original on December 18, 2020 . Retrieved February 22, 2021 .

Robertson, Derek (May 16, 2020).

"What Liberals Don't Get About Trump Supporters and Pop Culture" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on January 30, 2021 . Retrieved January 26, 2021 .

Roper, Willern (January 8, 2021).

"Nearly Half of Republicans Approve of Capitol Riot" .

Statista .

Archived from the original on December 24, 2021 . Retrieved February 8, 2021 .

Rosenfeld, Steven (August 9, 2019).

"Leading Civil Rights Lawyer Shows 20 Ways Trump Is Copying Hitler's Early Rhetoric and Policies" .

Common Dreams .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved November 21, 2020 .

Rosenberg, Matthew; Rutenberg, Jim (February 1, 2021).

"Key Takeaways From Trump's Effort to Overturn the Election – A Times examination of the 77 days between election and inauguration shows how a lie the former president had been grooming for years overwhelmed the Republican Party and stoked the assault on the Capitol" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on February 1, 2021 . Retrieved February 1, 2021 .

Ross, Alex (December 5, 2016).

"The Frankfurt school knew Trump was coming" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on December 13, 2020 . Retrieved February 18, 2021 .

Rushkoff, Douglas (July 7, 2016).

"The New Nationalism Of Brexit And Trump Is A Product Of The Digital Age" .

Fast Company .

Archived from the original on March 1, 2017 . Retrieved January 20, 2024 .

Rutenberg, Jim; Becker, Jo; Lipton, Eric; Haberman, Maggie; Martin, Jonathan; Rosenberg, Matthew; Schmidt, Michael S. (January 31, 2021).

"77 Days: Trump's Campaign to Subvert the Election Hours after the United States voted, the president declared the election a fraud – a lie that unleashed a movement that would shatter democratic norms and upend the peaceful transfer of power" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on February 1, 2021 . Retrieved February 1, 2021 .

Samphir, Harrison (July 23, 2019).

"The Post Millennial joins Conservative party's online booster club" .

NOW Magazine . Archived from the original on July 24, 2019 . Retrieved February 22, 2021 .

Schneider, Mac (April 21, 2017).

"Marine Le Pen: France's Trump is on the rise" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on December 24, 2021 . Retrieved January 23, 2021 .

Seeßlen, Georg (February 2, 2017).

"Sprachattacke der Rechtspopulisten: Trompeten des Trumpismus" [Language attack of the right-wing populists: Trumpets of Trumpism].

Der Spiegel (in German).

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved October 15, 2020 .

Serhan, Yasmeen (February 16, 2021).

"What History Tells Us Will Happen to Trumpism" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on February 17, 2021 . Retrieved February 17, 2021 .

Serwer, Adam (November 20, 2017).

"The Nationalist's Delusion" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved July 30, 2020 .

Shabad, Rebecca; Bennett, Geoff; Alba, Monica; Pettypiece, Shannon (June 2, 2020).

" 'The Bible is not a prop': Religious leaders, lawmakers outraged over Trump church visit" .

NBC News .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved January 13, 2021 .

Shellnutt, Kate (September 6, 2017).

"Should Christians Keep Advising a President They Disagree With?" .

Christianity Today .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved December 28, 2020 .

Shenk, Timothy (August 16, 2016).

"The dark history of Donald Trump's rightwing revolt" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on April 14, 2019 . Retrieved January 26, 2021 .

Solon, Olivia (November 10, 2016).

"Facebook's failure: Did fake news and polarized politics get Trump elected?" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on January 14, 2017 . Retrieved March 5, 2021 .

Stone, Peter (November 22, 2023).

" 'Openly authoritarian campaign': Trump's threats of revenge fuel alarm" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on November 27, 2023 . Retrieved January 18, 2024 .

"What Brazil's President, Jair Bolsonaro, has said about Brazil's Indigenous Peoples" .

survivalinternational.org . 2020.

Archived from the original on April 8, 2021 . Retrieved February 22, 2021 .

Tabatabai, Ariane (July 15, 2020).

"QAnon Goes to Iran" .

Foreign Policy .

Archived from the original on May 23, 2022 . Retrieved February 5, 2022 .

Tarnoff, Ben (November 9, 2016).

"The triumph of Trumpism: the new politics that is here to stay" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved November 24, 2016 .

Tashman, Brian (October 8, 2011).

"Jeffress Says Satan Is Behind Roman Catholicism" .

Right Wing Watch .

Archived from the original on September 19, 2016 . Retrieved April 15, 2021 .

Tharoor, Ishaan (July 11, 2018).

"Trump's NATO trip shows 'America First' is 'America Alone' " .

The Washington Post . Washington D.C.

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved November 28, 2020 .

Tharoor, Ishaan (August 21, 2022).

"Analysis | Trump's personality cult and the erosion of U.S. democracy" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on August 31, 2023 . Retrieved October 4, 2023 .

Teague, Matthew (June 3, 2020).

" 'He wears the armor of God': evangelicals hail Trump's church photo op" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved February 8, 2021 .

Matt Galloway (Host), Allan Rock (Guest) (November 6, 2020).

"Allan Rock on what the presidential election means for U.S.-Canada relations" .

The Current . CBC.

Archived from the original on December 24, 2021 . Retrieved January 12, 2021 .

Thompson, Derek (December 30, 2020).

"The Deep Story of Trumpism- Thinking about the Republican Party like a political psychiatrist" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on April 14, 2021 . Retrieved April 9, 2021 .

Todd, Chuck; Murray, Mike; Dann, Carrie (April 28, 2021).

"After 100 days out of office, Trump's support softens in NBC News poll" .

NBC News .

Archived from the original on April 30, 2021 . Retrieved May 1, 2021 .

Trump, Donald J.

(September 25, 2019).

"Remarks of President Trump at the 74th Session of the United Nations General Assembly" .

whitehouse.gov .

Archived from the original on March 9, 2021 . Retrieved December 6, 2020 – via National Archives .

In everything we do, we are focused on empowering the dreams and aspirations of our citizens ... we will cast off the enemies of liberty and overcome the oppressors of dignity.

Vallejo, Justin (February 28, 2021).

"Donald Trump CPAC speech" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on March 1, 2021 . Retrieved February 28, 2021 .

Von Rennenkampff, Markik (September 13, 2021).

"Canada's Conservatives show how dangerously skewed US politics have become" .

The Hill .

Ward, Myah (October 12, 2024).

"We watched 20 Trump rallies. His racist, anti-immigrant messaging is getting darker" .

Politico . Retrieved October 12, 2024 .

Weber, Thomas (January 24, 2021).

"Trump is not a fascist. But that didn't make him any less dangerous to our democracy" .

CNN (Opinion).

Archived from the original on February 20, 2021 . Retrieved March 13, 2021 .

Wehner, Peter (July 5, 2016).

"The Theology of Donald Trump" .

The New York Times (Opinion). New York.

Archived from the original on January 14, 2021 . Retrieved April 18, 2021 .

Wehner, Peter (January 21, 2017).

"Why I Cannot Fall in Line Behind Trump" .

The New York Times (Opinion).

Archived from the original on February 13, 2021 . Retrieved March 25, 2021 .

Wehner, Peter (July 5, 2019).

"The Deepening Crisis in Evangelical Christianity" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on April 23, 2021 . Retrieved April 18, 2021 .

Wehner, Peter (December 7, 2020).

"Trump's Most Malicious Legacy" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on May 14, 2021 . Retrieved April 18, 2021 .

Weisbrot, Mark (October 20, 2017).

"Brazil's Donald Trump?" .

U.S. News & World Report (Opinion).

Archived from the original on March 2, 2018 . Retrieved February 22, 2021 .

West, Cornel (November 17, 2016).

"American Neoliberalism: A New Neo-Fascist Era Is Here" .

The Guardian (Opinion).

Archived from the original on November 17, 2016 . Retrieved December 20, 2020 .

Livesey, Bruce (October 8, 2020).

"All the elements are in place for American-style fascism, says Cornel West" .

National Observer (Canada) (interview). Archived from the original on January 18, 2021 . Retrieved June 24, 2021 .

Whitebook, Joel (March 20, 2017).

"Opinion: Trump's Method, Our Madness" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on May 15, 2021 . Retrieved May 14, 2021 .

Will, George F. (July 10, 2020).

"The difference between Trumpism and fascism" (Opinion).

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved December 17, 2020 .

Wintour, Patrick (September 21, 2020).

"US announces new Iran sanctions and claims it is enforcing UN arms embargo" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved November 17, 2020 .

Wolf, Zachary B. (November 9, 2020).

"Election 2020: How the Trump administration's roadblocks could cause problems for Biden" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on November 30, 2020 . Retrieved February 16, 2021 .

Update November 10, 2020.

Woods, Mel (June 11, 2020).

"Erin O'Toole's 'Take Back Canada' Slogan Prompts Plenty Of Questions" .

HuffPost .

Archived from the original on June 8, 2021 . Retrieved January 12, 2021 .

Zaretsky, Robert (July 7, 2016).

"Donald Trump and the myth of mobocracy" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on February 7, 2021 . Retrieved October 15, 2020 .

Zengerle, Patricia (February 2, 2019).

"With eye on Afghanistan talks, Trump vows to stop 'endless wars' " .

Reuters .com.

Archived from the original on November 7, 2020 . Retrieved November 17, 2020 .

Zurcher, Anthony (August 26, 2020).

"RNC 2020: The Republican Party Now the Party of Trump" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on November 1, 2020 . Retrieved November 10, 2020 .

v t e Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Libertarian Moderate Movement Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Progressive Social Traditionalist Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian nationalism Classical liberalism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Gender essentialism Complementarianism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Militarism Moral absolutism Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Protectionism Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Tradition People Presidents Adams (John) Adams (John Quincy) G. H. W. Bush G. W. Bush Cleveland Coolidge Harding Hoover McKinley Nixon Reagan W. H. Taft Trump Washington Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan II Kavanaugh Kennedy O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft Thomas Vermeule Yoo Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Buckley Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eastman Eliot Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hazony Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kendall Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lasch Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet O'Connor Ong Ransom Rieff Santayana Sowell Strauss Viereck Voegelin Washington Weaver Yarvin Other figures Ailes Atwater Beck Breitbart Carlson Cheney Coulter Cruz DeSantis Dilling Elder Falwell Gingrich Giuliani Goldwater Hannity Ingraham Levin Limbaugh Lindbergh Lodge Lovecraft McCain McCarthy McConnell Novak O'Reilly Palin Rand Paul Ron Paul Pence Perot Quayle Romney Rove Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Schlafly Shapiro Stone Robert A. Taft Booker T. Washington Parties American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party of New York State Constitution Party Republican Party Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Movements Alt-right Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Dark Enlightenment Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBT Libertarian Republicans Militia movement Patriot movement Christian Radical Right Reactionary feminism Tea Party movement Trumpism Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Historical factions Bourbon Democrats Dixiecrats Loyalists Old Right Redeemers Southern Agrarians Other organizations 1789 Capital ATR FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Rockbridge Network Tea Party Patriots USCC Literature Democracy in America (1835–1840) Democracy and Leadership (1924) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) Losing Ground (1984) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Bell Curve (1994) A Republic, Not an Empire (1999) Hillbilly Elegy (2017) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) See also American nationalism Bibliography of conservatism in the United States List of American conservatives National conservatism Southern strategy Conservatism portal v t e Donald Trump 45th (2017–2021) and 47th (2025–present) President of the United States Life and politics Business career The Trump Organization legal affairs business projects in Russia links between business partners and Russian government officials wealth tax returns Trump Media & Technology Group Media career The Apprentice American football Golf Honors and awards Political positions Trumpism Relationship to fascism Relationship to antisemitism Views on the American Civil War Rhetoric 2021 CPAC speech Political endorsements False or misleading statements Promotion of conspiracy theories Protests timeline Racial views Security incidents Attempted assassinations Las Vegas rally incident in Pennsylvania raised-fist photographs perpetrator in Florida suspect Age and health concerns Religion Family Ivana Trump (first wife) Marla Maples (second wife) Melania Trump (third wife) Donald Trump Jr.

(son) Ivanka Trump (daughter) Eric Trump (son) Tiffany Trump (daughter) Barron Trump (son) Fred Trump (father) Mary Anne MacLeod Trump (mother) Maryanne Trump Barry (sister) Fred Trump Jr.

(brother) Robert Trump (brother) Frederick Trump (grandfather) Elizabeth Christ Trump (grandmother) Jared Kushner (son-in-law) Lara Trump (daughter-in-law) Michael Boulos (son-in-law) Vanessa Trump (former daughter-in-law) Blaine Trump (former sister-in-law) Amalija Knavs (mother-in-law) John G. Trump (uncle) Mary L. Trump (niece) Fred Trump III (nephew) John W. Walter (cousin) Books The Art of the Deal (1987) Trump: Surviving at the Top (1990) Trump: The Art of the Comeback (1997) The America We Deserve (2000) Trump: How to Get Rich (2004) The Way to the Top (2004) Trump 101 (2006) Why We Want You to Be Rich (2006) Think Big and Kick Ass (2007) Time to Get Tough (2011) Midas Touch (2011) Crippled America (2015) Our Journey Together (2021) Letters to Trump (2023) Save America (2024) Campaigns 2000 presidential campaign 2016 presidential campaign announcement " Make America Great Again " hat rallies links between campaign officials and Russian government officials Crossfire Hurricane 2016 Republican primaries debates running mate selection convention 2016 general election endorsements debates reactions transition Republican opposition Never Trump movement 2016 Mitt Romney speech 2020 2024 Sexual misconduct allegations Access Hollywood recording 2020 presidential campaign rallies 2020 Tulsa rally 2020 Republican primaries convention 2020 general election political endorsements non-political endorsements debates attempts to overturn fake electors plot Chesebro memos Eastman memos lawsuits Texas v. Pennsylvania Jeffrey Clark letter Republican reactions to Trump's election fraud claims Biden transition 2024 presidential campaign announcement rallies 2024 Republican primaries debates running mate selection convention 2024 general election eligibility endorsements debates transition Kamala is for they/them (attack ad) Trump Bible " God Bless the U.S.A.

" (campaign song) " Y.M.C.A.

" (campaign song) Legal affairs FBI investigation into handling of government documents FBI search of Mar-a-Lago Gulf of Mexico naming controversy New York investigations of the Trump Organization Stormy Daniels scandal civil criminal Carroll v. Trump Trump v. United States (2022) Relationship of Donald Trump and Jeffrey Epstein State prosecutions Georgia New York Smith special counsel investigation Federal prosecution classified documents case election obstruction case Trump mug shot Trump v. United States Related Family Foundation Presidential library In popular culture Best Sex I've Ever Had Trump dance filmography in music SNL parodies Residences 85-15 Wareham Place Trump Tower penthouse apartment Bedminster Mar-a-Lago The Visionary Colorado State Capitol portrait Social media media use conflict Feud with Elon Musk Twitter wiretapping allegations Real News Update covfefe Donald J. Trump State Park Nicknames used Trump Force One Trump derangement syndrome Fort Trump Official portraits Support groups Bikers for Trump Blacks for Trump Black Voices for Trump Gays for Trump Women for Trump Pseudonyms Wikipedia coverage ← Barack Obama ← Joe Biden → Category v t e First presidency of Donald Trump (2017–2021) Previous: Obama administration Next: Biden administration See also: Second Trump administration General Appointments ambassadors attorneys judges Supreme Court candidates Gorsuch Kavanaugh Barrett Cabinet Pence vice presidency Economic advisors Withdrawn appointees Short-tenure appointees Dismissals and resignations attorneys Comey inspectors general Executive orders Legal affairs Impeachments efforts resolutions impeachment inquiry first impeachment first trial second impeachment second trial proposed expungements Opinion polling 2017 2018 2019 Pardons Joe Arpaio commutation of Jaime Davidson Proclamations 2017 2018 2019 2020–21 Trips 2017 2018 2019 2020–21 international Rex TIllerson Mike Pompeo North Korea summit Singapore Hanoi DMZ Riyadh summit Helsinki summit Namaste Trump Events Timeline First 100 days 2017 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 2018 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 2019 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 2020 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 January 2021 Speeches Joint address to Congress Warsaw speech National Scout Jamboree State of the Union Address 2018 2019 2020 Oval Office Address 2019 2020 Farewell address Other Transition Inauguration Biden transition Policies Domestic Government shutdowns January 2018 2018–2019 Salute to America 2019 2020 COVID-19 pandemic Taskforce Communication Government response stimulus bills CARES Act Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 Operation Warp Speed White House outbreak Interference with science agencies Reactions to the George Floyd protests Photo op at St. John's Church Deployment of federal forces in the United States 2020 Mount Rushmore Fireworks Celebration National Garden of American Heroes Infrastructure Racial views Social First Step Act Cannabis Space Economic Tax cuts Tariffs China trade war USMCA Farmer bailouts Environmental Paris Agreement withdrawal America's Water Infrastructure Act of 2018 Foreign America First Saudi Arabia arms deal Relations with Iran Nuclear deal withdrawal Relations with Israel Jerusalem recognition Golan Heights recognition Palestine peace plan Abraham Accords UAE Bahrain Sudan Morocco Kosovo–Serbia agreements Syria strikes 2017 2018 Killings al-Baghdadi Soleimani Afghanistan withdrawal Taliban deal Proposed invasion of Venezuela Immigration Travel bans reactions legal challenges protests replacement Executive Order 13767 Border wall Family separation policy protests Migrant detentions Troop deployments National emergency Protests 2017 Women's March list Lincoln Portland Seattle global LGBTQ Travel ban list Day Without Immigrants Not My Presidents Day Day Without a Woman Tax March March for Science list Portland Seattle 2018 People's Climate March May Day March for Truth Impeachment March Boston Free Speech Rally (counter-protest) U.S. national anthem kneeling protests 2018 Women's March list Gun violence March for Our Lives list Portland Seattle Family separation Abolish ICE Families Belong Together Occupy ICE Women Disobey Donald Trump baby balloon Kremlin Annex Nobody Is Above the Law 2019 Women's March list 2019 Presidents Day protest Dump Trump (statue) December 2019 impeachment protests 2020 Women's March January list October list Racial unrest George Floyd protests list-USA list-abroad Trump Statue Initiative God Emperor Trump Related 2016 election Trump campaign Trumpism Donald Trump and fascism Social media Twitter Crossfire Hurricane Classified information disclosures Special counsel investigations Mueller Durham Links between Trump administration and Russian government officials Russian bounty program Anonymous senior official op-ed Stormy Daniels scandal Zelenskyy phone call Ukraine scandal Federal government data breach Attempts to overturn the 2020 presidential election Fake electors plot Chesebro memos Eastman memos Lawsuits Texas v. Pennsylvania Jeffrey Clark letter January 6 United States Capitol attack timeline aftermath continued protests domestic reactions international reactions Presidential Library Category v t e Second presidency of Donald Trump (2025–present) Previous: Biden administration See also: First Trump administration General Appointments ambassadors attorneys Cabinet Vance vice presidency Executive orders Legal affairs Opinion polling Pardons January 6 defendants Proclamations Trips 2025 international Marco Rubio Events Timeline First 100 days 2025 Q1 Q2 Q3 Speeches Joint address to Congress Other Transition Inauguration Policies Domestic DEI Department of Government Efficiency network of DOGE deferred resignation mass layoffs targets USAID " Designating English as the Official Language of the United States " Dismissals of inspectors general Education Federal funding freeze Federal hiring freeze Golden Dome NOAA Office of Shipbuilding Online resource removals " Restoring Names That Honor American Greatness " Gulf of America Mount McKinley Science TAKE IT DOWN Act Targeting political opponents and civil society Law firms Transgender people US Army 250th Anniversary Parade White House Faith Office Economic Cryptocurrency $Trump memecoin dinner Strategic bitcoin reserve " No tax on tips " Stargate Project Tariffs China trade war Canada and Mexico trade war "Liberation Day" tariffs TACO AI policy Environment Paris Agreement withdrawal Fiscal One Big Beautiful Bill Act Rescissions Act of 2025 Foreign Expansionism Canada Gaza Strip Greenland Munich Security Conference Russian invasion of Ukraine Putin call Saudi Arabia summit Zelenskyy Oval Office meeting minerals agreement peace talks Putin summit in Alaska Withdrawal from WHO Gaza war Yemen attacks Signal group chat leaks Ras Isa oil terminal airstrikes US–Houthi ceasefire Relations with Iran Iran negotiations Iran–Israel war June 2025 Iran strikes Iran–Israel war ceasefire Middle East visit Ramaphosa Oval Office meeting Armenia–Azerbaijan agreement Immigration Deportation and detention of U.S. citizens Alligator Alcatraz Deportation of immigrants Indians Venezuelans J.G.G. v. Trump Deportation of Kilmar Abrego Garcia W.M.M. v. Trump Activist deportations Mahmoud Khalil Rasha Alawieh Rümeysa Öztürk Mohsen Mahdawi Arrest of Hannah Dugan Laken Riley Act Jocelyn Nungaray National Wildlife Refuge Guantanamo Migrant Operations Center White South African refugee program Trump Gold Card " Protecting the Meaning and Value of American Citizenship " State of Washington v. Trump Trump v. CASA Barbara v. Trump Travel ban Proclamation 10949 Healthcare Make America Healthy Again MAHA Commission MAHA report HHS gender dysphoria report Protests Efforts to impeach resolutions 50501 movement protests Day of Action Anti-deportation protests Los Angeles Newsom v. Trump Canadian boycott Day Without Immigrants Department of Justice resignations Economic Blackout Response to DOGE DOGE lawsuits People's March Stand Up for Science 2025 Hands Off protests No Kings protests Good Trouble Lives On protest Rage Against the Regime Related 2024 election Trump campaign Presidential library Agenda 47 Anti-LGBTQ movement Border crisis Donald Trump and fascism Elon Musk feud Kennedy Center Penny debate in the United States Project 2025 Project Esther Trumpism Unlawful Impersonations of ICE officials Mar-a-Lago face Category v t e January 6 United States Capitol attack Background U.S. Capitol United States Capitol Police Harry Dunn Aquilino Gonell Eugene Goodman Yogananda Pittman Steven Sund Metropolitan Police Department of the District of Columbia Robert Contee Michael Fanone Daniel Hodges Timeline of prior security incidents Election Previous claims of election fraud by President Trump in 2012 in 2016 Republican reactions 2020–21 presidential election protests 2021 Electoral College vote count Predictions of violence 1776 Returns Attempts to overturn the 2020 presidential election Fake electors plot Chesebro memos Eastman memos Lawsuits Texas v. Pennsylvania Jeffrey Clark letter Other Democratic backsliding in the United States Michigan State Capitol storming Trumpism False or misleading statements by Donald Trump Conspiracy theories Social media use by Donald Trump Twitter QAnon Donald Trump and fascism Trump derangement syndrome Involved Christina Bobb Kenneth Chesebro Jeffrey Clark Joseph diGenova John Eastman Jenna Ellis Rudy Giuliani John McEntee Mark Meadows Cleta Mitchell Peter Navarro Sidney Powell Victoria Toensing Jim Troupis Donald Trump Donald Trump Jr.

Events Planning Timeline of attack Law enforcement response killing of Ashli Babbitt Death of Brian Sicknick Participants Proud Boys Enrique Tarrio Joe Biggs Ethan Nordean Dominic Pezzola Oath Keepers Stewart Rhodes Kelly Meggs Jeremy Bertino Ray Epps Roberto Minuta Jessica Marie Watkins Others Richard Barnett Jacob Chansley Cameron Clapp Isabella DeLuca Derrick Evans Nick Fuentes Tim "Baked Alaska" Gionet Simone Gold Couy Griffin Pamela Hemphill Alan Hostetter Adam Christian Johnson Jay Johnston Klete Keller Edward Kelley Carol Kicinski Kevin James Lyons Doug Mastriano Evan Neumann Nicholas Ochs Matthew Perna Rachel Powell Chaya "Libs of TikTok" Raichik Guy Reffitt Jason Riddle Dana Rohrabacher Rick Saccone Ryan Samsel Ronald Sandlin Jon Schaffer Tighe Scott Kevin Seefried Owen Shroyer Peter Francis Stager Brandon Straka John Earle Sullivan‎‎ Antwione Williams Christopher John Worrell Aftermath 2021 U.S. inauguration week protests Companies that halted political contributions Reactions domestic international Second impeachment of Donald Trump trial Suicides Howard Liebengood Jeffrey L. Smith Proceedings Justice Department investigation January 6 commission House Select Committee criminal proceedings list Fischer v. United States public hearings Thompson v. Trump Smith special counsel investigation Federal prosecution of Donald Trump Trump v. United States Justice for J6 rally 2021 Facebook company files leak Presidential eligibility of Donald Trump Trump v. Anderson Pardons Related 8 January Brasília attacks Alex Jones Ali Alexander Kathy Barnette Boogaloo movement Jericho March Groypers Sedition Caucus Social media use by Donald Trump Three Percenters Trumpism Day of Rage: How Trump Supporters Took the U.S. Capitol (2021) Four Hours at the Capitol (2021) This Place Rules (2022) "Justice for All" (2023) A Storm Foretold (2023) The Sixth (2024) Democratic backsliding in the United States Cincinnati FBI field office attack v t e Republican Party History National Union Party Third Party System Fourth Party System Fifth Party System Sixth Party System Presidential tickets , national conventions , and presidential primaries 1856 (Philadelphia) : Frémont / Dayton 1860 (Chicago) : Lincoln / Hamlin 1864 (Baltimore) : Lincoln / Johnson 1868 (Chicago) : Grant / Colfax 1872 (Philadelphia) : Grant / Wilson 1876 (Cincinnati) : Hayes / Wheeler 1880 (Chicago) : Garfield / Arthur 1884 (Chicago) : Blaine / Logan 1888 (Chicago) : Harrison / Morton 1892 (Minneapolis) : Harrison / Reid 1896 (Saint Louis) : McKinley / Hobart 1900 (Philadelphia) : McKinley / Roosevelt 1904 (Chicago) : Roosevelt / Fairbanks 1908 (Chicago) : Taft / Sherman 1912 (Chicago) : Taft / Sherman / Butler primaries 1916 (Chicago) : Hughes / Fairbanks primaries 1920 (Chicago) : Harding / Coolidge primaries 1924 (Cleveland) : Coolidge / Dawes primaries 1928 (Kansas City) : Hoover / Curtis primaries 1932 (Chicago) : Hoover / Curtis primaries 1936 (Cleveland) : Landon / Knox primaries 1940 (Philadelphia) : Willkie / McNary primaries 1944 (Chicago) : Dewey / Bricker primaries 1948 (Philadelphia) : Dewey / Warren primaries 1952 (Chicago) : Eisenhower / Nixon primaries 1956 (San Francisco) : Eisenhower / Nixon primaries 1960 (Chicago) : Nixon / Lodge primaries 1964 (San Francisco) : Goldwater / Miller primaries 1968 (Miami Beach) : Nixon / Agnew primaries 1972 (Miami Beach) : Nixon / Agnew primaries 1976 (Kansas City) : Ford / Dole primaries 1980 (Detroit) : Reagan / G. H. W. Bush primaries 1984 (Dallas) : Reagan / G. H. W. Bush primaries 1988 (New Orleans) : G. H. W. Bush / Quayle primaries 1992 (Houston) : G. H. W. Bush / Quayle primaries 1996 (San Diego) : Dole / Kemp primaries 2000 (Philadelphia) : G. W. Bush / Cheney primaries 2004 (New York) : G. W. Bush / Cheney primaries 2008 (St. Paul) : McCain / Palin primaries 2012 (Tampa) : Romney / Ryan primaries 2016 (Cleveland) : Trump / Pence primaries 2020 (Charlotte/other locations) : Trump / Pence primaries 2024 (Milwaukee) : Trump / Vance primaries 2028 (Houston) Presidential administrations Lincoln (1861–1865) Johnson (1865–1868) Grant (1869–1877) Hayes (1877–1881) Garfield (1881) Arthur (1881–1885) Harrison (1889–1893) McKinley (1897–1901) Roosevelt (1901–1909) Taft (1909–1913) Harding (1921–1923) Coolidge (1923–1929) Hoover (1929–1933) Eisenhower (1953–1961) Nixon (1969–1974) Ford (1974–1977) Reagan (1981–1989) G. H. W. Bush (1989–1993) G. W. Bush (2001–2009) Trump ( 2017–2021 ; 2025–present ) U.S. Senate leaders and Conference chairs J. P. Hale (1859–1862) Anthony (1862–1884) Sherman (1884–1885) Edmunds (1885–1891) Sherman (1891–1897) Allison (1897–1908) E. Hale (1908–1911) Cullom (1911–1913) Gallinger (1913–1918) Lodge (1918–1924) Curtis (1924–1929) Watson (1929–1933) McNary (1933–1940) Austin (1940–1941) McNary (1941–1944) White (1944–1949) Wherry (1949–1952) Bridges (1952–1953) Taft (1953) Knowland (1953–1959) Dirksen (1959–1969) Scott (1969–1977) Baker (1977–1979) Stevens (1979–1980) Baker (1980–1985) Dole (1985–1996) Lott (1996–2003) Frist (2003–2007) McConnell (2007–2025) Thune (2025–present) U.S. House leaders , Speakers , and Conference chairs Pennington (1860–1861) Grow (1861–1863) Colfax (1863–1869) Pomeroy (1869) Blaine (1869–1875) McCrary (1875–1877) Hale (1877–1879) Frye (1879–1881) Keifer (1881–1883) Cannon (1883–1889) Reed (1889–1891) T. J. Henderson (1891–1895) Reed (1895–1899) D. B. Henderson (1899–1903) Cannon (1903–1911) Mann (1911–1919) Gillett (1919–1925) Longworth (1925–1931) Snell (1931–1939) Martin (1939–1959) Halleck (1959–1965) Ford (1965–1973) Rhodes (1973–1981) Michel (1981–1995) Gingrich (1995–1999) Hastert (1999–2007) Boehner (2007–2015) Ryan (2015–2019) McCarthy (2019–2023) Johnson (2023–present) RNC Chairs Morgan Raymond Ward Claflin Morgan Chandler Cameron Jewell Sabin Jones Quay Clarkson Campbell Carter Hanna Payne Cortelyou New Hitchcock Hill Rosewater Hilles Wilcox Hays Adams Butler Work Huston Fess Sanders Fletcher Hamilton Martin Walsh Spangler Brownell Reece Scott Gabrielson Summerfield Roberts Hall Alcorn T. Morton Miller Burch Bliss R. Morton Dole Bush Smith Brock Richards Laxalt / Fahrenkopf Fahrenkopf Atwater Yeutter Bond Barbour Nicholson Gilmore Racicot Gillespie Mehlman Martínez / Duncan Duncan Steele Priebus McDaniel Whatley Chair elections 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019 2021 2023 2024 Parties by state and territory State Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Territory American Samoa District of Columbia Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico Virgin Islands Affiliated organizations Congress House Conference Legislative Digest Steering and Policy Committees Senate Conference Policy Committee Factions Freedom Caucus Problem Solvers Caucus Republican Governance Group Republican Study Committee Campaign committees National Republican Congressional Committee National Republican Redistricting Trust National Republican Senatorial Committee Republican Attorneys General Association Republican Governors Association Constituency groups College Republicans Chairmen Congressional Hispanic Conference Log Cabin Republicans National Black Republican Association Republican Hindu Coalition Republican Jewish Coalition Republican Muslim Coalition Republican National Hispanic Assembly Republicans Abroad Teen Age Republicans Young Republicans Republicans Overseas Factional groups Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Majority for Choice Republican Liberty Caucus Republican National Coalition for Life ConservAmerica Liberty Caucus Ripon Society The Wish List Related Primaries Debates Bibliography International Democracy Union Three Legged Stool Timeline of modern American conservatism Trumpism v t e Fascism Themes Core tenets Actual idealism Aestheticization of politics Anti-communism Anti-intellectualism Anti-materialism Anti-pacifism Authoritarianism Chauvinism Class collaboration Conspiracism Corporatism Cult of personality Dictatorship Direct action Dirigisme Economic interventionism Eugenics Heroic capitalism Heroic realism Heroism Imperialism Indoctrination Irrationalism Machismo Masculinity Militarism National syndicalism Nationalism Integral Palingenetic Ultra New Man One-party state Perpetual war Populism Proletarian nation Propaganda Racism Reactionary modernism Social Darwinism Social interventionism Social order State capitalism Statolatry Supercapitalism Syncretism Third Position Totalitarianism Topics Definitions Economics Fascism and ideology Fascism worldwide Symbolism Variants Arab Argentine Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Austrian Banderism Brazilian British Christian Christian Identity Mexican synarchism Clerical Crypto Eco English Falangism French Doriotism Pétainism Neo-Pétainism Jeune Nation L'Œuvre Française Valoisism Hindutva Hungarism Hutu Irish Islamic Ziaism Italian Intransigent Japanese Emperor-system Statism Restoration Ultra Jewish/Israeli Kahanism Revisionist Maximalism Korean Ilminism Nyulaiteu Latvian Mystical Nazism Austrian Esoteric Hitlerism Neo-Nazism Russian Strasserism Swedish Neo Finnish NRx Pan-Turkic Rexism Polish Romanian Legionarism Neo-Legionarism Romanianism/Stelism Russian Neo-Eurasianism Syndicalist Syrian Social Nationalism Techno Third Positionism National-anarchism National Bolshevism Nazi-Maoism Uruguayan Marzism Revisionism Sosism Ustašism Movements Africa Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging Coalition for the Defence of the Republic Greyshirts Muslim Association of the Lictor National Revolutionary Movement for Development Ossewabrandwag Radio Télévision Libre des Mille Collines Republican Democratic Movement Young Egypt Party (1933) Asia Abhinav Bharat Al-Muthanna Club Aria Party Azerbaijan National Democrat Party Azure Party Black Dragon Society Brit HaBirionim Concordia Association Grey Wolves Golden Square Hindu Mahasabha Iran-e-No Party Jewish National Front Kach Kataeb Party Kenkokukai Kokumin Dōmei Korea Nationalist Party Korean National Youth Association Lehi Liberal Party (South Korea) Nasyonal Aktivite ve Zinde İnkişaf National Socialism Association National Socialist Japanese Workers' Party Nationalist Movement Party Nationalist Task Party National Will Party Nation Party of Iran Otzma Yehudit Pan-Iranist Party Palestine Arab Party Patrol 36 Progress Party (Iran) Philippine Falange Rastakhiz Party Rastriya Prajatantra Party Reform bureaucrats Religious Zionist Party Sakurakai Sangh Parivar Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad Bharatiya Gau Raksha Dal Bharatiya Janata Party Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha Bharatiya Jana Sangh Bharatiya Kisan Sangh Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh Bharat Vikas Parishad Ekal Vidyalaya Hindu Makkal Katchi Hindu Munnani Hindu Swayamsevak Sangh Jammu Praja Parishad Muslim Rashtriya Manch Ram Janmabhoomi Nyas Rashtra Sevika Samiti Rashtriya Sikh Sangat Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh Akhil Bharatiya Itihas Sankalan Yojana Seva Bharati Vidya Bharati Vanavasi Kalyan Ashram Vishva Hindu Parishad Bajrang Dal Durga Vahini SUMKA Syrian Social Nationalist Party Tōhōkai Tsagaan Khas Turkish Union Party Wang Jingwei Kuomintang Northern / Northwestern Europe Academic Karelia Society Ailtirí na hAiséirghe Autonome Nationalisten Bases Autónomas Black Front (Netherlands) Blood & Honour Blueshirts Breton Social-National Workers' Movement British Democratic Party British Fascists Britain First British League of Ex-Servicemen and Women British Movement British National Party (1960) British National Party British People's Party (1939) British People's Party (2005) British Union of Fascists The Britons La Cagoule Casuals United Centre Party '86 Clerical People's Party Dutch Defence League Dutch Fascist Union English Defence League European Defence League English National Association European Liberation Front Le Faisceau Fédération d'action nationale et européenne Finnish National Socialist Labor Organisation Finnish People's Organisation Finnish-Socialist Workers' Party Flemish National Union French National-Collectivist Party French Nationalist Party French Popular Party General Dutch Fascist League Greater Britain Movement Groupe Collaboration Heathen Front Imperial Fascist League International Third Position Jeune Nation Lalli Alliance of Finland Lapua Movement League of Saint George Les Identitaires Mouvement d'Action Civique Mouvement Franciste Nasjonal Samling National Action (UK) National Alliance (Sweden) National Corporate Party National Fascisti National Front (UK) National League of Sweden Nationalist Party National Popular Rally National Rally National Socialist Bloc National Socialist Dutch Workers Party National Socialist Front National Socialist League National Socialist Movement (UK, 1962) National Socialist Movement (United Kingdom) National Socialist Movement in the Netherlands National Socialist Movement of Norway National Socialist Union of Finland National Socialist Workers' Party (Sweden) National Socialist Workers' Party of Denmark National Socialists of Finland National Syndicalists National Union (Netherlands) National Union (Portugal) New Party Nipsters Nordic League The Nordic Realm Party Nordic Resistance Movement Northern League Norwegian Defence League Nouvelle Droite GRECE L'Œuvre Française Official National Front Order of Flemish Militants Order of Nine Angles Organisation of National Socialists Parti Communautaire National-Européen Party of Finnish Labor Party of the Swedes Patriotic Alternative Patriotic People's Movement Patriotic People's Movement (1993) Pērkonkrusts Phalange Française Ragnarock Rebelles Européens Rexist Party Rising Finland Scottish Democratic Fascist Party Scottish Protestant League Skrewdriver Skullhead Stormers Terre et Peuple Third Way (France) Third Way (UK) Union Movement Verdinaso Vigrid White Aryan Resistance World Union of National Socialists Central Europe Action Front of National Socialists/National Activists Arrow Cross Party Artgemeinschaft Austrian Nazism Black Front (Germany) Bund Deutscher Osten Christian National Socialist Front Deutsche Reichspartei Eidgenössische Sammlung Falanga Free German Workers' Party German Faith Movement German National Movement in Liechtenstein German National Socialist Workers' Party (Czechoslovakia) German Party (Slovakia) German Social Union Honor Hungarian National Front Hungarian National Socialist Agricultural Labourers' and Workers' Party Hungarian National Socialist Party Combat League of German Socialists Kotlebists – People's Party Our Slovakia Landser Liechtenstein Homeland Service National Democratic Party (Austria) National Democratic Party of Germany National Fascist Community National Front (Hungary) National Front (Switzerland) National Movement of Switzerland National Radical Camp National Radical Camp (1993) National Revival of Poland National Union (Switzerland) Nationalist Front (Germany) Nazi Party Greater German People's Community Nazi Germany National Socialist Freedom Movement National Socialist Working Association New Order Nipsters No Colours Records PC Records Positive Christianity German Christians Republic Movement The Right (Germany) Rock-O-Rama Records Shield and Sword Slovak People's Party Socialist Reich Party Stahlgewitter Sudeten German Party The Third Path United Hungarian National Socialist Party Vlajka Volksdeutsche Bewegung Volkssozialistische Bewegung Deutschlands/Partei der Arbeit Wiking-Jugend Southern Europe ADÑ–Spanish Identity Albanian Fascist Party Balli Kombëtar Brothers of Italy CEDADE Democratic Fascist Party European Nation State Fasci d'Azione Rivoluzionaria Fasci Italiani di Combattimento Fascio d'Azione Rivoluzionaria Falange Sección Femenina La Falange (1999) Falange Auténtica Falange Española Falange Española Auténtica Falange Española de las JONS Falange Española de las JONS (1976) Falange Española Independiente Falangist Movement of Spain Freethinkers' Party Imperium Europa Italian fascism National Fascist Party (Italy) Italian Social Republic Republican Fascist Party Italian Social Movement Juntas de Ofensiva Nacional-Sindicalista Juntas Españolas National Alliance (Spain) National Alliance July 18 National Democracy (Italy) National Democracy (Spain) National Front (Spain, 1986) National Front (Spain, 2006) National Union (Italy, 1923) National Union (Spain) New Force (Italy) New Force (Spain) Republican Social Movement The Right (Italy) Sammarinese Fascist Party Spanish Military Union Struggle of the People Student Action Terza Posizione Tricolour Flame Unidad Falangista Montañesa Youth Front Eastern and Southeastern Europe Autochthonous Croatian Party of Rights Bosnian Movement of National Pride Bulgarian National Socialist Workers Party Croatian Liberation Movement Croatian National Resistance Croatian Party of Rights Crusade of Romanianism Ethnic National Union Eurasia Movement Eurasia Party Format18 For the Native Language!

Front of National Revolutionary Action German Party German People's Party Golden Dawn Greek National Socialist Party Hosank Iron Guard Kolovrat LEPEN Liberal Democratic Party of Russia Lithuanian Nationalist Union National Agrarian Party National Bolshevik Front National Bolshevik Party National-Christian Defense League National Christian Party National Fascist Movement National Italo-Romanian Cultural and Economic Movement National Party – Greeks National Socialist Patriotic Organisation National Socialist Society National Social Movement National Romanian Fascio National Renaissance Front National Salvation Front Nokturnal Mortum National Socialism / White Power Obraz Occupy Pedophilia Order of Nine Angles Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists The Other Russia of E. V. Limonov Pamyat Patriotic Alliance People's Party Progressive Socialist Party of Ukraine Ratniks (Bulgaria) Romanian Front Russian Imperial Movement Russian Fascist Party Russian National Unity Russian Women's Fascist Movement Serbian Action Serbian Radical Party Steel Shield Svoboda Union of Bulgarian National Legions Ustaše Ustaše in Australia Croatian Revolutionary Brotherhood Yugoslav Radical Union ZBOR North America Fascism in Canada Aryan Guard Aryan Nations Canadian Association for Free Expression Canadian Union of Fascists Citizens for Foreign Aid Reform Heritage Front Parti national social chrétien Fascism in the United States American Front American Nazi Party Betar US Creativity Fascist League of North America German American Bund Goyim Defense League Hammerskins Identity Evropa League of the South National Alliance (United States) National Renaissance Party Nationalist Social Club-131 National Socialist Legion National Socialist Liberation Front National Socialist Movement National States' Rights Party National Vanguard Nationalist Front (United States) Patriot Front Proud Boys Rise Above Movement Silver Legion of America Christian Party (United States, 1930s) Traditionalist Worker Party Vanguard America Volksfront White Aryan Resistance Wotansvolk Revolutionary Mexicanist Action Mexican Democratic Party Mexican Fascist Party National Pro Patria Party National Synarchist Union Nationalist Front of Mexico Order of Nine Angles Oceania Action Zealandia Antipodean Resistance Australia First Movement Australia First Party Australian Defence League Australian National Socialist Party Centre Party Lads Society National Action (Australia) National Socialist Network National Socialist Party of Australia Progressive Nationalist Party Reclaim Australia True Blue Crew United Patriots Front South America Agrarian Labor Party Argentine Anticommunist Alliance Argentine Fascist Party Argentine Nationalist Action Argentine Patriotic League Bolivian Socialist Falange Brazilian Integralism Brazilian Integralist Action Brazilian Integralist Front Falangism in Latin America Female Peronist Party Iron Guard (Argentina) Nacionalismo National Fascist Party (Argentina) National Fascist Union Nationalist Liberation Alliance National Liberation Movement National Socialist Movement of Chile National Universitary Concentration New Triumph Party Patriot Front (Argentina) Popular Dignity Popular Freedom Alliance Popular Representation Party Popular Socialist Vanguard Republican League La Resistencia Dios, Patria y Familia Revolutionary Union Tacuara Nationalist Movement People Australia Campbell (Eric) Campbell (Graeme) Cottrell Groot Mills Saleam Austria Dollfuss Miklas Pfrimer Planetta Schuschnigg Seyss-Inquart Starhemberg Belgium Daye Declercq Degrelle Denis Elias Eriksson Hermans Lagrou Poulet Severen Streel van de Wiele Croatia Boban Francetić Kraljević Kvaternik Luburić Pavelić Pavičić Rover Servatzy Finland Helanen Isotalo Kalsta Konkka Kosola Orko Simojoki Somersalo Törni Varjonen France Augier Bardèche Benoist-Méchin Béraud Brasillach Bucard Châteaubriant Déat Déroulède Dior Doriot La Rochelle Lagardelle Laval Pétain Rebatet Valois Vial Germany Abetz Andrae Baeumler Berchtold Berger Best Brunner Bühler Darré Falkenhausen Hocke Feder Forster Frank Franz V Gesche Goebbels Göring Graf Greiser Günther Hanke Heiden Hess Heydrich Himmler Hitler Klintzsch Kuhn Ludendorff Maurice Müller Niekisch Ploetz Rahn Reitsch Renthe-Fink Ribbentrop Rieger Rosenberg Schmitt Schreck Skorzeny Strasser (Gregor) Strasser (Otto) Streicher Terboven Thadden Krosigk Zündel Greece Dragoumis Kasidiaris Koryzis Lagos Michaloliakos Papadopoulos India Adityanath Advani Bose Godse Golwalkar Hedgewar Modi Mukherjee Savarkar Thakur Vajpayee Iran Forouhar Kashani Monshizadeh Pezeshkpour Teymourtash Israel Ahimeir Ben-Ari Ben-Gvir Eldad Eliyahu Goldstein Gopstein Greenberg Ha'ivri Heruti Kahane Marzel Natan-Zada Stern Yeivin Italy Acerbo Alfieri Ambris D'Annunzio Azara Badoglio Balbo Torrente Ballester Bastianini Bianchi Boni Bono Boselli Bottai Ciano (Costanzo) Ciano (Galeazzo) Cogni Corradini Freda Gentile Giuriati Gozi Grandi Graziani Guidi Malaparte Marinetti Michels Morgagni Mussolini Olivetti Panunzio Papini Pavolini Rauti Ricci Ridruejo Rocco Rossoni Sarfatti Soffici Spirito Volpi Japan Akao Araki Chō Hashimoto Honjō Kita Kodama Matsuoka Nonaka Ōkawa Sasakawa Romania Antonescu Bacaloglu Codreanu Crainic Cuza Gigurtu Goga Manoilescu Moța Ogoranu Sima Russia Astroŭski Borovikov Ilyin Kaminski Martsinkevich Milchakov Oktan Prilepin Prokhanov Rodzaevsky Spain Arrese Bau Nolla Bilbao Eguía Carrero Blanco Fernández-Cuesta Franco Franco y Polo Giménez Caballero Primo de Rivera Ramos Sánchez Mazas Serrano Suñer Ukraine Bandera Biletsky Dontsov Gubarev Klyachkivsky Lebed Rebet Samchuk Shukhevych Stetsko Tyahnybok Vitrenko United Kingdom Beckett Chamberlain Chesterton Lake Leese Mosley (Diana) Mosley (Oswald) Pankhurst Pearson Ramsay Robinson Southgate Tyndall Wellesley United States Auernheimer Collins Fuentes Joyce Pelley Pound Yockey Other Burdi Celmiņš Martínez Quisling Ramírez Riva-Agüero y Osma Šešelj Szálasi Works Literature 1776 Returns La Conquista del Estado The Culture of Critique Defiance Did Six Million Really Die?

The Doctrine of Fascism Essentials of Hindutva Fascist Manifesto For My Legionaries The Foundations of Geopolitics: The Geopolitical Future of Russia The Fourth Political Theory Hitlers Zweites Buch Hutu Ten Commandments Imperium: The Philosophy of History and Politics An Investigation of Global Policy with the Yamato Race as Nucleus Kokutairon and Pure Socialism The Last Will of a Russian Fascist Manifesto of Race Manifesto of the Fascist Intellectuals Mein Kampf My Autobiography My Life The Myth of the Twentieth Century OPROP!

Our Race Will Rule Undisputed Over The World Protestantische Rompilger A Racial Program for the Twentieth Century Uncomfortable Questions for Comfortable Jews A Warning to the Hindus Who Are the Mind Benders?

Periodicals Action Ajan Suunta L'Alba El Alcázar The American Review Der Angriff Arriba The Blackshirt La Conquista del Estado The Daily Stormer Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung Das Deutsche Mädel La Difesa della Razza Eleftheros Kosmos The European Fashist Fashizmi La France au travail Fritt Folk Fronten Gândirea Gioventù Fascista Golden Dawn Hamaas Hrvatski Domobran Je suis partout Kangura Kansallissosialisti Limonka Masada2000 Münchener Beobachter Nash Put' Nástup Nation Europa Neue Anthropologie Neues Volk Het Nieuwe Volk Norsk-Tysk Tidsskrift Novopress Norsk-Tysk Tidsskrift Organiser Panchjanya Panzerbär Parole der Woche Le Pays Réel Der Pimpf Il Popolo d'Italia Das Reich Revue d'histoire du fascisme Das Schwarze Korps Sfarmă-Piatră Signal Siniristi Spearhead Der Stürmer Türkische Post Der Umbruch Vairas Vlajka Volk en Staat Völkischer Beobachter Die Wehrmacht Wochenspruch der NSDAP Film L'Armata Azzurra Bengasi Condottieri The Daughter of the Samurai Erbkrank Europa: The Last Battle The Great Appeal The Old Guard Raza Scipio Africanus: The Defeat of Hannibal Der Sieg des Glaubens The Siege of the Alcazar Lo squadrone bianco Tag der Freiheit: Unsere Wehrmacht Triumph of the Will Music Fashwave Hindutva pop National Socialist black metal Nazi punk Rock Against Communism White power music Other Allach StoneToss Related topics Art of the Third Reich Fascist architecture Heroic realism Nazi architecture Nazism and cinema Organizations Institutional Ahnenerbe Chamber of Fasces and Corporations Grand Council of Fascism Imperial Way Faction Italian Nationalist Association National Socialist League of the Reich for Physical Exercise Quadrumvirs Activist Adelaide Institute Agrarian Trade Union Federation The Britons Casuals United DeVlag European Social Movement Finnish Realm Union Francisco Franco National Foundation Friends of New Germany German American Bund GRECE The Link Mladorossi National Party of Europe National Policy Institute National Popular Consciousness Panzerfaust Records Popular Force Party Right Club Russian Fascist Organization Youth Adler und Falke Albanian Lictor Youth Arab Lictor Youth Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha Blue-and-Blacks Ethiopian Lictor Youth Fascist Union of Youth Frente de Juventudes Al-Futuwwa Gioventù Italiana del Littorio Great Japan Youth Party Hitler Youth Faith and Beauty Society Deutsches Jungvolk Jungmädelbund League of German Girls Jeunesse Populaire Française Juventudes de Acción Popular Korean National Youth Association Levente Mocidade Portuguesa Nationale Jeugdstorm National League of Sweden National Socialist Liberation Front National Youth (Sweden) National Youth (Italy) National Youth Alliance National Youth Organisation (Greece) Opera Nazionale Balilla Österreichisches Jungvolk Patriotic/Eureka Youth League Union of Fascist Little Ones Union of Young Fascists – Vanguard (boys) Union of Young Fascists – Vanguard (girls) Ustaše Youth Wiking-Jugend Youth Front Paramilitary and terrorist Abhinav Bharat Albanian Fascist Militia Atomwaffen Division Azov Brigade Bajrang Dal Black Brigades Black Legion Blackshirts Blueshirts (Canada) Blueshirts (Ireland) Column 88 Combat Terrorist Organization Confederation of the Nation Corpul Muncitoresc Legionar Croatian Defence Forces Croatian National Resistance Croatian Revolutionary Brotherhood Bugojno group Einsatzgruppen Fasci di Azione Rivoluzionaria Falange Armata Falange Militia Flemish Guard Flemish Legion Frontbann Goldshirts Greenshirts Hilfspolizei Hitler Youth Greyshirts Heimwehr Hirden Hlinka Guard Hungarian National Defence Association Impuzamugambi Interbrigades Interahamwe Iron Wolf Jewish Defense League Jewish Defense Organization Kataeb Regulatory Forces Lăncieri Legion Wasa Lehava Lehi Levente Makapili Mano Blanca Misanthropic Division National Republican Guard New Guard Ostmärkische Sturmscharen Rodobrana Russian Imperial Movement Russian National Unity (2000) S14 Schutzstaffel Serbian Volunteer Corps Sicarii Sich Battalion Silver Shirts Sturmabteilung Sudetendeutsches Freikorps Terror Against Terror Third Klan Ukrainian Insurgent Army Ukrainian People's Militsiya Ustaše Militia Volkssport Walloon Guard Walloon Legion Waffen-SS Wagner Group Rusich Group Weerbaarheidsafdeling Werwolf Westland New Post Yokusan Sonendan Youth Front Student Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad Avanguardia Giovanile Fascista Frente de Estudiantes Sindicalistas German Student Union National Socialist German Students' League Sindicato Español Universitario Student Action International Axis powers NSDAP/AO ODESSA History 1900s Herero and Nama genocide and the Holocaust 1910s Arditi Fascio Fasci d'Azione Rivoluzionaria Armenian genocide and the Holocaust 1920s March on Rome Corfu incident Acerbo Law Beer Hall Putsch Aventine Secession Italian economic battles Le Faisceau 28 May 1926 coup d'état Libyan genocide 1930s March of the Iron Will November 1932 German federal election March 1933 German federal election Enabling Act Austrian Civil War July Putsch 1934 Montreux Fascist conference Romani Holocaust 4th of August Regime Anti-Comintern Pact Spanish Civil War 1940s World War II Nazi crimes against the Polish nation The Holocaust Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia End in Italy Nuremberg Trials Tokyo Trials Lists Anti-fascists Books about Hitler British fascist parties Fascist movements by country ( A-F G-M N-T U-Z ) Nazi ideologues Nazi leaders Secretaries of Italian fascist parties Speeches by Hitler SS personnel Related topics Authoritarian conservatism Chiangism Francoism Khomeinism Maurrassisme Pinochetism Putinism Ziaism Alt-right Alt-lite Alt-right pipeline Alt-tech Identitarian movement Anti-fascism Bahutu Manifesto Berlusconism Conservative Revolution Criticism of fascism Europe a Nation Fascist (epithet) Fascist mysticism Feudal fascism F-scale (personality test) Garveyism Germanisation of Poles during the Partitions Italianization of South Tyrol Japanization Morenazi Neosocialism Para-/semi-fascism Post-fascism Proto-fascism Red fascism Red–green–brown alliance Roman salute Saffronisation Sansepolcrismo Scientific racism Aryanism Nordicism Social fascism Sorelianism Synarchism Szeged Idea Trumpism Donald Trump and fascism Völkisch movement Women in Nazi Germany Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Trumpism&oldid=1306183659 " Categories : Trumpism 2015 introductions 2010s controversies in the United States 2020s controversies in the United States American nationalism American political neologisms Anti-intellectualism Antifeminism Christian messianism Christian nationalism in the United States Climate change denial Conservatism in the United States Cults of personality Donald Trump Donald Trump 2016 presidential campaign Donald Trump 2020 presidential campaign Donald Trump 2024 presidential campaign Donald Trump controversies Groups and movements involved with the January 6 United States Capitol attack National conservatism Political psychology Political terminology of the United States First presidency of Donald Trump Protectionism in the United States Reactionary Republican Party (United States) Right-wing ideologies Second presidency of Donald Trump Trump administration controversies Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from March 2025 CS1: long volume value All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 uses Japanese-language script (ja) CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia semi-protected pages Use American English from July 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from June 2025 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images All articles that may have off-topic sections Wikipedia articles that may have off-topic sections from July 2025 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from April 2024 Articles with excerpts Wikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2024 CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles containing French-language text Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 11:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Trumpism 31 languages Add topic

