Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Technologies for viral load testing Toggle Technologies for viral load testing subsection 1.1 Nucleic acid-based tests (NATs) 2 Plasma specimens Toggle Plasma specimens subsection 2.1 Storage 2.2 Measuring 2.3 Other factors that affect viral load 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Viral load 18 languages العربية Български Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית 日本語 Português Русский Slovenščina Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Amount of virus found in host tissue This article needs attention from an expert in Medicine . The specific problem is: Uncited "how to" content should be reviewed & article would generally benefit from expansion.

WikiProject Medicine may be able to help recruit an expert.

( January 2020 ) Viral load , also known as viral burden , is a numerical expression of the quantity of virus in a given volume of fluid, including biological and environmental specimens. It is not to be confused with viral titre or viral titer , which depends on the assay. When an assay for measuring the infective virus particle is done (Plaque assay, Focus assay), viral titre often refers to the concentration of infectious viral particles, which is different from the total viral particles. Viral load is measured using body fluids sputum [ 1 ] and blood plasma .

[ 2 ] As an example of environmental specimens, the viral load of norovirus can be determined from run-off water on garden produce.

[ 3 ] Norovirus has not only prolonged viral shedding and has the ability to survive in the environment but a minuscule infectious dose is required to produce infection in humans: less than 100 viral particles.

[ 4 ] Viral load is often expressed as viral particles, (virions) or infectious particles per mL depending on the type of assay. A higher viral burden, titre, or viral load often correlates with the severity of an active viral infection. The quantity of virus per mL can be calculated by estimating the live amount of virus in an involved fluid. For example, it can be given in RNA copies per millilitre of blood plasma.

Tracking viral load is used to monitor therapy during chronic viral infections, and in immunocompromised patients such as those recovering from bone marrow or solid organ transplantation . Currently, routine testing is available for HIV -1, cytomegalovirus , hepatitis B virus, and hepatitis C virus.

Viral load monitoring for HIV is of particular interest in the treatment of people with HIV , as this is continually discussed in the context of management of HIV/AIDS . An undetectable viral load does not imply a lack of infection. HIV positive patients on long-term combination antiretroviral therapy may present with an undetectable viral load on most clinical assays since the concentration of virus particles is below the limit of detection (LOD).

Technologies for viral load testing [ edit ] A 2010 review study by Puren et al.

[ 2 ] categorizes viral load testing into three types: (1) nucleic acid amplification based tests ( NATs or NAATs) commercially available in the United States with Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval, or on the market in the European Economic Area (EEA) with the CE marking ; (2) "Home–brew" or in-house NATs; (3) non-nucleic acid-based test.

[ citation needed ] Nucleic acid-based tests (NATs) [ edit ] There are many different molecular based test methods for quantifying the viral load using NATs. The starting material for amplification can be used to divide these molecular methods into three groups: [ 5 ] Target amplification which uses the nucleic acid itself. Just a few of the more common methods The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method of in vitro DNA synthesis uses a DNA template, polymerase , buffers, primers , and nucleotides to multiply the HIV in the blood sample. Then a chemical reaction marks the virus. The markers are measured and used to calculate the amount of virus.  PCR is used to quantify integrated DNA.

Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) is a variation of PCR that can be used to quantify viral RNA. RNA is used as the starting material for this method and converted to double-stranded DNA, using the enzyme reverse transcriptase (RT) for PCR.

The nucleic acid sequence-based amplification (NASBA) method is a transcription-based amplification system (TAS) variation of PCR. RNA is used as the target and a DNA copy is made. The DNA copy is then transcribed into RNA and amplified. Several TAS commercial variations are available including; transcription-mediated amplification (TMA), and self-sustaining sequence replication (3SR).

Probe specific amplification uses synthetic probes that preferentially bind to a target sequence. The probes are then amplified Signal amplification uses large amounts of signal bound to an unamplified target originally present in the sample. One commonly used method: The branched DNA (bDNA) method can use either DNA or RNA as the target nucleic acid. Short probes attached to a solid support and capture the target nucleic acid. Additional extender probes also bind to the target nucleic acid and to numerous reporter molecules which are used to increase the signal intensity, which is converted to a viral count.

Plasma specimens [ edit ] EDTA Plasma, from and EDTA blood sample is a good source of cell-free viral RNA for RNA-based viral load testing. Extraction of RNA from plasma requires specialized equipment, reagents and training, which might out of reach for medium to small laboratories. A large sample (> 1 mL of plasma) is needed requiring venipuncture .

Storage [ edit ] EDTA blood can be stored at room temperature for 30 hours, and  separated plasma for extended periods of time at -70 °C without significant decreases in viral load.

Measuring [ edit ] Viral load is reported as copies of HIV RNA in a millilitre (mL) of blood. Changes in viral load are usually reported as a log change (in powers of 10). For example, a three log increase in viral load (3 log10) is an increase of 10 3 or 1,000 times the previously reported level, while a drop from 500,000 to 500 copies would be a three-log-drop (also 3 log10).

[ citation needed ] Other factors that affect viral load [ edit ] Different test methods often give different results for the same patient sample. To be comparable the same test method (target amplification, probe specific amplification, or signal amplification) should be used each time a patient specimen is run. Ideally patient testing should be conducted at the same medical laboratory, using the same viral load test and analyzer.

See also [ edit ] Minimal infective dose Plaque forming unit Virus quantification References [ edit ] ^ Wölfel, Roman; Corman, Victor M.; Guggemos, Wolfgang; Seilmaier, Michael; Zange, Sabine; Müller, Marcel A.; Niemeyer, Daniela; Jones, Terry C.; Vollmar, Patrick; Rothe, Camilla ; Hoelscher, Michael; Bleicker, Tobias; Brünink, Sebastian; Schneider, Julia; Ehmann, Rosina; Zwirglmaier, Katrin; Drosten, Christian; Wendtner, Clemens (2020).

"Virological assessment of hospitalized patients with COVID-2019" .

Nature .

581 (7809): 465– 469.

Bibcode : 2020Natur.581..465W .

doi : 10.1038/s41586-020-2196-x .

PMID 32235945 .

^ a b Puren, Adrian; Gerlach, Jay L.; Weigl, Bernhard H.; Kelso, David M.; Domingo, Gonzalo J. (2010).

"Laboratory Operations, Specimen Processing, and Handling for Viral Load Testing and Surveillance" .

The Journal of Infectious Diseases .

201 : S27–36.

doi : 10.1086/650390 .

PMID 20225943 .

^ Shaheen, Mohamed N. F.; Elmahdy, Elmahdy M.; Chawla-Sarkar, Mamta (2019). "Quantitative PCR-based identification of enteric viruses contaminating fresh produce and surface water used for irrigation in Egypt".

Environmental Science and Pollution Research .

26 (21): 21619– 21628.

Bibcode : 2019ESPR...2621619S .

doi : 10.1007/s11356-019-05435-0 .

PMID 31129895 .

S2CID 167210903 .

^ Robilotti, Elizabeth; Deresinski, Stan; Pinsky, Benjamin A. (2015).

"Norovirus" .

Clinical Microbiology Reviews .

28 (1): 134– 164.

doi : 10.1128/CMR.00075-14 .

PMC 4284304 .

PMID 25567225 .

^ Buckingham, L.; Flaws, M.L. (2007).

Molecular Diagnostics Fundamentals, Methods, & Clinical Applications (PDF) . F.A. Davis Company. pp.

121– 154.

ISBN 978-0-8036-1659-2 . Retrieved 7 September 2020 .

Scholia has a profile for viral load (Q2528140) .

v t e Microbiology : Virus History Introduction Social history of viruses Virology Components Capsid Viral envelope Viral protein Viral life cycle Viral entry Viral replication Viral shedding Viroplasm Virus latency Lytic cycle Lysogenic cycle Genetics Antigenic drift Antigenic shift Phenotype mixing Reassortment Viral evolution By host Animal virus Bacteriophage Virophage Human virome Mycovirus Plant virus Other Antiviral drug Giant virus Helper virus Viral vector Helper dependent virus Laboratory diagnosis of viral infections Marine viruses Neurotropic virus Oncovirus Satellites Viral disease Viral load Virus-like particle Virus classification Virus quantification Virome Virosphere Portal Category Commons WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Viral_load&oldid=1305196670 " Categories : Virology HIV/AIDS Medical tests Epidemiology Global health Infectious diseases Pandemics Zoonoses Disease transmission Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing expert attention from January 2020 All articles needing expert attention Medicine articles needing expert attention All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2021 This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 16:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Viral load 18 languages Add topic

