Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Context and summary 2 Goals of the orator 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Orator (Cicero) 9 languages Català Deutsch Español Français Italiano Latina Nederlands Shqip Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Delectare ) Not to be confused with De Oratore .

Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e Orator was written by Marcus Tullius Cicero in the latter part of the year 46 BC.

[ 1 ] It is his last work on rhetoric , three years before his death.

[ 2 ] Describing rhetoric, Cicero addresses previous comments on the five canons of rhetoric: Inventio , Dispositio , Elocutio , Memoria , and Pronuntiatio . In this text, Cicero attempts to describe the perfect orator, in response to Marcus Junius Brutus ’ request.

Orator is the continuation of a debate between Brutus and Cicero , which originated in his text Brutus , written earlier in the same year.

The oldest partial text of Orator was recovered in the monastery of Mont Saint-Michel and now is located in the library at Avranches .

[ 3 ] Thirty-seven existing manuscripts have been discovered from this text. Another complete text was discovered in 1421, near Milan in the town of Lodi . The texts of these two manuscripts vary considerably, and modern translators rely on both.

In 46 BC, when Cicero wrote Orator , many young Roman men revolted against the stylistic paradigms put forward by Cicero, and from most Roman traditions in general.

[ 2 ] Cicero writes in a defensive posture to this hostile audience.

Context and summary [ edit ] In Orator , Cicero depicts several models for speakers. Cicero states to the Romans the importance of searching and discovering their own sense of rhetoric . “I am sure, the magnificence of Plato did not deter Aristotle from writing, nor did Aristotle with all his marvelous breadth of knowledge put an end to the studies of others.” [ 4 ] Cicero encouraged the plebeians through his writing, “Moreover, not only were outstanding men not deterred from undertaking liberal pursuits, but even craftsmen did not give up their arts because they were unable to equal the beauty of the picture of Ialysus . . . .” [ 4 ] Cicero proposes that rhetoric cannot be confined to one specific group but rather outlines a guide that will lead to the creation of successful orators across Roman society.

[ 2 ] In Orator , Cicero also addressed the accusation lodged by his fellow senators, including Brutus , that he was an “ Atticist .” Cicero addresses this claim by saying that he is too independent and bold to be associated with Atticism , producing his own unique style. Cicero claims the perfect orator creates his own “ elocutio ,” or diction and style, rather than following this movement.

[ 2 ] Cicero states that all five canons are equally important. Throughout the text, Cicero advises his Roman audience on how to form proper oratory by formal guidelines but also how to specialize individually in their own sense of oratory.

Orator is written with ideas ranging from the construction of arguments to rhetorical performance. In relation to other Ciceronian works on rhetoric, Orator receives less treatment with scarce research compared to other rhetorical works.

Goals of the orator [ edit ] The three aims of the orator, according to Cicero, are " docere, delectare, et movere ." That is: to prove your thesis to the audience, to delight the audience, and to emotionally move the audience.

[ 5 ] The emotional vividness of poetic language becomes part of the rhetorical tools in service of persuading the audience to your point of view.

[ 6 ] References [ edit ] ^ Tempest, Kathryn. "Prologue." In Cicero: politics and persuasion in ancient Rome. London: Continuum, 2011. 1-7.

^ a b c d Cicero, Marcus Tullius, and George L. Hendrickson. Brutus Orator / Cicero. With an English transl. by H.M. Hubbell.. Rev. and repr. ed. London: Heinemann [u.a.], 1962.

^ Hendrickson, G. L. . "Cicero's Correspondence with Brutus and Calvus on Oratorical Style ." The American Journal of Philology 47, no. 3 (1926): 237-238.

^ a b Cicero, Marcus Tullius, and B White. Cicero's Brutus, or history of famous orators: 	also, his Orator, or accomplished speaker. Now first translated into English, by E. Jones. London: Printed for B. White, 1776.

^ Clark, Donald.

"Rhetoric and Poetry in the Renaissance" . Distributed Proofreaders . Retrieved 14 November 2013 .

^ Cicero, Marcus Tullius.

"Orator" . Retrieved 14 November 2013 .

External links [ edit ] Latin Wikisource has original text related to this article: Orator A copy of the text , along with Brutus v t e Marcus Tullius Cicero Personal life Political career Writings Treatises Rhetoric and politics De Inventione De Oratore Book III De Partitionibus Oratoriae De Optimo Genere Oratorum Brutus Orator De Legibus Philosophical Hortensius Academica Consolatio De Finibus Bonorum et Malorum Tusculanae Disputationes De Natura Deorum De Divinatione De Fato Cato Maior de Senectute Laelius de Amicitia De Officiis De Re Publica Somnium Scipionis Paradoxa Stoicorum Marcus Tullius Cicero Orations Political De Imperio Cn. Pompei In Catilinam I–IV In Toga Candida Pro Milone Pro Marcello Philippicae Judicial Pro Quinctio Pro Roscio Amerino Divinatio in Caecilium In Verrem Pro Tullio Pro Caecina Pro Cluentio Pro Archia Poeta Pro Caelio Letters Epistulae ad Atticum Epistulae ad Brutum Epistulae ad Familiares Epistulae ad Quintum Fratrem Portrayals Cicero at His Villa at Tusculum (1839 painting) Related Summum bonum Terentia (wife) Tullia (daughter) Cicero Minor (son) Quintus Tullius Cicero (brother) Cicero, Illinois Cicero, New York Authority control databases International VIAF 2 3 National Germany United States France BnF data Poland Vatican 2 Israel Catalonia Other IdRef 2 Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Orator_(Cicero)&oldid=1286800283#Goals_of_the_orator " Categories : Works by Cicero on oratory Rhetoric This page was last edited on 22 April 2025, at 01:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Orator (Cicero) 9 languages Add topic

