Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 El Criticón 3 The Art of Worldly Wisdom 4 Acclaim 5 Works 6 Notes 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Baltasar Gracián 40 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Ido Ирон Italiano עברית Кыргызча Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Spanish Jesuit and baroque prose writer and philosopher The Reverend Baltasar Gracián S.J.

Baltasar Gracián Born ( 1601-01-08 ) 8 January 1601 Belmonte de Gracián , Aragón , Spanish Empire Died 6 December 1658 (1658-12-06) (aged 57) Tarazona , Aragón , Spanish Empire Philosophical work Era 17th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy Spanish philosophy School Spanish Baroque literature , Christian philosophy Main interests Political philosophy , moral philosophy Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Baltasar Gracián y Morales S.J.

( Spanish: [baltaˈsaɾ ɣɾaˈθjan] ; 8 January 1601 – 6 December 1658), better known as Baltasar Gracián , was a Spanish Jesuit priest and Baroque prose writer and philosopher . He was born in Belmonte , near Calatayud ( Aragón ). His writings were lauded by Schopenhauer and Nietzsche .

[ 1 ] He is best known for his book The Art of Worldly Wisdom (1647), but his novel El Criticón (1651-57) is considered his greatest work.

Biography [ edit ] The son of a doctor, in his childhood Gracián lived with his uncle, who was a priest . He studied at a Jesuit school in 1621 and 1623 and theology in Zaragoza.  He was ordained in 1627 and took his final vows in 1635.

He assumed the vows of the Jesuits in 1633 and dedicated himself to teaching in various Jesuit schools. He spent time in Huesca , where he befriended the local scholar Vincencio Juan de Lastanosa , who helped him achieve an important milestone in his intellectual upbringing. He acquired fame as a preacher, although some of his oratorical displays, such as reading a letter sent from Hell from the pulpit, were frowned upon by his superiors. He was named Rector of the Jesuit College of Tarragona and wrote works proposing models for courtly conduct such as El héroe ( The Hero ), El político ( The Politician ), and El discreto ( The Discreet One ). During the Catalan Revolt , he was chaplain for the Spanish army that lifted the French siege of Lleida (Lérida) in 1646.

[ 2 ] In 1651, he published the first part of the El Criticón without the permission of his superiors, whom he disobeyed repeatedly. That attracted the Society's displeasure. Ignoring the reprimands, he published the second part of Criticón in 1657 and so he was sanctioned and exiled to Graus in early 1658. Soon, Gracián wrote to apply for membership in another religious order. His demand was not met, but his sanction was reduced. In April 1658, he was sent to several minor positions under the college of Tarazona . His physical decline prevented him from attending the provincial congregation of Calatayud and on 6 December 1658 Gracián died in Tarazona, near Zaragoza in the Kingdom of Aragón .

[ 3 ] Gracián is the most representative writer of the Spanish Baroque literary style known as Conceptismo (Conceptism), of which he was the most important theoretician; his Agudeza y arte de ingenio ( Wit and the Art of Inventiveness ) is at once a poetic , a rhetoric and an anthology of the conceptist style.

In 1985, the Aragonese village in which he was born, Belmonte de Calatayud (Belmonte del Río Perejiles) officially changed its name to Belmonte de Gracián in his honour.

[ 4 ] El Criticón [ edit ] Main article: El Criticón El Criticón , first edition (1651).

The three parts of the El Criticón , published in 1651, 1653 and 1657, achieved fame in Europe, especially in German-speaking countries. It is the author's masterpiece and one of the great works of the Siglo de Oro . It is a lengthy allegorical novel with philosophical overtones. It recalls the Byzantine style of novel in its many vicissitudes and in the numerous adventures to which the characters are subjected, as well as the picaresque novel in its satirical take on society, as evidenced in the long pilgrimage undertaken by the main characters: Critilo, the "critical man" who personifies disillusionment, and Andrenio, the "natural man" who represents innocence and primitive impulses. The author constantly exhibits a perspectivist technique that unfolds according to the criteria or points of view of both characters, but in an antithetical rather than plural way as in Miguel de Cervantes . The novel reveals a philosophy, pessimism , with which one of its greatest readers and admirers, the 19th century German philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer , identified.

The following is a summary of the El criticón , reduced almost to the point of a sketch, of a complex work that demands detailed study.

Critilo, man of the world, is shipwrecked on the coast of the island of Santa Elena, where he meets Andrenio, the natural man, who has grown up completely ignorant of civilization. Together they undertake a long voyage to the Isle of Immortality, travelling the long and prickly road of life. In the first part, "En la primavera de la niñez" ("In the Spring of Childhood"), they join the royal court, where they suffer all manner of disappointments; in the second part, "En el otoño de la varonil edad" ("In the Autumn of the Age of Manliness"), they pass through Aragon , where they visit the house of Salastano (an anagram of the name of Gracián's friend Lastanosa), and travel to France, which the author calls the "wasteland of Hipocrinda", populated entirely by hypocrites and dunces, ending with a visit to a house of lunatics. In the third part, "En el invierno de la vejez" ("In the Winter of Old Age"), they arrive in Rome, where they encounter an academy where they meet the most inventive of men, arriving finally at the Isle of Immortality. He is intelligent and contributed greatly to the world. One of his most famous phrases is "Respect yourself if you would have others respect you." [ 5 ] Title page of the Manual Oracle and Art of Discretion , 1647 The Art of Worldly Wisdom [ edit ] Gracián's style, generically called conceptism , is characterized by ellipsis and the concentration of a maximum of significance in a minimum of form, an approach referred to in Spanish as agudeza (wit), and which is brought to its extreme in the Oráculo Manual y Arte de Prudencia (literally Manual Oracle and Art of Discretion , commonly translated as The Art of Worldly Wisdom ), which is almost entirely composed of three hundred maxims with commentary. He constantly plays with words: each phrase becomes a puzzle, using the most diverse rhetorical devices.

Its appeal has endured: in 1992, Christopher Maurer's translation of this book remained 18 weeks (2 weeks in first place) in The Washington Post ' s list of Nonfiction General Best Sellers. It has sold nearly 200,000 copies.

Acclaim [ edit ] The 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica wrote of Gracián that: "He has been excessively praised by Schopenhauer , whose appreciation of the author induced him to translate his works into German, and he has also been praised by Ticknor and others. He is an acute thinker and observer, led by his systematic misanthropy and by his fantastic literary theories".

[ 6 ] Nietzsche wrote of El Discreto , "Europe has never produced anything finer or more complicated in matters of moral subtlety," and Schopenhauer, who translated it into German, considered the book "Absolutely unique... a book made for constant use... a companion for life" for "those who wish to prosper in the great world." [ 7 ] The English translation of Oráculo manual by Joseph Jacobs (London: Macmillan and Co., Limited), first published in 1892, was a huge commercial success, with many reprintings over the years (most recently by Shambala). Jacobs's translation is alleged to have been read by Winston Churchill , seven years later, on the ship taking him to the Boer Wars.

In Paris, in 1924, a revision and reprint of the translation into French by Abraham Nicolas Amelot de La Houssaye , with a preface by André Rouveyre , attracted a wide readership there, and was admired by André Gide . A new translation by Christopher Maurer (New York: Doubleday) became a national bestseller in the U.S. in 1992 [1] , and the English edition, which sold almost 200,000 copies, was translated into Finnish, Portuguese, Chinese, Japanese, Korean, and many other languages.

Works [ edit ] El Héroe (1637, The Hero ), draws a portrait of the ideal Christian leader.

[ 8 ] Translated as El Héroe: The Valiant Hero (1637) by M.San Pedro (2024).

El Político Don Fernando el Católico (1640), "The Politician King Ferdinand the Catholic ", presents the ideal image of a king . Translated as El Politico: The Perfect King (1640) by M. San Pedro (2024).

El Arte de Ingenio (1642), revised as Agudeza y Arte de Ingenio in 1648, an essay on literature and aesthetics .

El Discreto (1646), describes the qualities that make a man complete and the center of perfection. Translated as El Discreto: The Complete Man (1646) by M.San Pedro (2023).

El Oráculo Manual y Arte de Prudencia (1647), a collection of three hundred aphorisms offering practical advice on how to make your way in a chaotic world, and how to make it well. Translated as The Art of Worldly Wisdom by Joseph Jacobs (1892) and Christopher Maurer (1992) and as The Wisdom of Baltasar Gracián by J. Leonard Kaye (1992). Also translated as El Oráculo Manual y Arte de Prudencia: The Art of Worldly Wisdom (1647) by M.San Pedro (Spring of 2026).

El Comulgatorio (1655), a religious book containing prayers and meditations to be read before and after Holy Communion. Translated as El Comulgatorio: The Holy Communion (1655) by M. San Pedro (Fall of 2026) .

El Criticón (1651–1657), a three part novel with part one being translated as The Critic by Sir Paul Rycaut in 1681. Also translated as El Criticón: The Foolish Critic (1651-1657), The Complete Three Part Series by M. San Pedro (Fall of 2027).

The only publication which bears Gracián's name is El Comulgatorio (1655); his more important books were issued under the pseudonym of Lorenzo Gracián (a supposed brother of the writer) or under the anagram of Gracía de Marlones. Gracián was punished for publishing without his superior's permission El Criticón , but no objection was taken to its substance.

[ 9 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ "Biografía de Baltasar Gracián - Baltasar Gracián" .

Biblioteca Virtual Miguel de Cervantes (in Spanish) . Retrieved 2023-01-18 .

^ Robbins, Jeremy (2011). "Introduction".

Baltasar Gracián: The Pocket Oracle and Art of Prudence . London: Penguin. p.

27 .

ISBN 978-0-14-196697-7 .

^ Selig, Karl-Ludwig (1958).

"Some Remarks on Gracian's Literary Taste and Judgments" .

Homenaje a Gracián, 1958, págs. 155-162 . Institución "Fernando el Católico": 155– 162.

^ "Historia" .

Belmonte de Gracián: Un pueblo con Historia y Encanto (in Spanish). Pueblo de Belmonte de Gracián.

Archived from the original on 11 June 2013.

^ Morales, Baltasar Gracián y; Laílla, Luis Sánchez; Gil, José Enrique Laplana; Sancho, María Pilar Cuartero (2016).

El criticón . Institución "Fernando el Católico".

ISBN 978-84-9911-418-7 .

^ Chisholm 1911 , p. 326.

^ Duff, E. Grant (26 March 2016).

"Balthasar Gracian" .

fortnightlyreview.co.uk . Retrieved 1 February 2019 .

^ Morales, Baltasar Gracián y; Egido, Aurora (2016).

El héroe: edición facsímil (Huesca, Juan Francisco de Larumbe, 1637) . Departamento de Educación, Cultura y Deporte.

ISBN 978-84-9911-391-3 .

^ Chisholm 1911 , p. 326 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Baltasar Gracián .

References [ edit ] Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Gracián y Morales, Baltasar" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 12 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

310– 311.

Endnotes: See Karl Borinski, Baltasar Gracián und die Hofliteratur in Deutschland (Halle, 1894); Benedetto Croce , I Trattatisti Italiani del "concettismo" e Baltasar Gracián (Napoli, 1899); Narciso José Liñán y Heredia, Baltasar Gracián (Madrid, 1902). Schopenhauer and Joseph Jacobs have respectively translated the Oráculo manual into German and English.

Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Baltasar Gracián (Gratian)" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Further reading [ edit ] Croce, Benedetto (1923). "I trattatisti italiani del Concettismo e Baltasar Gracián".

Problemi di Estetica . Bari: 311– 348.

Bethel, S. L. (1953). "Gracián, Tesauro and the Nature of Metaphysical Wit".

Northern Miscellany of Literary Criticism .

1 : 19– 40.

Hatzfeld, H. (1961). "Three national deformations of Aristotle: Tesauro, Gracián, Boileau ".

Studi secenteschi .

II : 3– 21.

Hafter, Monroe Z. (1966).

Gracián and Perfection .

Harvard University Press .

Foster, Virginia R. (1975).

Baltasar Gracián . Boston: Twayne Publishers.

Kassier, Theodore L. (1976).

The Truth Disguised: Allegorical Structure and Technique in Gracián's Criticón . London: Tamesis.

Laurens, Pierre (1979). " Ars ingenii : la théorie de la pointe au XVII e siècle (Baltasar Gracián, Emanuele Tesauro)".

La Licorne .

III : 185– 213.

Batllori, Miguel; Peralta, Ceferino (1969).

Baltasar Gracián en su vida y en sus obras . Zaragoza: CSIC.

Blanco, Mercedes (1992).

Les rhétoriques de la pointe. Baltasar Gracián et le conceptisme en Europe . Paris: Librairie Honoré Champion.

Blecua, José Manuel (1976). "Baltasar Gracián, un pensador europeo del siglo XVII".

Mundo Hispánico .

29 : 14– 15.

Hidalgo-Serna, Emilio (1993).

El pensamiento ingenioso en Baltasar Gracián. El "concepto" y su función lógica . Barcelona: Anthropos.

Jiménez Moreno, Luis «Presencia de Baltasar Gracián en filósofos alemanes: Schopenhauer y Nietzsche». Baltasar Gracián. Selección de estudios, investigación actual y documentación, Barcelona. J. Ayala (ed.). 1993 (Anthropos 37, 1993). 125–138.

Maravall, José A.

«Antropología y política en el pensamiento de Gracián». «Un mito platónico en Gracián». Estudios de historia del pensamiento español. Madrid: Cultura Hispánica, 1984. 333–373. 375–383.

Muratta Bunsen, Eduardo. «Gracián y el concepto de prudencia». Los conceptos de Gracián. Sebastian Neumeister (ed.). Berlin: Verlag Walter Frey, 2010. 69–98.

Neumeister, Sebastian. «Gracián filósofo». Estado actual de los estudios sobre el Siglo de Oro. M. García Martín (ed.). Salamanca, Universidad de Salamanca, 1993. 735–739.

Patella, Giuseppe (1993).

Gracián o della perfezione» . Rome: Edizioni Studium.

Pelegrín, Benito.

Éthique et esthétique du baroque. L'espace jésuitique de Baltasar Gracián , Arles , Actes Sud / Hubert Nyssen , 1985.

Romera-Navarro, Miguel.

Estudios sobre Gracián , Austin, University of Texas Press , 1950.

Sobejano, Gonzalo. «Gracián y la prosa de ideas». Historia y crítica de la literatura española. Francisco Rico (ed.). Barcelona: Crítica, 1983. 904–970.

Wilmat, Karl Dean.

The philosophy of education of Baltasar Gracián , (Dissertation at the University of Kansas), Lawrence, 1979, 346.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Baltasar Gracián .

Works by or about Baltasar Gracián at the Internet Archive Works by Baltasar Gracián at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Petri Liukkonen.

"Baltasar Gracián" .

Books and Writers .

"Gracián and the psychoanalysis" , features a portrait.

v t e Philosophical pessimism Philosophers Hegesias of Cyrene Giacomo Leopardi Arthur Schopenhauer Julius Bahnsen Olga Plümacher Philipp Mainländer Eduard von Hartmann Agnes Taubert Peter Wessel Zapffe Emil Cioran Julio Cabrera Thomas Ligotti David Benatar Concepts Antinatalism Benatar's asymmetry argument Depressive realism Duḥkha History of philosophical pessimism Misanthropy Problem of evil Radical evil Weltschmerz Wild animal suffering Related articles Absurdism Nihilism Will to live Bibliography of philosophical pessimism List of pessimistic literature Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists KulturNav People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Baltasar_Gracián&oldid=1306511156 " Categories : 1601 births 1658 deaths 17th-century Spanish Jesuits 17th-century Spanish philosophers 17th-century Spanish writers Spanish Baroque writers Jesuit philosophers People from Comunidad de Calatayud Philosophers of pessimism Spanish Roman Catholic writers Spanish Golden Age Spanish male writers Aphorists Hidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Pages using Template:Post-nominals with customized linking Pages with Spanish IPA Articles containing Spanish-language text Commons link from Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 03:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Baltasar Gracián 40 languages Add topic

