Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Informal presentation 2 Formal presentation 3 Philosophical implications 4 Set-theoretic responses 5 History 6 Applied versions 7 Applications and related topics Toggle Applications and related topics subsection 7.1 Russell-like paradoxes 8 Related paradoxes 9 See also 10 Notes 11 References 12 Sources 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Russell's paradox 47 languages العربية Asturianu Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Íslenska Italiano עברית Lombard Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 文言 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Paradox in set theory This article is part of a series about Bertrand Russell Views on philosophy Views on society ( Peace Foundation ) Professorship of Philosophy Appointment court case Russell's paradox Peano–Russell notation Copleston–Russell debate Russell–Einstein Manifesto Russell Tribunal Russell's teapot Theory of descriptions Logical atomism v t e In mathematical logic , Russell's paradox (also known as Russell's antinomy ) is a set-theoretic paradox published by the British philosopher and mathematician , Bertrand Russell , in 1901.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Russell's paradox shows that every set theory that contains an unrestricted comprehension principle leads to contradictions.

[ 3 ] According to the unrestricted comprehension principle, for any sufficiently well-defined property , there is the set of all and only the objects that have that property. Let R be the set of all sets that are not members of themselves. (This set is sometimes called "the Russell set".)  If R is not a member of itself, then its definition entails that it is a member of itself; yet, if it is a member of itself, then it is not a member of itself, since it is the set of all sets that are not members of themselves. The resulting contradiction is Russell's paradox. In symbols: Let R = { x ∣ ∣ x ∉ x } {\displaystyle R=\{x\mid x\not \in x\}} . Then R ∈ ∈ R ⟺ ⟺ R ∉ R {\displaystyle R\in R\iff R\not \in R} .

Russell also showed that a version of the paradox could be derived in the axiomatic system constructed by the German philosopher and mathematician Gottlob Frege , hence undermining Frege's attempt to reduce mathematics to logic and calling into question the logicist programme . Two influential ways of avoiding the paradox were both proposed in 1908: Russell's own type theory and the Zermelo set theory . In particular, Zermelo's axioms restricted the unlimited comprehension principle. With the additional contributions of Abraham Fraenkel , Zermelo set theory  developed into the now-standard Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory (commonly known as ZFC when including the axiom of choice ). The main difference between Russell's and Zermelo's solution to the paradox is that Zermelo modified the axioms of set theory while maintaining a standard logical language, while Russell modified the logical language itself. The language of ZFC, with the help of Thoralf Skolem , turned out to be that of first-order logic .

[ 4 ] The paradox had already been discovered independently in 1899 by the German mathematician Ernst Zermelo .

[ 5 ] However, Zermelo did not publish the idea, which remained known only to David Hilbert , Edmund Husserl , and other academics at the University of Göttingen . At the end of the 1890s, Georg Cantor – considered the founder of modern set theory – had already realized that his theory would lead to a contradiction, as he told Hilbert and Richard Dedekind by letter.

[ 6 ] Informal presentation [ edit ] Most sets commonly encountered are not members of themselves. Let us call a set "normal" if it is not a member of itself, and "abnormal" if it is a member of itself. Clearly every set must be either normal or abnormal. For example, consider the set of all squares in a plane . This set is not itself a square in the plane, thus it is not a member of itself and is therefore normal. In contrast, the complementary set that contains everything which is not a square in the plane is itself not a square in the plane, and so it is one of its own members and is therefore abnormal.

Now we consider the set of all normal sets, R , and try to determine whether R is normal or abnormal. If R were normal, it would be contained in the set of all normal sets (itself), and therefore be abnormal; on the other hand if R were abnormal, it would not be contained in the set of all normal sets (itself), and therefore be normal. This leads to the conclusion that R is neither normal nor abnormal: Russell's paradox.

Formal presentation [ edit ] The term " naive set theory " is used in various ways.  In one usage, naive set theory is a formal theory, that is formulated in a first-order language with a binary non-logical predicate ∈ ∈ {\displaystyle \in } , and that includes the axiom of extensionality : ∀ ∀ x ∀ ∀ y ( ∀ ∀ z ( z ∈ ∈ x ⟺ ⟺ z ∈ ∈ y ) ⟹ ⟹ x = y ) {\displaystyle \forall x\,\forall y\,(\forall z\,(z\in x\iff z\in y)\implies x=y)} and the axiom schema of unrestricted comprehension : ∃ ∃ y ∀ ∀ x ( x ∈ ∈ y ⟺ ⟺ φ φ ( x ) ) {\displaystyle \exists y\forall x(x\in y\iff \varphi (x))} for any predicate φ φ {\displaystyle \varphi } with x as a free variable inside φ φ {\displaystyle \varphi } . Substitute x ∉ ∉ x {\displaystyle x\notin x} for φ φ ( x ) {\displaystyle \varphi (x)} to get ∃ ∃ y ∀ ∀ x ( x ∈ ∈ y ⟺ ⟺ x ∉ ∉ x ) {\displaystyle \exists y\forall x(x\in y\iff x\notin x)} Then by existential instantiation (reusing the symbol y {\displaystyle y} ) and universal instantiation we have y ∈ ∈ y ⟺ ⟺ y ∉ ∉ y , {\displaystyle y\in y\iff y\notin y,} a contradiction.  Therefore, this naive set theory is inconsistent .

[ 7 ] Philosophical implications [ edit ] Prior to Russell's paradox (and to other similar paradoxes discovered around the time, such as the Burali-Forti paradox ), a common conception of the idea of set was the "extensional concept of set", as recounted by von Neumann and Morgenstern: [ 8 ] A set is an arbitrary collection of objects, absolutely no restriction being placed on the nature and number of these objects, the elements of the set in question. The elements constitute and determine the set as such, without any ordering or relationship of any kind between them.

In particular, there was no distinction between sets and proper classes as collections of objects. Additionally, the existence of each of the elements of a collection was seen as sufficient for the existence of the set of said elements. However, paradoxes such as Russell's and Burali-Forti's showed the impossibility of this conception of a set, by examples of collections of objects that do not form sets, despite all said objects being existent.

Set-theoretic responses [ edit ] From the principle of explosion of classical logic , any proposition can be proved from a contradiction .  Therefore, the presence of contradictions like Russell's paradox in an axiomatic set theory is disastrous; since if any formula can be proved true it destroys the conventional meaning of truth and falsity.  Further, since set theory was seen as the basis for an axiomatic development of all other branches of mathematics, Russell's paradox threatened the foundations of mathematics as a whole. This motivated a great deal of research around the turn of the 20th century to develop a consistent (contradiction-free) set theory.

In 1908, Ernst Zermelo proposed an axiomatization of set theory that avoided the paradoxes of naive set theory by replacing arbitrary set comprehension with weaker existence axioms, such as his axiom of separation ( Aussonderung ). (Avoiding paradox was not Zermelo's original intention, but instead to document which assumptions he used in proving the well-ordering theorem .) [ 9 ] Modifications to this axiomatic theory proposed in the 1920s by Abraham Fraenkel , Thoralf Skolem , and by Zermelo himself resulted in the axiomatic set theory called ZFC . This theory became widely accepted once Zermelo's axiom of choice ceased to be controversial, and ZFC has remained the canonical axiomatic set theory down to the present day.

ZFC does not assume that, for every property, there is a set of all things satisfying that property. Rather, it asserts that given any set X , any subset of X definable using first-order logic exists. The object R defined by Russell's paradox above cannot be constructed as a subset of any set X , and is therefore not a set in ZFC. In some extensions of ZFC, notably in von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory , objects like R are called proper classes .

ZFC is silent about types, although the cumulative hierarchy has a notion of layers that resemble types. Zermelo himself never accepted Skolem's formulation of ZFC using the language of first-order logic. As José Ferreirós notes, Zermelo insisted instead that "propositional functions (conditions or predicates) used for separating off subsets, as well as the replacement functions, can be 'entirely arbitrary ' [ganz beliebig ]"; the modern interpretation given to this statement is that Zermelo wanted to include higher-order quantification in order to avoid Skolem's paradox . Around 1930, Zermelo also introduced (apparently independently of von Neumann), the axiom of foundation , thus—as Ferreirós observes—"by forbidding 'circular' and 'ungrounded' sets, it [ZFC] incorporated one of the crucial motivations of TT [type theory]—the principle of the types of arguments". This 2nd order ZFC preferred by Zermelo, including axiom of foundation, allowed a rich cumulative hierarchy. Ferreirós writes that "Zermelo's 'layers' are essentially the same as the types in the contemporary versions of simple TT [type theory] offered by Gödel and Tarski. One can describe the cumulative hierarchy into which Zermelo developed his models as the universe of a cumulative TT in which transfinite types are allowed. (Once we have adopted an impredicative standpoint, abandoning the idea that classes are constructed, it is not unnatural to accept transfinite types.) Thus, simple TT and ZFC could now be regarded as systems that 'talk' essentially about the same intended objects. The main difference is that TT relies on a strong higher-order logic, while Zermelo employed second-order logic, and ZFC can also be given a first-order formulation. The first-order 'description' of the cumulative hierarchy is much weaker, as is shown by the existence of countable models (Skolem's paradox), but it enjoys some important advantages." [ 10 ] In ZFC, given a set A , it is possible to define a set B that consists of exactly the sets in A that are not members of themselves.

B cannot be in A by the same reasoning in Russell's Paradox. This variation of Russell's paradox shows that no set contains everything.

Through the work of Zermelo and others, especially John von Neumann , the structure of what some see as the "natural" objects described by ZFC eventually became clear: they are the elements of the von Neumann universe , V , built up from the empty set by transfinitely iterating the power set operation. It is thus now possible again to reason about sets in a non-axiomatic fashion without running afoul of Russell's paradox, namely by reasoning about the elements of V . Whether it is appropriate to think of sets in this way is a point of contention among the rival points of view on the philosophy of mathematics .

Other solutions to Russell's paradox, with an underlying strategy closer to that of type theory , include Quine 's New Foundations and Scott–Potter set theory . Yet another approach is to define multiple membership relation with appropriately modified comprehension scheme, as in the Double extension set theory .

History [ edit ] Russell discovered the paradox in May [ 11 ] or June 1901.

[ 12 ] By his own account in his 1919 Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy , he "attempted to discover some flaw in Cantor's proof that there is no greatest cardinal".

[ 13 ] In a 1902 letter, [ 14 ] he announced the discovery to Gottlob Frege of the paradox in Frege's 1879 Begriffsschrift and framed the problem in terms of both logic and set theory, and in particular in terms of Frege's definition of function : [ a ] [ b ] There is just one point where I have encountered a difficulty. You state (p. 17 [p. 23 above]) that a function too, can act as the indeterminate element. This I formerly believed, but now this view seems doubtful to me because of the following contradiction. Let w be the predicate: to be a predicate that cannot be predicated of itself. Can w be predicated of itself? From each answer its opposite follows. Therefore we must conclude that w is not a predicate. Likewise there is no class (as a totality) of those classes which, each taken as a totality, do not belong to themselves. From this I conclude that under certain circumstances a definable collection [Menge] does not form a totality.

Russell would go on to cover it at length in his 1903 The Principles of Mathematics , where he repeated his first encounter with the paradox: [ 15 ] Before taking leave of fundamental questions, it is necessary to examine more in detail the singular contradiction, already mentioned, with regard to predicates not predicable of themselves. ... I may mention that I was led to it in the endeavour to reconcile Cantor's proof....

Russell wrote to Frege about the paradox just as Frege was preparing the second volume of his Grundgesetze der Arithmetik .

[ 16 ] Frege responded to Russell very quickly; his letter dated 22 June 1902 appeared, with van Heijenoort's commentary in Heijenoort 1967:126–127. Frege then wrote an appendix admitting to the paradox, [ 17 ] and proposed a solution that Russell would endorse in his Principles of Mathematics , [ 18 ] but was later considered by some to be unsatisfactory.

[ 19 ] For his part, Russell had his work at the printers and he added an appendix on the doctrine of types .

[ 20 ] Ernst Zermelo in his (1908) A new proof of the possibility of a well-ordering (published at the same time he published "the first axiomatic set theory") [ 21 ] laid claim to prior discovery of the antinomy in Cantor's naive set theory. He states: "And yet, even the elementary form that Russell 9 gave to the set-theoretic antinomies could have persuaded them [J. König, Jourdain, F. Bernstein] that the solution of these difficulties is not to be sought in the surrender of well-ordering but only in a suitable restriction of the notion of set".

[ 22 ] Footnote 9 is where he stakes his claim: 9 1903 , pp. 366–368. I had, however, discovered this antinomy myself, independently of Russell, and had communicated it prior to 1903 to  Professor Hilbert among others.

[ 23 ] Frege sent a copy of his Grundgesetze der Arithmetik to Hilbert; as noted above, Frege's last volume mentioned the paradox that Russell had communicated to Frege. After receiving Frege's last volume, on 7 November 1903, Hilbert wrote a letter to Frege in which he said, referring to Russell's paradox, "I believe Dr. Zermelo discovered it three or four years ago".  A written account of Zermelo's actual argument was discovered in the Nachlass of Edmund Husserl .

[ 24 ] In 1923, Ludwig Wittgenstein proposed to "dispose" of Russell's paradox as follows: The reason why a function cannot be its own argument is that the sign for a function already contains the prototype of its argument, and it cannot contain itself. For let us suppose that the function F(fx) could be its own argument: in that case there would be a proposition F(F(fx)) , in which the outer function F and the inner function F must have different meanings, since the inner one has the form O(fx) and the outer one has the form Y(O(fx)) . Only the letter 'F' is common to the two functions, but the letter by itself signifies nothing. This immediately becomes clear if instead of F(Fu) we write (do) : F(Ou) . Ou = Fu . That disposes of Russell's paradox. ( Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus , 3.333) Russell and Alfred North Whitehead wrote their three-volume Principia Mathematica hoping to achieve what Frege had been unable to do. They sought to banish the paradoxes of naive set theory by employing a theory of types they devised for this purpose. While they succeeded in grounding arithmetic in a fashion, it is not at all evident that they did so by purely logical means. While Principia Mathematica avoided the known paradoxes and allows the derivation of a great deal of mathematics, its system gave rise to new problems.

In any event, Kurt Gödel in 1930–31 proved that while the logic of much of Principia Mathematica , now known as first-order logic, is complete , Peano arithmetic is necessarily incomplete if it is consistent . This is very widely—though not universally—regarded as having shown the logicist program of Frege to be impossible to complete.

In 2001, A Centenary International Conference celebrating the first hundred years of Russell's paradox was held in Munich and its proceedings have been published.

[ 12 ] Applied versions [ edit ] This section has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( March 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( March 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) [ dubious – discuss ] ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) There are some versions of this paradox that are closer to real-life situations and may be easier to understand for non-logicians. For example, the barber paradox supposes a barber who shaves all men who do not shave themselves and only men who do not shave themselves. When one thinks about whether the barber should shave himself or not, a similar paradox begins to emerge.

[ 25 ] An easy refutation of the "layman's versions" such as the barber paradox seems to be that no such barber exists, or that the barber is not a man, and so can exist without paradox. The whole point of Russell's paradox is that the answer "such a set does not exist" means the definition of the notion of set within a given theory is unsatisfactory. Note the difference between the statements "such a set does not exist" and "it is an empty set ". It is like the difference between saying "There is no bucket" and saying "The bucket is empty".

A notable exception to the above may be the Grelling–Nelson paradox , in which words and meaning are the elements of the scenario rather than people and hair-cutting. Though it is easy to refute the barber's paradox by saying that such a barber does not (and cannot ) exist, it is impossible to say something similar about a meaningfully defined word.

One way that the paradox has been dramatised is as follows: Suppose that every public library has to compile a catalogue of all its books. Since the catalogue is itself one of the library's books, some librarians include it in the catalogue for completeness; while others leave it out as it being one of the library's books is self evident. Now imagine that all these catalogues are sent to the national library. Some of them include themselves in their listings, others do not. The national librarian compiles two master catalogues—one of all the catalogues that list themselves, and one of all those that do not.

[ 26 ] The question is: should these master catalogues list themselves? The 'catalogue of all catalogues that list themselves' is no problem. If the librarian does not include it in its own listing, it remains a true catalogue of those catalogues that do include themselves. If he does include it, it remains a true catalogue of those that list themselves. However, just as the librarian cannot go wrong with the first master catalogue, he is doomed to fail with the second. When it comes to the 'catalogue of all catalogues that do not list themselves', the librarian cannot include it in its own listing, because then it would include itself, and so belong in the other catalogue, that of catalogues that do include themselves. However, if the librarian leaves it out, the catalogue is incomplete. Either way, it can never be a true master catalogue of catalogues that do not list themselves.

[ 26 ] Applications and related topics [ edit ] Russell-like paradoxes [ edit ] As illustrated above for the barber paradox, Russell's paradox is not hard to extend. Take: A transitive verb ⟨V⟩ , that can be applied to its substantive form.

Form the sentence: The ⟨V⟩ er that ⟨V⟩ s all (and only those) who do not ⟨V⟩ themselves, Sometimes the "all" is replaced by "all ⟨V⟩ ers".

An example would be "paint": The paint er that paint s all (and only those) that do not paint themselves.

or "elect" The elect or ( representative ), that elect s all that do not elect themselves.

In the Season 8 episode of The Big Bang Theory , "The Skywalker Intrusion", Sheldon Cooper analyzes the song " Play That Funky Music ", concluding that the lyrics present a musical example of Russell's Paradox.

[ 27 ] Paradoxes that fall in this scheme include: The barber with "shave" .

The original Russell's paradox with "contain": The container (Set) that contains all (containers) that do not contain themselves.

The Grelling–Nelson paradox with "describer": The describer (word) that describes all words, that do not describe themselves.

Richard's paradox with "denote": The denoter (number) that denotes all denoters (numbers) that do not denote themselves. (In this paradox, all descriptions of numbers get an assigned number. The term "that denotes all denoters (numbers) that do not denote themselves" is here called Richardian .) "I am lying.", namely the liar paradox and Epimenides paradox , whose origins are ancient Russell–Myhill paradox Related paradoxes [ edit ] The Burali-Forti paradox , about the order type of all well-orderings The Kleene–Rosser paradox , showing that the original lambda calculus is inconsistent, by means of a self-negating statement Curry's paradox (named after Haskell Curry ), which does not require negation The smallest uninteresting integer paradox Girard's paradox in type theory See also [ edit ] Basic Law V Cantor's diagonal argument – Proof in set theory Gödel's incompleteness theorems – Limitative results in mathematical logic Hilbert's first problem – Proposition in mathematical logic Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets " On Denoting " Paradoxes of set theory Quine's paradox Self-reference List of self–referential paradoxes Strange loop – Cyclic structure that goes through several levels in a hierarchical system Universal set – Mathematical set containing all objects Notes [ edit ] ^ In the following, p. 17 refers to a page in the original Begriffsschrift , and page 23 refers to the same page in van Heijenoort 1967 ^ Remarkably, this letter was unpublished until van Heijenoort 1967—it appears with van Heijenoort's commentary at van Heijenoort 1967:124–125.

References [ edit ] ^ Russell, Bertrand, "Correspondence with Frege}. In Gottlob Frege Philosophical and Mathematical Correspondence . Translated by Hans Kaal., University of Chicago Press,  Chicago, 1980.

^ Russell, Bertrand.

The Principles of Mathematics . 2d. ed. Reprint, New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 1996. (First published in 1903.) ^ Irvine, A. D., H. Deutsch (2021). "Russell's Paradox". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2021 Edition), E. N. Zalta (ed.), [1] ^ A.A. Fraenkel; Y. Bar-Hillel; A. Levy (1973).

Foundations of Set Theory . Elsevier. pp.

156– 157.

ISBN 978-0-08-088705-0 .

^ Bernhard Rang, Wolfgang Thomas: Zermelo's Discovery of the "Russell Paradox", Historia Mathematica 8.

^ Walter Purkert , Hans J. Ilgauds: Vita Mathematica - Georg Cantor , Birkhäuser, 1986, ISBN 3-764-31770-1 ^ Irvine, Andrew David; Deutsch, Harry (2014).

"Russell's Paradox" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ R. Bunn, Infinite Sets and Numbers (1967), pp.176–178. Ph.D dissertation, University of British Columbia ^ P. Maddy, " Believing the Axioms I " (1988). Association for Symbolic Logic.

^ José Ferreirós (2008).

Labyrinth of Thought: A History of Set Theory and Its Role in Modern Mathematics (2nd ed.). Springer. § Zermelo's cumulative hierarchy pp. 374-378.

ISBN 978-3-7643-8350-3 .

^ The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell , George Allen and Unwin Ltd., 1971, page 147: "At the end of the Lent Term [1901], I went back to Fernhurst, where I set to work to write out the logical deduction of mathematics which afterwards became Principia Mathematica . I thought the work was nearly finished but in the month of May [emphasis added] I had an intellectual set-back […]. Cantor had a proof that there is no greatest number, and it seemed to me that the number of all the things in the world ought to be the greatest possible. Accordingly, I examined his proof with some minuteness, and endeavoured to apply it to the class of all the things there are. This led me to consider those classes which are not members of themselves, and to ask whether the class of such classes is or is not a member of itself. I found that either answer implies its contradictory".

^ a b Godehard Link (2004), One hundred years of Russell's paradox , Walter de Gruyter, p. 350, ISBN 978-3-11-017438-0 , retrieved 2016-02-22 ^ Russell 1920:136 ^ Gottlob Frege, Michael Beaney (1997), The Frege reader , Wiley, p. 253, ISBN 978-0-631-19445-3 , retrieved 2016-02-22 . Also van Heijenoort 1967:124–125 ^ Russell 1903:101 ^ cf van Heijenoort's commentary before Frege's Letter to Russell in van Heijenoort 1964:126.

^ van Heijenoort's commentary, cf van Heijenoort 1967:126; Frege starts his analysis by this exceptionally honest comment : "Hardly anything more unfortunate can befall a scientific writer than to have one of the foundations of his edifice shaken after the work is finished.  This was the position I was placed in  by a letter of Mr Bertrand Russell, just when the printing of this volume was nearing its completion" (Appendix of Grundgesetze der Arithmetik, vol. II , in The Frege Reader , p. 279, translation by Michael Beaney ^ cf van Heijenoort's commentary, cf van Heijenoort 1967:126. The added text reads as follows: " Note . The second volume of Gg., which appeared too late to be noticed in the Appendix, contains an interesting discussion of the contradiction (pp. 253–265), suggesting that the solution is to be found by denying that two propositional functions that determine equal classes must be equivalent. As it seems very likely that this is the true solution, the reader is strongly recommended to examine Frege's argument on the point" (Russell 1903:522); The abbreviation Gg. stands for Frege's Grundgezetze der Arithmetik . Begriffsschriftlich abgeleitet. Vol. I. Jena, 1893. Vol. II. 1903.

^ Livio states that "While Frege did make some desperate attempts to remedy his axiom system, he was unsuccessful. The conclusion appeared to be disastrous ..." Livio 2009:188. But van Heijenoort in his commentary before Frege's (1902) Letter to Russell describes Frege's proposed "way out" in some detail—the matter has to do with the " 'transformation of the generalization of an equality into an equality of courses-of-values. For Frege a function is something incomplete, 'unsaturated ' "; this seems to contradict the contemporary notion of a "function in extension"; see Frege's wording at page 128: "Incidentally, it seems to me that the expression 'a predicate is predicated of itself' is not exact. ...Therefore I would prefer to say that 'a concept is predicated of its own extension' [etc]". But he waffles at the end of his suggestion that a function-as-concept-in-extension can be written as predicated of its function. van Heijenoort cites Quine: "For a late and thorough study of Frege's "way out", see Quine 1956 ": "On Frege's way out", Mind 64 , 145–159; reprinted in Quine 1955b : Appendix. Completeness of quantification theory. Loewenheim's theorem , enclosed as a pamphlet with part of the third printing (1955) of Quine 1950 and incorporated in the revised edition (1959), 253—260" (cf REFERENCES in van Heijenoort 1967:649) ^ Russell mentions this fact to Frege, cf van Heijenoort's commentary before Frege's (1902) Letter to Russell in van Heijenoort 1967:126 ^ van Heijenoort's commentary before Zermelo (1908a) Investigations in the foundations of set theory I in van Heijenoort 1967:199 ^ van Heijenoort 1967:190–191. In the section before this he objects strenuously to the notion of impredicativity as defined by Poincaré (and soon to be taken by Russell, too, in his 1908 Mathematical logic as based on the theory of types cf van Heijenoort 1967:150–182).

^ Ernst Zermelo (1908) A new proof of the possibility of a well-ordering in van Heijenoort 1967:183–198. Livio 2009:191 reports that Zermelo "discovered Russell's paradox independently as early as 1900"; Livio in turn cites Ewald 1996 and van Heijenoort 1967 (cf Livio 2009:268).

^ B. Rang and W. Thomas, "Zermelo's discovery of the 'Russell Paradox'", Historia Mathematica , v. 8 n. 1, 1981, pp. 15–22.

doi : 10.1016/0315-0860(81)90002-1 ^ "barber paradox" .

Oxford Reference . Retrieved 2024-02-04 .

^ a b Moorcroft, Francis (Spring 1998).

"Paradoxes" .

The Philosophers' Magazine (2): 63.

doi : 10.5840/tpm1998293 – via Philosophy Documentation Center (pdoc).

^ "Play That Funky Music Was No. 1 40 Years Ago" .

Minnesota Public Radio . September 27, 2016 . Retrieved January 30, 2022 .

Sources [ edit ] Potter, Michael (15 January 2004), Set Theory and its Philosophy , Clarendon Press ( Oxford University Press ), ISBN 978-0-19-926973-0 van Heijenoort, Jean (1967), From Frege to Gödel: A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–1931, (third printing 1976) , Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press , ISBN 0-674-32449-8 Livio, Mario (6 January 2009), Is God a Mathematician?

, New York: Simon & Schuster , ISBN 978-0-7432-9405-8 External links [ edit ] Kaplan, Jeffrey (2022).

"Russell's Paradox - a simple explanation of a profound problem" .

YouTube . Retrieved 25 November 2023 .

Wikiversity has learning resources about Russell's paradox "Russell's Paradox" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Irvine, Andrew David (2016).

"Russell's Paradox" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Weisstein, Eric W.

"Russell's Antinomy" .

MathWorld .

"Russell's Paradox" .

Cut-the-Knot . Retrieved 25 November 2023 .

Links to related articles v t e Bertrand Russell British philosopher, logician, and social critic Philosophy Views on philosophy Copleston–Russell debate Logical atomism Russell's teapot Theory of descriptions Views on society Russell–Einstein Manifesto Russell Tribunal Mathematics Peano–Russell notation Russell's paradox Works The Principles of Mathematics (1903) " On Denoting " (1905) Principia Mathematica (1910–1913) The Problems of Philosophy (1912) Why Men Fight (1916) Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy (1919) " Free Thought and Official Propaganda " (1922) " Why I Am Not a Christian " (1927) Marriage and Morals (1929) In Praise of Idleness and Other Essays (1935) Power: A New Social Analysis (1938) A History of Western Philosophy (1945) My Philosophical Development (1959) Family Alys Pearsall Smith (wife, 1894–1921) Dora Russell (wife, 1921–1935) Patricia Russell (wife, 1936–1951) Edith Finch Russell (wife, 1952–1970) John Russell, 4th Earl Russell (son) Conrad Russell, 5th Earl Russell (son) Frank Russell, 2nd Earl Russell (brother) John Russell, Viscount Amberley (father) Katharine Russell, Viscountess Amberley (mother) John Stuart Mill (godfather) John Russell, 1st Earl Russell (paternal grandfather) Henrietta Stanley, Baroness Stanley of Alderley (maternal grandmother) Related Appointment court case Earl Russell Peace Foundation Professorship of Philosophy Category: Works by Bertrand Russell v t e Paradoxes Philosophical Analysis Buridan's bridge Dream argument Epicurean Fiction Fitch's knowability Free will Goodman's Hedonism Liberal Meno's Mere addition Moore's Newcomb's Nihilism Omnipotence Preface Rule-following Sorites Theseus' ship White horse Zeno's Logical Barber Berry Bhartrhari's Burali-Forti Court Crocodile Curry's Epimenides Free choice paradox Grelling–Nelson Kleene–Rosser Liar Card No-no Pinocchio Quine's Yablo's Opposite Day Paradoxes of set theory Richard's Russell's Socratic Hilbert's Hotel Temperature paradox Barbershop Catch-22 Chicken or the egg Drinker Entailment Lottery Plato's beard Raven Ross's Unexpected hanging " What the Tortoise Said to Achilles " Heat death paradox Olbers's paradox Economic Allais Antitrust Arrow information Bertrand Braess' Competition Income and fertility Downs–Thomson Easterlin Edgeworth Ellsberg European Gibson's Giffen good Icarus Jevons Leontief Lerner Lucas Mandeville's Mayfield's Metzler Plenty Productivity Prosperity Scitovsky Service recovery St. Petersburg Thrift Toil Tullock Value Decision theory Abilene Apportionment Alabama New states Population Arrow's Buridan's ass Chainstore Condorcet's Decision-making Downs Ellsberg Fenno's Fredkin's Green Hedgehog's Inventor's Kavka's toxin puzzle Morton's fork Navigation Newcomb's Parrondo's Preparedness Prevention Prisoner's dilemma Tolerance Willpower List Category v t e Set theory Overview Set (mathematics) Axioms Adjunction Choice countable dependent global Constructibility (V=L) Determinacy projective Extensionality Infinity Limitation of size Pairing Power set Regularity Union Martin's axiom Axiom schema replacement specification Operations Cartesian product Complement (i.e. set difference) De Morgan's laws Disjoint union Identities Intersection Power set Symmetric difference Union Concepts Methods Almost Cardinality Cardinal number ( large ) Class Constructible universe Continuum hypothesis Diagonal argument Element ordered pair tuple Family Forcing One-to-one correspondence Ordinal number Set-builder notation Transfinite induction Venn diagram Set types Amorphous Countable Empty Finite ( hereditarily ) Filter base subbase Ultrafilter Fuzzy Infinite ( Dedekind-infinite ) Recursive Singleton Subset · Superset Transitive Uncountable Universal Theories Alternative Axiomatic Naive Cantor's theorem Zermelo General Principia Mathematica New Foundations Zermelo–Fraenkel von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Morse–Kelley Kripke–Platek Tarski–Grothendieck Paradoxes Problems Russell's paradox Suslin's problem Burali-Forti paradox Set theorists Paul Bernays Georg Cantor Paul Cohen Richard Dedekind Abraham Fraenkel Kurt Gödel Thomas Jech John von Neumann Willard Quine Bertrand Russell Thoralf Skolem Ernst Zermelo v t e Mathematical logic General Axiom list Cardinality First-order logic Formal proof Formal semantics Foundations of mathematics Information theory Lemma Logical consequence Model Theorem Theory Type theory Theorems ( list ) and paradoxes Gödel's completeness and incompleteness theorems Tarski's undefinability Banach–Tarski paradox Cantor's theorem, paradox and diagonal argument Compactness Halting problem Lindström's Löwenheim–Skolem Russell's paradox Logics Traditional Classical logic Logical truth Tautology Proposition Inference Logical equivalence Consistency Equiconsistency Argument Soundness Validity Syllogism Square of opposition Venn diagram Propositional Boolean algebra Boolean functions Logical connectives Propositional calculus Propositional formula Truth tables Many-valued logic 3 finite ∞ Predicate First-order list Second-order Monadic Higher-order Fixed-point Free Quantifiers Predicate Monadic predicate calculus Set theory Set hereditary Class ( Ur- ) Element Ordinal number Extensionality Forcing Relation equivalence partition Set operations: intersection union complement Cartesian product power set identities Types of sets Countable Uncountable Empty Inhabited Singleton Finite Infinite Transitive Ultrafilter Recursive Fuzzy Universal Universe constructible Grothendieck Von Neumann Maps and cardinality Function / Map domain codomain image In / Sur / Bi -jection Schröder–Bernstein theorem Isomorphism Gödel numbering Enumeration Large cardinal inaccessible Aleph number Operation binary Set theories Zermelo–Fraenkel axiom of choice continuum hypothesis General Kripke–Platek Morse–Kelley Naive New Foundations Tarski–Grothendieck Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Ackermann Constructive Formal systems ( list ), language and syntax Alphabet Arity Automata Axiom schema Expression ground Extension by definition conservative Relation Formation rule Grammar Formula atomic closed ground open Free/bound variable Language Metalanguage Logical connective ¬ ∨ ∧ → ↔ = Predicate functional variable propositional variable Proof Quantifier ∃ !

∀ rank Sentence atomic spectrum Signature String Substitution Symbol function logical/constant non-logical variable Term Theory list Example axiomatic systems ( list ) of arithmetic : Peano second-order elementary function primitive recursive Robinson Skolem of the real numbers Tarski's axiomatization of Boolean algebras canonical minimal axioms of geometry : Euclidean : Elements Hilbert's Tarski's non-Euclidean Principia Mathematica Proof theory Formal proof Natural deduction Logical consequence Rule of inference Sequent calculus Theorem Systems axiomatic deductive Hilbert list Complete theory Independence ( from ZFC ) Proof of impossibility Ordinal analysis Reverse mathematics Self-verifying theories Model theory Interpretation function of models Model equivalence finite saturated spectrum submodel Non-standard model of arithmetic Diagram elementary Categorical theory Model complete theory Satisfiability Semantics of logic Strength Theories of truth semantic Tarski's Kripke's T-schema Transfer principle Truth predicate Truth value Type Ultraproduct Validity Computability theory Church encoding Church–Turing thesis Computably enumerable Computable function Computable set Decision problem decidable undecidable P NP P versus NP problem Kolmogorov complexity Lambda calculus Primitive recursive function Recursion Recursive set Turing machine Type theory Related Abstract logic Algebraic logic Automated theorem proving Category theory Concrete / Abstract category Category of sets History of logic History of mathematical logic timeline Logicism Mathematical object Philosophy of mathematics Supertask Mathematics portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.canary‐5777f5b8f9‐cntm5
Cached time: 20250814234259
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.779 seconds
Real time usage: 1.049 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4372/1000000
Revision size: 32284/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 259025/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 78101/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 125622/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.458/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 14463175/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  802.576      1 -total
 21.95%  176.152      2 Template:Reflist
 17.56%  140.962      6 Template:Annotated_link
 14.25%  114.350     10 Template:Navbox
 13.61%  109.219      1 Template:Navboxes
 13.26%  106.422      1 Template:Infobox_Bertrand_Russell
 12.89%  103.479      1 Template:Sidebar_person
 10.76%   86.327      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 10.32%   82.838      2 Template:Cite_book
  7.54%   60.525      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:46095:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814234259 and revision id 1305897781. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Russell%27s_paradox&oldid=1305897781 " Categories : Bertrand Russell Eponymous paradoxes Paradoxes of naive set theory 1901 in science Self-referential paradoxes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2021 All articles needing additional references Articles that may contain original research from March 2021 All articles that may contain original research All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from March 2021 Articles with multiple maintenance issues Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 18:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Russell's paradox 47 languages Add topic

