Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Activities 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Butterfly house 16 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Svenska 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Facility for the breeding and display of butterflies For other uses of "butterfly house", see Butterfly house (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Butterfly house" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Bayer Insectarium A butterfly house , conservatory , or lepidopterarium is a facility which is specifically intended for the breeding and display of butterflies with an emphasis on education.  They may also be used to support local populations through butterfly release. Some butterfly houses also feature other insects and arthropods .  Butterfly houses are owned and operated by zoos, museums, universities, non-profit corporations, and private individuals as part of their residence; as well as small businesses that are owner operated.

History [ edit ] Larva room Live butterfly exhibits became popular in England in the end of the 1970s, appealing to the British love of greenhouses and natural settings.

The tropical world's first live butterfly and insect sanctuary is Penang Butterfly Farm in Penang, Malaysia, established on March 29, 1986.

The first butterfly house in the United States, Butterfly World , opened in Coconut Creek, Florida, in 1988.

Activities [ edit ] Feeding butterflies at the Schmetterlingsparadies in Mannheim, Germany Butterfly houses are typically open to the public.

Exploration of such facilities may be with a guide or self-paced.  Guided tours may last about fifteen minutes, as the guide points out all the species of butterflies that are in the greenhouse that day. Stocks vary, as new shipments usually arrive weekly. Guides may also show butterfly eggs , caterpillars , and chrysalids and identify specific plants that are favored by each species. Usually, the best time to see butterflies emerging from their pupae is between 10 a.m. and 1 p.m.

Butterflies are most active on warm and sunny days with little wind , because they require the heat of the sun to aid in their digestion. On rainy days, they usually hide in the flowers and leaves.

There are often many different species in such butterfly houses, with stock including butterflies from Africa, Malaysia , South America, Thailand , Costa Rica , the Philippines , and other places. The vibrant colors and patterns on the wings of the insects have earned them the fanciful nickname "flying flowers".

[ citation needed ] Monarch butterflies in a butterfly house in the Park of the Reserve Many species of adult butterflies live only one to two weeks, during which time they must produce a new generation. Some species, such as the familiar monarch butterfly, however, can live as long as six months or even longer in the wild.

Schools have butterfly houses for educational purposes. In Puerto Rico, a group of students from the Clara Maldonado de Aramburu School in Juncos , celebrated the relaunching of its butterfly house which had been destroyed by Hurricane Maria on September 19, 2017.  With help from community members, the butterfly houses and ecosystem was fixed, and their monarch butterflies took flight in March 2019.

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] List of butterfly houses List of insectariums References [ edit ] ^ "Revive el mariposario de escuela Clara Maldonado de Aramburu en Juncos" (in Spanish). El Oriental PR. 20 November 2018.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Butterfly zoos .

Visiting Butterfly Houses, Farms and Gardens [ usurped ] v t e Zoos , aquariums , and aviaries Types of zoos Animal sanctuary Animal theme park Aquarium Aviary Bear pit Butterfly house Dolphinarium Herpetarium Insectarium Nature center Marine mammal park Menagerie Oceanarium Penguinarium Pheasantry Petting zoo Reptile centre Safari park Virtual zoo Vivarium Zoo Conservation Biodiversity Captive breeding Conservation biology Endangered species Ex situ conservation In situ conservation Species reintroduction Lists Zoos Aquariums largest Animal sanctuaries Butterfly houses Dolphinariums Conservation topics Former zoos and aquariums Nature centers Zoo associations WAZA members Related Animal rights Animal cruelty Animals in captivity Animal training Behavioral enrichment Frozen zoo Immersion exhibit Nocturnal house Wildlife conservation Zookeeper Zoo emergency response team Zoo key Zoological society Zoology Animals portal Category: Zoos Category: Aquariums Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Butterfly_house&oldid=1293431456 " Categories : Butterfly houses Butterflies Insectariums Hidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2019 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2017 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 June 2025, at 17:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Butterfly house 16 languages Add topic

