Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Organizations 2 History 3 Ideology 4 Implementation Toggle Implementation subsection 4.1 Chiang Kai-shek 5 Support 6 Influence 7 Constitution of the Republic of China 8 See also 9 References Toggle the table of contents Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang 4 languages Français Polski Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Chinese .

(January 2024) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Consider adding a topic to this template: there are already 377 articles in the main category , and specifying |topic= will aid in categorization.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Chinese Wikipedia article at [[:zh:中国国民党的社会主义思想]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|zh|中国国民党的社会主义思想}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Sun Yat-sen 's sketch of the doctrine of Mínshēng (Welfare Rights), arguing both socialism and communism are subsets of the doctrine.

Part of a series on Socialism History Outline Development French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Socialist calculation debate Socialist economics Ideas Calculation in kind Collective ownership Cooperative Common ownership Critique of political economy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal liberty Equal opportunity Free association Freed market Industrial democracy Input–output model Internationalism Labour-time calculation Labour voucher Material balance planning Peer‑to‑peer economics Production for use Sharing economy Spontaneism Social dividend Social ownership Socialism in one country Socialist mode of production Soviet democracy Strike action To each according to his contribution / needs Vanguardism Workers' self-management Workplace democracy Models Communalism Socialist planned economy Decentralized planning Inclusive Democracy OGAS Project Cybersyn Soviet-type Market socialism Lange model Mutualism Socialist market economy Socialist-oriented market Participatory economics Variants 21st-century African Arab Agrarian Anarchism Authoritarian Blanquism Buddhist Chinese Christian Communism Democratic Democratic road Digital Ethical Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Fourierism Free-market Gandhian Guild Islamic Jewish Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Marhaenism Market Marxism Municipal Nationalist Nkrumaism Owenism Popular (Central Europe) Popular (Nordic) Reformism Religious Revolutionary Ricardian Saint-Simonianism Scientific Sewer Social democracy State Syndicalism Third World Utopian Yellow Zionist Intellectuals More Campanella d'Hupay Saint-Simon Buonarroti Saint-Just Owen Fourier Cabet Leroux Sue Blanqui Proudhon Greeley Herzen Bakunin Marx Kingsley Engels Wallace Lavrov Lassalle Saltykov Chernyshevsky Tolstoy Michel Morris Jones Kropotkin Carpenter Sorel Bellamy Kautsky Wilde Bellamy Plekhanov Ferrer Dewey Wells Du Bois Gorky Goldman Landauer Berkman Luxemburg Russell Pannekoek Rocker Spengler Keller Pankhurst Volin Lukács Korsch Polanyi Vanzetti Bordiga Serge Gramsci Sacco Day Marcuse James Orwell Montseny Sartre Bookchin Zinn Castoriadis Thompson Chomsky Fotopoulos Newton Wolff Ali Öcalan Hampton Žižek West Hedges Varoufakis Saito Politicians (Tiberius) Gracchus (Gaius) Gracchus Mazdak Roux Babeuf Blanc Hong Bebel Bernstein Malatesta Debs Markievicz Connolly Gandhi Liebknecht Savage Blum Stauning Martov Nygaardsvold Trotsky Kerensky Attlee Spiridonova Chifley Drees Makhno Nehru Tito Nagy Durruti Gerhardsen Van Acker Spaak Sukarno Erlander Douglas Senghor Allende van der Lubbe Nkrumah Kreisky Whitlam Corvalán Mitterrand Nasser Mandela Dubček Nyerere Koivisto Manley Benn Palme Bhutto Che Gorbachev Ismail Vázquez Sanders González Lula Ortega Guterres Corbyn Sankara Mélenchon Chávez Galloway Marcos Morales Sánchez Ocasio-Cortez Organizations Socialist Party Labour and Socialist International Network of Social Democracy in Asia Party of European Socialists Socialist International World Socialist Movement Young European Socialists Related topics Capitalism Communist society Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Economic calculation problem Economic system French Left Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Market abolitionism Marxist philosophy Nanosocialism Progressivism Socialism and LGBTQ rights Socialist calculation debate Socialist Party Socialist state Workers' council Lists Democratic socialists Democratic socialist parties and organizations Economists Films Social democrats Social democratic parties Songs States Socialism portal ( WikiProject ) Economics portal Organized Labour portal Philosophy portal Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Three Principles of the People Principles Anti-imperialism Republicanism Nationalism (Mínzú) Chinese unification Pan-Asianism Five Races Under One Union Zhonghua minzu Democracy (Mínquán) Five-Power Constitution Popular initiative Popular sovereignty Recall election Referendum Revolutionary people's rights [ zh ] Socialism (Mínshēng) Equalization of Land Ownership [ zh ] The International Development of China [ zh ] Land reform in Taiwan State-owned enterprise History 1911 Revolution First United Front History of the Kuomintang June 16 incident [ zh ] Kidnapped in London National Revolution [ zh ] National Revolutionary Army Nationalist government New Life Movement Northern Expedition Provisional Government of the Republic of China Second Revolution Parties Chinese Nationalist Party Chinese Pan-Blue Alliance Revolutionary Committee 123 Democratic Alliance Democratic Alliance Hong Kong and Kowloon Trades Union Council Revive China Society Tongmenghui Young China Party Organisations Blue Shirts Society Chinese Muslim Association Grand Alliance for China's Reunification under the Three Principles of the People Guominjun Kuomintang Youth League Reorganization Group Western Hills Group People Sun Chen Chiang (Ching-kuo) Chiang (Kai-shek) Chiang (Wei-shui) Dai Hu Huang Liao Shao Song Wang (Chonghui) Wang (Jingwei) Wu Yu Zhang [ zh ] Zhu Zou (Lu) [ zh ] Zou (Rong) Outside of mainland China Kokang Democracy and Unity Party Korea Nationalist Party Malaysian Chinese Association People's Power Party Restoration League of Vietnam Three Principles of the Equality Taiwanese People's Party Tibet Improvement Party Vietnamese Nationalist Party Related ideologies Anarchism Anti-communism (element) Chiangism Communitarianism Cultural conservatism Dai Jitao Thought Georgism Liberalism (element) Multiracialism Progressivism Economic Revolutionary nationalism Related topics Anti-Qing sentiment Constitution of the Republic of China Democratic centralism (Kuomintang) National Assembly National Anthem Pan-Blue Coalition mainland China Hong Kong Republic of China Military Academy Republic of China portal People's Republic of China portal v t e Part of a series on the Chinese Communist Revolution Proclamation of the People's Republic of China Chairman Mao Zedong and leading revolutionaries proclaim the People's Republic of China on October 1, 1949.

Outline of the Chinese Civil War Origins Context Century of Humiliation 1911 Revolution Warlord Era Ideas Nationalism Anarchism Marxism Movements New Culture Movement May Fourth Movement Diligent Work-Frugal Study Movement Early history First United Front Founding of the Communist Party Far Eastern Bureau of the Communist International Sun–Joffe Manifesto Left Kuomintang Peasant Movement Training Institute Canton Coup 28 Bolsheviks Labor organizing 1922 seamen's strike May Thirtieth Movement Canton–Hong Kong strike Northern Expedition Wuhan Government Hunan Report Hankou incident Nanjing Incident Shanghai Commune Break with the KMT Civil War Aftermath of purge Nanchang Little Long March Autumn Harvest Guangzhou Internal Purges AB League Incident Futian incident Chinese Soviet Republic Jiangxi Soviet Chinese Red Army Long March Zunyi Conference Anti-Japanese resistance Xi'an Incident Second United Front Second Sino-Japanese War New Fourth Army Eighth Route Army East River Column Hundred Regiments Offensive New Fourth Army Incident Communist base areas Yan'an Soviet Jin-Cha-Ji Border Region Yan'an Rectification Campaign Yan'an Forum Women's movement Resumed Civil War Military conflict " Millet plus rifles " People's Liberation Army Operation Beleaguer Liaoshen campaign Huaihai campaign Pingjin campaign Retreat of the ROC to Taiwan Urban support for Communists China Democratic League Shen Chong case Jiaochangkou incident Yu Zisan Incident Revolutionary Committee of the KMT Forming the People's Republic Government Central People's Government Writing the Constitution 1954 Constitution Reforms Land Reform New Marriage Law First five-year plan Three-anti and Five-anti Campaigns Suppression of counterrevolutionaries Foreign relations Sino-Soviet Cooperation Annexation of Tibet Intervention in Korea Intervention in Vietnam Legacy Mao Zedong Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism National Day 100th Anniversary of the CCP China portal Communism portal v t e The historical Kuomintang socialist ideology is a form of socialist thought developed in mainland China during the early Republic of China . The Tongmenghui revolutionary organization led by Sun Yat-sen was the first to promote socialism in China.

Organizations [ edit ] The Tongmenghui and its successor, the Kuomintang , were one of  the first political groups to develop socialist ideology in China.

History [ edit ] One of the Three Principles of the People of the Kuomintang, Minsheng, was defined as the People's Livelihood by Sun Yat-sen . The concept may be understood as social welfare as well. Sun understood it as an industrial economy and equality of land holdings for the Chinese peasant farmers. Here he was influenced by the American thinker Henry George (see Georgism ) and British thinker Bertrand Russell ; the land value tax in Taiwan is a legacy thereof. He divided livelihood into four areas: food, clothing, housing, and transportation; and planned out how an ideal Chinese government can take care of these for its people.

The Kuomintang was referred to having a socialist ideology. "Equalization of land rights" was a clause Sun included in the original Tongmenhui. The Kuomintang's revolutionary ideology in the 1920s incorporated unique Chinese socialism as part of its ideology.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The Soviet Union trained Kuomintang revolutionaries in the Moscow Sun Yat-sen University . In the West and in the Soviet Union, Chiang Kai-shek was known as the "Red General".

[ 3 ] Movie theaters in the Soviet Union showed newsreels and clips of Chiang. At Moscow Sun Yat-sen University, portraits of Chiang were hung on the walls. In the Soviet May Day parades in 1927, Chiang's portrait was to be carried along with the portraits of Karl Marx , Vladimir Lenin , Joseph Stalin and other socialist leaders.

[ 4 ] The Kuomintang attempted to levy taxes on merchants in Canton and the merchants resisted by raising an army, the Merchant's Volunteer Corps. The merchants were conservative and reactionary , and appointed Chen Lianbao, a prominent comprador trader, as leader of the Volunteer Corps. The merchants' Corps accused the Kuomintang of leading a "Red Revolution" in Canton.

[ 5 ] Sun initiated this anti-merchant policy and Chiang enforced it by leading his army of Whampoa Military Academy graduates against the merchants' Corps. Chiang was assisted in his campaign by Soviet advisors, who supplied him with weapons. The merchants' Volunteer Corps were supplied with weapons from the Western countries.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] The merchants were supported by the foreign, Western imperialists such as the British, who led an international flotilla to support them against Sun.

[ 8 ] Chiang, in battling the Corps, seized the western-supplied weapons from the merchants. A Kuomintang general executed several merchants, and the Kuomintang formed a Soviet-inspired Revolutionary Committee.

[ 9 ] The Communist Party of Great Britain congratulated Sun for his war against foreign imperialists and capitalists.

[ 10 ] Even after Chiang turned on the Soviet Union and massacred the communists, he still continued anti-capitalist activities and promoting revolutionary thought, accusing the merchants of being reactionaries and counter-revolutionaries .

The United States consulate and other westerners in Shanghai was concerned about the approach of "Red General" Chiang as his army was seizing control in the Northern Expedition .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Chiang also confronted and dominated the merchants of Shanghai in 1927, seizing loans from them, with the threats of death or exile. Rich merchants , industrialists , and entrepreneurs were arrested by Chiang, who accused them of being "counterrevolutionary", and Chiang held them until they gave money to the Kuomintang. Chiang's arrests also targeted rich millionaires, accusing them of communism and counterrevolutionary activities. Chiang also enforced an anti-Japanese boycott, sending his agents to sack the shops of those who sold Japanese made items, fining them. Chiang also disregarded the Internationally protected International Settlement , putting cages on its borders, threatening to have the merchants placed in there. He terrorized the merchant community. The Kuomintang's alliance with the Green Gang allowed it to ignore the borders of the foreign concessions.

[ 13 ] The Kuomintang repeatedly attempted land reform in China.

[ 14 ] On 8 January 1933, Chiang Kai-Shek established the Chinese Institute of Land Economics, under the 1932 "Ten Principles for promoting Party Land Policy", to "Regulate land ownership rights", "Establish a system of equal land rights", "Advance land use", "Establish land governance organisations", to facilitate land redistribution.

[ 15 ] United States Ambassador Patrick Hurley declared that the difference between the Communists and Nationalists were no greater than those between the Republican and Democratic parties in the United States.

[ 16 ] In 1948, a new currency was introduced, the Gold Yuan, purchaseable for gold or silver. Information was leaked and there was a wave of chaos from speculation. The Kuomintang again curbed the merchants of Shanghai, and Chiang sent his son Chiang Ching-kuo to restore economic order. Ching-kuo copied Soviet methods which he learned during his stay there to start a social revolution by targeting middle class merchants. He also enforced low prices on all goods to raise support from the proletariat . This however caused a hoarding frenzy.

[ 17 ] The value of the Yuan plunged and many became destitute. As riots broke out and savings were ruined, bankrupting shop owners, Ching-kuo began to pursue the wealthy, seizing assets and placing them under arrest. The son of the gangster Du Yuesheng was arrested by him. Ching-kuo ordered Kuomintang agents to raid the Yangtze Development Corporation's warehouses, which was privately owned by H. H. Kung and his family. H. H. Kung's wife was Soong Ai-ling , the sister of Soong Mei-ling who was Ching-kuo's stepmother. H. H. Kung's son David was arrested, the Kung's responded by blackmailing the Chiangs, threatening to release information about them, eventually he was freed after negotiations, and Ching-kuo resigned, ending the terror on the Shanghainese merchants.

[ 18 ] General Ma Bufang , the Kuomintang Muslim Governor of Qinghai , was described as a socialist by American journalist John Roderick .

[ 19 ] An American scholar and government advisor, A. Doak Barnett , praised Ma Bufang's government as "one of the most efficient in China, and one of the most energetic. While most of China is bogged down, almost inevitably, by Civil War, Chinghai is attempting to carry out small-scale, but nevertheless ambitious, development and reconstruction schemes on its own initiative".

General Ma started a state run and controlled industrialization project, directly creating educational, medical, agricultural, and sanitation projects, run or assisted by the state. The state provided money for food and uniforms in all schools, state run or private. Roads and a theater were constructed. The state controlled all the press, no freedom was allowed for independent journalists. His regime was dictatorial in its political system. Barnett admitted that the regime had "stern authoritarianism" and "little room for personal freedom".

[ 20 ] Ideology [ edit ] The Kuomintang also promotes government-owned corporations , and its founder, Sun Yat-sen , was heavily influenced by the economic ideas of Henry George , who believed that the rents extracted from natural monopolies or the usage of land belonged to the public. Sun argued for Georgism and emphasized the importance of a mixed economy, which he termed "The Principle of Minsheng" in his Three Principles of the People: "The railroads, public utilities, canals, and forests should be nationalized, and all income from the land and mines should be in the hands of the State. With this money in hand, the State can therefore finance the social welfare programs." [ 21 ] Ma Hongkui , the Kuomintang Muslim Governor of Ningxia , promoted state-owned monopoly companies. His government's Fu Ning Company had a monopoly over commercial and industry in Ningxia.

[ 22 ] The Chinese Muslim 36th Division (National Revolutionary Army) governed southern Xinjiang from 1934 to 1937. Muslim General Ma Hushan was chief of the 36th Division. The Chinese Muslims operated state-owned carpet factories.

[ 23 ] Corporations such as CSBC Corporation, Taiwan , CPC Corporation, Taiwan and Aerospace Industrial Development Corporation are owned by the state in the Republic of China .

The Kuomintang government under Sun and Chiang denounced feudalism as counterrevolutionary and proudly proclaimed itself to be revolutionary .

[ 24 ] Chiang called the warlords feudalists and called for feudalism and counterrevolutionaries to be stamped out by the Kuomintang.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] Chiang showed extreme rage when he was called a warlord because of its negative, feudal connotations.

[ 29 ] Marxists also existed in the Kuomintang and viewed revolution in different terms from the CCP by claiming that China has already gone past its feudal stage and in a stagnation period, rather than in another mode of production. These Marxists in the Kuomintang did not always agree with the ideology of the Chinese Communist Party .

[ 30 ] The Left Kuomintang who disagreed with Chiang Kai-shek formed the Revolutionary Committee of the Chinese Kuomintang , [ 31 ] [ 32 ] and later joined the government of the CCP .

Implementation [ edit ] Chiang Kai-shek [ edit ] Contrary to the view that he was pro-capitalist, Chiang Kai-shek behaved in an antagonistic manner to the capitalists of Shanghai, often attacking them and confiscating their capital and assets for the use of the government, even while he was fighting the communists.

[ 33 ] Chiang crushed pro-communist worker and peasant organizations and the rich Shanghai capitalists at the same time. Chiang continued Sun's anti-capitalist ideology; Kuomintang media openly attacked the capitalists and capitalism, demanding government-controlled industry instead.

[ 34 ] The KMT established a large bureaucratic technostructure for managing its many state-owned enterprises, which attracted heavy criticism from foreign businesses due to the vast government monopolies and negative treatment of foreign competitors.

[ 35 ] Chiang blocked the capitalists from gaining any political power or voice in his regime. Once Chiang was done with his original rampage and "reign of terror" on pro-communist laborers, he proceeded to turn on the capitalists. Gangster connections allowed Chiang to attack them in the International Settlement, to force capitalists to back him up with their assets for his military expenditures.

[ 36 ] Support [ edit ] Revolutionary and communist leader Vladimir Lenin praised Sun Yat-sen and the Kuomintang for their ideology and principles. Lenin praised Sun, his attempts on social reformation and congratulated him for fighting foreign imperialism.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] [ 39 ] Sun also returned the praise, calling him a "great man" and sent his congratulations on the revolution in Russia.

[ 40 ] Influence [ edit ] The Việt Nam Quốc Dân Đảng , also known as the Vietnamese Kuomintang, was based on the Kuomintang and one part of its ideology was socialism.

The Revolutionary Committee of the Chinese Kuomintang (RCCK) was founded in 1948 by left-wing members who broke with the main Kuomintang during the Chinese Civil War . The RCCK is now one of nine registered political parties in the People's Republic of China .

Constitution of the Republic of China [ edit ] The Three Principles of the People are officially the ideology of the Republic of China as stated in the Constitution of the Republic of China . Mínshēng, defined as People's Livelihood or welfarism , is one of these principles.

See also [ edit ] China portal Taiwan portal Socialism portal Socialism with Chinese characteristics Ideology of the Chinese Communist Party Dang Guo Leninism Democratic centralism (Kuomintang) References [ edit ] ^ Arif Dirlik (2005).

The Marxism in the Chinese revolution . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 20.

ISBN 0-7425-3069-8 .

^ Von KleinSmid Institute of International Affairs, University of Southern California. School of Politics and International Relations (1988).

Studies in comparative communism, Volume 21 . Butterworth-Heinemann. p. 134.

^ Hannah Pakula (2009).

The last empress: Madame Chiang Kai-Shek and the birth of modern China . Simon and Schuster. p.

346 .

ISBN 978-1-4391-4893-8 .

chiang was then known as the red general movies.

^ Jay Taylor (2000).

The Generalissimo's son: Chiang Ching-kuo and the revolutions in China and Taiwan . Harvard University Press. p. 42.

ISBN 0-674-00287-3 .

^ Jonathan Fenby (2005).

Chiang Kai Shek: China's Generalissimo and the Nation He Lost . Carroll & Graf Publishers. p. 71.

ISBN 0-7867-1484-0 .

^ Jonathan Fenby (2005).

Chiang Kai Shek: China's Generalissimo and the Nation He Lost . Carroll & Graf Publishers. p. 71.

ISBN 0-7867-1484-0 .

^ Hannah Pakula (2009).

The last empress: Madame Chiang Kai-Shek and the birth of modern China . Simon and Schuster. p.

128 .

ISBN 978-1-4391-4893-8 .

merchants levy taxes.

^ Hannah Pakula (2009).

The last empress: Madame Chiang Kai-Shek and the birth of modern China . Simon and Schuster. p.

128 .

ISBN 978-1-4391-4893-8 .

customs surplus merchants levy taxes.

^ Jonathan Fenby (2005).

Chiang Kai Shek: China's Generalissimo and the Nation He Lost . Carroll & Graf Publishers. p. 72.

ISBN 0-7867-1484-0 .

^ Jonathan Fenby (2005).

Chiang Kai Shek: China's Generalissimo and the Nation He Lost . Carroll & Graf Publishers. p. 73.

ISBN 0-7867-1484-0 .

^ Jay Taylor (2009).

The generalissimo: Chiang Kai-shek and the struggle for modern China, Volume 39 . Harvard University Press. p. 602.

ISBN 978-0-674-03338-2 .

^ Robert Carver North (1963).

Moscow and Chinese Communists . Stanford University Press. p.

94 .

ISBN 0-8047-0453-8 .

red general chiang.

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Hannah Pakula (2009).

The last empress: Madame Chiang Kai-Shek and the birth of modern China . Simon and Schuster. p.

160 .

ISBN 978-1-4391-4893-8 .

shanghai merchants chiang mercy.

^ 朱匯森; 侯坤宏 (1988).

土地改革史料: 民國16 至 49 年 . 國史館.

^ 李嘉圖 (2016).

土地改革回顧與展望 . 現代地政雜誌社. p. 沿革1.

ISBN 978-9570301427 .

^ Russel D. Buhite, Patrick J. Hurley and American Foreign Policy (Ithaca, NY: Cornell U Press, 1973), 160 – 162.

^ Jonathan Fenby (2005).

Chiang Kai Shek: China's Generalissimo and the Nation He Lost . Carroll & Graf Publishers. p. 485.

ISBN 0-7867-1484-0 .

^ Jonathan Fenby (2005).

Chiang Kai Shek: China's Generalissimo and the Nation He Lost . Carroll & Graf Publishers. p. 486.

ISBN 0-7867-1484-0 .

^ John Roderick (1993).

Covering China: the story of an American reporter from revolutionary days to the Deng era . Imprint Publications. p. 104.

ISBN 1-879176-17-3 .

^ Werner Draguhn, David S. G. Goodman (2002).

China's communist revolutions: fifty years of the People's Republic of China . Psychology Press. p. 38.

ISBN 0-7007-1630-0 .

^ Simei Qing "From Allies to Enemies", p. 19.

^ A. Doak Barnett (1968).

China on the eve of Communist takeover . Praeger. p. 190.

^ Andrew D. W. Forbes (1986).

Warlords and Muslims in Chinese Central Asia: a political history of Republican Sinkiang 1911-1949 . Cambridge, England: CUP Archive. p. 131.

ISBN 0-521-25514-7 .

^ Jieru Chen, Lloyd E. Eastman (1993).

Chiang Kai-shek's secret past: the memoir of his second wife, Chʻen Chieh-ju . Westview Press. p. 19.

ISBN 0-8133-1825-4 .

^ Kai-shek Chiang (1947).

Philip Jacob Jaffe (ed.).

China's destiny & Chinese economic theory . Roy Publishers. p. 225.

^ Simei Qing (2007).

From allies to enemies: visions of modernity, identity, and U.S.-China diplomacy, 1945-1960 . Harvard University Press. p. 65.

ISBN 978-0-674-02344-4 .

^ Kai Shew Chiang Kai Shew (2007).

China's destiny & Chinese economic theory . READ BOOKS. p. 225.

ISBN 978-1-4067-5838-2 .

^ Hongshan Li, Zhaohui Hong (1998).

Image, perception, and the making of U.S.-China relations . University Press of America. p. 268.

ISBN 0-7618-1158-3 .

^ Chen, Jieru; Eastman, Lloyd E. (1993).

Chiang Kai-shek's secret past: the memoir of his second wife, Chʻen Chieh-ju .

Westview Press . p. 226.

ISBN 0-8133-1825-4 – via Google Books .

^ Byres, T. J.; Mukhia, Harbans (1985).

Feudalism and non-European societies .

Psychology Press . p. 207.

ISBN 0-7146-3245-7 – via Google Books .

^ "Zhōngguó guómíndǎng gémìng wěiyuánhuì" 中国国民党革命委员会 [The Revolutionary Committee of the Chinese Kuomintang].

SCUT .

South China University of Technology .

Archived from the original on 12 December 2018 . Retrieved 13 July 2020 .

^ "Zhōngguó guómíndǎng gémìng wěiyuánhuì jiǎnjiè" 中国国民党革命委员会简介 [Introduction to the Revolutionary Committee of the Chinese Kuomintang].

Revolutionary Committee of the Chinese Kuomintang . 9 April 2018.

Archived from the original on 12 November 2018 . Retrieved 13 July 2020 .

^ Frank J. Coppa (2006).

Encyclopedia of modern dictators: from Napoleon to the present . Peter Lang. p. 58.

ISBN 0-8204-5010-3 .

^ Parks M. Coble (1986).

The Shanghai capitalists and the Nationalist government, 1927-1937 . Vol. 94 of Harvard East Asian monographs (2, reprint, illustrated ed.). Harvard Univ Asia Center. p. 263.

ISBN 0-674-80536-4 .

^ Thomas Robinson, David Shambaugh (1994).

Chinese Foreign Policy Theory and Practice . Clarendon Press. pp.

27– 28.

ISBN 9780198283898 .

^ Parks M. Coble (1986).

The Shanghai capitalists and the Nationalist government, 1927-1937 . Vol. 94 of Harvard East Asian monographs (2, reprint, illustrated ed.). Harvard Univ Asia Center. p. 264.

ISBN 0-674-80536-4 .

^ Robert Payne (2008).

Mao Tse-tung: Ruler of Red China . READ BOOKS. p. 22.

ISBN 978-1-4437-2521-7 .

^ Ross, Harold Wallace; Shawn, William; Brown, Tina; White, Katharine Sergeant Angell; Remnick, David; Irvin, Rea; Angell, Roger (1980).

Great Soviet Encyclopedia . p. 237.

^ Aleksandr Mikhaĭlovich Prokhorov (1982).

Great Soviet encyclopedia, Volume 25 . Macmillan.

^ Bernice A Verbyla (2010).

Aunt Mae's China . Xulon Press. p. 170.

ISBN 978-1-60957-456-7 .

v t e Kuomintang History History of the Kuomintang History of the Kuomintang cultural policy National Revolutionary Army Northern Expedition Blue Sky with a White Sun Revolutionary Committee of the Chinese Kuomintang 2005 Pan–Blue visits to mainland China Founders Song Jiaoren Sun Yat-sen Lu Haodong (Flag, emblem creator) Ideology Chinese unification Chiangism Dang Guo Democratic centralism Five Races Under One Union Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang Three Principles of the People Zhonghua minzu Leaders Sun Yat-sen Song Jiaoren Zhang Renjie Chiang Kai-shek Hu Hanmin Wang Jingwei Chiang Ching-kuo Lee Teng-hui Lien Chan Ma Ying-jeou Wu Po-hsiung Chiang Pin-kung Wu Den-yih Eric Chu Huang Min-hui Hung Hsiu-chu Lin Junq-tzer Wu Den-yih Lin Rong-te Johnny Chiang Party congress 1st (1924) 2nd (1926) 3rd (1929) 4th (1931) 5th (1935) Extraordinary (1938) 6th (Wang, 1939) 6th (1945) 7th (1952) 8th (1957) 9th (1963) 10th (1969) 11th (1976) 12th (1981) 13th (1988) 14th (1993) 15th (1997) 16th (2001) 17th (2005) 18th (2009) 19th (2013) 20th (2017) 21st (2021) Leadership elections 2001 2005 2007 (b) 2009 2013 2015 (b) 2016 (b) 2017 2020 (b) 2021 2025 Significant venues Huguang Guild Hall Presidential Palace (Nanjing) See also List of assets owned by the Kuomintang 2019 Kuomintang presidential primary Notes: Acting leaders italicised ; By-elections denoted with (b) v t e Socialism by country By country Argentina Australia New Australia Bangladesh Brazil Lulism Canada China Communist since 1978 Kuomintang Hong Kong Estonia Ethiopia Finland France Greece India Iran Italy Libya Netherlands New Zealand Pakistan Sri Lanka Sweden Tunisia United Kingdom Corbynism United States African-American Venezuela Chavismo Vietnam History United Kingdom United States Regional variants African Arab British Burmese Chinese European Israeli Melanesian Nicaraguan Tanzanian Venezuelan Vietnamese Current and historical socialist states Africa Angola Benin Burkina Faso Congo-Brazzaville Egypt Ethiopia 1974–1987 1987–1991 Guinea Libya Madagascar Mozambique Seychelles Somalia Sudan Americas Barbados Cuba Grenada Chile Nicaragua Asia Afghanistan Burma Cambodia 1975–1979 1979–1992 1982–1992 China Iraq North Korea Laos Mongolia South Yemen Syria Tuva Vietnam North Vietnam Short-lived Azerbaijan People's Government East Turkestan Far East Fujian Gilan Inner Mongolia Jiangxi Kuwait Kurdish Republic of Mahabad North Korea (1946–1947) North Korea (1947–1948) Democratic Republic of Yemen South Vietnam Europe Albania Bulgaria Czechoslovakia Czech Republic Slovakia East Germany Hungary (1949–1989) Poland Romania Soviet Union Yugoslavia Short-lived Alsace-Lorraine Banat Baranya–Baja Bavaria 1918–1919 1919 Bessarabia Byelorussia (1919) Bremen Bihać Crimea (1919) Finland 1918 1939–1940 Estonia (1918–1919) Galicia Hungary (1919) Ireland Naissaar Saxony Slovakia (1919) Tarnobrzeg Užice Würzburg Brussels Soldiers' Council History of socialism v t e Cross-strait relations Diplomatic posts Hong Kong Economic, Trade and Cultural Office (Taiwan) Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in Hong Kong Macau Economic and Cultural Office (Taiwan) Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in Macau Diplomacy Opening of the South-North route Restoration of Taiwan strait shipping Kinmen Agreement Wang–Koo summit Cross-strait charter 2004 Taiwanese cross-strait relations referendum May 17 Statement 2005 Pan–Blue visits to mainland China Cross-strait high-level talks First Chen–Chiang summit Second Chen–Chiang summit Fourth Chen–Chiang summit Fifth Chen–Chiang summit Sixth Chen–Chiang summit Seventh Chen–Chiang summit Tuan Tuan and Yuan Yuan Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement Cross-Strait CEO Summit Cross-Strait Service Trade Agreement Jinjiang–Kinmen Pipeline 2014 Wang–Zhang meetings 2015 Xi–Chu meeting First Ma–Xi meeting Straits Forum Shanghai-Taipei City Forum Second Ma–Xi meeting Conflicts Chinese Civil War Second Kuomintang-Communist Civil War Retreat of the government of the Republic of China to Taiwan Guanbi policy First Taiwan Strait Crisis Project National Glory Battle of Dong-Yin Battle of Dongshan Battle of East Chongwu Second Taiwan Strait Crisis Third Taiwan Strait Crisis Senkaku Islands Dispute Incidents Capture of the Tuapse Kashmir Princess United Nations General Assembly Resolution 2758 Joint Communiqué on the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations CAAC Flight 296 China Airlines Flight 334 1987 Lieyu massacre Min Ping Yu No. 5540 incident Min Ping Yu No. 5202 1990 Guangzhou Baiyun airport collisions Qiandao Lake incident China Airlines Flight 611 Sunflower Student Movement Braga incident Anti-Black Box Curriculum Movement Wang Liqiang Freedom pineapples 2021 Solomon Islands unrest Chinese military exercises around Taiwan 2022 2023 2024 2025 Taiwan Exercise 2024 Kinmen Chinese motorboat capsizing incident Legislation Cross-Strait Act Proposed National Unification Promotion Law Anti-Secession Law Anti-Infiltration Act Organizations All-China Federation of Taiwan Compatriots Alumni Association of Huangpu Military Academy Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits Association for Tourism Exchange Across the Taiwan Straits Central Leading Group for Taiwan Affairs China Council for the Promotion of Peaceful National Reunification Cross-Straits Common Market Foundation Cross-Strait Economic, Trade and Culture Forum Cross-Strait Peace Forum Grand Alliance for China's Reunification under the Three Principles of the People Institute of Taiwan Studies Lienchiang Cross-Strait Matters Forum Mainland Affairs Council National Unification Council Straits Exchange Foundation Taiwan Affairs Office Taiwan.cn Taiwan Competitiveness Forum Taiwan Strait Tourism Association Concepts 1992 Consensus Both sides of the Taiwan Strait are one family China Circle Chinese unification Chinese nationalism Chinese irredentism Chinese Taipei Cross-Strait Economic Zone Dang Guo Deng's Six Conceptions Four Noes and One Without Fujian Demonstration Zone Greater China Han chauvinism Hu's Four Points Hu's Six Points Jiang's Eight Points Message to Compatriots in Taiwan Never promise to renounce the use of force One China One China framework One China principle One-China policy One Country on Each Side One country, two systems Propaganda in China Cross-strait propaganda Qian's Seven Points Republic of China on Taiwan Self-determination Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang Socialism with Chinese characteristics Special non-state-to-state relations Six Assurances Taiwan, China Two Chinas Three Noes Three Links Taiwan consensus Taiwan independence movement Theory of the Undetermined Status of Taiwan United front in Taiwan Under the Roof of One China Xi Jinping Thought Xi's Five Points Ye's Nine Points White Paper on the Taiwan Question Zhonghua minzu Related Fujian–Taiwan relationship Hong Kong–Taiwan relations Hong Kong–Taiwan Economic and Cultural Co-operation and Promotion Council Taiwan–Hong Kong Economic and Cultural Co-operation Council Hong Kong and Kowloon Trades Union Council Pro-ROC camp Macau–Taiwan relations Chinese Travel Document Taiwan Entry Permit Mainland Travel Permit for Taiwan Resident Cross-strait language database ECFA Debate Geostrategy in Taiwan HMS Aurora (12) China and the United Nations China and the World Bank Chinese intelligence activity abroad Chinese information operations and information warfare Chinese Soviet Republic Freedom of religion in China Foreign relations of China Timeline of diplomatic relations with China Opinion polling on Taiwanese identity Political status of Taiwan Foreign relations of Taiwan Timeline of diplomatic relations of Taiwan Anti-Communist Hero Milk Tea Alliance Taishang G3 Beijing–Taipei Expressway G99 Taiwan Ring Expressway China National Highway 228 (Taiwan) Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission Tibet Religious Foundation of His Holiness the Dalai Lama The World Turned Upside Down Go and Reclaim the Mainland Pro–Republic of China sentiment 2045 Reversed Front Zero Day Attack Category:Cross-strait relations Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Socialist_ideology_of_the_Kuomintang&oldid=1305449550 " Categories : Ideology of the Kuomintang Socialism in China Three Principles of the People Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 uses Chinese-language script (zh) CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Articles needing translation from Chinese Wikipedia This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 03:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang 4 languages Add topic

