Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Public collections 3 References 4 Literature 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Jan Baptist Weenix 15 languages Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Français Italiano مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Русский Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 17th-century Dutch painter Jan Baptist Weenix Portrait of the artist Born 1621 Amsterdam , Dutch Republic Died 1659 (aged 37–38) Vleuten , Dutch Republic Nationality Dutch Known for Painting Movement Dutch Golden Age Children Jan Weenix Jan Baptist Weenix , also spelled Jan Baptiste Weeninx [ 1 ] (1621– c.

1659 ), was a painter of the Dutch Golden Age . Despite his relatively brief career, he was a very productive and versatile painter. His favourite subjects were Italian landscapes with large figures among ruins, seaside views, and, later in life, large still life pictures of dead game or dogs.  He was mainly responsible for introducing the Italian harbour scene into Dutch art, in mid-size paintings with a group of figures in the foreground.

Life [ edit ] Castle Ter Mey, Vleuten, 1738 drawing by Hendrik Spilman Weenix was born near Amsterdam's harbour, the son of an architect .

[ 2 ] He could not speak well, apparently from a medical condition, and because he very much liked to read books, his mother sent him to work for a bookseller, who was not able to deal with him. 
He drew whenever he could, according to Jan Weenix his son, who told the story to Arnold Houbraken .

Weenix first studied under Jan Micker , who was the brother-in-law of his oldest sister Lysbeth. He then studied in Utrecht under Abraham Bloemaert , and later back in Amsterdam under Claes Corneliszoon Moeyaert . 
In 1639, he married Josijntje d'Hondecoeter, the daughter of Gillis d'Hondecoeter .

[ 3 ] In 1643, Weenix travelled to Rome with Nicolaes Pieterszoon Berchem , who had also studied with Moeyaert.

[ 2 ] He had left his home in secret, but his wife traced him to Rotterdam . He was allowed to stay away for four months. 
In Rome, he became a member of the Bentvueghels with the name Ratel (meaning rattle, because a voice defect), and was much esteemed and worked for Pope Innocent X .

[ 2 ] He returned to Amsterdam after four years; his wife had refused to come to Rome.

In 1649, he became master of the guild of St. Luke in Utrecht, [ 2 ] and also painted a portrait of René Descartes . 
When his brother-in-law Gijsbert d'Hondecoeter died, he trained his nephew Melchior d'Hondecoeter , together with his own son Jan Weenix . Weenix rented the castle Ter Mey [ nl ] at Haarzuilens outside Utrecht, to concentrate on his work or for health reasons (plague).

[ 4 ] On 25 April 1659 the inventory of his estate was auctioned off.

[ 5 ] His widow, who had been living on Wittevrouwenstraat, in Utrecht, was buried on 6 October 1662.

[ 6 ] He painted a few religious scenes, one of the rare pieces of this kind being the "Jacob and Esau" ( Gemäldegalerie Alte Meister , Dresden ).  In the National Gallery, London , is a "Hunting Scene" by Weenix, and Glasgow has a characteristic painting of ruins. Weenix is represented at most of the important continental galleries, notably at Munich, Vienna, Berlin, Amsterdam, and St Petersburg.

[ 2 ] Public collections [ edit ] Before the walls of Rome from the National Museum in Wrocław Among the public collections holding works by Jan Baptist Weenix are: Museum de Fundatie in Zwolle, Netherlands Teylers Museum , in Haarlem, Netherlands Museum Boijmans Van Beuningen in Rotterdam, Netherlands Philadelphia Museum of Art in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States Wallace Collection , London, England References [ edit ] ^ Jan Baptist Weenix at the Encyclopædia Britannica ^ a b c d e Chisholm 1911 .

^ Jan Baptist Weenix in the RKD ^ "Het kasteel Ter Mey te Haarzuilens" .

^ "Jan Baptist Weenix" .

^ Burial record Utrechts Archief Literature [ edit ] Attribution: This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Weenix, Jan Baptist ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 28 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 467.

Anke A. Van Wagenberg-Ter Hoeven (2018) Jan Baptist Weenix & Jan Weenix: The Paintings, Zwolle: Waanders & De Kunst.

ISBN 9789462621596 External links [ edit ] Works and literature on Jan Baptist Weenix Wikimedia Commons has media related to Jan Baptist Weenix .

‹ The template below ( Authority control (arts) ) is being considered for deletion. See templates for discussion to help reach a consensus. › Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States Artists ULAN RKD Artists KulturNav Victoria Städel National Gallery of Canada People Netherlands Deutsche Biographie Other SNAC Te Papa (New Zealand) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jan_Baptist_Weenix&oldid=1301987175 " Categories : 1621 births 1659 deaths Dutch Golden Age painters Dutch male painters Painters of ruins Dutch landscape painters Painters from Amsterdam Painters from Utrecht (city) Members of the Bentvueghels Hidden categories: Articles with Encyclopædia Britannica links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 19:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jan Baptist Weenix 15 languages Add topic

