Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 History 3 Types Toggle Types subsection 3.1 Religious camping 3.1.1 Christianity 3.1.1.1 Evangelical Christianity 4 Equipment Toggle Equipment subsection 4.1 List of common equipment 5 Campgrounds and commercial campsites 6 Popularity Toggle Popularity subsection 6.1 United States 6.2 United Kingdom 6.3 France 6.4 Canada 6.5 Australia 7 Camping and public access 8 In popular culture 9 See also 10 Further reading 11 References 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Camping 49 languages العربية Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Kiswahili Lëtzebuergesch Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Română Sicilianu Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tsetsêhestâhese Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Outdoor recreational activity For other uses, see Camping (disambiguation) .

Camping is a form of outdoor recreation or outdoor education involving overnight stays with a basic temporary shelter such as a tent . Camping can also include a recreational vehicle , sheltered cabins, a permanent tent, a shelter such as a bivy or tarp , or no shelter at all. Typically, participants leave developed areas to spend time outdoors, in pursuit of activities providing them enjoyment or in a form of educational experience. Spending the night away from home distinguishes camping from day-tripping , picnicking , and other outdoor activities.

Tent camping in Sierra Nevada National Park Tent camping in Turkey Camping as a recreational activity became popular among elites in the early 20th century. With time, it grew in popularity among other socioeconomic classes. Modern campers frequent publicly owned natural resources such as national and state parks , wilderness areas , and commercial campgrounds. In a few countries, including Sweden and Scotland, public camping is legal on privately held land as well. Camping is a key part of many youth organizations around the world, such as Scouting , which use it to teach both self-reliance and teamwork. School camping trips also have numerous benefits and can play an essential role in the personal growth and development of students.

[ 1 ] Tent camping, Arizona , Grand Canyon National Park , Camping ground, April 6 Definition [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( July 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Camping in Ontario , c.

1907 The Cambridge Academic Content Dictionary defines camping as: [ 2 ] The act of staying and sleeping in an outside area for one or more days and nights, usually in a tent.

The Britannica Dictionary defines camping as: [ 3 ] The activity of sleeping outdoors in a tent usually for enjoyment.

Camping describes a range of activities and approaches to outdoor accommodation.

Survivalist and wild campers typically set off with as little as possible to get by. Other campers might use specialized camping gear designed to provide comfort, including their own power and heat sources as well as camping furniture. Camping may be combined with hiking , as in backpacking , and is often enjoyed in conjunction with other outdoor activities such as canoeing , kayaking , climbing , fishing , and hunting .

Fastpacking involves both running and camping.

There is no universally held definition of what is and what is not camping. Just as with motels , which serve both recreational and business guests, the same campground may serve recreational campers, school field trips, migrant workers, and the homeless at the same time. Fundamentally, it reflects a combination of intent and the nature of the activities involved.  A children's summer camp with dining hall meals and bunkhouse accommodations may have "camp" in its name but fails to reflect the spirit and form of "camping" as it is broadly understood. Similarly, a homeless person's lifestyle may involve many common camping activities, such as sleeping out and preparing meals over a fire but fails to reflect the elective nature and pursuit of spirit rejuvenation that are an integral aspect of camping.

History [ edit ] Thomas Hiram Holding outside his camping tent The history of recreational camping is often traced back to Thomas Hiram Holding , a British traveling tailor, but it was first popularised in the UK on the River Thames . By the 1880s, large numbers of visitors took part in the pastime, which was connected to the late Victorian craze for pleasure boating.

[ 4 ] Although Thomas Hiram Holding is often seen as the father of modern camping in the UK, he was responsible for popularising a different type of camping in the early twentieth century. He experienced the activity in his youth when he spent much time traveling across the American prairies with his parents. Later he embarked on a cycling and camping tour with some friends across Ireland .

[ 5 ] His book on his Ireland experience, Cycle and Camp in Connemara led to the formation of the first camping group in 1901, the Association of Cycle Campers, later to become the Camping and Caravanning Club .

[ 6 ] He wrote The Campers Handbook in 1908, so that he could share his enthusiasm for the great outdoors with the world.

[ 7 ] Possibly the first commercial camping ground in the world was Cunningham's camp , near Douglas, Isle of Man , which opened in 1894. In 1906, the Association of Cycle Campers opened its first camping site in Weybridge . By that time, the organization had several hundred members. In 1910 the Association was merged into the National Camping Club. Although the First World War was responsible for a certain hiatus in camping activity, the association received a new lease of life after the war when Sir Robert Baden-Powell (founder of the Boy Scouts movement ) became its president in 1919.

[ 8 ] In the US, camping may be traced to William Henry Harrison Murray 's 1869 publication of Camp-Life in the Adirondacks, resulting in a flood of visitors to the Adirondacks that summer.

[ 9 ] During the early twentieth century, the popularity of camping in the United States grew as a result of the publicity created by The Vagabonds: Henry Ford , Thomas Edison , John Burroughs , and Harvey S. Firestone . This group of famous American businessmen, inventors, and authors traveled for ten years to different states, and the press highly documented their trips from across the country. Oftentimes, "...these rough and tumble pioneers would drive toward the Adirondacks and essentially live off the land, camping at farms and buying food along the way just like ordinary Americans out for a holiday on the road." [ 10 ] The International Federation of Camping Clubs (Fédération Internationale de Camping et de Caravanning) was founded in 1932, and national clubs from many countries affiliated with it. By the 1960s, camping had become an established family holiday standard, and today, campsites are widespread across Europe and North America.

Types [ edit ] Seelammi lean-to in Lapakisto, Lahti , Finland Car campsite in Ōarai Japan Different types of camping may be named after their form of transportation, such as canoe camping , car camping, RVing , and backpacking , including ultralight backpacking .

Camping is also labeled by lifestyle: Glamping (glamorous camping) combines camping with the luxury and amenities of a home or hotel, [ 11 ] and has its roots in the early 1900s European and American safaris in Africa.

Workamping allows campers to trade their labor variously for discounts on campsite fees, campground utilities, and even some degree of pay.

Migrant camps are formed not for recreation but as a temporary housing arrangement. Campgrounds for custom harvesters in the United States may include room-to-park combines and other large farm equipment. Camping is also popular at air shows, notably at the Oshkosh air show where people often camp in a small tent under their aircraft's wing.

[ 12 ] Religious camping [ edit ] Christianity [ edit ] Evangelical Christianity [ edit ] Camp Agape in Benton, Tennessee , United States.

In Evangelical Christianity , camping for a spiritual retreat was encouraged by the development of camp meetings in the 19th century, to promote spiritual renewal, far from the city and in nature.

[ 13 ] These camps were an opportunity to pray, sing and listen to sermons for several days.

Various church associations have also established campgrounds or conference centers in isolated locations, which provide retreat times for children and adults.

[ 14 ] Equipment [ edit ] This section contains instructions or advice .

Wikipedia is not a guidebook; please help rewrite the content to make it more encyclopedic or move it to Wikiversity , Wikibooks , or Wikivoyage .

( October 2015 ) Camping equipment A dome tent Shelter constructed from a tarp The equipment used in camping varies by intended activity. For instance, in survival camping the equipment consists of small items which have the purpose of helping the camper in providing food , heat , and safety . The equipment used in this type of camping must be lightweight and it is restricted to the mandatory items. Other types of camping such as winter camping involve having specially designed equipment in terms of tents or clothing that is strong enough to protect the camper's body from the wind and cold .

[ 15 ] Survival camping involves certain items that campers are recommended to have with them in case something goes wrong and they need to be rescued. A survival kit includes mandatory items that are small and must fit in one's pocket or which otherwise could be carried on one's person. This kit is useless in these circumstances if it is kept in the backpack that is left in camp. Such a kit should include a small metal container that can be used to heat water over a campfire , a small length of duct tape which can prove useful in many situations, and an emergency space blanket . These blankets are specially designed to occupy minimal space, can be used as emergency shelters for keeping the camper warm, and their reflective properties mean that they can be easily seen from an aircraft . Candle stubs are good for starting a fire as well as for warming an enclosed space. One or two band-aids are mandatory in this type of camping. Any camper, and not only the survival ones, need waterproof matches or a lighter and a large safety pin or fish hook which can be used in fishing .

Rubber gloves , antiseptic wipes, tinfoil , jackknife, or halazone tablets (which purify the water) are also to be included in a survival kit.

[ citation needed ] List of common equipment [ edit ] Main article: Hiking equipment The following is a list of commonly used camping equipment: First aid kit Tent , lean-to , or other form of shelter Hammer or mallet to drive tent stakes into the soil (hammers are often a claw hammer , which is also helpful for removing them) Sleeping bag and/or blankets for warmth Sleeping pad or air mattress to be placed underneath the sleeping bag for cushioning from stones and twigs, as well as for insulation from the ground Lantern or flashlight Hatchet , axe or saw for cutting firewood for a campfire Fire starter for starting a campfire Folding chairs for placement around a campfire Ropes for stringing clothes line and for securing the shelter Tarp for adding a layer of storm protection to a tent, and to shelter dining areas Raincoat or poncho Hiking boots Fishing pole Canteen (bottle) Chuck box to hold camp kitchen items for food preparation, consumption, and cleanup Trash bags , for the handling of waste; see leave no trace Cathole trowel for sanitation in areas where a toilet is not provided Insect repellent Sunscreen for protecting skin rope for climbing or in case someone gets stuck Personal care products and towel Cooler to store perishables and beverages. If electricity is available, a thermoelectric or stirling engine cooler can be used without the need for ice. Campers at modern campgrounds will normally bring perishable foods in coolers while backcountry campers will bring non-perishable foods such as dried fruits , nuts , jerky , and MREs .

Bottled water or portable water filter for areas that have access to rivers or lakes Cooking implements such as a tripod chained grill, Dutch oven , or La Cotta clay pot can be used for cooking on a campfire . A portable stove can be used where campfires are forbidden or impractical. If using a campground with electricity, an electric frying pan or slow cooker can be used.

Firewood for campfires Emergency Preparedness Kit Multi-tool or knife Global Positioning System (GPS) Much of the remaining needed camping equipment is commonly available in the home, including dishes, pots, and pans; however, many people opt not to use their home items but instead utilize equipment better tailored for camping. These amenities include heavy plastic tableware and salt and pepper shakers with tops that close to shelter the shakers from rain. Old kitchen gear purchased from thrift stores or garage sales may also be used in place of home items as an alternative to buying specialized (and more expensive) camping equipment. Backpackers use lightweight and portable equipment.

[ 16 ] Campgrounds and commercial campsites [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( May 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) By the 1960s camping had become an established family holiday standard and today camp sites are ubiquitous across Europe and North America .

Tent trailer camping provides comfort in a towable package Campers span a broad range of age, ability, and ruggedness, and campsites are designed in many ways as well. Many campgrounds have sites with facilities such as fire rings, barbecue grills, utilities, shared bathrooms, and laundry, as well as access to nearby recreational facilities, however, not all campsites have similar levels of development. Campsites can range from a patch of dirt to a level, paved pad with sewer and electricity with many public and private campgrounds also offering cabin options. (For more information on facilities, see the campsite and RV park articles.) Other vehicles used for camping include motorcycles, touring bicycles, boats, canoes, pack animals , and even bush planes ; although backpacking on foot is a popular alternative.

A large recreational vehicle provides many amenities when camping.

A group of men, women, and children sitting on the chairs in a camp in the forest. July 7th, 1910, Wainwright, Alberta.

Tent camping sites often cost less than campsites with full amenities, and most allow direct access by car. Some "walk-in" sites lie a short walk away from the nearest road but do not require full backpacking equipment. Those who seek a rugged experience in the outdoors prefer to camp with only tents, or with no shelter at all ("under the stars").

Popularity [ edit ] United States [ edit ] According to an infographic produced by Red Rover Camping and based on data from the 2014 American Camper Report published by the Coleman Company, Inc. and the Outdoor Foundation, camping in the United States is gaining popularity after a fall of 4.2  million participants from 2011 to 2012.

[ 17 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] According to data provided by the Great British Tourism Survey conducted by Visit England, almost 4.5  million camping and caravanning holidays were taken by British residents during the first half of 2015, for an average of 3.7 nights.

[ 18 ] As in the United States, camping is gaining popularity, with an 8% increase in trips compared to the same period in 2014. The Caravan Club and the Camping and Caravanning Club represent UK campers.

Scotland allows " wild camping " on privately owned wilderness.

France [ edit ] Data collected by the Fédération Nationale De L'Hôtellerie De Plein Air (FNHPA) shows that around 113 million nights were taken at French campsites in 2015, which was up by 3.9% in the same period in 2014. French holidaymakers took 77 million of these, and the rest was made up of other nationalities, the majority of whom were Dutch, German, and UK tourists. The French Government hopes to have 100 million tourists each year by 2030. The most popular region for camping is Languedoc and Roussillon with around 19,331,663 nights spent at campsites during 2015, whilst the department with the most campsites is the Vendée.

[ 19 ] Canada [ edit ] Canada is a country that has four different seasons throughout the year. In this day and age, with the proper camping equipment, it is possible to camp all over Canada all year round. At the end of the 19th century, Canada started establishing areas all over the territory to be later named " National Parks ".

[ 20 ] These days, the parks are now known for being some of the most popular campgrounds in the country. But it was not always accessible to everyone. In Canada, before the 1910s, camping was reserved only for men.

[ 21 ] The first camping ground to be established in a National Park in Canada was in 1964 at the Lake Louise .

[ 20 ] According to data by a study made by Camping Québec in 2016, 20% of the province of Québec did go camping, that being about 1,600,000 people.

[ 22 ] In the same research, the study has shown that a certain 8% of those campers were strangers.

[ 22 ] The popularity of camping in Canada is not only for locals but also for travelers. About 34% of the camp fanatics in Québec are camping on either National Parks or Provincials Parks .

[ 22 ] Australia [ edit ] According to the Australian government , camping and caravan holds a special place in the hearts of many Australians , as it offers a unique opportunity to connect with the country's diverse natural landscapes and rich outdoor heritage.

Australia benefits from a favorable climate and an expansive array of camping grounds and sites throughout the country.

[ 23 ] Before the onset of COVID-19 , there was a notable 67% increase in the number of caravan and camping trips over the preceding decade. In the year concluding in 2019, Australians embarked on a record-breaking 13.9 million caravan and camping journeys. Of these excursions, commercial caravan parks and camping grounds contributed to 52% of trips, 62% of nights spent, and 64% of total expenditure. Since the lifting of COVID-related restrictions, there has been a strong rebound in numbers. By the conclusion of the year in June 2022, trips had reached 12.7 million, while spending surged to an unprecedented $10.5 billion. With over 770,000 caravan and campervan registrations nationwide in 2021, this upward trend is poised to persist.

[ 23 ] Camping and public access [ edit ] Camping on open land, regardless of ownership, is legal in a few countries, including Sweden and Scotland. In Sweden, a right of public access – allowing outdoor recreational activity on privately held wilderness – is enshrined in the constitution.

[ 24 ] Large groups, however, must obtain the landowner's permission.

[ 25 ] In Scotland, people may camp on most unenclosed land, whether state- or privately owned. There is however a "leave-no-trace" policy and a common-law outdoor-access code.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] In popular culture [ edit ] Many films and other media have focused on camping or portrayed events regarding camping. Music includes the c.

1962 Phil Ochs album, Camp Favorites .

See also [ edit ] Backpacking (hiking) Backpacking with animals Bell tent Bow drill Camping food Dispersed camping Firelighting Hammock camping Outdoor cooking Overlanding Swag Tarp tent Wilderness-acquired diarrhea Further reading [ edit ] Frank A. Bates, Camping and camp cooking (Boston: The Ball Publishing Co., 1909, pubdate 1914) Jeff Guinn, The Vagabonds: The Story of Henry Ford and Thomas Edison's Ten-Year Road Trip (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2019).

References [ edit ] ^ "The Benefits of School Camping Trips" . March 29, 2023.

^ "Meaning of camping in English" .

Cambridge Dictionary . Retrieved 20 June 2022 .

^ "Camping Definition & Meaning | Britannica Dictionary" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 2025-06-01 .

^ Wenham, Simon M. (2015).

"The River Thames and the Popularisation of Camping, 1860–1980" (PDF) .

Oxoniensia .

LXXX : 57– 74.

^ Wills, Dixe (16 April 2011).

"Camping? It should be about the simple life" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 24 July 2011 .

^ "Thomas Hiram Holding" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 24 July 2011 .

^ "Thomas Hiram Holding" .

National Portrait Gallery, London . Retrieved 24 July 2011 .

^ "Club History - The Camping and Caravanning Club" .

www.campingandcaravanningclub.co.uk .

^ Young, Terence (17 October 2017).

"The Minister Who Invented Camping in America Read more" .

Smithsonian . Retrieved 23 October 2017 .

^ Guinn, Jeff (2019).

The Vagabonds: The Story of Henry Ford and Thomas Edison's Ten-Year Road Trip . New York: (New York: Simon & Schuster). p. 68.

ISBN 978-1501159305 .

^ " 'Glamping' brings creature comforts to outdoors" .

USA Today . 2011-08-04. Archived from the original on December 6, 2013 . Retrieved 2015-11-27 .

^ "Camping & Lodging | EAA AirVenture Oshkosh" .

www.eaa.org .

^ Brett Grainger, Church in the Wild: Evangelicals in Antebellum America , Harvard University Press, USA, 2019, p. 58-59 ^ Samuel S. Hill, The New Encyclopedia of Southern Culture: Volume 1: Religion , University of North Carolina Press, USA, 2006, p. 177 ^ Tent, Campros (2022-07-10).

"How to Make Your Tent Cozy: 24 Hours to Improving Tent" .

Campros Tent . Retrieved 2022-10-07 .

^ ULTRALIGHT MAKEOVER Archived 2011-10-02 at the Wayback Machine , Kelly Bastone, Backpacker Magazine , August 2011 ^ "2014 American Camper Report" (PDF) . The Coleman Company, Inc. and the Outdoor Foundation. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 April 2015 . Retrieved 17 June 2015 .

^ "Great Britain Tourism Survey" (PDF) . VisitEngland. June 2015 . Retrieved 21 October 2015 .

^ "French Camping Statistics" .

Go Camp France . 16 September 2016.

^ a b Lothian, W.F. (1987). Petite histoire des parcs nationaux du Canada. Environnement Canada.

http://www.parkscanadahistory.com/publications/history/lothian/brief/fra/petite-histoire.pdf ^ Lemaire-Caplette, M.-J. (2019). S’évader en pleine nature. Magazine Gaspésie, 56(2), 3–4.

^ a b c Camping Québec. (2017, juillet). Portrait de la pratique du camping au Québec 2017.

https://www.campingquebec.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/02/Pratique_camping_Quebec_2017_complet.pdf ^ a b "Caravan and camping data | Tourism Research Australia" .

www.tra.gov.au . Retrieved 2024-03-20 .

^ "Allemansrätten - Sweden's right of public access" .

visitsweden.com . Retrieved 2023-01-02 .

^ "Sweden's right of public access in a nutshell" .

^ "The Scottish Outdoor Access Code" .

www.outdooraccess-scotland.scot . Retrieved 2023-01-02 .

^ Lomond, Loch; G83 8EG, The Trossachs National Park Authority Carrochan Carrochan Road Balloch.

"Camping Management Byelaws - #LetsDoNetZero" .

Loch Lomond & The Trossachs National Park . Retrieved 2023-01-02 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) External links [ edit ] This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines .

Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references .

( June 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Camping at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Textbooks from Wikibooks Travel information from Wikivoyage Images of historic camping and hiking on the Long Trail, Center for Digital Initiatives, University of Vermont Library Reflections of Summer: Car Camping!

Video produced by Oregon Field Guide Letter from Henry Ford to Thomas Edison thanking him for including his family on a camping trip.

v t e Adventure travel Types Accessible tourism Adjectival tourisms Adventure recreation Agritourism Backpacking (travel) Backpacking (hiking) Bicycle touring Camping Cultural tourism Ecotourism Extreme tourism Freighthopping Glamping Hiking Hitchhiking Jungle tourism Kloofing Overlanding Picnic Rogaining Safari Slum tourism Tramping Travel Ultralight backpacking Urban exploration Volunteer travel Wildlife tourism Activities Climbing Geocaching Geohashing Hang gliding Mountain biking Mountaineering Naturism Nude recreation Paragliding Rafting River trekking Scuba diving Zip-lining Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐2lqbw
Cached time: 20250818122502
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.571 seconds
Real time usage: 0.739 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2853/1000000
Revision size: 28273/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 75240/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2431/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 99014/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.348/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6602514/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  611.595      1 -total
 35.47%  216.935      1 Template:Reflist
 23.00%  140.664     15 Template:Cite_web
 12.53%   76.655      1 Template:Adventure_travel
 11.60%   70.968      1 Template:Navbox
 11.02%   67.418      1 Template:Short_description
 10.17%   62.195      1 Template:Sister_project_links
  8.40%   51.397      1 Template:Unreferenced_section
  8.06%   49.300      4 Template:Ambox
  7.83%   47.866      2 Template:Unreferenced Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:228012:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818122502 and revision id 1306138263. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Camping&oldid=1306138263 " Categories : Camping Procedural knowledge Scoutcraft Survival skills Types of tourism Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2020 All articles needing additional references Articles needing cleanup from October 2015 All pages needing cleanup Articles containing how-to sections All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 Articles needing additional references from May 2024 Wikipedia external links cleanup from June 2024 Pages using Sister project links with wikidata mismatch Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 04:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Camping 49 languages Add topic

