Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Christoph Gottfried Bardili 13 languages Deutsch Español فارسی Français Italiano Latina Magyar Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Rational realism ) German philosopher (1761–1808) Christoph Gottfried Bardili (18 May 1761 – 5 June 1808) was a German philosopher and cousin of Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling . He was critical of Kantian idealism and proposed his own system of philosophy known as rational realism , a view based purely upon " thinking as thinking".

[ 1 ] Life [ edit ] Bardili was born on 18 May 1761 in Blaubeuren in the Duchy of Württemberg . In 1786 he became a  Repentant at the Stift , a Protestant theological college in Tübingen . In 1790 he became a professor of philosophy at the Karlsschule in Stuttgart . After the closing of the Karlschule in 1794, he became a professor of philosophy at the Stuttgart Gymnasium Illustre where he taught until his death on 5 June 1808.

He dissented strongly from the Kantian distinction between matter and form of thought, and urged that philosophy should consider only thought in itself, pure thought, the ground or possibility of being.

The fundamental principle of thought is, according to him, the law of identity; logical thinking is real thinking. The matter upon which thought operated is in itself indefinite and is rendered definite through the action of thought. Bardili worked out his idea in a one-sided manner. He held that thought has in itself no power of development, and ultimately reduced it to arithmetical computation.

[ 2 ] According to the Encyclopædia Britannica Eleventh Edition : His system has had little influence in Germany ; Karl Leonhard Reinhold (1757–1823) alone expounded it against the attack of Fichte and Schelling . Yet in some respects his ideas opened the way for the later speculations of Schelling and Hegel.

[ 3 ] Bardili died in Mergelstetten [ de ] .

Works [ edit ] Observationes physicae, praesertim meteorologicae (1780).

Ueber die Entstehung und Beschaffenheit des ausserordentlichen Nebels in unseren Gegenden im Sommer 1783 (1783).

Epochen der vorzüglichsten philosophischen Begriffe (1788). 2 volumes.

Volume 1 .

Epochen der Ideen von einem Geist, von Gott und der menschlichen Seele .

Giebt es für die wichtigsten Lehren der theoretischen sowohl als der praktischen Philosophie (1791).

Sophylus oder Sittlichkeit und Natur als Fundamente der Weltweisheit (1794).

Allgemeine praktische Philosophie (1795).

Ueber den Ursprung des Begriffs von der Willensfreiheit (1796).

Ueber die [Gesetze] der Ideenassoziation (1796).

Briefe über den Ursprung der Metaphysik überhaupt (1798).

Kiel Grundriss der ersten Logik (1800).

Philosophische Elementarlehre (1802–1806). 2 volumes.

Beiträge zur Beurtheilung des gegenwärtigen Zustandes der Vernunftlehre (1803).

Briefwechsel über das Wesen der Philosophie und das Unwesen der Speculation (1804).

Google References [ edit ] ^ Tom Rockmore , Kant and Phenomenology , University of Chicago Press, 2011, p. 85.

^ One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Bardili, Christoph Gottfried ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 3 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 396.

This cites: C. L. Michelet , Geschichte der letzten Systeme.

J. E. Erdmann , Versuch einer Geschichte d. neu. Phil. Bd.

iii. pt. i.

Bardilis und Reinholds Briefwechsel.

^ Chisholm 1911 .

External links [ edit ] (in German) Hanslmeier, Josef (1953).

"Neue Deutsche Biographie" .

Deutsche Biographie . Retrieved 2022-04-05 .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Sweden Israel Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Christoph_Gottfried_Bardili&oldid=1251904133 " Categories : 1761 births 1808 deaths People from Alb-Donau-Kreis People from the Duchy of Württemberg 18th-century German philosophers German logicians German male writers 19th-century German philosophers Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with German-language sources (de) This page was last edited on 18 October 2024, at 18:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Christoph Gottfried Bardili 13 languages Add topic

