Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 19th century 1.2 20th century 1.2.1 1948 U.S. presidential election 1.3 21st century 1.4 2020s 2 Editorial Toggle Editorial subsection 2.1 Policy 2.2 Election endorsements 3 Tribune Company Toggle Tribune Company subsection 3.1 Pulitzer Prizes 3.1.1 Current 3.1.2 Past 4 Zell ownership and bankruptcy 5 Tribune Publishing divestment 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Chicago Tribune 52 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Hausa हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Lietuvių Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Major American newspaper, founded 1847 "The Trib" redirects here. For other newspapers with similar names, see Tribune (disambiguation) .

Chicago Tribune The front page of the Chicago Tribune on March 27, 2024 Type Daily newspaper Format Broadsheet Owner(s) Tribune Publishing Founder(s) James Kelly John E. Wheeler Joseph K. C. Forrest Editor-in-chief Mitch Pugh General manager Par Ridder Opinion editor Chris Jones Sports editor Amanda Kaschube Photo editor Todd Panagopoulos Founded June 10, 1847 ; 178 years ago ( 1847-06-10 ) Language English Headquarters Freedom Center (Chicago) Country United States Circulation 73,000  Average print circulation [ 1 ] ISSN 1085-6706 (print) 2165-171X (web) OCLC number 7960243 Website chicagotribune .com Media of the United States List of newspapers The Chicago Tribune is an American daily newspaper based in Chicago , Illinois, United States. Founded in 1847, it was formerly self-styled as the "World's Greatest Newspaper", [ 2 ] [ 3 ] a slogan from which its once integrated WGN radio and WGN television received their call letters. It is the most-read daily newspaper in the Chicago metropolitan area and the Great Lakes region , and the sixth-largest newspaper by print circulation in the United States.

[ 4 ] In the 1850s, under Joseph Medill , the Chicago Tribune became closely associated with the Illinois politician Abraham Lincoln , and the then new Republican Party 's progressive wing. In the 20th century, under Medill's grandson 'Colonel' Robert R. McCormick , its reputation was that of a crusading newspaper with an outlook that promoted American conservatism and opposed the New Deal . Its reporting and commentary reached markets outside Chicago through family and corporate relationships at the New York Daily News and the Washington Times-Herald .  Through much of the 20th century and into the early 21st, it employed a network of overseas news bureaus and foreign correspondents. In the 1960s, its corporate parent owner, Tribune Company began expanding into new markets buying additional daily papers. In 2008, for the first time in its history, its editorial page endorsed a Democrat, Barack Obama , a U.S. senator from Illinois, for U.S. president.

[ 5 ] Originally published solely as a broadsheet , the Tribune announced on January 13, 2009 that it would continue publishing as a broadsheet for home delivery, but would publish in tabloid format for newsstand , news box, and commuter station sales.

[ 6 ] The change, however, proved unpopular with readers; in August 2011, the Tribune discontinued the tabloid edition, returning to its established broadsheet format through all distribution channels.

[ 7 ] The Tribune was owned by parent company Tribune Publishing . In May 2021, Tribune Publishing was acquired by Alden Global Capital , which operates its media properties through Digital First Media ; since then, the newspaper's coverage has evolved away from national and international news and toward coverage of Illinois and especially Chicago-area news.

The Tribune settled a lawsuit over illegal charges to consumers in 2013 [ 8 ] and was again sued for deceptive billing practices in 2023.

[ 9 ] History [ edit ] 19th century [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( January 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) An 1870 advertisement for Chicago Tribune subscriptions The lead editorial in the Chicago Tribune following the Great Chicago Fire The Tribune was founded by James Kelly , John E. Wheeler, and Joseph K. C. Forrest, publishing the first edition on June 10, 1847. Numerous changes in ownership and editorship took place over the next eight years. Initially, the Tribune was not politically affiliated, but tended to support either the Whig or Free Soil parties against the Democrats in elections.

[ 10 ] By late 1853, it was frequently running editorials that criticized foreigners and Roman Catholics .

[ 11 ] About this time, it also became a strong proponent of temperance .

[ 12 ] However nativist its editorials may have been, it was not until February 10, 1855, that the Tribune formally affiliated itself with the nativist American or Know Nothing party, whose candidate Levi Boone was elected Mayor of Chicago the following month.

[ 13 ] Around 1854, part-owner Capt. J. D. Webster, later General Webster and chief of staff at the Battle of Shiloh , and Charles H. Ray of Galena, Illinois , through Horace Greeley , convinced Joseph Medill of Cleveland 's Leader to become managing editor.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] Ray became editor-in-chief, Medill became the managing editor, and Alfred Cowles, Sr.

, brother of Edwin Cowles , initially was the bookkeeper. Each purchased one third of the Tribune .

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Under their leadership, the Tribune distanced itself from the Know Nothings, and became the main Chicago organ of the Republican Party .

[ 19 ] However, the paper continued to print anti-Catholic and anti-Irish editorials, in the wake of the massive famine immigration from Ireland .

[ 20 ] The Tribune absorbed three other Chicago publications under the new editors: the Free West in 1855, the Democratic Press of William Bross in 1858, and the Chicago Democrat in 1861, whose editor, John Wentworth , left his position when elected as Mayor of Chicago . Between 1858 and 1860, the paper was known as the Chicago Press & Tribune . On October 25, 1860, it became the Chicago Daily Tribune .

[ 21 ] Before and during the American Civil War , the new editors strongly supported Abraham Lincoln , whom Medill helped secure the presidency in 1860, and pushed an abolitionist agenda.

[ citation needed ] The paper remained a force in Republican politics for years afterwards.

[ citation needed ] In 1861, the Tribune published new lyrics by William W. Patton for the song " John Brown's Body ". These rivaled the lyrics published two months later by Julia Ward Howe . Medill served as mayor of Chicago for one term after the Great Chicago Fire of 1871.

[ citation needed ] 20th century [ edit ] Tribune in 1919 In the 20th-century, Colonel Robert R. McCormick , who took control in the 1920s, the paper was strongly isolationist and aligned with the Old Right in its coverage of political news and social trends. It used the motto "The American Paper for Americans". From the 1930s to the 1950s, it excoriated the Democrats and the New Deal of Franklin D. Roosevelt , was resolutely disdainful of the British and French, and greatly enthusiastic for Chiang Kai-shek and Sen.

Joseph McCarthy .

[ citation needed ] When McCormick assumed the position of co-editor with his cousin Joseph Medill Patterson in 1910, the Tribune was the third-best-selling paper among Chicago's eight dailies, with a circulation of only 188,000.

[ 22 ] The young cousins added features such as advice columns and homegrown comic strips such as Little Orphan Annie and Moon Mullins . They promoted political crusades, and their first success came with the ouster of the Republican political boss of Illinois, Sen.

William Lorimer .

[ 22 ] At the same time, the Tribune competed with the Hearst paper, the Chicago Examiner , in a circulation war . By 1914, the cousins succeeded in forcing out William Keeley, the newspaper's managing editor. By 1918, the Examiner was forced to merge with the Chicago Herald .

In 1919, Patterson left the Tribune and moved to New York City to launch his own newspaper, the New York Daily News .

[ 22 ] In a renewed circulation war with Hearst's Herald-Examiner , McCormick and Hearst ran rival lotteries in 1922. The Tribune won the battle, adding 250,000 readers to its ranks. The same year, the Chicago Tribune hosted an international design competition for its new headquarters, the Tribune Tower . The competition worked brilliantly as a publicity stunt, and more than 260 entries were received. The winner was a neo-Gothic design by New York architects John Mead Howells and Raymond Hood .

[ citation needed ] The newspaper sponsored a pioneering attempt at Arctic aviation in 1929, an attempted round-trip to Europe across Greenland and Iceland in a Sikorsky amphibious aircraft.

[ 23 ] But, the aircraft was destroyed by ice on July 15, 1929, near Ungava Bay at the tip of Labrador , Canada. The crew were rescued by the Canadian science ship CSS Acadia .

[ 24 ] The Tribune ' s reputation for innovation extended to radio; it bought an early station, WDAP, in 1924 and renamed it WGN , the station call letters standing for the paper's self-description as the "World's Greatest Newspaper".

WGN Television was launched on April 5, 1948. These broadcast stations remained Tribune properties for nine decades and were among the oldest newspaper/broadcasting cross-ownerships in the country. (The Tribune ' s East Coast sibling, the New York Daily News , later established WPIX television and FM radio .) The Tribune ' s legendary sports editor Arch Ward created the Major League Baseball All-Star Game in 1933 as part of the city's Century of Progress exposition.

[ citation needed ] One of the great scoops in Tribune history came when it obtained the text of the Treaty of Versailles in June 1919. Another was its revelation of United States war plans on the eve of the Pearl Harbor attack. The Tribune ' s June 7, 1942, front page announcement that the United States had broken Japan's naval code was the revelation by the paper of a closely guarded military secret.

[ 25 ] The story revealing that Americans broke the enemy naval codes was not cleared by censors, and had U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt so enraged that he considered shutting down the Tribune .

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] From 1940 to 1943, the paper supplemented its comic strip offerings with The Chicago Tribune Comic Book , responding to the new success of comic books . At the same time, it launched the more successful and longer-lasting The Spirit Section , which was also an attempt by newspapers to compete with the new medium.

[ 30 ] Under McCormick's stewardship, the Tribune was a champion of modified spelling for simplicity. Beginning in 1934, the paper compiled lists of dozens of common words whose spelling could be made "saner", removing double L's and shortening "-ogue" endings to "-og", among other changes.

[ 31 ] In 1939, some of these alternative spellings were abandoned due to unpopularity, such as "crum" for "crumb" and "sherif" for "sheriff", while introducing more prominent changes, such as the words "altho", "tho", "thoro", and "thru", [ 32 ] which would become distinctive features of the Tribune for decades. Most of these simplified spellings were kept until a stylebook update in 1975 adopted Webster's Third as the paper's authority on spelling, with an editorial concluding that "we do not want to make any more trouble between Johnny and his teacher." However, a few others, including "cigaret" and "dialog", were kept as late as 1981.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] 1948 U.S. presidential election [ edit ] Main article: Dewey Defeats Truman Truman was widely expected to lose the 1948 election, and the Chicago Tribune ran the incorrect headline, " Dewey Defeats Truman " in its early edition the day after the election.

The paper is well known for a mistake it made during the 1948 presidential election . At that time, much of its composing room staff was on strike. The early returns led editors to believe (along with many in the country) that the Republican candidate Thomas Dewey would win. An early edition of the next day's paper carried the headline " Dewey Defeats Truman ", turning the paper into a collector's item. Democrat Harry S. Truman won and proudly brandished the newspaper in a famous picture taken at St. Louis Union Station . Beneath the headline was a false article , written by Arthur Sears Henning, which purported to describe West Coast results although written before East Coast election returns were available.

McCormick, a vigorous campaigner for the Republican Party, died in 1955, just four days before Democratic boss Richard J. Daley was elected mayor for the first time.

In 1969, under the leadership of publisher Harold Grumhaus and editor Clayton Kirkpatrick , the Tribune began reporting from a wider viewpoint. The paper retained its Republican and conservative perspective in its editorials, but it began to publish perspectives in wider commentary that represented a spectrum of diverse opinions, while its news reporting no longer had the conservative slant it had in the McCormick years.

[ citation needed ] On May 1, 1974, in a major feat of journalism, the Tribune published the complete 246,000-word text of the Watergate tapes , in a 44-page supplement that hit the streets 24 hours after the transcripts' release by the Nixon White House . Not only was the Tribune the first newspaper to publish the transcripts, but it beat the U.S.

Government Printing Office 's published version, and made headlines doing so.

[ clarification needed ] A week later, after studying the transcripts, the paper's editorial board observed that "the high dedication to grand principles that Americans have a right to expect from a President is missing from the transcript record." The Tribune ' s editors concluded that "nobody of sound mind can read [the transcripts] and continue to think that Mr. Nixon has upheld the standards and dignity of the Presidency," and called for Nixon's resignation. The Tribune call for Nixon to resign made news, reflecting not only the change in the type of conservatism practiced by the paper, but as a watershed event in terms of Nixon's hopes for survival in office. The White House reportedly perceived the Tribune ' s editorial as a loss of a longtime supporter and as a blow to Nixon's hopes to weather the scandal.

On December 7, 1975, Kirkpatrick announced in a column on the editorial page that Rick Soll , a "young and talented columnist" for the paper, whose work had "won a following among many Tribune readers over the last two years", had resigned from the paper. He had acknowledged that one column he wrote, dating to November 23, 1975, contained verbatim passages written by another columnist in 1967 and later published in a collection. Kirkpatrick did not identify the columnist. The passages in question, Kirkpatrick wrote, were from a notebook where Soll regularly entered words, phrases and bits of conversation which he had wished to remember. The paper initially suspended Soll for a month without pay. Kirkpatrick wrote that further evidence was revealed came out that another of Soll's columns contained information which he knew was false. At that point, Tribune editors decided to accept the resignation offered by Soll when the internal investigation began.

[ 36 ] After leaving, Soll married Pam Zekman , a Chicago newspaper (and future TV) reporter.

He worked for the short-lived [ 37 ] [ 38 ] Chicago Times magazine, [ 39 ] by Small Newspaper Group Inc. of Kankakee, Illinois , [ 40 ] in the late 1980s.
Soll was born in 1946, in Chicago, to Marjorie and Jules Soll. Soll graduated from New Trier High School , received a Bachelor of Arts in 1968 from Colgate University , and a master's degree from Medill School of Journalism , Northwestern University in 1970.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] In January 1977, Tribune columnist Will Leonard died at age 64.

[ 43 ] In March 1978, the Tribune announced that it hired columnist Bob Greene from the Chicago Sun-Times .

[ 44 ] Kirkpatrick stepped down as editor in 1979 and was succeeded by Maxwell McCrohon , who served as editor until 1981. He was transitioned to a corporate position. McCrohon held the corporate position until 1983, when he left to become editor-in-chief of the United Press International .

James Squires served as the paper's editor from July 1981 until December 1989.

Jack Fuller served as the Tribune ' s editor from 1989 until 1993, when he became the president and chief executive officer of the Chicago Tribune .

Howard Tyner served as the Tribune ' s editor from 1993 until 2001, when he was promoted to vice president/editorial for Tribune Publishing.

The Tribune won 11 Pulitzer prizes during the 1980s and 1990s.

[ 45 ] Editorial cartoonist Dick Locher won the award in 1983, and editorial cartoonist Jeff MacNelly won one in 1985. Then, future editor Jack Fuller won a Pulitzer for editorial writing in 1986. In 1987, reporters Jeff Lyon and Peter Gorner won a Pulitzer for explanatory reporting, and in 1988, Dean Baquet , William Gaines and Ann Marie Lipinski won a Pulitzer for investigative reporting. In 1989, Lois Wille won a Pulitzer for editorial writing and Clarence Page snagged the award for commentary. In 1994, Ron Kotulak won a Pulitzer for explanatory journalism, while R. Bruce Dold won it for editorial writing. In 1998, reporter Paul Salopek won a Pulitzer for explanatory writing, and in 1999, architecture critic Blair Kamin won it for criticism.

[ 45 ] In September 1981, baseball writer Jerome Holtzman was hired by the Tribune after a 38-year career at the Sun-Times .

In September 1982, the Chicago Tribune opened a new $180 million printing facility, Freedom Center .

[ 46 ] In November 1982, Tribune managing editor William H. "Bill" Jones, who had won a Pulitzer Prize in 1971, died at age 43 of cardiac arrest as a result of complications from a long battle with leukemia .

[ 47 ] In May 1983, Tribune columnist Aaron Gold died at age 45 of complications from leukemia .

[ 48 ] Gold had coauthored the Tribune's "Inc." column with Michael Sneed and prior to that had written the paper's "Tower Ticker" column.

The Tribune scored a coup in 1984 when it hired popular columnist Mike Royko away from the rival Sun-Times .

[ 49 ] In 1986, the Tribune announced that film critic Gene Siskel , the Tribune ' s best-known writer, was no longer the paper's film critic, and that his position with the paper had shifted from being that of a full-time film critic to that of a freelance contract writer who was to write about the film industry for the Sunday paper and also provide capsule film reviews for the paper's entertainment sections.

[ 50 ] The demotion occurred after Siskel and longtime Chicago film critic colleague Roger Ebert decided to shift the production of their weekly movie review show, then known as At the Movies with Gene Siskel and Roger Ebert and later known as Siskel & Ebert & The Movies from Tribune Entertainment to The Walt Disney Company 's Buena Vista Television unit. "He has done a great job for us," editor James Squires said at the time. "It's a question of how much a person can do physically. We think you need to be a newspaper person first, and Gene Siskel has always tried to do that. But there comes a point when a career is so big that you can't do that." Siskel declined to comment on the new arrangement, but Ebert publicly criticized Siskel's Tribune bosses for punishing Siskel for taking their television program to a company other than Tribune Entertainment.

[ 51 ] Siskel remained in that freelance position until he died in 1999. He was replaced as film critic by Dave Kehr .

[ 52 ] In February 1988, Tribune foreign correspondent Jonathan Broder resigned after publishing his article from February 22 that contained a number of sentences and phrases taken, without attribution, from a column written by another writer, Joel Greenberg, that had been published 10 days earlier in The Jerusalem Post .

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] In August 1988, Chicago Tribune reporter Michael Coakley died at age 41 of complications from AIDS .

[ 55 ] In November 1992, Tribune associate subject editor Searle "Ed" Hawley was arrested by Chicago police and charged with seven counts of aggravated criminal sexual abuse for allegedly having sex with three juveniles in his home in Evanston, Illinois .

[ 56 ] Hawley formally resigned from the paper in early 1993, and pleaded guilty in April 1993. He was sentenced to 3 years in prison.

[ 57 ] In October 1993, the Tribune fired its longtime military affairs writer, retired Marine David Evans, saying publicly that the position was being replaced by a national security writer.

[ 58 ] In December 1993, the Tribune ' s longtime Washington, D.C.

bureau chief, Nicholas Horrock , was fired after he chose not to attend a meeting that editor Howard Tyner requested of him in Chicago.

[ 59 ] Horrock, who shortly thereafter left the paper, was replaced by James Warren , who attracted new attention to the Tribune ' s D.C. bureau through his continued attacks on celebrity broadcast journalists in Washington.

In December 1993, the Tribune hired Margaret Holt from the South Florida Sun-Sentinel as its assistant managing editor for sports, making her the first female to head a sports department at any of the nation's 10 largest newspapers.

[ 60 ] In mid-1995, Holt was replaced as sports editor by Tim Franklin and shifted to a newly created job, customer service editor.

[ 61 ] In 1994, reporter Brenda You was fired by the Tribune after free-lancing for supermarket tabloid newspapers and lending them photographs from the Tribune ' s photo library.

[ 44 ] She later worked for the National Enquirer and as a producer for The Jerry Springer Show before committing suicide in November 2005.

[ 62 ] In April 1994, the Tribune ' s new television critic, Ken Parish Perkins , wrote an article about then- WFLD morning news anchor Bob Sirott in which Perkins quoted Sirott as making a statement that Sirott later denied making. Sirott criticized Perkins on the air, and the Tribune later printed a correction acknowledging that Sirott had never made that statement.

[ 63 ] Eight months later, Perkins stepped down as TV critic, and he left the paper shortly thereafter.

[ 64 ] In December 1995, the alternative newsweekly Newcity published a first-person article by the pseudonymous Clara Hamon (a name mentioned in the play The Front Page ) but quickly identified by Tribune reporters as that of former Tribune reporter Mary Hill that heavily criticized the paper's one-year residency program. The program brought young journalists in and out of the paper for one-year stints, seldom resulting in a full-time job. Hill, who wrote for the paper from 1992 until 1993, acknowledged to the Chicago Reader that she had written the diatribe originally for the Internet, and that the piece eventually was edited for Newcity .

[ 65 ] In 1997, the Tribune celebrated its 150th anniversary in part by tapping longtime reporter Stevenson Swanson to edit the book Chicago Days: 150 Defining Moments in the Life of a Great City .

On April 29, 1997, popular columnist Mike Royko died of a brain aneurysm . On September 2, 1997, the Tribune promoted longtime City Hall reporter John Kass to take Royko's place as the paper's principal Page Two news columnist.

[ 66 ] On June 1, 1997, the Tribune published what ended up becoming a very popular column by Mary Schmich called "Advice, like youth, probably just wasted on the young", otherwise known as " Wear Sunscreen " or the "Sunscreen Speech". The most popular and well-known form of the essay is the successful music single released in 1999, accredited to Baz Luhrmann .

In 1998, reporter Jerry Thomas was fired by the Tribune after he wrote a cover article on boxing promoter Don King for Emerge magazine at the same time that he was writing a cover article on King for the Chicago Tribune Sunday magazine. The paper decided to fire Thomas—and suspend his photographer on the Emerge story, Pulitzer Prize-winning Tribune photographer Ovie Carter for a month—because Thomas did not tell the Tribune about his outside work and also because the Emerge story wound up appearing in print first.

[ 67 ] On June 6, 1999, the Tribune published a first-person travel article from freelance writer Gaby Plattner that described a supposed incident in which a pilot for Air Zimbabwe who was flying without a copilot inadvertently locked himself out of his cockpit while the plane was flying on autopilot and as a result needed to use a large ax to chop a hole in the cockpit door.

[ 68 ] An airline representative wrote a lengthy letter to the paper calling the account "totally untrue, unprofessional and damaging to our airline" and explaining that Air Zimbabwe does not keep axes on its aircraft and never flies without a full crew, [ 69 ] and the paper was forced to print a correction stating that Plattner "now says that she passed along a story she had heard as something she had experienced." [ 68 ] The Tribune has been a leader on the Internet, acquiring 10 percent of America Online in the early 1990s, then launching such web sites as Chicagotribune.com (1995), Metromix .com (1996), ChicagoSports.com (1999), ChicagoBreakingNews.com (2008), and ChicagoNow (2009). In 2002, the paper launched a tabloid edition targeted at 18- to 34-year-olds known as RedEye .

21st century [ edit ] Ann Marie Lipinski was the paper's editor from February 2001 until stepping down on July 17, 2008.

Gerould W. Kern was named the paper's editor in July 2008.

[ 70 ] In early August 2008, managing editor for news Hanke Gratteau resigned, and several weeks later, managing editor for features James Warren resigned as well.

[ 71 ] Both were replaced by Jane Hirt , who previously had been the editor of the Tribune ' s RedEye tabloid.

[ 71 ] In June 2000, Times Mirror merged with Tribune Company making The Baltimore Sun and its community papers Baltimore Sun Media Group / Patuxent Publishing a subsidiary of Tribune.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] In July 2000, Tribune outdoors columnist John Husar, who had written about his need for a new liver transplant, died at age 63, just over a week after receiving part of a new liver from a live donor.

[ 74 ] Tribune's Baltimore Community papers include Arbutus Times , Baltimore Messenger , Catonsville Times , Columbia Flier , Howard County Times , The Jeffersonian , Laurel Leader , Lifetimes , North County News , Northeast Booster , Northeast Reporter , Owings Mills Times , and Towson Times .

The Howard County Times was named 2010 Newspaper of the Year by the Suburban Newspaper Association.

[ 75 ] The Towson Times expands coverage beyond the Towson area and includes Baltimore County government and politics.

[ 76 ] [ 77 ] The Tribune won five Pulitzer prizes in the first decade of the 21st century.

[ 45 ] Salopek won his second Pulitzer for the Tribune in 2001 for international reporting, and that same year an explanatory reporting team—lead writers of which were Louise Kiernan , Jon Hilkevitch , Laurie Cohen , Robert Manor , Andrew Martin, John Schmeltzer , Alex Rodriguez and Andrew Zajac —won the honor for a profile of the chaotic U.S. air traffic system.

[ 45 ] [ 78 ] In 2003, editorial writer Cornelia Grumman snagged the award for editorial writing.

[ 45 ] In 2005, Julia Keller won a Pulitzer for feature reporting on a tornado that struck Utica, Illinois .

[ 45 ] And, in 2008, an investigative reporting team including Patricia Callahan , Maurice Possley , Sam Roe , Ted Gregory, Michael Oneal , Evan Osnos and photojournalist Scott Strazzante won the Pulitzer for its series about faulty government regulation of defective toys, cribs and car seats.

[ 45 ] [ 79 ] In late 2001, sports columnist Michael Holley announced he was leaving the Tribune after just two months because he was homesick.

[ 80 ] He ultimately returned to The Boston Globe , where he had been working immediately before the Tribune had hired him.

[ 80 ] On September 15, 2002, Lipinski wrote a terse, page-one note informing readers that the paper's longtime columnist, Bob Greene , resigned effective immediately after acknowledging "engaging in inappropriate sexual conduct some years ago with a girl in her late teens whom he met in connection with his newspaper column." The conduct later was revealed to have occurred in 1988 with a woman who was of the age of consent in Illinois. "Greene's behavior was a serious violation of Tribune ethics and standards for its journalists," Lipinski wrote. "We deeply regret the conduct, its effect on the young woman and the impact this disclosure has on the trust our readers placed in Greene and this newspaper." [ 81 ] [ 82 ] In January 2003, Mike Downey , formerly of the Los Angeles Times , was hired as new Tribune sports columnist. He and colleague Rick Morrissey would write the In the Wake of the News Column originated by Ring Lardner .

In March 2004, the Tribune announced that freelance reporter Uli Schmetzer , who retired from the Tribune in 2002 after 16 years as a foreign correspondent, had fabricated the name and occupation of a person he had quoted in a story. The paper terminated Schmetzer as a contract reporter and began a review of the 300 stories that Schmetzer had written over the prior three years.

[ 83 ] In May 2004, the Tribune revealed that freelance reporter Mark Falanga was unable to verify some facts that he inserted in a lifestyle-related column that ran on April 18, 2004, about an expensive lunch at a Chicago restaurant—namely, that the restaurant charged $15 for a bottle of water and $35 for a pasta entree. "Upon questioning, the freelance writer indicated the column was based on an amalgam of three restaurants and could not verify the prices," the paper noted.

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] After the correction, the Tribune stopped using Falanga.

In October 2004, Tribune editor Ann Marie Lipinski at the last minute spiked a story written for the paper's WomanNews section by freelance reporter Lisa Bertagnoli titled "You c_nt say that (or can you?)," about a noted vulgarism .

[ 86 ] The paper ordered every spare body to go to the Tribune ' s printing plant to pull already-printed WomanNews sections containing the story from the October 27 package of preprinted sections in the Tribune .

[ 86 ] In September 2008, the Tribune considered hiring controversial sports columnist Jay Mariotti , shortly after his abrupt resignation from Tribune archrival Chicago Sun-Times .

[ 87 ] Discussions ultimately ended, however, after the Sun-Times threatened to sue for violating Mariotti's noncompete agreement, which was to run until August 2009.

[ 87 ] Sports columnist Rick Morrissey defected to the Sun-Times in December 2009.

In April 2009, 55 Tribune reporters and editors signed their names to an e-mail sent to Kern and managing editor Jane Hirt, questioning why the newspaper's marketing department had solicited subscribers' opinions on stories before they were published, and suggesting that the practice raised ethical questions as well as legal and competitive issues. Reporters declined to speak on the record to the Associated Press about their issues. "We'll let the e-mail speak for itself," reporter John Chase told the AP. In the wake of the controversy, Kern abruptly discontinued the effort, which he described as "a brief market research project".

[ 88 ] In the first decade of the 21st century, the Tribune had multiple rounds of reductions of staff through layoffs and buyouts as it has coped with the industrywide declines in advertising revenues: In December 2005, the Tribune eliminated 28 editorial positions through a combination of buyouts and layoffs, including what were believed to be the first layoffs in the paper's history.

[ 89 ] Among the reporters who left the paper in that round were Carol Kleiman, Bill Jauss and Connie Lauerman.

[ 89 ] In June 2007, about 25 newsroom employees took buyouts, including well-known bylines like Charles Madigan , Michael Hirsley and Ronald Kotulak, along with noted photographer Pete Souza .

[ 90 ] In March 2008, the paper gave buyouts to about 25 newsroom employees, including sportswriter Sam Smith .

[ 91 ] On August 15, 2008, the Tribune laid-off more than 40 newsroom and other editorial employees, including reporters Rick Popely, Ray Quintanilla, Lew Freedman , Michael Martinez and Robert Manor.

[ 92 ] Also in August 2008, about 36 editorial employees took voluntary buyouts or resigned, including well-known bylines like Michael Tackett, Ron Silverman, Timothy McNulty, Ed Sherman, Evan Osnos, Steve Franklin, Maurice Possley, Hanke Gratteau, Chuck Osgood and Skip Myslenski.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] [ 94 ] [ 95 ] On November 12, 2008, five editorial employees in the paper's Washington, D.C. bureau were laid off, including John Crewdson .

[ 96 ] On December 4, 2008, about 11 newsroom employees were laid-off, with one sports columnist, Mike Downey , having departed several weeks earlier when his contract was not renewed. Well-known bylines who were laid off included Neil Milbert, Stevenson Swanson, Lisa Anderson, Phil Marty, Charles Storch, Courtney Flynn and Deborah Horan.

[ 97 ] In February 2009, the Tribune laid off about 20 editorial employees, including several foreign correspondents, and some feature reporters and editors, although several, including Charles Leroux and Jeff Lyon, technically took buyouts. Among those who were let go were reporters Emily Nunn, Susan Chandler, Christine Spolar and Joel Greenberg.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] [ 100 ] On April 22, 2009, the paper laid off 53 newsroom employees, including well-known bylines like Patrick Reardon, Melissa Isaacson, Russell Working, Jo Napolitano, Susan Diesenhouse, Beth Botts, Lou Carlozo, Jessica Reaves, Tom Hundley, Alan Artner, Eric Benderoff, James P. Miller, Bob Sakamoto, Terry Bannon and John Mullin.

[ 101 ] That number was less than the 90 newsroom jobs that Crain's Chicago Business previously had reported were to be eliminated.

[ 99 ] [ 102 ] The Tribune broke the story on May 29, 2009, that several students had been admitted to the University of Illinois based upon connections or recommendations by the school's Board of Trustees, Chicago politicians, and members of the Rod Blagojevich administration. Initially denying the existence of a so-called "Category I" admissions program, university President B. Joseph "Joe" White and Chancellor Richard Herman later admitted that there were instances of preferential treatment. Although they claimed the list was short and their role was minor, the Tribune , in particular, revealed emails through a FOIA finding that White had received a recommendation for a relative of convicted fundraiser Tony Rezko to be admitted. The Tribune also later posted emails from Herman pushing for underqualified students to be accepted.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] The Tribune has since filed suit against the university administration under the Freedom of Information Act to acquire the names of students benefited by administrative clout and impropriety.

On February 8, 2010, the Chicago Tribune shrank its newspaper's width by an inch. They said that the new format was becoming the industry standard and that there would be minimal content changes.

In July 2011, the Chicago Tribune underwent its first round of layoffs of editorial employees in more than two years, letting go about 20 editors and reporters.

[ 105 ] Among those let go were DuPage County reporter Art Barnum , Editorial Board member Pat Widder and photographer Dave Pierini .

[ 105 ] [ 106 ] On March 15, 2012, the Tribune laid off 15 editorial staffers, including security guard Wendell Smothers (Smothers then died on November 12, 2012).

[ 107 ] [ 108 ] At the same time, the paper gave buyouts to six editorial staffers, including Pulitzer Prize-winning reporter William Mullen, Barbara Mahany and Nancy Reese.

[ 109 ] In June 2012, the Tribune ' s Pulitzer Prize-winning cultural critic Julia Keller left the paper to join the faculty of Ohio University and to pursue a career as a novelist.

[ 110 ] In September 2012, Tribune education reporter Joel Hood resigned from the paper to become a real estate broker, City Hall reporter Kristen Mack left the paper to become press secretary for Cook County Board President Toni Preckwinkle , [ 111 ] and the Tribune hired Pulitzer Prize-winning photographer John J. Kim from the Chicago Sun-Times .

[ 112 ] In October 2012, the Tribune ' s science and medicine reporter, Trine Tsouderos, quit to join a public relations firm.

[ 113 ] Also in October 2012, the Tribune announced plans to create a paywall for its website, offering digital-only subscriptions at $14.99 per month, starting on November 1, 2012. Seven-day print subscribers would continue to have unlimited online access at no additional charge.

[ 114 ] In February 2013, the Tribune agreed to pay a total of $660,000 to settle a class-action lawsuit that had been filed against the paper by 46 current and former reporters of its TribLocal local-news reporting group over unpaid overtime wages.

[ 115 ] The suit had been filed in federal court on behalf of Carolyn Rusin, who had been a TribLocal staff reporter from July 2010 until October 2011.

[ 115 ] The paper's TribLocal unit had been formed in 2007 and uses staff reporters, freelance writers and user-generated content to produce hyperlocal Chicago-area community news.

[ 115 ] On June 12, 2013, the Boston Marathon bombing tribute was posted again, which showed the words "We are Chicago" above the names of Boston sports teams.

[ 116 ] On the graphic on June 12, the word "Bruins" was ripped off and the comment was added, "Yeah, not right now we're not", in a reference to the 2013 Stanley Cup Finals , which play the Chicago Blackhawks against the Boston Bruins .

[ 116 ] Gerould Kern tweeted later that the Tribune "still supports [Boston] after all you've been through. We regret any offense. Now let's play hockey." [ 116 ] On November 20, 2013, the Tribune laid off another 12 or so editorial staffers.

[ 117 ] On April 6, 2014, the Tribune increased the newsstand price of its Sunday/Thanksgiving Day paper by 50 percent to $2.99 for a single copy. The newsrack price increased $0.75, or 42.9%, to $2.50.

[ 118 ] By January 2017 the price increased again, up $1 or 40% at newsracks, to $3.50. At newsstands it went up also $1, or 33.3%, to $3.99.

On January 28, 2015, metropolitan editor Peter Kendall was named managing editor, replacing Jane Hirt, who had resigned several months earlier. Colin McMahon was named associate editor.

[ 119 ] On February 18, 2016, the Tribune announced the retirement of editor Gerould Kern and the immediate promotion of the paper's editorial page editor, R. Bruce Dold, to be the Tribune's editor.

[ 53 ] On June 9, 2018, the Tribune ended their 93-year stint at Tribune Tower and moved to One Prudential Plaza . The tower was later converted to condos.

[ 120 ] 2020s [ edit ] On February 27, 2020, the Tribune announced that publisher and editor Bruce Dold would leave the Tribune on April 30, 2020, and would step down immediately as editor in chief. His replacement as editor was Colin McMahon. Also, the paper announced that one of the two managing editors of the paper, Peter Kendall, would leave the Tribune on February 28, 2020.

[ 121 ] In January 2021, the Chicago Tribune moved out of One Prudential Plaza , and relocated their offices and newsroom to Freedom Center.

[ 122 ] In May 2021, the paper was purchased by Alden Global Capital.

[ 123 ] Alden immediately launched a round of employee buyouts, reducing the newsroom staff by 25 percent, and the cuts continued. A former reporter said the paper is being "snuffed out, quarter after quarter after quarter".

[ 124 ] A report in The Atlantic said that Alden's business model is simple: "Gut the staff, sell the real estate, jack up subscription prices, and wring as much cash as possible out of the enterprise until eventually enough readers cancel their subscriptions that the paper folds, or is reduced to a desiccated husk of its former self." [ 124 ] Mitch Pugh was named the Tribune ' s executive editor on August 20, 2021, after eight years in the same role at The Post and Courier in Charleston, South Carolina .

[ 125 ] Editorial [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Tribune Tower , the newspaper's headquarters, opened in Chicago in 1925.

Chicago Tribune building Policy [ edit ] In a 2007 statement of principles published in the Tribune ' s print and online editions, the paper's editorial board described the newspaper's philosophy, from which is excerpted the following: The Chicago Tribune believes in the traditional principles of limited government; maximum individual responsibility; minimum restriction of personal liberty, opportunity and enterprise. It believes in free markets, free will and freedom of expression. These principles, while traditionally conservative, are guidelines and not reflexive dogmas.

The Tribune brings a Midwestern sensibility to public debate. It is suspicious of untested ideas.

The Tribune places great emphasis on the integrity of government and the private institutions that play a significant role in society. The newspaper does this in the belief that the people cannot consent to be governed unless they have knowledge of, and faith in, the leaders and operations of government. The Tribune embraces the diversity of people and perspectives in its community. It is dedicated to the future of the Chicago region.

The Tribune has remained economically conservative, being widely skeptical of increasing the minimum wage and entitlement spending . It criticized the George W. Bush administration's record on civil liberties, the environment, and many aspects of its foreign policy, it continued to support his presidency while taking Democrats, such as Illinois Governor Rod Blagojevich and Cook County Board President Todd Stroger , to task and calling for their removal from office.

In 2018, the Chicago Tribune and Los Angeles Times withdrew their websites from European Union nations to avoid the purview of the General Data Protection Regulation .

[ 126 ] Election endorsements [ edit ] In 2004, the Tribune endorsed President George W. Bush for reelection, a decision consistent with its longstanding support for the Republican Party . In 2008, it endorsed Democratic candidate and Illinois junior U.S. Senator Barack Obama —the first time that it had ever endorsed a Democrat for president.

[ 127 ] The Tribune endorsed Obama once again for reelection in 2012, [ 128 ] and in 2020 would endorse another Democrat, Joe Biden , who had served as vice president under Obama.

[ 129 ] In 2024, it abstained from endorsement.

[ 130 ] The Tribune has occasionally backed candidates of other parties for president. In 1872, it supported Horace Greeley , a former Republican Party newspaper editor, [ 131 ] and in 1912 the paper endorsed Theodore Roosevelt , who ran on the Progressive Party slate against Republican President William Howard Taft . In 2016, the Tribune endorsed the Libertarian Party candidate, former New Mexico Governor Gary Johnson , for president, over Republican Donald Trump and Democrat Hillary Clinton .

[ 132 ] Even when it uniformly backed Republicans for president, the Tribune endorsed some Democrats for lesser offices, including endorsements of Bill Foster , Barack Obama for the Senate and Democrat Melissa Bean , who defeated Philip Crane , the House of Representatives ' longest-serving Republican. Although the Tribune endorsed George Ryan in the 1998 Illinois gubernatorial race, the paper subsequently investigated and reported on the scandals surrounding Ryan during his preceding years as Secretary of State. Ryan declined to run for re-election in 2002 and was subsequently indicted, convicted and imprisoned as a result of the scandal.

Tribune Company [ edit ] Main article: Tribune Media The Chicago Tribune was the founding business unit of Tribune Company (since renamed Tribune Media ), which included many newspapers and television stations around the country. In Chicago, Tribune Media owned the WGN radio station (720 AM) and WGN-TV (Channel 9). Tribune Company also owned the Los Angeles Times —which displaced the Tribune as the company's largest property—and the Chicago Cubs baseball team. The Cubs were sold in 2009;the newspapers spun off in 2014 as Tribune Publishing.

Tribune Company owned the New York Daily News from its 1919 founding until its 1991 sale to British newspaper magnate Robert Maxwell . The founder of the News — Capt.

Joseph Medill Patterson — was a grandson of Joseph Medill and a cousin of Tribune editor Robert McCormick. Both Patterson and McCormick were enthusiasts of simplified spelling , another hallmark of their papers for many years. In 2008, the Tribune Company sold the Long Island newspaper Newsday —founded in 1940 by Patterson's daughter (and Medill's great-granddaughter), Alicia Patterson —to Long Island cable TV company Cablevision .

From 1925 to 2018, the Chicago Tribune was housed in the Tribune Tower on North Michigan Avenue on the Magnificent Mile . The building is neo-Gothic in style, and the design was the winner of an international competition hosted by the Tribune. The Chicago Tribune moved in June 2018 to the Prudential Plaza office complex overlooking Millennium Park after Tribune Media sold Tribune Tower to developers.

Pulitzer Prizes [ edit ] Colonel McCormick prevented the Tribune for years from participating in the Pulitzer Prize competition. But it has won 28 [ 133 ] of the awards over the years, including many for editorial writing .

[ 45 ] [ 134 ] [ 135 ] The Tribune won its first post-McCormick Pulitzer in 1961, when Carey Orr won the award for editorial cartooning. Reporter George Bliss won a Pulitzer the following year for reporting, and reporter Bill Jones another in 1971 for reporting.

[ 45 ] A reporting team won the award in 1973, followed by reporter William Mullen and photographer Ovie Carter , who won a Pulitzer for international reporting in 1975. A local reporting team won the award in 1976, and architecture critic Paul Gapp won a Pulitzer in 1979.

[ 45 ] In 2022, Cecilia Reyes, Chicago Tribune , and Madison Hopkins, Better Government Association, won a Pulitzer Prize in local reporting for a piercing examination of the city's long history of failed building- and fire-safety code enforcement, which let scofflaw landlords commit serious violations that resulted in dozens of unnecessary deaths.

[ 136 ] Current [ edit ] Amy Dickinson [ 137 ] Chris Jones Clarence Page Michael Phillips Nina Metz Laura Washington Past [ edit ] William Armstrong Skip Bayless Claudia Cassidy Steve Chapman Steve Daley Mike Downey Dahleen Glanton Bob Greene David Haugh Vernon Jarrett Blair Kamin John Kass Hugh Keough Ann Landers Ring Lardner Charles Madigan Steve Neal Jack Mabley Mike Royko Mary Schmich Gene Siskel Heidi Stevens Arch Ward Eric Zorn Rex Huppke Zell ownership and bankruptcy [ edit ] In December 2007, the Tribune Company was bought out by Chicago real estate magnate Sam Zell in an $8.2 billion deal. Zell was the company's new chairman.

[ 138 ] A year after going private, following a $124 million third-quarter loss, the Tribune Company filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection on December 8, 2008. The company made its filing with the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the District of Delaware, citing a debt of $13 billion and assets of $7.6 billion.

[ 139 ] Sam Zell originally planned to turn the company into a private company through the creation of an ESOP (employee stock ownership plan) within the company, but due to poor management that existed prior to his ownership, this did not work out as well as he intended.

[ 140 ] As part of its bankruptcy plan, owner Sam Zell intended to sell the Cubs to reduce debt. This sale has become linked to the corruption charges leading to the arrest of former Illinois Governor Rod Blagojevich on December 9, 2008. Specifically, Blagojevich was accused of exploiting the paper's financial trouble in an effort to have several editors fired.

[ 141 ] In the bankruptcy, unsecured bondholders of Tribune Co. essentially claimed that ordinary Tribune shareholders participated in a "fraudulent transfer" of wealth.

[ 142 ] The law firm Brown Rudnick, representing the Aurelius group of junior creditors, filed fraudulent transfer claims and fraud claims against 33,000 to 35,000 stockholders who bought Tribune stock.

[ 143 ] Prolonged due to these claims against former officers, directors, and every former stockholder of the Chicago Tribune Company, [ 143 ] [ 144 ] the Tribune's bankruptcy-related legal and professional fees of $500 million were more than twice the usual amount for that size of company.

[ 145 ] The Tribune Co. emerged from bankruptcy in January 2013, partially owned by private equity firms which had speculated on its distressed debt. The reorganized company's plan included selling off many of its assets.

[ 145 ] Tribune Publishing divestment [ edit ] Tribune Publishing , owning the Chicago Tribune , Los Angeles Times , and eight other newspapers, was spun off as a separate publicly traded company in August 2014. The parent Tribune Company was renamed Tribune Media .

[ 146 ] Tribune Publishing started life with a $350 million loan, $275 million of which was paid as a dividend to Tribune Media. The publishing company was also due to lease its office space from Tribune Media for $30 million per year through 2017.

[ 146 ] [ 147 ] Spinning off Tribune Publishing avoided the capital gains taxes that would accrue from selling those assets. The shares in Tribune Publishing were given tax-free to stakeholders in Tribune Media, the largest shareholder was Oaktree Capital Management with 18.5%.

[ 147 ] Tribune Media, retaining the non-newspaper broadcasting, entertainment, real estate, and other investments, also sold off some of the non-newspaper properties.

[ 146 ] On February 7, 2018, Tribune Publishing Company agreed to sell the Los Angeles Times to billionaire biotech investor Patrick Soon-Shiong. The purchase, made through Soon-Shiong's Nant Capital investment fund, was valued at $500 million, along with the assumption of $90 million in pension liabilities. The deal, which also included the San Diego Union-Tribune and other assets, was finalized on June 16, 2018.

[ 148 ] See also [ edit ] Chicago portal Illinois portal Journalism portal Chicago Tribune Syndicate Chicago Tribune Silver Basketball Chicago Tribune Silver Football References [ edit ] ^ Majid, Aisha (June 24, 2022).

"Top 25 US newspaper circulations: Print circulations of largest titles fall 14% in year to September 2023" .

Press Gazette . Retrieved March 8, 2024 .

^ "Chicago Tribune" .

^ "Relationship to Tribune Publishing" .

Studio1847.io . Retrieved September 16, 2023 .

^ Turvill, William (June 24, 2022).

"Top 25 US newspaper circulations: Print sales fall another 12% in 2022" .

Press Gazette . Retrieved June 28, 2022 .

^ Editorial.

"Tribune 2008 presidential endorsement" .

Chicago Tribune . Retrieved May 22, 2019 .

^ "Tribune to launch tabloid for newsstands" .

Chicago Tribune . January 13, 2009 . Retrieved June 19, 2020 .

^ "Chicago Tribune drops tabloid edition of paper" .

Chicago Tribune . August 31, 2011 . Retrieved April 7, 2015 .

^ "Tribune subscriber class-action suit settled" .

Chicago Tribune . May 17, 2013.

^ "Subscriber Sues Tribune Publishing, Accusing It of Deceptive Billing" .

^ ( Wendt 1979 , pp. 23, 27–28) ^ ( Cole 1948 , p. 14) ^ ( Keefe 1971 , p. 131) ^ ( Keefe 1975 , pp. 233–4) ^ Dante, Harris L. (1965).

"The Chicago Tribune's 'Lost' Years, 1865–1874" .

Journal of the Illinois State Historical Society .

58 (2): 140.

JSTOR 40190285 . Retrieved March 8, 2021 .

^ Grossman, Ron (June 8, 1997).

"The Man Who Built a Paper, a Party and a Presidency" .

Chicago Tribune .

^ Jones, Tim (December 18, 2007).

"Joseph Medill buys the Chicago Tribune" .

Chicago Tribune .

^ Rushton, Wyatt (1916).

Joseph Medill and the Chicago Tribune (thesis) . Retrieved October 24, 2007 .

and White, James Terry (1895).

The National Cyclopaedia of American Biography: Being the History of the United States . James T. White & Company, via New York Public Library via Internet Archive full view. p.

224 . Retrieved October 24, 2007 .

^ Robert Norton Smith (June 10, 1997).

Chapter 1, The Colonel, The Life and Legend of Robert R. McCormick 1880–1955 . Houghton Mifflin Co. via The New York Times Company.

ISBN 0-395-53379-1 . Retrieved October 24, 2007 .

^ ( Wendt 1979 , pp. 57–65) ^ ( Cole 1948 , p. 66) ^ Chicago Daily Tribune [ permanent dead link ] , October 25, 1860.

^ a b c "Robert R. McCormick," Current Biography 1941 , pp. 545–547.

^ "Great Circle Route" (PDF) .

Chicago Tribune . June 30, 1929 . Retrieved April 7, 2015 .

^ "Bowler over Evanston" .

Chicago Tribune . July 3, 1929 . Retrieved April 7, 2015 .

^ "Navy had Word of Jap Plan to Strike at Sea; Knew Dutch Harbor was a Feint" .

Chicago Tribune . June 7, 1942 . Retrieved January 4, 2016 .

^ Evans, Harold (2003).

War Stories: Reporting in the Time of Conflict from the Crimea to Iraq . Bunker Hill Publishing. pp.

65–66 .

ISBN 9781593730055 .

^ "Homepage" .

Freedom Forum . Archived from the original on October 3, 2013.

^ Sanger, M. D., Grant (September 1977).

"Freedom of the Press or Treason?" .

Proceedings .

103 (9).

United States Naval Institute : 895 . Retrieved January 4, 2016 .

^ "National Security v. the Role of the Press" .

Frontline .

PBS . February 20, 2007 . Retrieved January 4, 2016 .

^ "Stripper's Guide" . Strippersguide.blogspot.com . Retrieved April 7, 2015 .

^ "Tribune Adopts Saner Spelling of Many Words" , Chicago Tribune , January 28, 1934, front page and Part 1, page 4 .

^ "Tho, Altho, Thru, Thoro" , Chicago Tribune , September 24, 1939, Part 1, page 16.

^ "Thru's through and so is tho" , Chicago Tribune , September 29, 1975, front page and section 2, page 2 .

^ Shipley, Burke (1998).

"Spelling the Chicago Tribune Way, 1934–1975, Part I" (PDF) .

Journal of the Simplified Spelling Society (24).

English Spelling Society . Retrieved January 2, 2016 .

^ Shipley, John B. (1999).

"Spelling the Chicago Tribune Way, 1934–1975, Part II" (PDF) .

Journal of the Simplified Spelling Society (25).

English Spelling Society . Retrieved January 2, 2016 .

^ Kirkpatrick, Clayton (December 7, 1975). "Reporting the news".

Chicago Tribune . p. 4.

^ Warren, James (May 9, 1989).

"Chicago Times sold to former publisher" .

Chicago Tribune . Archived from the original on January 31, 2023 . Retrieved January 31, 2023 .

^ " "Chicago Times" magazine" .

Chicago History Today . January 14, 2015 . Retrieved January 31, 2023 .

^ Chicago Times Magazine . Chicago Times. 1989.

^ "EXECUTIVE DISPUTE AT CHICAGO TIMES" .

Chicago Tribune . Archived from the original on January 31, 2023 . Retrieved January 31, 2023 .

^ "Rick Soll Obituary (1946 - 2016) - Chicago, IL" .

Chicago Sun-Times . Legacy.com . Retrieved January 31, 2023 .

^ "Reporter, writer, editor Rick Soll dead at 69" .

Chicago Sun-Times . April 29, 2016 . Retrieved January 31, 2023 .

^ "Will Leonard, our man 'On Town,' dies".

Chicago Tribune . January 7, 1977. p. B7.

^ a b Froelke Coburn, Marcia; Rhodes, Steve (March 2003).

"The Sad Saga of Bob Greene" .

Chicago magazine . Chicagomag.com. Archived from the original on May 10, 2011 . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j "Chicago Tribune Pulitzer Prizes" .

Chicago Tribune . May 15, 2006.

^ "Freedom Center Name" .

Chicago Tribune . July 16, 1981. p. 18 . Retrieved May 8, 2022 .

^ "Tribune's managing editor Jones".

Chicago Tribune . November 24, 1982. p. 16.

^ "Aaron Gold, Tribune columnist for 10 years".

Chicago Tribune . May 24, 1983. p. 16.

^ Crimmins, Jerry; Rick Kogan (April 30, 1997). "Mike Royko 1932–1997 – Newspaper legend Mike Royko dies – Pulitzer prize-winning columnist was the voice of Chicago for more than 30 years".

Chicago Tribune . p. 1.

^ Siskel, Gene (July 2, 1986).

"Complex 'Mona Lisa' spellbinding" .

Chicago Tribune . Retrieved July 1, 2022 – via Newspapers.com.

^ "Film critic comes to defense of rival Siskel" . The Bulletin. April 22, 1986 . Retrieved November 7, 2010 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Michael Miner (May 21, 1993).

"Reader Archive-Extract: 1993/930521/HOTTYPE" . Securesite.chireader.com . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ a b Channick, Robert (February 18, 2016).

"Chicago Tribune names Bruce Dold as new editor; Gerould Kern to retire" .

Chicagotribune.com . Retrieved October 15, 2017 .

^ Miner, Michael (March 10, 1988).

"Broder Against Broder/For the Editor Who Dares to Be Different" .

Chicagoreader.com . Archived from the original on October 16, 2017 . Retrieved October 15, 2017 .

^ "Tribune Reporter Michael Coakley, 41" . Chicago Tribune. August 4, 1988 . Retrieved April 7, 2015 .

^ Blau, Robert (November 20, 1992). "Trib newsman charged in sex case".

Chicago Tribune . p. 6.

^ "Former editor pleads guilty in sex-abuse case, gets 3 years".

Chicago Tribune . April 13, 1993. p. 3.

^ Michael Miner (November 5, 1993).

"Reader Archive-Extract: 1993/931105/HOTTYPE" . Securesite.chireader.com . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Michael Miner (December 17, 1993).

"Reader Archive-Extract: 1993/931217/HOTTYPE" . Securesite.chireader.com . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Michael Miner (December 17, 1993).

"Reader Archive-Extract: 1993/931217/HOTTYPE" . Securesite.chireader.com . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Michael Miner (August 4, 1995).

"Reader Archive-Extract: 1995/950804/HOTTYPE" . Securesite.chireader.com . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Roderick, Kevin (November 14, 2005).

"Brenda You, 38, possible suicide" . LA Observed . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

^ Michael Miner (April 15, 1994).

"Reader Archive-Extract: 1994/940415/HOTTYPE" . Securesite.chireader.com . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Michael Miner (December 16, 1994).

"Reader Archive-Extract: 1994/941216/HOTTYPE" . Securesite.chireader.com . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Michael Miner (January 5, 1996).

"Reader Archive-Extract: 1996/960105/HOTTYPE" . Securesite.chireader.com . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Tyner, Howard (September 2, 1997). "Introducing a new column by John Kass".

Chicago Tribune . p. 1.

^ Michael Miner.

"Reader Archive-Extract: 1998/980703/HOTTYPE" . Securesite.chireader.com . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ a b "Choppy Skies" . Chicago Tribune. June 6, 1999 . Retrieved June 19, 2020 .

^ "No Truth To The Story" . Chicago Tribune. July 18, 1999 . Retrieved June 19, 2020 .

^ Richard Pérez-Peña (July 15, 2008).

"Two Leaders to Step Down at Tribune Newspapers" .

The New York Times . Retrieved June 19, 2020 .

^ a b Miner, Michael (August 21, 2008).

"Hirt In; Warren Out" . Chicago Reader. Archived from the original on December 1, 2008 . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

^ "About The Baltimore Sun" . Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on June 22, 2020 . Retrieved June 19, 2020 .

^ "Baltimore Sun Media Group Executive Profiles" . Baltimore Sun. February 20, 2020 . Retrieved June 19, 2020 .

^ "John Husar, 63, Tribune Writer" .

Chicago Tribune . July 21, 2000 . Retrieved June 19, 2020 .

^ "Tribune.com » Library » Howard County Times named 2010 Newspaper of the Year" . Corporate.tribune.com. September 24, 2010. Archived from the original on July 6, 2012 . Retrieved March 2, 2013 .

^ "Baltimore County - baltimoresun.com" . explorebaltimorecounty.com . Retrieved January 27, 2014 .

^ "Tribune Company" . Patuxent.com. December 31, 2012. Archived from the original on October 10, 2002 . Retrieved March 2, 2013 .

^ Davey, Monica (April 17, 2001). "Tribune awarded 2 Pulitzers".

Chicago Tribune . p. 6.

^ Miner, Michael (February 19, 2008).

"Tribune, blogger win Polk awards" . Chicago Reader. Archived from the original on October 6, 2008 . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

^ a b Michael Miner.

"Reader Archive-Extract: 2001/011214/HOTTYPE" . Securesite.chireader.com . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Lipinski, Ann Marie (September 15, 2002). "To our readers".

Chicago Tribune . p. 1.

^ Pappu, Sridhar.

"Articles & Archives" .

Chicago Reader . Archived from the original on February 26, 2009 . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

^ Wycliff, Don (March 5, 2004). "From the Public Editor – How a journalist's career came undone".

Chicago Tribune . p. 27.

^ Falanga, Mark (April 18, 2004). "Mr. Big City feels like Mr. Big Idiot".

Chicago Tribune . p. 11.

^ "Corrections and Clarifications".

Chicago Tribune . May 9, 2004. p. 2.

^ a b Joravsky, Ben.

"Articles & Archives" .

Chicago Reader . Archived from the original on August 8, 2007 . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

^ a b Kirk, Jim (September 16, 2008).

"Former Sun-Times columnist Mariotti not joining Tribune – Chicago Tribune " . Archives.chicagotribune.com . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

^ McCann, Herbert G. (April 30, 2009).

"Reader survey of stories roils tribune newsroom" .

San Diego Union-Tribune . Associated Press. Archived from the original on November 25, 2015 . Retrieved November 25, 2015 .

^ a b Rosenthal, Phil (December 2, 2005). "28 newsroom jobs, New City News cut by Tribune".

Chicago Tribune . p. 1.

^ "Community Media Workshop" . Newstips.org. Archived from the original on July 27, 2011 . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

^ Miner, Michael (March 19, 2008).

"Is Alan Solomon crazy? | The Blog | Chicago Reader" . Blogs.chicagoreader.com. Archived from the original on December 7, 2008 . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

^ a b Miner, Michael (August 17, 2008).

"The Tribune casualty list | The Blog | Chicago Reader" . Blogs.chicagoreader.com. Archived from the original on December 1, 2008 . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

^ Miner, Michael (August 18, 2008).

"Paul Salopek Correction | The Blog | Chicago Reader" . Blogs.chicagoreader.com. Archived from the original on September 24, 2008 . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

^ Miner, Michael (August 18, 2008).

"More Trib Losses | The Blog | Chicago Reader" . Blogs.chicagoreader.com. Archived from the original on December 1, 2008 . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

^ Rosenthal, Phil (August 16, 2008). "Tribune cuts 40 more in newsroom – 2-week total 80 as paper works to stem losses".

Chicago Tribune . p. 3.

^ Miner, Michael (November 12, 2008).

"Tribune lays off John Crewdson, others | The Blog | Chicago Reader" . Blogs.chicagoreader.com. Archived from the original on March 15, 2009 . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

^ Miner, Michael (December 4, 2008).

"More Tribune layoffs | The Blog | Chicago Reader" . Blogs.chicagoreader.com. Archived from the original on December 23, 2008 . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

^ "Chicago Tribune trims newsroom staff | Crain's Chicago Business" . Chicagobusiness.com. February 12, 2009 . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

^ a b "Trib to pare newsroom 20% | Crain's Chicago Business" . Chicagobusiness.com. April 13, 2009 . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

^ Miner, Michael (February 12, 2009).

"More layoffs at Tribune | The Blog | Chicago Reader" . Blogs.chicagoreader.com. Archived from the original on March 21, 2009 . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

^ Miner, Michael (April 22, 2009).

"53 out at Tribune – victims of "changing priorities" | The Blog" .

Chicago Reader . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

^ "Crain's: Chicago Tribune to Lay Off 20 Percent of Newsroom « News Cycle" . Newscycle.wordpress.com. April 14, 2009 . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

^ Wurth, Julie (June 9, 2009).

"Pols press for hearings in UI's 'Cloutgate' scandal" .

The News-Gazette .

Champaign-Urbana, Illinois . Retrieved January 4, 2016 .

^ "U. of I. leaders urged to resign" . Chicago Breaking News. June 7, 2009. Archived from the original on June 22, 2009 . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

^ a b "Newsroom layoffs show Tribune's true colors" .

Time Out Chicago . July 22, 2011. Archived from the original on May 12, 2013 . Retrieved March 2, 2013 .

^ "Radio 101: New station has a lot to learn before it's ready for" .

Time Out Chicago . July 25, 2011 . Retrieved March 2, 2013 .

^ "Tribune stops the presses for 15 more staffers" . Time Out Chicago. Archived from the original on February 1, 2014 . Retrieved January 27, 2014 .

^ "Wendell Smothers, 1960–2012" . Chicago Tribune. November 16, 2012 . Retrieved June 19, 2020 .

^ "Bill Mullen" . Chicago Reader. February 11, 2012 . Retrieved January 27, 2014 .

^ "Keller to end 'extraordinary journey' as Tribune critic" . Time Out Chicago. Archived from the original on February 1, 2014 . Retrieved January 27, 2014 .

^ Feder, Robert (September 27, 2012).

"WLS-FM mornings go in 'different direction' without Fogel" . Timeout.com. Archived from the original on November 21, 2015 . Retrieved April 7, 2015 .

^ Feder, Robert (September 24, 2012).

"Konkol leaves Sun-Times to write for DNAInfo Chicago" . Timeout.com. Archived from the original on April 18, 2015 . Retrieved April 7, 2015 .

^ Feder, Robert (October 15, 2012).

"Former radio sex therapist finds her Eden in Hawaii" . Timeout.com. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015 . Retrieved April 7, 2015 .

^ "Tribune sets pay wall on some content at $14.99 per month" . Chicago Tribune. October 18, 2012 . Retrieved June 19, 2020 .

^ a b c "TribLocal reporters win $660K in class-action against Tribune Co" . Chicago Tribune. March 1, 2013 . Retrieved June 19, 2020 .

^ a b c "Chicago Tribune apologizes for hockey-related joke about Boston Marathon bombing" .

The Washington Post . Associated Press. June 14, 2013. Archived from the original on June 16, 2013 . Retrieved June 17, 2013 .

^ "Stop the presses: Layoffs hit Tribune " . Robert Feder. November 20, 2013 . Retrieved January 27, 2014 .

^ Feder, Robert (April 6, 2014).

"Sunday Tribune hikes price 50%" . Robertfeder.com . Retrieved April 7, 2015 .

^ Channick, Robert (January 28, 2015).

"Chicago Tribune names new senior editors" .

Chicago Tribune . Archived from the original on April 7, 2015 . Retrieved April 7, 2015 .

^ Grossman, Ron (June 2, 2018).

"Leaving Tribune Tower: 'The world's most beautiful office building' " .

Chicago Tribune . Retrieved May 8, 2022 .

^ "New editor for Chicago Tribune named as part of newsroom leadership restructuring" .

Chicago Tribune . February 27, 2020 . Retrieved July 8, 2021 .

^ Ori, Ryan (January 11, 2021).

"Chicago Tribune to exit Prudential Plaza, move newsroom to printing facility" .

Chicago Tribune . Retrieved May 6, 2022 .

^ Channick, Robert (May 21, 2021).

"Hedge fund Alden's bid to buy Chicago Tribune, other papers approved by Tribune Publishing shareholders" .

Chicago Tribune . Retrieved November 10, 2021 .

^ a b Coppins, McKay (October 14, 2021).

"A secretive hedge fund is gutting newsrooms" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved November 10, 2021 .

^ "Chicago Tribune names new top editor as newsroom leader resigns" .

Chicago Tribune . August 10, 2021.

^ Newcomb, Alyssa (May 25, 2018).

"Chicago Tribune, Los Angeles Times block European users due to GDPR" .

NBC News .

NBC Universal . Retrieved June 8, 2018 .

^ "Tribune Endorsement: Barack Obama for president" .

Chicago Tribune . October 17, 2008 . Retrieved June 19, 2020 .

^ "Tribune endorses Obama: Our children's America" . Chicago Tribune. October 26, 2012. Archived from the original on October 27, 2012 . Retrieved June 19, 2020 .

^ "Editorial: Our Case for Joe Biden over Donald Trump," from Chicago Tribune , September 25, 2020 ^ "Chicago Tribune among ,those that won't endorse for President" from https://www.axios.com , October 29, 2024 ^ "To-morrow".

Chicago Daily Tribune . Chicago Tribune. November 4, 1872. p. 4.

^ "A principled option for U.S. president: Endorsing Gary Johnson, Libertarian" .

Chicagotribune.com . Archived from the original on October 16, 2017 . Retrieved October 15, 2017 .

^ "Chicago Tribune's 28 Pulitzer Prizes: A list of all the winners" .

Chicago Tribune . May 9, 2022.

^ "Pulitzer Award-winning Journalism" .

Tribune Publishing . Archived from the original on January 19, 2016 . Retrieved January 4, 2016 .

^ Reardon, Patrick T. (June 8, 1997).

"A Parade Of Pulitzers" .

Chicago Tribune . Retrieved June 19, 2020 .

^ Reyes, Cecilia; Hopkins, Madison (May 9, 2022) [11 October 2021].

"Mayor Lori Lightfoot Put out a List of Building Safety 'Scofflaws.' Only 98 Properties Are on It" .

Chicago Tribune .

Archived from the original on July 28, 2024 . Retrieved July 28, 2024 .

^ "Amy Dickinson" .

Chicago Tribune . May 21, 2023.

^ Carpenter, Dave (December 21, 2007).

"Tribune buyout, at $8.2 billion, closes in Chicago" .

The News Journal . Wilmington, Delaware. Associated Press. Archived from the original on December 23, 2007 . Retrieved August 6, 2014 .

^ "Tribune Co. files for bankruptcy protection" . Business Courier of Cincinnati. December 9, 2008 . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

^ "Employee Ownership Through ESOPS:A Bad Bargain-BECKER" .

The Becker-Posner Blog . April 8, 2007. Archived from the original on November 15, 2018 . Retrieved November 15, 2018 .

^ Rood, Justin (December 9, 2008).

"Paper Cuts: Did Chicago Tribune Owner Cut Deal to Fire His Editor?" . ABC News. Archived from the original on December 12, 2008 . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

^ "Lyondell Suit a Potential Threat for Private Equity" .

The Wall Street Journal . May 3, 2011. Archived from the original on October 13, 2013 . Retrieved May 6, 2013 .

The Lyondell suit alleges that the shareholders participated in a "fraudulent transfer" of wealth from the company and its creditors by knowingly burdening it with debt it couldn't handle, pushing it into bankruptcy less than a year after the close of the buyout... Unsecured bondholders of Tribune Co., the media conglomerate still in Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, are making essentially the same claim in their high-profile case.

^ a b Oneal, Michael; Sachdev, Ameet (November 27, 2011).

"Tribune Co. bankruptcy case haunting former shareholders" .

Chicago Tribune . Retrieved June 19, 2020 .

^ "Chicago Tribune Bankruptcy Update" .

Bankruptcy Law Review . Archived from the original on June 11, 2013 . Retrieved May 6, 2013 .

^ a b Channick, Robert (December 31, 2012).

"Tribune Co. emerges from bankruptcy" .

Chicago Tribune . Retrieved June 19, 2020 .

^ a b c Channick, Robert (August 5, 2014).

"Spun-off Tribune Publishing faces future on its own" .

Chicago Tribune . Archived from the original on August 5, 2014 . Retrieved August 5, 2014 .

^ a b Channick, Robert (June 12, 2014).

"Tribune Publishing to carry $350 million in debt in spinoff" .

Chicago Tribune . Archived from the original on August 8, 2014 . Retrieved August 5, 2014 .

^ "Historic sale of the L.A. Times to billionaire Patrick Soon-Shiong to close on Monday" .

Los Angeles Times . June 16, 2018 . Retrieved January 19, 2025 .

Further reading [ edit ] Cole, Bruce M. (1948).

The Chicago Press and the Know Nothings 1850–1856 (MA). University of Chicago.

OCLC 47084261 .

At Google Books .

Keefe, Thomas M. (1971). "Chicago's Flirtation with Political Nativism".

Records of the American Catholic Historical Society of Philadelphia .

82 : 131– 158.

Keefe, Thomas M. (1975). "The Catholic Issue in the Chicago Tribune Before the Civil War".

Mid-America .

57 (4). Loyola University: 227– 245.

Mayer, Gordon (2006).

"Party Rags? Politics and the News Business in Chicago's Party Press, 1831–71" (subscription required) .

Journalism History 32#3: 138–146.

doi : 10.1080/00947679.2006.12062709 .

McKinney, Megan (2011).

The Magnificent Medills: America's Royal Family of Journalism During a Century of Turbulent Splendor . Harper Collins.

Smith, Richard Norton (2003).

The Colonel: The Life and Legend of Robert R. McCormick, 1880–1955 .

Wendt, Lloyd (1979).

Chicago Tribune: The Rise of a Great American Newspaper . Chicago: Rand McNally.

ISBN 0-528-81826-0 .

Ziv, Nina (2002).

"The Chicagotribune.com: Creating a Newspaper for the New Economy" .

Strategic Management: Concepts and Cases .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Chicago Tribune .

LCCN sn83045111 Official website Tribune Media website Tribune Group Overview at Ketupa Chicago Tribune Archives (1849–present) Chicago Daily Tribune at the Internet Archive Chicago Tribune at the Illinois Newspaper Project John Tinney McCutcheon Editorial Cartoon Collection Archived May 25, 2025, at the Wayback Machine at the University of Missouri Janet A. Ginsburg Chicago Tribune newspaper collection at Michigan State University v t e Tribune Publishing Ownership and parent company Alden Global Capital Chicago Tribune Media Group Chicago Tribune Chicago ChicagoNow (defunct) Daily Southtown Forsalebyowner.com Hoy Lake County News-Sun Metromix (defunct) Naperville Sun Pioneer Press Post-Tribune RedEye Daily Press Media Group Daily Press The Virginia Gazette Hartford Courant Media Hartford Courant CTNow ReminderNews Morning Call Media Group The Morning Call Orlando Sentinel Media Group Orlando Sentinel El Sentinel Pilot Media The Virginian-Pilot Inside Business Style Weekly Sun-Sentinel Media Group Sun Sentinel El Sentinel del Sur de la Florida Spanfeller Media Group The Daily Meal Other assets Tribune Content Agency v t e Chicago Architecture Beaches Climate tornadoes Colleges and universities Community areas Crime gangs Culture Demographics Economy companies Expressways Flag Geography Government Harbor History politics timeline Landmarks Literature Media newspapers Metropolitan area Museums Neighborhoods Parks list People music musicians theater Public schools list Skyscrapers Sports Tourism Transportation Visual arts Portal Category v t e Current White House James S. Brady Press Briefing Room seating chart # Podium 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 NBC News The Wall Street Journal Politico CNBC / MSNBC / Telemundo Bloomberg Government Washington Examiner The Boston Globe / Washington Blade Fox News CBS News Radio PBS / AP Radio Voice of America Time Gray TV / Scripps News EWTN / The Daily Caller CBS News Bloomberg News McClatchy New York Post / TheGrio The Washington Times CBN / Salem Radio Hearst Television Associated Press NPR Foreign pool The Hill Regional media Newsmax Spectrum News ABC News The Washington Post Agence France-Presse Fox News Radio / Fox Business Roll Call / The Christian Science Monitor Al Jazeera NewsNation Reuters The New York Times Los Angeles Times AURN / Univision RealClearPolitics The Daily Beast / The Independent BBC News / Newsweek CNN USA Today ABC News Radio Daily Mail National Journal HuffPost Financial Times / The Guardian White House Correspondents' Association v t e Pulitzer Prize for Explanatory Reporting Previously the Pulitzer Prize for Explanatory Journalism from 1985–1997 Jon Franklin (1985) Staff of The New York Times (1986) Jeff Lyon & Peter Gorne (1987) Daniel Hertzberg & James B. Stewart (1988) David Hanners , William Snyder & Karen Blessen (1989) David A. Vise & Steve Coll (1990) Susan C. Faludi (1991) Robert S. Capers & Eric Lipton (1992) Mike Toner (1993) Ronald Kotulak (1994) Leon Dash & Lucian Perkins (1995) Laurie Garrett (1996) Michael Vitez , April Saul & Ron Cortes (1997) Paul Salopek (1998) Richard Read (1999) Eric Newhouse (2000) Staff of the Chicago Tribune (2001) Staff of The New York Times (2002) Staff of The Wall Street Journal (2003) Kevin Helliker & Thomas M. Burton (2004) Gareth Cook (2005) David Finkel (2006) Kenneth R. Weiss , Usha Lee McFarling & Rick Loomis (2007) Amy Harmon (2008) Bettina Boxall & Julie Cart (2009) Michael Moss & Staff of The New York Times (2010) Mark Johnson , Kathleen Gallagher , Gary Porter , Lou Saldivar & Alison Sherwood (2011) David Kocieniewski (2012) Staff of The New York Times including David Barboza , Charles Duhigg , David Kocieniewski , Steve Lohr , John Markoff , David Segal , David Streitfeld , Hiroko Tabuchi & Bill Vlasic (2013) Eli Saslow (2014) Zachary R. Mider (2015) T. Christian Miller & Ken Armstrong (2016) International Consortium of Investigative Journalists , McClatchy & Miami Herald (2017) Staff of The Arizona Republic & Staff of USA Today Network (2018) David Barstow , Susanne Craig & Russ Buettne (2019) Staff of The Washington Post (2020) Ed Yong (2021) Andrew Chung, Lawrence Hurley, Andrea Januta, Jaimi Dowdell and Jackie Botts (2021) Natalie Wolchover & Staff of Quanta Magazine (2022) Caitlin Dickerson (2023) v t e Pulitzer Prize for Investigative Reporting Previously the Pulitzer Prize for Local Reporting, No Edition Time from 1953–1963 and the Pulitzer Prize for Local Investigative Specialized Reporting from 1964–1984 1953–1975 Edward J. Mowery (1953) Alvin McCoy (1954) Roland Kenneth Towery (1955) Arthur Daley (1956) Wallace Turner (1957) George Beveridge (1958) John Harold Brislin (1959) Miriam Ottenberg (1960) Edgar May (1961) George Bliss (1962) Oscar Griffin Jr.

(1963) James V. Magee , Albert V. Gaudiosi & Frederick Meyer (1964) Gene Goltz (1965) John Anthony Frasca (1966) Gene Miller (1967) J. Anthony Lukas (1968) Al Delugach & Denny Walsh (1969) Harold E. Martin (1970) William Jones (1971) Timothy Leland , Gerard M. O'Neill , Stephen Kurkjian & Ann Desantis (1972) The Sun Newspapers of Omaha (1973) William Sherman (1974) The Indianapolis Star (1975) 1976–2000 Chicago Tribune (1976) Acel Moore & Wendell Rawls Jr.

(1977) Anthony R. Dolan (1978) Gilbert M. Gaul & Elliot G. Jaspin (1979) Stephen Kurkjian , Alexander B. Hawes Jr.

, Nils Bruzelius , Joan Vennochi & Robert M. Porterfield (1980) Clark Hallas & Robert B. Lowe (1981) Paul Henderson (1982) Loretta Tofani (1983) Kenneth Cooper , Joan Fitz Gerald , Jonathan Kaufman , Norman Lockman , Gary McMillan , Kirk Scharfenberg & David Wessel (1984) Lucy Morgan , Jack Reed & William K. Marimow (1985) Jeffrey A. Marx & Michael M. York (1986) Daniel R. Biddle , H.G. Bissinger , Fredric N. Tulsky & John Woestendiek (1987) Dean Baquet , William C. Gaines & Ann Marie Lipinski (19) Bill Dedman (1989) Lou Kilzer (1990) Joseph T. Hallinan & Susan M. Headden (1991) Lorraine Adams & Dan Malone (1992) Jeff Brazil & Steve Berry (1993) Providence Journal-Bulletin (1994) Stephanie Saul & Brian Donovan (1995) The Orange County Register (1996) Eric Nalder , Deborah Nelson & Alex Tizon (1997) Gary Cohn & Will Englund (1998) Miami Herald (1999) Sang-Hun Choe , Charles J. Hanley & Martha Mendoza (2000) 2001–2025 David Willman (2001) Sari Horwitz , Scott Higham & Sarah Cohen (2002) Clifford J. Levy (2003) Michael D. Sallah , Joe Mahr & Mitch Weiss (2004) Nigel Jaquiss (2005) Susan Schmidt , James V. Grimaldi & R. Jeffrey Smith (2006) Brett Blackledge (2007) Walt Bogdanich , Jake Hooker & Chicago Tribune (2008) David Barstow (2009) Barbara Laker , Wendy Ruderman & Sheri Fink (2010) Paige St. John (2011) Matt Apuzzo , Adam Goldman , Eileen Sullivan , Chris Hawley , Michael J. Berens & Ken Armstrong (2012) David Barstow & Alejandra Xanic von Bertrab (2013) Chris Hamby (2014) Eric Lipton & The Wall Street Journal (2015) Leonora LaPeter Anton , Anthony Cormier , Michael Braga & Esther Htusan (2016) Eric Eyre (2017) The Washington Post (2018) Matt Hamilton , Harriet Ryan & Paul Pringle (2019) Brian Rosenthal (2020) Matt Rocheleau , Vernal Coleman , Laura Crimaldi , Evan Allen & Brendan McCarthy (2021) Corey G. Johnson , Rebecca Woolington & Eli Murray (2022) Staff of The Wall Street Journal (2023) Authority control databases Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐6lgwb
Cached time: 20250817044850
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.079 seconds
Real time usage: 2.413 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 13605/1000000
Revision size: 104636/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 447130/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 21133/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 22/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 564226/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.302/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 10982601/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1989.036      1 -total
 61.13% 1215.887      1 Template:Reflist
 24.33%  483.913     76 Template:Cite_web
 21.04%  418.518     49 Template:Cite_news
  6.74%  134.053      1 Template:Conservatism_US
  4.73%   94.061      1 Template:Infobox_newspaper
  4.58%   91.124     19 Template:Fix
  4.52%   89.817      1 Template:Infobox
  4.28%   85.064      6 Template:Harv
  3.70%   73.669      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:60961:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044850 and revision id 1302545728. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chicago_Tribune&oldid=1302545728 " Categories : Chicago Tribune 1847 establishments in Illinois Companies that filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in 2008 Daily newspapers published in the United States Newspapers established in 1847 Newspapers published in Chicago Old Right (United States) Pulitzer Prize for Explanatory Journalism winners Pulitzer Prize for Investigative Reporting winners Pulitzer Prize–winning newspapers Tribune Publishing Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from November 2016 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2022 Articles with dead external links from June 2019 Articles with dead external links from July 2017 CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from July 2022 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from April 2024 Articles needing additional references from January 2021 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2014 Pages containing links to subscription-only content Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 26 July 2025, at 03:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chicago Tribune 52 languages Add topic

