Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Properties 2 Relation to other geometries 3 Hilbert planes 4 Incompleteness 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Absolute geometry 25 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Кыргызча Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Тоҷикӣ Türkmençe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Geometry without the parallel postulate Geometry Projecting a sphere to a plane Branches Euclidean Non-Euclidean Elliptic Spherical Hyperbolic Non-Archimedean geometry Projective Affine Synthetic Analytic Algebraic Arithmetic Diophantine Differential Riemannian Symplectic Discrete differential Complex Finite Discrete/Combinatorial Digital Convex Computational Fractal Incidence Noncommutative geometry Noncommutative algebraic geometry Concepts Features Dimension Straightedge and compass constructions Angle Curve Diagonal Orthogonality ( Perpendicular ) Parallel Vertex Congruence Similarity Symmetry Zero-dimensional Point One-dimensional Line segment ray Length Two-dimensional Plane Area Polygon Triangle Altitude Hypotenuse Pythagorean theorem Parallelogram Square Rectangle Rhombus Rhomboid Quadrilateral Trapezoid Kite Circle Diameter Circumference Area Three-dimensional Volume Cube cuboid Cylinder Dodecahedron Icosahedron Octahedron Pyramid Platonic Solid Sphere Tetrahedron Four -/other-dimensional Tesseract Hypersphere Geometers by name Aida Aryabhata Ahmes Alhazen Apollonius Archimedes Atiyah Baudhayana Bolyai Brahmagupta Cartan Chern Coxeter Descartes Euclid Euler Gauss Gromov Hilbert Huygens Jyeṣṭhadeva Kātyāyana Khayyám Klein Lobachevsky Manava Minkowski Minggatu Pascal Pythagoras Parameshvara Poincaré Riemann Sakabe Sijzi al-Tusi Veblen Virasena Yang Hui al-Yasamin Zhang List of geometers by period BCE Ahmes Baudhayana Manava Pythagoras Euclid Archimedes Apollonius 1–1400s Zhang Kātyāyana Aryabhata Brahmagupta Virasena Alhazen Sijzi Khayyám al-Yasamin al-Tusi Yang Hui Parameshvara 1400s–1700s Jyeṣṭhadeva Descartes Pascal Huygens Minggatu Euler Sakabe Aida 1700s–1900s Gauss Lobachevsky Bolyai Riemann Klein Poincaré Hilbert Minkowski Cartan Veblen Coxeter Chern Present day Atiyah Gromov v t e Absolute geometry is a geometry based on an axiom system for Euclidean geometry without the parallel postulate or any of its alternatives. Traditionally, this has meant using only the first four of Euclid's postulates .

[ 1 ] The term was introduced by János Bolyai in 1832.

[ 2 ] It is sometimes referred to as neutral geometry , [ 3 ] as it is neutral with respect to the parallel postulate. The first four of Euclid's postulates are now considered insufficient as a basis of Euclidean geometry, so other systems (such as Hilbert's axioms without the parallel axiom) are used instead.

[ 4 ] Properties [ edit ] In Euclid's Elements , the first 28 Propositions and Proposition 31 avoid using the parallel postulate, and therefore are valid in absolute geometry.  One can also prove in absolute geometry the exterior angle theorem (an exterior angle of a triangle is larger than either of the remote angles), as well as the Saccheri–Legendre theorem , which states that the sum of the measures of the angles in a triangle has at most 180°.

[ 5 ] Proposition 31 is the construction of a parallel line to a given line through a point not on the given line.

[ 6 ] As the proof only requires the use of Proposition 27 (the Alternate Interior Angle Theorem), it is a valid construction in absolute geometry. More precisely, given any line l and any point P not on l , there is at least one line through P which is parallel to l . This can be proved using a familiar construction: given a line l and a point P not on l , drop the perpendicular m from P to l , then erect a perpendicular n to m through P .  By the alternate interior angle theorem, l is parallel to n .  (The alternate interior angle theorem states that if lines a and b are cut by a transversal t such that there is a pair of congruent alternate interior angles, then a and b are parallel.)  The foregoing construction, and the alternate interior angle theorem, do not depend on the parallel postulate and are therefore valid in absolute geometry.

[ 7 ] In absolute geometry, it is also provable that two lines perpendicular to the same line cannot intersect (i.e., must be parallel).

[ 8 ] Relation to other geometries [ edit ] The theorems of absolute geometry hold in hyperbolic geometry , which is a non-Euclidean geometry , as well as in Euclidean geometry .

[ 9 ] Absolute geometry is inconsistent with elliptic geometry or spherical geometry : the notion of ordering or betweenness of points on lines, used to axiomatize absolute geometry, is inconsistent with these other geometries.

[ 10 ] Absolute geometry is an extension of ordered geometry , and thus, all theorems in ordered geometry hold in absolute geometry. The converse is not true. Absolute geometry assumes the first four of Euclid's Axioms (or their equivalents), to be contrasted with affine geometry , which does not assume Euclid's third and fourth axioms.
(3: "To describe a circle with any centre and distance radius .",
4: "That all right angles are equal to one another." ) 
Ordered geometry is a common foundation of both absolute and affine geometry.

[ 11 ] The geometry of special relativity has been developed starting with nine axioms and eleven propositions of absolute geometry.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] The authors Edwin B. Wilson and Gilbert N. Lewis then proceed beyond absolute geometry when they introduce hyperbolic rotation as the transformation relating two frames of reference .

Hilbert planes [ edit ] A plane that satisfies Hilbert's Incidence , Betweenness and Congruence axioms is called a Hilbert plane .

[ 14 ] Hilbert planes are models of absolute geometry.

[ 15 ] Incompleteness [ edit ] Absolute geometry is an incomplete axiomatic system , in the sense that one can add extra independent axioms without making the axiom system inconsistent.  One can extend absolute geometry by adding various axioms about parallel lines and get mutually incompatible but internally consistent axiom systems, giving rise to Euclidean or hyperbolic geometry.  Thus every theorem of absolute geometry is a theorem of hyperbolic geometry and Euclidean geometry.  However the converse is not true.

See also [ edit ] Affine geometry Erlangen program Foundations of geometry Incidence geometry Non-Euclidean geometry Notes [ edit ] ^ Faber 1983 , pg. 131 ^ In " Appendix exhibiting the absolute science of space: independent of the truth or falsity of Euclid's Axiom XI (by no means previously decided) " ( Faber 1983 , pg. 161) ^ Greenberg cites W. Prenowitz and M. Jordan (Greenberg, p. xvi) for having used the term neutral geometry to refer to that part of Euclidean geometry that does not depend on Euclid's parallel postulate.  He says that the word absolute in absolute geometry misleadingly implies that all other geometries depend on it.

^ Faber 1983 , pg. 131 ^ One sees the incompatibility of absolute geometry with elliptic geometry, because in the latter theory all triangles have angle sums greater than 180°.

^ Faber 1983 , p. 296 ^ Greenberg 2007 , p. 163 ^ Fine et al. 2022 , Corollary 1.8, p. 11 .

^ Indeed, absolute geometry is in fact the intersection of hyperbolic geometry and Euclidean geometry when these are regarded as sets of propositions.

^ Ewald, G. (1971), Geometry: An Introduction , Wadsworth, p. 53 ^ Coxeter 1969 , pp. 175–6 ^ Edwin B. Wilson & Gilbert N. Lewis (1912) "The Space-time Manifold of Relativity. The Non-Euclidean Geometry of Mechanics and Electromagnetics" Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences 48:387–507 ^ [1] , a digest of the axioms used, and theorems proved, by Wilson and Lewis. Archived by Wayback Machine ^ Hartshorne 2005 , p.97 ^ Greenberg 2010 , p.200 References [ edit ] Coxeter, H. S. M.

(1969), Introduction to Geometry (2nd ed.), New York: John Wiley & Sons Faber, Richard L. (1983), Foundations of Euclidean and Non-Euclidean Geometry , New York: Marcel Dekker, ISBN 0-8247-1748-1 Fine, Benjamin; Moldenhauer, Anja; Rosenberger, Gerhard; Schürenberg, Annika; Wienke, Leonard (2022), Geometry and Discrete Mathematics: A Selection of Highlights , De Gruyter Textbooks (2nd ed.), Walter de Gruyter, ISBN 9783110740783 Greenberg, Marvin Jay (2007), Euclidean and Non-Euclidean Geometries: Development and History (4th ed.), New York: W. H. Freeman, ISBN 0-7167-9948-0 Greenberg, Marvin Jay (2010), "Old and New Results in the Foundations of Elementary Plane Euclidean and Non-Euclidean Geometries" (PDF) , Mathematical Association of America Monthly , 117 : 198– 219, archived from the original (PDF) on 2023-03-27 , retrieved 2018-11-01 Hartshorne, Robin (2005), Geometry: Euclid and Beyond , New York: Springer-Verlag, ISBN 0-387-98650-2 Pambuccain, Victor Axiomatizations of hyperbolic and absolute geometries , in: Non-Euclidean geometries (A. Prékopa and E. Molnár, eds.). János Bolyai memorial volume. Papers from the international conference on hyperbolic geometry, Budapest, Hungary, July 6–12, 2002. New York, NY: Springer, 119–153, 2006.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Absolute geometry at Wikimedia Commons Weisstein, Eric W.

"Absolute Geometry" .

MathWorld .

Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Absolute_geometry&oldid=1304495958 " Category : Classical geometry Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 10:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Absolute geometry 25 languages Add topic

