Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Establishment 1.2 Early development 1.3 Jacques Delors 1.4 Jacques Santer 1.5 Romano Prodi 1.6 José Manuel Barroso 1.7 Jean-Claude Juncker 1.8 Ursula von der Leyen 2 Powers and functions Toggle Powers and functions subsection 2.1 Executive power 2.2 Legislative initiative 2.3 Enforcement 3 College of Commissioners Toggle College of Commissioners subsection 3.1 Appointment 3.2 Dismissal 3.3 Political styles 4 Administration Toggle Administration subsection 4.1 Press 5 Legitimacy and criticism 6 Initiatives Toggle Initiatives subsection 6.1 Anti-terrorism 6.2 COVID-19 response 7 Location 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents European Commission 82 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar Македонски Malti მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Mirandés Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt Võro 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Executive branch of the European Union European Commission Name in official languages Bulgarian : Европейска комисия Croatian : Europska komisija Czech : Evropská komise Danish : Europa-Kommissionen Dutch : Europese Commissie English : European Commission Estonian : Euroopa Komisjon Finnish : Euroopan komissio French : Commission européenne German : Europäische Kommission Greek : Ευρωπαϊκή Επιτροπή Hungarian : Európai Bizottság Irish : Coimisiún Eorpach Italian : Commissione europea Latvian : Eiropas Komisija Lithuanian : Europos Komisija Maltese : Kummissjoni Ewropea Polish : Komisja Europejska Portuguese : Comissão Europeia Romanian : Comisia Europeană Slovak : Európska komisia Slovene : Evropska komisija Spanish : Comisión Europea Swedish : Europeiska kommissionen Overview Established 16 January 1958 ; 67 years ago ( 1958-01-16 ) Country 27 member states Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Polity European Union Leader President of the Commission ( Ursula von der Leyen since 1 December 2019) Appointed by Nominated by the European Council and elected by the European Parliament Main organ College of Commissioners Ministries 33 Agriculture and Rural Development Budget Climate Action Communication Communications Networks, Content and Technology Competition Economic and Financial Affairs Education and Culture Employment, Social Affairs and Inclusion Energy Environment European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid Operations Eurostat Financial Stability, Financial Services and Capital Markets Union Health and Food Safety Human Resources and Security Informatics Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs International Cooperation and Development Interpretation Joint Research Centre Justice and Consumers Maritime Affairs and Fisheries Migration and Home Affairs Mobility and Transport Neighbourhood and Enlargement Negotiations Regional and Urban Policy Research and Innovation Taxation and Customs Union Trade Translation Responsible to European Parliament Headquarters Brussels , Belgium Luxembourg City , Luxembourg Website ec .europa .eu The Berlaymont building , seat of the European Commission The European Commission ( EC ) is the primary executive branch of the European Union (EU). It operates as a cabinet government , with a number of members of the Commission ( directorial system , informally known as "commissioners") corresponding to two thirds of the number of member states , unless the European Council , acting unanimously, decides to alter this number.

[ 1 ] The current number of commissioners is 27, including the president.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] It includes an administrative body of about 32,000 European civil servants. The commission is divided into departments known as Directorates-General (DGs) that can be likened to departments or ministries each headed by a director-general who is responsible to a commissioner.

Currently, there is one member per member state , but members are bound by their oath of office to represent the general interest of the EU as a whole rather than their home state.

[ 4 ] The Commission president (currently Ursula von der Leyen ) is proposed by the European Council [ 5 ] (the 27 heads of state/governments) and elected by the European Parliament .

[ 6 ] The Council of the European Union then nominates the other members of the Commission in agreement with the nominated president, and the 27 members as a team are then subject to a vote of approval by the European Parliament.

[ 7 ] The current Commission is the von der Leyen Commission II , which took office in December 2024, following the European Parliament elections in June of the same year .

History [ edit ] Further information: History of the European Union The European Commission derives from one of the five key institutions created in the supranational European Community system, following the proposal of Robert Schuman , French Foreign Minister, on 9 May 1950. Originating in 1951 as the High Authority in the European Coal and Steel Community , the commission has undergone numerous changes in power and composition under various presidents, involving three Communities.

[ 8 ] Establishment [ edit ] Signed In force Document 1951 1952 Paris Treaty 1957 1958 Rome treaties: EEC Treaty Euratom Treaty 1965 1967 Merger Treaty 2007 2009 Lisbon Treaty Commission of the European Atomic Energy Community Commission of the European Communities European Commission High Authority of the European Coal and Steel Community Commission of the European Economic Community v t e The first Commission originated in 1951 as the nine-member " High Authority " under President Jean Monnet (see Monnet Authority ). The High Authority was the supranational administrative executive of the new European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC). It took office first on 10 August 1952 in Luxembourg City. In 1958, the Treaties of Rome had established two new communities alongside the ECSC: the European Economic Community (EEC) and the European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom). However, their executives were called "Commissions" rather than "High Authorities".

[ 8 ] The reason for the change in name was the new relationship between the executives and the Council . Some states, such as France, expressed reservations over the power of the High Authority and wished to limit it by giving more power to the Council rather than the new executives.

[ 9 ] Walter Hallstein , the first President of the Commission Louis Armand led the first Commission of Euratom .

Walter Hallstein led the first Commission of the EEC , holding the first formal meeting on 16 January 1958 at the Château of Val-Duchesse . It achieved agreement on a contentious cereal price accord, as well as making a positive impression upon third countries when it made its international debut at the Kennedy Round of General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) negotiations.

[ 10 ] Hallstein notably began the consolidation of European law and started to have a notable impact on national legislation. Little heed was taken of his administration at first but, with help from the European Court of Justice , his Commission stamped its authority solidly enough to allow future Commissions to be taken more seriously.

[ 11 ] In 1965, however, accumulating differences between the French government of Charles de Gaulle and the other member states on various subjects (British entry, direct elections to Parliament, the Fouchet Plan and the budget) triggered the "empty chair" crisis , ostensibly over proposals for the Common Agricultural Policy . Although the institutional crisis was solved the following year, it cost Étienne Hirsch his presidency of Euratom and later Walter Hallstein the EEC presidency, despite his otherwise being viewed as the most 'dynamic' leader until Jacques Delors .

[ 10 ] Early development [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Politics of the European Union Member states (27) Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Candidate countries Albania Bosnia and Herzegovina Georgia Moldova Montenegro North Macedonia Serbia Ukraine Countries with suspended accession negotiations Turkey Applicant countries Kosovo States not on the agenda Armenia Azerbaijan Belarus Iceland Kazakhstan Norway Russia Switzerland United Kingdom Microstates and the European Union Andorra Liechtenstein Monaco San Marino Vatican City Special territories EU 3 (EU founding states) Enlargement of the European Union Withdrawal from the European Union Treaties and Declarations Schuman Declaration (1950) Treaty of Paris (1951) Europe Declaration (1951) Spaak Report (1956) Treaty of Rome (1957) Euratom Treaty (1957) Merger Treaty (1965) Solemn Declaration (1983) Single European Act (1986) Maastricht Treaty (1992) Treaty of Amsterdam (1997) Treaty of Nice (2001) Berlin Declaration (2007) Treaty of Lisbon (2007) Article 7 Article 50 Opt-outs Treaties of accession 1972 , 1979 , 1985 , 1994 , 2003 , 2005 , 2011 Treaties of withdrawal 1984 , 2020 Other treaties Schengen Agreement (1985) European Economic Area Agreement (1992) Abandoned treaties and agreements European Constitution (2004) UK membership renegotiation (2015–2016) Executive institutions European Council President : Costa (PES) Parties List of meetings European Commission Von der Leyen Commission President : Von der Leyen (EPP) Vice Presidents College of Commissioners Civil Service Secretary-General : Juhansone Legislative institutions Legislative procedure Council of the EU Presidency Denmark ( July–December 2025 ) Configurations GAC FAC ECOFIN Eurogroup AGRIFISH EPSCO COMPET TTE ENVI JHA EYC Voting Secretariat Secretary-General : Thérèse Blanchet Directorates-general Council preparatory bodies COREPER Council Working Parties European Parliament ( Members ) President : Metsola Largest groups EPP ( Manfred Weber ) S&D ( Iratxe García ) Member of the European Parliament 10th session (2024–2029) Bureau Vice Presidents Quaestor Conference National parliaments Judicial institutions Court of Justice of the EU European Court of Justice Members Advocates General Rulings General Court Auditory institutions European Court of Auditors European Court of Auditors Other auditory bodies Internal Audit Service of the Commission Committee on Budgetary Control of the Parliament Economic and Financial Affairs configuration of the Council Anti-Fraud Office Public Prosecutor's Office European Central Bank President Lagarde ESCB EMU Euro banknotes Euro coins Other bodies European Investment Bank Group Investment Bank Investment Fund EIB Institute European Stability Mechanism European Stability Mechanism European University Institute European University Institute Unified Patent Court Unified Patent Court Agencies, decentralised independent bodies and joint undertakings Decentralised agencies of the EU Single market agencies CFSP agencies AFSC agencies ESFS European Supervisory Authorities SRM bodies Executive agencies of the EU Euratom agencies Decentralised independent bodies of the EU European Institute of Innovation and Technology European Public Prosecutor's Office Corporate bodies of the EU European Data Protection Board Authority for European Political Parties and European Political Foundations Joint undertakings of the EU of the Euratom Other independent bodies European Data Protection Supervisor European Ombudsman Advisory bodies European Committee of the Regions European Economic and Social Committee Political and Security Committee European Union Military Committee EU/ESA Space Council Inter-institutional bodies Publications Office of the European Union European External Action Service European Personnel Selection Office Anti-Fraud Office European Administrative School Euratom Euratom members Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Associated states Switzerland United Kingdom Nuclear power in the European Union Euratom since 1 January 2021 Economic and Monetary Union Eurozone members Austria Belgium Croatia Cyprus Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Eurogroup President Paschal Donohoe Other currencies in use Bulgarian lev Czech koruna Danish krone Hungarian forint Polish złoty Romanian leu Swedish krona ERM II Enlargement of the eurozone Non Euro countries relationship to Euro Bulgaria Czechia Denmark Hungary Poland Sweden Romania Eurozone since 2015 Schengen Area Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Non-EU members Iceland Liechtenstein Norway Switzerland Non-Schengen area EU member states Cyprus Ireland (Opt-out) ETIAS Prüm Convention Schengen Information System Visa Information System Visa policy of the Schengen Area Schengen Area from January 2023 European Economic Area EEA members Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Non-EU members Iceland Liechtenstein Norway Topics EEA Joint Committee EEA National Identity cards Microstates and the European Union European Economic Area Elections Elections to the European Parliament European parties European foundations Political groups of the European Parliament Spitzenkandidat Constituencies Apportionment Referendums related to the EU European elections 1979 1984 1989 1994 1999 2004 2009 2014 2019 2024 (latest election) Elections in EU member states Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Law Acquis Conferral Primacy ( ECJ Case 6/64 ) Subsidiarity Regulation Democratic legitimacy Directive Decision Recommendation Fundamental Rights Policies and issues Budget Customs Union Free Trade Agreements European Single Market Area of FS&J Policies Agricultural Energy Fisheries Regional Citizenship Passports of the European Union Identity Pro-Europeanism Euroscepticism European banking union European Banking Supervision Single Resolution Mechanism Capital Markets Union European System of Financial Supervision Institutional seats of the European Union Integration Supranationalism European Federation Multi-speed Europe Enhanced cooperation Foreign relations High Representative Kaja Kallas Ext. Action Service Foreign Policy Defence Policy Foreign relations of EU member states Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Argentina–European Union relations Armenia–European Union relations Australia–European Union relations Brazil–European Union relations Canada–European Union relations China–European Union relations European Union–NATO relations Georgia–European Union relations Iceland–European Union relations Iran–European Union relations Israel–European Union relations Japan–European Union relations Kazakhstan–European Union relations Mexico–European Union relations Moldova–European Union relations Norway–European Union relations Russia–European Union relations Switzerland–European Union relations Turkey–European Union relations Ukraine–European Union relations United Kingdom–European Union relations ( History ) Post-Brexit United Kingdom relations with the European Union Brexit United States–European Union relations Common Travel Area ( Ireland ) Microstates and the European Union European Union and the United Nations European Union Association Agreement European Neighbourhood Policy Eastern Partnership Euronest Parliamentary Assembly G7 G20 Defunct bodies European Communities (1958–1993) European Coal and Steel Community European Economic Community European Community Western European Union Convention on the Future of Europe European Union portal Other countries v t e The three bodies, collectively named the European Executives , co-existed until 1 July 1967 when, under the Merger Treaty , they were combined into a single administration under President Jean Rey .

[ 8 ] Owing to the merger, the Rey Commission saw a temporary increase to 14 members—although subsequent Commissions were reduced back to nine, following the formula of one member for small states and two for larger states.

[ 12 ] The Rey Commission completed the Community's customs union in 1968 and campaigned for a more powerful, elected, European Parliament .

[ 13 ] Despite Rey being the first President of the combined communities, Hallstein is seen as the first President of the modern Commission.

[ 8 ] The Malfatti and Mansholt Commissions followed with work on monetary co-operation and the first enlargement to the north in 1973.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] With that enlargement, the College of Commissioners membership increased to thirteen under the Ortoli Commission (the United Kingdom as a large member was granted two Commissioners), which dealt with the enlarged community during economic and international instability at that time.

[ 12 ] [ 16 ] The external representation of the Community took a step forward when President Roy Jenkins , recruited to the presidency in January 1977 from his role as Home Secretary of the United Kingdom's Labour government, [ 17 ] became the first President to attend a G8 summit on behalf of the Community.

[ 18 ] Following the Jenkins Commission , Gaston Thorn 's Commission oversaw the Community's enlargement to the south, in addition to beginning work on the Single European Act .

[ 19 ] Jacques Delors [ edit ] Jacques Delors , the European Commission president from 1985–1994 Main article: Delors Commission The Commission headed by Jacques Delors was seen as giving the Community a sense of direction and dynamism.

[ 20 ] Delors and his College are also considered as the " founding fathers of the euro ".

[ 21 ] The International Herald Tribune noted the work of Delors at the end of his second term in 1992: "Mr. Delors rescued the European Community from the doldrums. He arrived when Europessimism was at its worst. Although he was a little-known former French finance minister, he breathed life and hope into the EC and into the dispirited Brussels Commission. In his first term, from 1985 to 1988, he rallied Europe to the call of the single market, and when appointed to a second term he began urging Europeans toward the far more ambitious goals of economic, monetary, and political union".

[ 22 ] Jacques Santer [ edit ] Main article: Santer Commission The successor to Delors was Jacques Santer . As a result of a fraud and corruption scandal, the entire Santer Commission was forced by the Parliament to resign in 1999. These frauds were revealed by internal auditor Paul van Buitenen , with French commissioner Édith Cresson being the main target of the allegations.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] That was the first time a College of Commissioners had been forced to resign en masse , and represented a shift of power towards the Parliament.

[ 25 ] However, the Santer Commission did carry out work on the Treaty of Amsterdam and the euro.

[ 26 ] In response to the scandal, the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) was created.

Romano Prodi [ edit ] Main article: Prodi Commission Following Santer, Romano Prodi took office. The Amsterdam Treaty had increased the commission's powers and Prodi was dubbed by the press as something akin to a Prime Minister.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Powers were strengthened again; the Treaty of Nice , signed in 2001, gave the Presidents more power over the composition of the College of Commissioners.

[ 8 ] José Manuel Barroso [ edit ] Main article: Barroso Commission José Manuel Barroso became president in 2004: the Parliament once again asserted itself in objecting to the proposed membership of the Barroso Commission. Owing to this opposition, Barroso was forced to reshuffle his College before taking office.

[ 29 ] The Barroso Commission was also the first full Commission since the enlargement in 2004 to 25 members; hence, the number of Commissioners at the end of the Prodi Commission had reached 30. As a result of the increase in the number of states, the Amsterdam Treaty triggered a reduction in the number of Commissioners to one per state, rather than two for the larger states.

[ 12 ] Allegations of fraud and corruption were again raised in 2004 by former chief auditor Jules Muis.

[ 30 ] A Commission officer, Guido Strack , reported alleged fraud and abuses in his department in the years 2002–2004 to OLAF, and was fired as a result.

[ 31 ] In 2008, Paul van Buitenen (the former auditor known from the Santer Commission scandal) accused the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) of a lack of independence and effectiveness.

[ 32 ] Barroso's first Commission term expired on 31 October 2009. Under the Treaty of Nice, the first Commission to be appointed after the number of member states reached 27 would have to be reduced to "less than the number of Member States". The exact number of Commissioners was to be decided by a unanimous vote of the European Council , and membership would rotate equally between member states. Following the accession of Romania and Bulgaria in January 2007, this clause took effect for the next Commission.

[ 33 ] The Treaty of Lisbon, which came into force on 1 December 2009, mandated a reduction of the number of commissioners to two-thirds of member-states from 2014 unless the Council decided otherwise. Membership would rotate equally and no member state would have more than one Commissioner. However, the treaty was rejected by voters in Ireland in 2008 with one main concern being the loss of their Commissioner. Hence a guarantee given for a rerun of the vote was that the council would use its power to amend the number of Commissioners upwards. However, according to the treaties it still has to be fewer than the total number of members, thus it was proposed that the member state that does not get a Commissioner would get the post of High Representative – the so-called 26+1 formula.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] This guarantee (which may find its way into the next treaty amendment, probably in an accession treaty) contributed to the Irish approving the treaty in a second referendum in 2009.

Lisbon also combined the posts of European Commissioner for External Relations with the council's High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy . This post, also a Vice-president of the Commission , would chair the Council of the European Union's foreign affairs meetings as well as the commission's external relations duties.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] The treaty further provides that the most recent European elections should be " taken into account " when appointing the President of the European Commission, and although they are still proposed by the European Council; the European Parliament " elects " candidates to the office, rather than " approves " them as under the Treaty of Nice.

[ 7 ] [ 36 ] The Barroso Commission is, in reaction to Euroscepticism , said to have toned down enforcement to increase integration.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] Jean-Claude Juncker [ edit ] Main article: Juncker Commission In 2014, Jean-Claude Juncker became President of the European Commission.

Juncker appointed his previous campaign director and head of the transition team, Martin Selmayr , as his chief of cabinet. During the Juncker presidency Selmayr has been described as "the most powerful EU chief of staff ever." [ 40 ] Ursula von der Leyen [ edit ] Incumbent President von der Leyen Main articles: Von der Leyen Commission I and Von der Leyen Commission II In 2019, Ursula von der Leyen was appointed as President of the European Commission. She submitted the guidelines of her policy to the European Parliament on 16 July 2019, following her confirmation. She had not been considered a likely candidate (in general, the elected candidate is determined, according to the results of the European election , as winner of the internal election into the dominant European party known as " spitzenkandidat "). While the European People's Party had won the European Parliament election, they had performed worse than expected and therefore nominated von der Leyen instead of Manfred Weber , their original candidate. On 9 September, the Council of the European Union declared a list of candidate-commissioners, which are sent to Brussels by the governments of each member state and which had to be officially approved by the parliament.

[ 41 ] In September 2024, Von der Leyen revealed her new team of European Commissioners, marking a shift to a "leaner" and more interconnected structure. The lineup featured six executive vice-presidents (EVPs) from France, Finland, Estonia, Italy, Romania, and Spain. These EVPs, including Teresa Ribera and Stéphane Séjourné , were tasked with overseeing various clusters of Commissioners and steering key policy areas such as prosperity, security, and democracy.

Raffaele Fitto was appointed despite criticism from European socialists over his hard-right affiliations. Other notable appointments included Kaja Kallas as EVP for Foreign and Security Policy, and Henna Virkkunen as EVP for Tech Sovereignty and Digital Technologies. The Commission also introduced new roles like the Commissioner for Defence and Security and the Commissioner for the Mediterranean.

[ 42 ] Powers and functions [ edit ] The commission was set up from the start to act as an independent supranational authority separate from governments; it has been described as "the only body paid to think European".

[ 43 ] The members are proposed by their member state governments, one from each. However, they are bound to act independently – free from other influences such as those governments which appointed them. This is in contrast to the Council of the European Union, which represents governments, the European Parliament, which represents citizens , the Economic and Social Committee , which represents organised civil society, and the Committee of the Regions , which represents local and regional authorities.

[ 44 ] Through Article 17 of the Treaty on European Union the commission has several responsibilities: to develop medium-term strategies; to draft legislation and arbitrate in the legislative process; to represent the EU in trade negotiations; to make rules and regulations, for example in competition policy; to draw up the budget of the European Union ; and to scrutinise the implementation of the treaties and legislation.

[ 45 ] The rules of procedure of the European Commission set out the commission's operation and organisation.

[ 46 ] Executive power [ edit ] Before the Treaty of Lisbon came into force, the executive power of the EU was held by the council: it conferred on the Commission such powers for it to exercise. However, the council was allowed to withdraw these powers, exercise them directly, or impose conditions on their use.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] This aspect has been changed by the Treaty of Lisbon, after which the Commission exercises its powers just by virtue of the treaties. Powers are more restricted than most national executives, in part due to the commission's lack of power over areas like foreign policy – that power is held by the Council of the European Union and the European Council, which some analysts have described as another executive.

[ 49 ] Considering that under the Treaty of Lisbon, the European Council has become a formal institution with the power of appointing the commission, it could be said that the two bodies hold the executive power of the EU (the European Council also holds individual national executive powers). However, it is the Commission that currently holds most of the executive power over the European Union .

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] Legislative initiative [ edit ] The Commission differs from the other institutions in that it alone has legislative initiative in the EU. Only the commission can make formal proposals for legislation: they cannot originate in the legislative branches. Under the Treaty of Lisbon, no legislative act is allowed in the field of the Common Foreign and Security Policy . In the other fields, the Council and Parliament can request legislation; in most cases the Commission initiates on the basis of these proposals. This monopoly is designed to ensure coordinated and coherent drafting of EU law .

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] This monopoly has been challenged by some who claim the Parliament should also have the right, with most national parliaments holding the right in some respects.

[ 53 ] However, the Council and Parliament may request the commission to draft legislation, though the Commission does have the power to refuse to do so [ 54 ] as it did in 2008 over transnational collective conventions.

[ 55 ] Under the Lisbon Treaty, EU citizens are also able to request the commission to legislate in an area via a petition carrying one million signatures , but this is not binding.

[ 56 ] The commission's powers in proposing law have usually centred on economic regulation. It has put forward a large number of regulations based on a " precautionary principle ". This means that pre-emptive regulation takes place if there is a credible hazard to the environment or human health: for example on tackling climate change and restricting genetically modified organisms . The European Commission has committed EU member states to carbon neutrality by 2050.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] This is opposed to weighting regulations for their effect on the economy. Thus, the Commission often proposes stricter legislation than other countries. Owing to the size of the European market, this has made EU legislation an important influence in the global market.

[ 59 ] On February 23, 2022, the European Commission published the Corporate Sustainability Due Diligence Directive which establishes a framework of due diligence for companies to identify actual or potential risks and harm to human rights and the environment as well as establishing processes and standards to diminish these risks. The Directive is expected to be officially adopted in 2024 and then be incorporated into domestic laws within two years by all of the European Union member states.

Recently the commission has moved into creating European criminal law . In 2006, a toxic waste spill off the coast of Côte d'Ivoire , from a European ship, prompted the commission to look into legislation against toxic waste. at that time did not even have a crime against shipping toxic waste; this led the Commissioners Franco Frattini and Stavros Dimas to put forward the idea of "ecological crimes". Their right to propose criminal law was challenged in the European Court of Justice but upheld. As of 2007, [update] the only other criminal law proposals which have been brought forward are on the intellectual property rights directive , [ 60 ] and on an amendment to the 2002 counter-terrorism framework decision, outlawing terrorism‑related incitement, recruitment (especially via the internet) and training.

[ 61 ] Enforcement [ edit ] Once legislation is passed by the Council and Parliament, it is the commission's responsibility to ensure it is implemented. It does this through the member states or through its agencies . In adopting the necessary technical measures, the commission is assisted by committees made up of representatives of member states and of the public and private lobbies [ 62 ] (a process known in jargon as " comitology ").

[ 63 ] Furthermore, the commission is responsible for the implementation of the EU budget , ensuring, along with the Court of Auditors , that EU funds are correctly spent.

In particular the commission has a duty to ensure the treaties and law are upheld, potentially by taking member states or other institutions to the Court of Justice in a dispute. In this role it is known informally as the "Guardian of the Treaties".

[ 44 ] Finally, the Commission provides some external representation for the Union, alongside the member states and the Common Foreign and Security Policy , representing the Union in bodies such as the World Trade Organization . It is also usual for the President to attend meetings of the G7 .

[ 44 ] College of Commissioners [ edit ] For members of the current Commission, see Von der Leyen Commission II .

The commission is composed of a "College of Commissioners " of 27 members, including the President and vice-presidents. Even though each member is nominated on the basis of the suggestions made by the national governments, one per state, they do not represent their state in the commission.

[ 64 ] In practice, however, they do occasionally press for their national interest.

[ 65 ] Once proposed, the President delegates portfolios among each of the members. The power of a Commissioner largely depends upon their portfolio, and can vary over time. For example, the Education Commissioner has been growing in importance, in line with the rise in the importance of education and culture in European policy-making.

[ 66 ] Another example is the Competition Commissioner , who holds a highly visible position with global reach.

[ 64 ] Before the commission can assume office, the college as a whole must be approved by the Parliament.

[ 44 ] Commissioners are supported by their personal cabinet who give them political guidance, while the Civil Service (the DGs, see below) deal with technical preparation.

[ 67 ] Appointment [ edit ] Floor 13 of the Berlaymont, Commission's meeting room The President of the Commission is appointed in an indirect election . The candidate is first selected by the European Council , according to the Qualified Majority Vote (QMV), taking into account the latest parliamentary elections (any person from the largest party can be picked [ 68 ] ). That candidate then faces approval by the European Parliament . If the European Parliament fails to elect the candidate, the European Council shall propose another within one month.

[ 7 ] [ 6 ] Following the selection of the President, and the appointment of the High Representative by the European Council, each Commissioner is proposed by their member state (except for those states who provided the President and High Representative) in consultation with the Commission President and the Council of the European Union , who formally adopts the list of candidates. The President's proposed College of Commissioners is then subject to hearings at the European Parliament which will question them and then vote on their suitability as a whole. If the European Parliament submits a negative opinion of a candidate, the President must either reshuffle them or request a new candidate from the member state to avoid the college's outright rejection by the European Parliament. Once the college is approved by parliament, it is formally appointed following a QMV vote by the European Council .

[ 7 ] Following the college's appointment, the President appoints a number of Vice-presidents from among the commissioners. Vice-presidents manage policy areas involving multiple Commissioners.

[ 69 ] One of these includes the High Representative , who is automatically one of the Vice-presidents ex officio rather than by appointment and confirmation. Commonly referred to as the 'HR/VP' position, the High Representative also coordinates commissioners' activities involving the external relations and defence cooperation of the European Union. The von der Leyen Commission also created the position of more senior Executive Vice-presidents , appointed from the three largest political groups in the European Parliament. Unlike the other vice-presidents, their mission is to manage the incumbent Commission's top priority policy areas, for which they receive additional support from a dedicated Directorate-General .

[ 70 ] Dismissal [ edit ] The European Parliament can dissolve the College of Commissioners as a whole following a vote of no-confidence , which requires a two-thirds vote.

Only the President can request the resignation of an individual Commissioner. However, individual Commissioners, by request of the council or Commission, can be compelled to retire on account of a breach of obligation(s) and if so ruled by the European Court of Justice (Art. 245 and 247, Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union).

Political styles [ edit ] The Barroso Commission took office in late 2004 after being delayed by objections from the Parliament, which forced a reshuffle. In 2007 the Commission increased from 25 to 27 members with the accession of Romania and Bulgaria who each appointed their own Commissioners. With the increasing size of the commission, Barroso adopted a more presidential style of control over the college, which earned him some criticism.

[ 71 ] However, under Barroso, the commission began to lose ground to the larger member states as countries such as France, the UK and Germany sought to sideline its role. This has increased with the creation of the President of the European Council under the Treaty of Lisbon .

[ 72 ] There has also been a greater degree of politicisation within the Commission .

Administration [ edit ] Further information: European Civil Service Cypriot politician Androulla Vassiliou was European Commissioner for Education, Culture, Multilingualism and Youth between 2010 and 2014.

The commission is divided into departments known as Directorates-General (DGs) that can be likened to departments or ministries . Each covers a specific policy area such as agriculture or justice and citizens' rights or internal services such as human resources and translation and is headed by a director-general who is responsible to a commissioner. A commissioner's portfolio can be supported by numerous DGs; they prepare proposals for them and if approved by a majority of commissioners proposals go forward to the Parliament and Council for consideration.

[ 44 ] [ 73 ] The Commission's civil service is headed by a Secretary General . The position is currently held by Ilze Juhansone .

[ 74 ] The rules of procedure of the European Commission set out the commission's operation and organisation.

[ 46 ] There has been criticism from a number of people that the highly fragmented DG structure wastes a considerable amount of time in turf wars as the different departments and Commissioners compete with each other. Furthermore, the DGs can exercise considerable control over a Commissioner with the Commissioner having little time to learn to assert control over their staff.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] According to figures published by the commission, 23,803 persons were employed by the commission as officials and temporary agents in September 2012. In addition to these, 9230 "external staff" (e.g. Contractual agents, detached national experts, young experts, trainees etc.) were employed. The single largest DG is the Directorate-General for Translation , with a 2309-strong staff, while the largest group by nationality is Belgian (18.7%), probably due to a majority (17,664) of staff being based in the country.

[ 77 ] Press [ edit ] Press Room in the Berlaymont Communication with the press is handled by the Directorate-General Communication . The commission's chief spokesperson is Eric Mamer who holds the midday press briefings, commonly known as the "Midday Presser". It takes place every weekday in the commission's press room at the Berlaymont where journalists may ask questions to the Commission officials on any topic and legitimately expect to get an "on the record" answer for live TV. Such a situation is unique in the world.

[ 78 ] As an integral part of the Directorate-General for Communication, the Spokesperson's Service, in coordination with the Executive Communication Adviser in the President's Cabinet, supports the President and Commissioners so that they can communicate effectively. On political communication matters, the chief spokesperson reports directly to the President of the European Commission.

It has been noted by one researcher that the press releases issued by the commission are uniquely political. A release often goes through several stages of drafting which emphasises the role of the commission and is used "for justifying the EU and the Commission" increasing their length and complexity. Where there are multiple departments involved a press release can also be a source of competition between areas of the Commission and Commissioners themselves. This also leads to an unusually high number of press releases, and is seen as a unique product of the EU's political set-up.

[ 76 ] There is a larger press corps in Brussels than Washington, D.C.; in 2020, media outlets in every Union member-state had a Brussels correspondent . Although there has been a worldwide cut in journalists, the considerable press releases and operations such as Europe by Satellite and EuroparlTV leads many news organisations to believe they can cover the EU from these source and news agencies .

[ 79 ] The Commission shut down Presseurop on 20 December 2013, [ 80 ] though the decision was criticised.

[ 81 ] Legitimacy and criticism [ edit ] See also: Democratic legitimacy of the European Union § European Commission As the commission is the executive branch, candidates are chosen individually by the 27 national governments. Within the EU, the legitimacy of the commission is mainly drawn from the vote of approval that is required from the European Parliament, along with its power to dismiss the body. Eurosceptics have therefore raised the concern of the relatively low turnout (often less than 50%) in elections for the European Parliament since 1999 . While that figure may be higher than that of some national elections, including the off-year elections of the United States Congress , the fact that there are no direct elections for the position of Commission President calls the position's legitimacy into question in the eyes of some Eurosceptics.

[ 82 ] The fact that the commission can directly decide (albeit with oversight from specially formed 'comitology committees' ) on the shape and character of implementing legislation further raises concerns about democratic legitimacy.

[ 83 ] Even though democratic structures and methods are changing there is not such a mirror in creating a European civil society .

[ 84 ] The Treaty of Lisbon may go some way to resolving the perceived deficit in creating greater democratic controls on the commission, including enshrining the procedure of linking elections to the selection of the Commission president. Historically, the commission had indeed been seen as a technocratic expert body which, akin with institutions such as independent central banks , deals with technical areas of policy and therefore ought to be removed from party politics.

[ 85 ] From this viewpoint, electoral pressures would undermine the commission's role as an independent regulator.

[ 86 ] Defenders of the Commission point out that legislation must be approved by the Council in all areas (the ministers of member states) and the European Parliament in most areas before it can be adopted, thus the amount of legislation which is adopted in any one country without the approval of its government is limited.

[ 86 ] In 2009 the European ombudsman published statistics of citizens' complaints against EU institutions, with most of them filed against the commission (66%) and concerning lack of transparency (36%).

[ 87 ] In 2010 the commission was sued for blocking access to documents on EU biofuel policy.

[ 88 ] This happened after media accused the Commission of blocking scientific evidence against biofuel subsidies.

[ 89 ] Lack of transparency, unclear lobbyist relations, conflicts of interests and excessive spending of the commission was highlighted in a number of reports by internal and independent auditing organisations.

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] [ 92 ] [ 93 ] It has also been criticised on IT-related issues, particularly with regard to Microsoft .

[ 94 ] In September 2020, the European Commission put forward an Anti-Racism Action Plan to tackle the structural racism in the European Union, including measures to address the lack of racial diversity among the European decision makers in Brussels, as denounced by the #BrusselsSoWhite movement.

[ 95 ] Initiatives [ edit ] Anti-terrorism [ edit ] The European Commission has an Action Plan to enhance preparedness against chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear (CBRN) security risks as part of its anti-terrorism package released in October 2017. In recent times Europe has seen an increased threat level [ quantify ] [ from whom?

] of CBRN attacks.

[ citation needed ] [ according to whom?

] As such, the European Commission's preparedness plan is important, said Steven Neville Chatfield, a director for the Centre for Emergency Preparedness and Response in the United Kingdom's Health Protection Agency . For the first time, the European Commission proposed that medical preparedness for CBRN attack threats is a high priority. "The European Commission's (EC) Action Plan to enhance preparedness against CBRN security risks is part of its anti-terrorism package released in October 2017, a strategy aimed at better protecting the more than 511 million citizens across the 27 member states of the European Union (EU)." [ 96 ] COVID-19 response [ edit ] The European Commission organized a video conference of world leaders on 4 May 2020 to raise funds for COVID-19 vaccine development. US$8 billion was raised.

[ 97 ] The European Commission issued a new multi-year data plan in February 2020 pushing the digitalization of all aspects of EU society for the benefit of civic and economic growth.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] [ 100 ] [ 101 ] The goal of this data strategy is to create a single market for data in which data flows across the EU and across sectors while maintaining full respect for privacy and data protection, where access rules are fair, and where the European economy benefits enormously as a global player as a result of the new data economy.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] [ 100 ] [ 101 ] Location [ edit ] Headquarters of the European Commission in Brussels (Berlaymont building) The commission's political seat is in Brussels with the President's office and the commission's meeting room on the 13th floor of the Berlaymont building . The commission also operates out of numerous other buildings in Brussels and Luxembourg City .

[ 102 ] [ 103 ] When the Parliament is meeting in Strasbourg , the Commissioners also meet there in the Winston Churchill building to attend the Parliament's debates.

[ 104 ] The Members of the Commission and their "cabinets" (immediate teams) are also based in the Berlaymont building in Brussels. Additionally, the European Commission has in-house scientific facilities that support it in: Ispra , Italy; Petten , Netherlands; Karlsruhe , Germany; Geel , Belgium and Seville , Spain. In Grange, County Meath , Ireland, a Commission site is hosting part of DG Santè.

See also [ edit ] European Union portal European Free Trade Association Surveillance Authority List of European Commissioners by nationality EU Open Data Portal European Data Portal References [ edit ] ^ European Union (2016).

"Consolidated Version of the Treaty on European Union" .

EUR-Lex . Retrieved 22 October 2024 .

^ European Commission (2006).

How the European Union works: Your guide to the EU institutions (PDF) . p. 20.

ISBN 92-79-02225-3 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 January 2012 . Retrieved 4 December 2011 .

Informally, the appointed members of the Commission are known as 'Commissioners'.

^ "How the Commission is organised" . European Commission.

Archived from the original on 11 November 2020 . Retrieved 13 September 2019 .

The Commission is steered by a group of 28 Commissioners, known as 'the college'.

^ "European Commission swears oath to respect the EU Treaties" (Press release). Brussels: European Commission. 3 May 2010.

Archived from the original on 21 July 2019 . Retrieved 1 June 2014 .

^ "European Council Decision of 27 June 2014 proposing to the European Parliament a candidate for President of the European Commission" .

EUR-Lex . 1 July 2014.

Archived from the original on 25 February 2021 . Retrieved 13 July 2021 .

^ a b Schütze, Robert (2012).

European Constitutional Law . Cambridge University Press. pp.

99– 100, 118.

ISBN 978-0521-73275-8 .

^ a b c d Treaty on European Union: Article 17:7 ^ a b c d e "European Commission" . CVCE. 2016.

Archived from the original on 28 September 2016 . Retrieved 18 April 2013 .

^ "Council of the European Union" . CVCE. 2016.

Archived from the original on 1 August 2020 . Retrieved 18 April 2013 .

^ a b Ludlow, N (2006).

"De-commissioning the Empty Chair Crisis: the Community institutions and the crisis of 1965–6" (PDF) .

London School of Economics . Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 October 2007 . Retrieved 24 September 2007 .

^ Eppink, Derk-Jan (2007).

Life of a European Mandarin: Inside the Commission . Translated by Ian Connerty (1st ed.). Tielt, Belgium: Lannoo. pp.

221–2 .

ISBN 978-90-209-7022-7 .

^ a b c "Composition" . CVCE. 31 August 2016.

Archived from the original on 8 July 2017 . Retrieved 18 April 2013 .

^ "Discover the former Presidents: The Rey Commission" . Europa (web portal).

Archived from the original on 22 October 2007 . Retrieved 23 August 2007 .

^ "Discover the former Presidents: The Mansholt Commission" . Europa (web portal).

Archived from the original on 23 October 2007 . Retrieved 23 August 2007 .

^ "Discover the former Presidents: The Malfatti Commission" . Europa (web portal).

Archived from the original on 23 October 2007 . Retrieved 23 August 2007 .

^ "Discover the former Presidents: The Ortoli Commission" . Europa (web portal).

Archived from the original on 22 October 2007 . Retrieved 23 August 2007 .

^ "1977: Jenkins quits Commons for Brussels" .

BBC News . 3 January 1977.

Archived from the original on 10 January 2008 . Retrieved 14 January 2012 .

^ "EU and the G8" . European Commission. Archived from the original on 26 February 2007 . Retrieved 25 September 2007 .

^ "Discover the former Presidents: The Thorn Commission" . Europa (web portal).

Archived from the original on 23 October 2007 . Retrieved 23 August 2007 .

^ "The new Commission – some initial thoughts" . Burson-Marsteller. 2004. Archived from the original on 23 September 2006 . Retrieved 17 June 2007 .

^ "Discover the former Presidents: The Delors Commission" . Europa (web portal).

Archived from the original on 23 October 2007 . Retrieved 23 August 2007 .

^ Merritt, Giles (21 January 1992).

"A Bit More Delors Could Revamp the Commission" .

International Herald Tribune . Archived from the original on 21 January 2008 . Retrieved 17 October 2007 .

^ Paul van Buitenen (2000).

Blowing the Whistle: Fraud in the European Commission . Politicos Pub.

ISBN 978-1-902301-46-4 .

^ "Second report on Reform of the Commission. Analysis of current practice and proposals for tackling mismanagement, irregularities, and fraud. Committee of Independent Experts, 1999" . European Parliament.

Archived from the original on 9 June 2017 . Retrieved 25 October 2011 .

^ Topan, Angelina (30 September 2002).

"The resignation of the Santer-Commission: the impact of 'trust' and 'reputation' " (PDF) . European Integration Online Papers.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 March 2004 . Retrieved 12 June 2007 .

^ "Discover the former Presidents: The Santer Commission" . Europa (web portal).

Archived from the original on 23 October 2007 . Retrieved 23 August 2007 .

^ James, Barry (16 April 1999).

"Prodi to Have Wide, New Powers as Head of the European Commission" .

International Herald Tribune . Archived from the original on 17 October 2007 . Retrieved 17 June 2007 .

^ Rossant, John (27 September 1999).

"Commentary: Romano Prodi: Europe's First Prime Minister? (int'l edition)" .

Business Week . Archived from the original on 23 October 2007 . Retrieved 17 June 2007 .

^ Tobais, Troll (2 November 2004).

"We have to democratise procedures" . Café Babel. Archived from the original on 29 November 2005 . Retrieved 12 June 2007 .

^ Fraser, Ian (8 August 2004).

"Auditor blames politicians for EC waste and corruption" .

The Sunday Herald . Archived from the original on 24 September 2015.

^ Beck, Sebastien (6 October 2011).

"Guido Strack – the downfall of a whistleblower" . VoxEurop. Archived from the original on 27 December 2013 . Retrieved 25 October 2011 .

^ "Paul van Buitenen: Alleged irregularities in OLAF" . Eur-law.eu. Archived from the original on 30 March 2012.

^ See the attached Protocol, Article 4 ^ Smyth, Jamie (5 September 2009).

"Rejection may undermine EU's effectiveness, warns Swedish premier" .

The Irish Times . Archived from the original on 24 December 2012 . Retrieved 15 September 2009 .

^ Czechs prepare for possible second Irish No Archived 18 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine , EUobserver , 8 January 2009 ^ a b "The Union's institutions: Commission" . Europa (web portal). Archived from the original on 19 August 2007 . Retrieved 6 July 2007 .

^ Council of the European Union (20 June 2007).

"Brussels European Council 21/22 June 2007: Presidency Conclusions" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 June 2007 . Retrieved 22 June 2007 .

^ The curious case of the EU's disappearing infringements Archived 27 April 2022 at the Wayback Machine Politico. 2022.

^ Where Have the Guardians Gone? Law Enforcement and the Politics of Supranational Forbearance in the European Union Archived 28 April 2022 at the Wayback Machine SSRN. 2021.

^ Herszenhorn, David M. (17 November 2016).

" 'Monster' at the Berlaymont" . Politico.

Archived from the original on 27 March 2017 . Retrieved 3 May 2017 .

^ "Formation of von der Leyen Commission advances" . European Commission. 9 September 2019.

Archived from the original on 10 September 2019 . Retrieved 9 September 2019 .

^ Jones, Mared Gwyn (17 September 2024).

"Ursula von der Leyen unveils proposed team of European Commissioners" .

Euronews . Retrieved 17 September 2024 .

^ "Interview with European Commission Secretary-General Catherine Day" . EurActiv. 25 September 2006. Archived from the original on 24 December 2017 . Retrieved 17 June 2007 .

^ a b c d e "Institutions of the EU: The European Commission" .

Europa . Archived from the original on 23 June 2007 . Retrieved 18 June 2007 .

^ Hix, Simon (1999) "The political system of the European Union" MacMillan, Basingstoke. p32 ^ a b "Rules of procedure of the European Commission" .

EUR-Lex . 2020.

Archived from the original on 30 November 2020 . Retrieved 25 March 2019 .

^ "Executive body" . CVCE. 15 September 2016.

Archived from the original on 5 August 2020 . Retrieved 18 April 2013 .

^ "Implementing powers of the Council of the European Union" . CVCE. 2016.

Archived from the original on 5 August 2020 . Retrieved 18 April 2013 .

^ a b Stark, Christine (4 September 2002).

"Evolution of the European Council: The implications of a permanent seat" (PDF) . Dragoman. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 March 2009 . Retrieved 10 July 2007 .

^ Bermann, George (2004).

"Executive Power in the New European Constitution" (RTF) . New York University.

Archived from the original on 31 July 2020 . Retrieved 18 June 2006 .

^ "Glossary: Right of initiative" . Europa (web portal). Archived from the original on 8 July 2007 . Retrieved 18 June 2007 .

^ "The Commission's right of initiative" (PDF) . Europa (web portal). Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 October 2007 . Retrieved 18 June 2007 .

^ Murray, Alasdair (30 September 2002).

"Reform now or languish later" . Centre for European Reform. Archived from the original on 28 September 2007 . Retrieved 18 June 2007 .

^ Peterson, John; Shackleton, Michael, eds. (2006).

The Institutions of the European Union . Oxford University Press. p. 152.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Anne-Cécile Robert (March 2009) "Et la crise sociale a rattrapé le Parlement européen", Le Monde diplomatique . p. 6–7 ^ Wallis, Diana ; Picard, Severine.

"The Citizens' Right of Initiative in the European Constitution: A Second Chance for Democracy" .

eumap . Archived from the original on 6 March 2006 . Retrieved 18 June 2007 .

^ Rees, Matt (26 June 2020).

"EU/China/US climate survey shows public optimism about reversing climate change" .

European Investment Bank .

Archived from the original on 20 October 2021 . Retrieved 24 August 2020 .

^ "2050 long-term strategy" .

Climate Action – European Commission . 23 November 2016. Archived from the original on 22 April 2021 . Retrieved 24 August 2020 .

^ "Brussels rules OK" .

The Economist . 20 September 2007.

Archived from the original on 12 October 2007 . Retrieved 22 October 2007 .

^ Charter, David (2007). "A new legal environment".

E!Sharp . People Power Process. pp.

23– 5.

^ "Counter‑terrorism – EU steps up a gear" . European Commission. 6 November 2007. Archived from the original on 13 December 2007 . Retrieved 21 November 2007 .

^ La Lobbycracia Europea Archived 22 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine – Aparicio Caicedo, analyst, Gertrude Ryan Law Observeratory, opinion piece in Legal Today magazine.

^ "Glossary: Comitology" . Europa (web portal). Archived from the original on 29 June 2007 . Retrieved 18 June 2007 .

^ a b Lungescu, Oana (23 July 2004).

"Examining the EU executive" .

BBC News . Archived from the original on 1 February 2012 . Retrieved 21 May 2020 .

^ Eppink, Derk-Jan (2007).

Life of a European Mandarin: Inside the Commission . Translated by Ian Connerty (1st ed.). Tielt, Belgium: Lannoo. p.

119 .

ISBN 978-90-209-7022-7 .

^ "Brussels European Council, Presidency Conclusions" (PDF) . Council of the European Union. 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 July 2008 . Retrieved 20 August 2009 .

See paragraphs 7, 8 & 13 of the Presidency conclusions of the European Council on 13/14 March 2008 ^ Nugent, Neill (2 July 2001).

The European Commission . Palgrave.

ISBN 9780333587430 – via Internet Archive.

^ Himmelreich, Jorg.

"Ursula von der Leyen's EU nomination is a win for Emmanuel Macron DW 05.07.2019" .

DW .

Archived from the original on 25 March 2022 . Retrieved 25 March 2022 .

^ "The Commissioners" .

European Commission . Retrieved 20 July 2023 .

^ "The Working Methods of the von der Leyen Commission" .

European Commission . 4 December 2019 . Retrieved 20 July 2023 .

^ Beunderman, Mark (22 February 2007).

"EU commission sees civil servants' power grow" . EU Observer.

Archived from the original on 23 October 2007 . Retrieved 27 February 2007 .

^ Iey Berry, Peter Sain (18 January 2008).

"[Comment] Power is slipping from the commission to the council" . EU Observer.

Archived from the original on 5 June 2011 . Retrieved 18 January 2008 .

^ "Eurojargon" . Europa (web portal). Archived from the original on 29 October 2013 . Retrieved 18 June 2007 .

^ "La Commission européenne a une nouvelle secrétaire générale" .

Contexte . 15 January 2020.

Archived from the original on 31 July 2020 . Retrieved 5 April 2020 .

^ Amies, Nick (21 September 2007).

"Former EU Mandarin Spills the Beans on Commission Intrigue" . Deutsche Welle.

Archived from the original on 23 December 2007 . Retrieved 17 October 2007 .

^ a b Mahony, Honor (17 October 2007).

"EU carefully manages PR through 1000s of press releases" . EU Observer.

Archived from the original on 21 May 2008 . Retrieved 17 October 2007 .

^ "Civil Service: Staff figures" . Europa (web portal).

Archived from the original on 19 October 2012 . Retrieved 5 September 2012 .

^ Lynam, Joe (1 April 2007).

"The peculiar world of the European Union" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 9 May 2007 . Retrieved 17 June 2007 .

^ Castle, Stephen (21 March 2010).

"As the E.U. Does More, Fewer Tell About It" .

International Herald Tribune . Archived from the original on 1 January 2022 . Retrieved 3 April 2010 .

^ Editorial (2 December 2013).

"Without Presseurop?" .

Presseurop . Archived from the original on 4 December 2013 . Retrieved 9 December 2013 .

^ Martin Schulz (10 December 2013).

"Presseurop's role is essential" .

Presseurop . Archived from the original on 14 December 2013 . Retrieved 14 December 2013 .

^ Mulvey, Stephen (21 November 2003).

"The EU's democratic challenge" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 9 February 2006 . Retrieved 17 June 2007 .

^ Rhinard, Mark (2002). "The Democratic Legitimacy of the European Union Committee System".

Governance .

15 (2): 185– 210.

doi : 10.1111/1468-0491.00185 .

^ Lamming, Richard (10 September 2004).

"The democratic credentials of the new European Union: does the Constitution increase the EU's democratic legitimacy?" .

Federal Union . Archived from the original on 15 May 2007 . Retrieved 17 June 2007 .

^ Thiemeyer, Guido (2008).

"Das Demokratiedefizit der Europäischen Union. Geschichtswissenschaftliche Perspektiven" .

Themenportal Europäische Geschichte .

Archived from the original on 24 September 2019 . Retrieved 24 September 2019 .

^ a b Majone, Giandomenico (2002). "Perils of Parliamentarization".

Governance .

15 (3): 375– 392.

doi : 10.1111/0952-1895.00193 .

^ Mahony, Honor (27 April 2009).

"EU citizens complain about lack of transparency" .

EUobserver .

Archived from the original on 18 May 2012 . Retrieved 25 October 2011 .

^ Willis, Andrew (21 September 2010).

"EU sued over lack of transparency" .

EUobserver .

Archived from the original on 18 May 2012 . Retrieved 25 October 2011 .

^ Harrison, Pete (5 July 2010).

"Special Report – Europe finds politics and biofuels don't mix" .

Reuters . Archived from the original on 24 November 2016 . Retrieved 5 July 2021 .

^ Barr, Caelainn (1 June 2011).

"Analysis: EU Commission expenses highlight lack of transparency in Brussels" . TBIJ. Archived from the original on 23 November 2016 . Retrieved 25 October 2011 .

^ Barr, Caelainn (1 June 2011).

"/EU Commission Expenses: Cocktail parties, private jets, luxury away-days and limousines" . The Bureau of Investigative Journalism. Archived from the original on 23 November 2016 . Retrieved 25 October 2011 .

^ "Ex-commissioners face conflict of interest accusations" . EurActiv. 14 May 2010. Archived from the original on 9 June 2011 . Retrieved 25 October 2011 .

^ Sarah McInerney (18 April 2009).

"Be careful what you write, Eurocrats told" .

The Sunday Times . Archived from the original on 15 November 2012.

^ Hourdaux, Jérôme (17 December 2013).

"The EU and Microsoft's 20-year marriage" .

Mediapart .

VoxEurop . Archived from the original on 19 December 2013 . Retrieved 17 December 2013 .

^ Islam, Shada (16 December 2020).

"In a messy world, EU's clout depends on respecting values" .

EUobserver .

Archived from the original on 7 May 2021 . Retrieved 7 May 2021 .

^ Riley, Kim (2 January 2018).

"European anti-terrorism package prioritizes CBRN preparedness, expert says" .

Homeland Preparedness News .

Archived from the original on 13 April 2020 . Retrieved 8 January 2018 .

^ Stevis-Gridneff, Matina; Jakes, Lara (4 May 2020).

"World Leaders Join to Pledge $8 Billion for Vaccine as U.S. Goes It Alone" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 4 May 2020 . Retrieved 10 May 2020 .

^ a b "Does This Change Everything? Coronavirus and your private data" .

European Investment Bank .

Archived from the original on 7 June 2021 . Retrieved 7 June 2021 .

^ a b "Strategy for Data | Shaping Europe's digital future" .

digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu .

Archived from the original on 7 June 2021 . Retrieved 7 June 2021 .

^ a b "What is GDPR, the EU's new data protection law?" .

GDPR.eu . 7 November 2018.

Archived from the original on 27 April 2021 . Retrieved 7 June 2021 .

^ a b "Data protection in the EU" .

European Commission – European Commission .

Archived from the original on 28 April 2018 . Retrieved 7 June 2021 .

^ "European Commission" .

European Union .

Europa . 16 June 2016.

Archived from the original on 10 July 2016 . Retrieved 17 September 2013 .

^ Castle, Stephen (5 August 2004).

"After 13 years of hold-ups and incompetence, the EU's 'Berlaymonster' rises like a phoenix" .

The Independent . London. Archived from the original on 1 October 2007 . Retrieved 18 June 2007 .

^ Eppink, Derk-Jan (2007).

Life of a European Mandarin: Inside the Commission . Translated by Ian Connerty (1st ed.). Tielt, Belgium: Lannoo. p.

213 .

ISBN 978-90-209-7022-7 .

External links [ edit ] European Commission at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity European Commission European Commission welcome page Access to documents of the European Commission on EUR-Lex Documents of the European Commission are consultable at the Historical Archives of the EU in Florence.

European Commissions on CVCE website – Multimedia website with historical information on the European integration Studies. No such material is found on the page. This page contains a legal Notice and warning about copyrighted material. Retrieved 18 April 2013.

Statue of Europe . Retrieved 10 October 2012.

Spokesperson's Service . Retrieved 16 September 2023.

v t e Presidents of the European Commission High Authority of the Coal and Steel Community (1952–1967) Jean Monnet ( Monnet Authority, 1952–55 ) René Mayer ( Mayer Authority, 1955–58 ) Paul Finet ( Finet Authority, 1958–59 ) Piero Malvestiti ( Malvestiti Authority, 1959–63 ) Rinaldo Del Bo ( Del Bo Authority, 1963–67 ) Acting: Albert Coppé ( Coppé Authority, 1967 ) Commission of the Atomic Energy Community (1958–1967) Louis Armand ( Armand Commission, 1958–59 ) Étienne Hirsch ( Hirsch Commission, 1959–62 ) Pierre Chatenet ( Chatenet Commission, 1962–67 ) Commission of the Economic Community (1958–1967) Walter Hallstein ( Hallstein Commission, 1958–67 ) Commission of the Communities (1967–2009) Jean Rey ( Rey Commission, 1967–70 ) Franco Maria Malfatti ( Malfatti Commission, 1970–72 ) Sicco Mansholt ( Mansholt Commission, 1972–73 ) François-Xavier Ortoli ( Ortoli Commission, 1973–77 ) Roy Jenkins ( Jenkins Commission, 1977–81 ) Gaston Thorn ( Thorn Commission, 1981–85 ) Jacques Delors ( Delors Commission, 1985–95 ) Jacques Santer ( Santer Commission, 1995–99 ) Acting: Manuel Marín ( Santer Commission, 1999 ) Romano Prodi ( Prodi Commission, 1999–2004 ) José Manuel Barroso ( Barroso Commission, 2004–09 ) Commission (2009–present) José Manuel Barroso ( Barroso Commission, 2009–14 ) Jean-Claude Juncker ( Juncker Commission 2014–19 ) Ursula von der Leyen ( Von der Leyen Commission, 2019–2024 ) Ursula von der Leyen ( Von der Leyen Commission II, since 2024 ) Commission President President of the European Council Council Presidency President of the European Parliament v t e Administration of the European Commission Table of European Commission Directorates-General and Services DG = Directorate-General Civil Service Directorates-General Cabinets Comitology EPSO Civil Service Tribunal Policy DGs Agriculture and Rural Development Climate Action Communications Networks, Content and Technology Competition Defence Industry and Space Economic and Financial Affairs Education and Culture Employment, Social Affairs and Equal Inclusion Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs Environment Health and Food Safety Migration and Home Affairs Financial Stability, Financial Services and Capital Markets Union Joint Research Centre Justice and Consumers Maritime Affairs and Fisheries Regional and Urban Policy Research and Innovation Taxation and Customs Union Mobility and Transport Energy External DGs Service for Foreign Policy Instruments Neighborhood and Enlargement Negotiations Trade International Cooperation and Development European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid Operations General Services Communication Eurostat HERA OLAF Publications Secretariat-General Secretary-General Europe by Satellite Structural Reform Support Service Internal Services Budget European Political Strategy Centre Digital Services Data Protection Officer Infrastructures and Logistics (Brussels & Luxembourg) Internal Audit Service Interpretation Legal Service PMO Human Resources and Security Translation Buildings Berlaymont Breydel Charlemagne Convent Van Maerlant Euroforum Jean Monnet 2 Joseph Bech Madou Plaza Tower Missions Triangle building European Union portal v t e European Union articles History Timeline Ideas of European unity before 1948 Founders 1948–1957 1958–1972 1973–1993 1993–2004 Since 2004 Predecessors Defence policy Western Union (1948–1954) Western European Union (1954–2011) European Communities (1967–2009) International Authority for the Ruhr (1949–1951) European Coal and Steel Community (1951–2002) European Economic Community (1958–1993) European Community (1993–2009) European Atomic Energy Community (est. 1958) Central bank European Monetary Cooperation Fund (1973–1994) European Monetary Institute (1994–1998) Financial stability European Financial Stability Facility (2010– 2012 ) European Financial Stability Mechanism (2010– 2012 ) Enlargements 1954 1973 1981 1986 1990 1995 2004 2007 2013 Withdrawals 1962 1984 1985 2012 2020 Geography Geography Demographics External border Environmental issues Extreme points Geographic centre Institutional seats of the European Union Larger urban zones Member states Protected areas Regions (first-level NUTS) Special territories Statistics Bodies Institutions Legislature European Parliament President Vice-Presidents Secretariat Committees Elections Constituencies Political groups European political parties European political foundations Council of the European Union Presidency General Secretariat Eurogroup Executive European Council President Euro summit European Commission President Vice-Presidents Commissioners Directorates-General Judiciary Court of Justice of the European Union Court of Justice General Court Central bank European Central Bank President System of Central Banks Eurosystem Supreme audit institution European Court of Auditors Secretary-General Other international-law EU bodies European Atomic Energy Community EIB Group European Investment Bank European Investment Fund EIB Institute European University Institute European Stability Mechanism Unified Patent Court Independent offices European Ombudsman European Data Protection Supervisor Agencies Agencies of the European Union Advisory bodies European Committee of the Regions European Economic and Social Committee Military bodies Political and Security Committee European Union Military Committee European Union Military Staff Law Acquis Charter of Fundamental Rights Competition law Copyright law Directive Citizens' Rights Mechanism for Cooperation and Verification Official Journal Legislative procedure Citizens' Initiative Regulation LGBT rights Enhanced cooperation Treaties opt-outs Withdrawal Economy Budget Currencies Community preference Government procurement Eurozone Euro International status and usage Transport TRACECA Minimum wage Average wage Unemployment rate Health expense per person Politics Concepts European integration Eurosphere Intergovernmentalism Multi-speed Europe Neofunctionalism Optimum currency area Supranational union Euroscepticism Euromyths Federalisation Pro-Europeanism Budget accountability Censorship Democratic legitimacy Differentiated integration Privileged partnership Potential superpower status Policies Area of freedom, security and justice Migration and asylum policy Schengen Area European Judicial Network (criminal matters) European Judicial Network in civil and commercial matters Citizenship passports identity card ( list ) Driving licence Vehicle registration plates Common Foreign and Security Policy Common Security and Defence Policy Permanent Structured Cooperation Enlargement Policy Neighbourhood Policy Global Strategy Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) Eurozone European banking union European Banking Supervision Single Resolution Mechanism Capital Markets Union European System of Financial Supervision Single market Agricultural policy Cultural policies Customs Union Educational policies Energy policy Environmental policy European Green Deal Fisheries policy Healthcare Health Insurance Card Labour mobility Regional development European Structural and Investment Funds Space policy Sport policies VAT Area Foreign relations Neighbourhood Policy European Economic Area EEA Joint Committee Energy Community European Political Community European Common Aviation Area European Higher Education Area EU/ESA Framework Agreement EU/ESA Space Council European Peace Facility Economic Partnership Agreements European Union Association Agreement Stabilisation and Association Process Eastern Partnership Euronest Parliamentary Assembly EU Gateway Programme EU Strategy for the South Caucasus Northern Dimension Union for the Mediterranean Global Strategy Free trade agreements Enlargement Current agenda Statistics Culture Douzelage House of European History 2012 Nobel Peace Prize Laissez-passer Languages Media freedom Public holidays Religion Telephone numbers Symbols Lists Books on the subject Directives Largest cities by population within city limits National parties by affiliation Presidents of the institutions Terrorist incidents Urban areas Outline Category Portal v t e Recipients of the Charlemagne Prize 1950–1975 1950 Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi 1951 Hendrik Brugmans 1952 Alcide De Gasperi 1953 Jean Monnet 1954 Konrad Adenauer 1955 1956 Winston Churchill 1957 Paul-Henri Spaak 1958 Robert Schuman 1959 George C. Marshall 1960 Joseph Bech 1961 Walter Hallstein 1962 1963 Edward Heath 1964 Antonio Segni 1965 1966 Jens Otto Krag 1967 Joseph Luns 1968 1969 European Commission 1970 François Seydoux de Clausonne 1971 1972 Roy Jenkins 1973 Salvador de Madariaga 1974 1975 1976–2000 1976 Leo Tindemans 1977 Walter Scheel 1978 Konstantinos Karamanlis 1979 Emilio Colombo 1980 1981 Simone Veil 1982 King Juan Carlos I 1983 1984 1985 1986 People of Luxembourg 1987 Henry Kissinger 1988 François Mitterrand / Helmut Kohl 1989 Brother Roger 1990 Gyula Horn 1991 Václav Havel 1992 Jacques Delors 1993 Felipe González 1994 Gro Harlem Brundtland 1995 Franz Vranitzky 1996 Queen Beatrix 1997 Roman Herzog 1998 Bronisław Geremek 1999 Tony Blair 2000 Bill Clinton 2001–present 2001 György Konrád 2002 Euro 2003 Valéry Giscard d'Estaing 2004 Pat Cox / Pope John Paul II 1 2005 Carlo Azeglio Ciampi 2006 Jean-Claude Juncker 2007 Javier Solana 2008 Angela Merkel 2009 Andrea Riccardi 2010 Donald Tusk 2011 Jean-Claude Trichet 2012 Wolfgang Schäuble 2013 Dalia Grybauskaitė 2014 Herman Van Rompuy 2015 Martin Schulz 2016 Pope Francis 2017 Timothy Garton Ash 2018 Emmanuel Macron 2019 António Guterres 2020 Klaus Iohannis 2022 Sviatlana Tsikhanouskaya , Maria Kalesnikava , Veronika Tsepkalo 2023 Volodymyr Zelensky , the Ukrainian people 2024 Pinchas Goldschmidt and the Jewish communities in Europe 2025 Ursula von der Leyen 1 Received extraordinary prize.

Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic 2 Spain Portugal Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Academics CiNii Artists ULAN People Trove Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐wbpml
Cached time: 20250818002456
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.367 seconds
Real time usage: 2.769 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 39569/1000000
Revision size: 86610/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 854330/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 91432/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 62/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 436977/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.150/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17731893/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2194.153      1 -total
 33.28%  730.151      1 Template:Reflist
 25.81%  566.259      1 Template:Politics_of_the_European_Union
 25.63%  562.260      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 18.85%  413.519     64 Template:Cite_web
 15.52%  340.633    136 Template:Flag_icon
 14.44%  316.900      1 Template:Infobox_executive_government
 14.35%  314.795      1 Template:Infobox
  8.44%  185.270    117 Template:Flaglist
  6.02%  132.065      1 Template:Name_in_official_languages Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:9974:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818002456 and revision id 1306300118. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=European_Commission&oldid=1306300118 " Categories : European Commission Anti-dumping authorities Organizations established in 1967 Organisations based in Brussels Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Pages with missing ISBNs Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from November 2013 Use dmy dates from January 2022 Articles containing Bulgarian-language text Articles containing Croatian-language text Articles containing Czech-language text Articles containing Danish-language text Articles containing Dutch-language text Articles containing explicitly cited English-language text Articles containing Estonian-language text Articles containing Finnish-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Greek-language text Articles containing Hungarian-language text Articles containing Irish-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing Latvian-language text Articles containing Lithuanian-language text Articles containing Maltese-language text Articles containing Polish-language text Articles containing Portuguese-language text Articles containing Romanian-language text Articles containing Slovak-language text Articles containing Slovene-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles containing Swedish-language text Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2007 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2022 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from April 2022 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Pages using Sister project links with default search This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 01:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents European Commission 82 languages Add topic

