Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biodiversity 2 Geography and climate 3 Ecoregions 4 Endemic species 5 Vertebrates Toggle Vertebrates subsection 5.1 Mammals 5.2 Birds 5.3 Reptiles 5.4 Amphibians 5.5 Fishes 6 Invertebrates 7 Marine fauna Toggle Marine fauna subsection 7.1 Strait of Messina 8 Introduced species Toggle Introduced species subsection 8.1 Lessepsian migration 9 Conservation 10 Pleistocene fauna Toggle Pleistocene fauna subsection 10.1 Insular dwarfism 11 Zoological museums 12 Zoological societies 13 See also 14 References 15 Bibliography 16 External links Toggle the table of contents Fauna of Italy 2 languages العربية Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Native animals of Italy The Italian wolf , which inhabits the Apennine Mountains and the Western Alps , features prominently in Latin and Italian cultures, such as in the legend of the founding of Rome .

[ 1 ] It is the national animal of Italy.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The fauna of Italy comprises all the animal species inhabiting the territory of the Italian Republic and its surrounding waters. Italy has the highest level of faunal biodiversity in Europe , with over 57,000 species recorded, representing more than a third of all European fauna.

[ 4 ] This is due to various factors. The Italian peninsula is in the centre of the Mediterranean Sea, forming a corridor between central Europe and North Africa , and it has 8,000 km (5,000 mi) of coastline. Italy also receives species from the Balkans , Eurasia , and the Middle East . Italy's varied geological structure, including the Alps and the Apennines , Central Italian woodlands, and Southern Italian Garigue and Maquis shrubland , also contribute to high climate and habitat diversity .

The fauna of Italy includes 4,777 endemic animal species, which include the Sardinian long-eared bat , Sardinian red deer , spectacled salamander , brown cave salamander , Italian newt , Italian frog , Apennine yellow-bellied toad , Italian wall lizard , Aeolian wall lizard , Sicilian wall lizard , Italian Aesculapian snake , and Sicilian pond turtle . In Italy, there are 119 mammals species , 550 bird species , 69 reptile species , 39 amphibian species , 623 fish species and 56,213 invertebrate species, of which 37,303 insect species.

Biodiversity [ edit ] Apennine yellow-bellied toad Italy is probably the richest European country in both plant and animal biodiversity , with a population very rich in endemic forms .

[ 5 ] It has the highest number and density of both animal and plant species within the European Union .

[ 6 ] During the Pleistocene glaciations , the Italian territory remained largely free of ice, which allowed the flora and fauna to survive, something that did not happen in the central-northern areas of the continent, and the retreat of the great glaciers has left glacial relict fauna in some mountain locations.

[ 7 ] The Italian territory extends over about 10° of latitude , therefore, while remaining in the context of temperate climates without extremes of heat, cold or aridity, the climatic difference between the north and the south of the country is not at all negligible, going from the nival climates of the Alpine peaks to the cool semi-continental temperate climate of the Po Valley , to the Mediterranean climate of the central-southern coasts and the islands.

[ 8 ] Italy is predominantly hilly and mountainous in nature of the territory, which has caused a proliferation of ecological niches , close in space but very diversified.

[ 9 ] Geography and climate [ edit ] Further information: Geography of Italy and Climate of Italy Italian cave salamander Italy consists of a 1,000 km (620 miles) long peninsula extending out into the central Mediterranean, together with a number of islands to the south and west. The Apennines run north-south through the peninsula connecting the Alps in the north to Etna and the Peloritani mountains in Sicily in the south. The geology is diverse.

Northern Italy is dominated by the Alps and an extensive valley of the Po river which is extensively agricultural and industrialised. Central Italy includes the regions of Tuscany , Umbria , Marche and Lazio . It is dominated by the Apennines, from which a few major rivers flow. There are few natural plains. A process of land reclamation has replaced the coastal swamps and marshes with agricultural land.

Southern Italy includes the regions of Abruzzo , Molise , Apulia , Basilicata and Campania . Agriculture and industry are less developed. The main islands are Sicily , Sardinia and the Aeolian Islands .

Because of the length of the Italian peninsula and the mostly mountainous hinterland, the climate of Italy is highly diverse. In most of the inland northern and central regions, the climate ranges from humid subtropical to humid continental and oceanic . In particular, the climate of the Po Valley geographical region is mostly continental, with harsh winters and hot summers.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] The coastal areas of Liguria , Tuscany and most of the South generally fit the Mediterranean climate stereotype ( Köppen climate classification ). Each region has a distinct fauna.

Ecoregions [ edit ] Further information: List of ecoregions in Italy Marsican brown bear An ecoregion is an ecologically and geographically defined area with characteristic species. Most of the Italian territory is included in the Mediterranean Basin . Important Italian terrestrial ecoregions include the Illyrian deciduous forests , the Italian sclerophyllous and semi-deciduous forests , the South Apennine mixed montane forests , the Tyrrhenian-Adriatic sclerophyllous and mixed forests , Apennine deciduous montane forests , the Dinaric Mountains mixed forests and the Po Basin mixed forests . There are also many cave systems significant for biodiversity.

[ 12 ] Endemic species [ edit ] Italian loach The Checklist of the Species of the Italian Fauna includes 4,777 endemic animal species in Italy.

[ 13 ] Unique mammals include the Corsican hare , the Sardinian long-eared bat , the Apennine shrew , the Udine shrew the Calabria pine vole , the Mesola deer , and the Sardinian deer .

Endemic amphibians and reptiles include the spectacled salamander , the Sardinian cave salamander , the Italian cave salamander , the Monte Albo cave salamander , the Sardinian brook newt , the Italian newt , the Italian frog , the Apennine yellow-bellied toad , the Sicilian green toad , the Aeolian wall lizard , the Sicilian wall lizard , the Italian Aesculapian snake , and the Sicilian pond turtle ( Emys trinacris ).

Endemic fishes include the Bergatino loach , the Italian barbel , the brook chub , the Arno goby , the Garda carp , the carpione del Fibreno , and the Timavo sculpin . Endemic birds include the Italian sparrow . There are 288 endemic species of lepidopterans in Italy.

[ 14 ] A notable species is the European owl moth found only in Southern Italy.

Vertebrates [ edit ] Mammals [ edit ] Main article: List of mammals of Italy Sardinian deer There are 119 species of mammals in Italy.

[ 15 ] Some of the species are Alpine marmot , forest dormouse , Etruscan shrew (the smallest mammal in the world), European snow vole , and Schreiber's long-fingered bat . Notable large mammals are the Eurasian lynx , Italian wolf , Marsican brown bear , Pyrenean chamois , Alpine ibex , common genet , fallow deer , mouflon , rough-toothed dolphin , crested porcupine , and Mediterranean monk seal .

Birds [ edit ] Main article: List of birds of Italy Italian sparrow , the national bird of Italy.

[ 16 ] Italy has recorded 550 bird species.

[ 17 ] Notable birds are the hoopoe , roller , white-backed woodpecker , black woodpecker , European green woodpecker , Alpine chough , snow finch , rock partridge , Bonelli's eagle , goshawk , eagle owl , lammergeier , Egyptian vulture , griffon vulture , collared pratincole , glossy ibis , spoonbill , Allen's gallinule , great bustard , trumpeter finch , rosy starling , great spotted cuckoo , woodchat shrike , bluethroat , and Eurasian nightjar .

Italy is an important route for trans-Saharan bird migrants because it is a natural bridge connecting continental Europe to Africa across the Mediterranean. Migratory birds with a low wing loading, such as stork , European honey buzzard , black kite , marsh harrier , kestrel , and hobby , depend on thermals and updrafts for soaring to cross the Mediterranean in spring. Although the majority of these birds enter Europe via the Bosphorus or Straits of Gibraltar , large numbers leave at Cap Bon in Tunisia and enter Europe via the Aeolian Islands and the Straits of Messina to Calabria . Most of these birds breed in central and northern Europe. The birds return to Africa in autumn by the same route.

Reptiles [ edit ] See also: List of reptiles of Italy and List of snakes of Italy Italian wall lizard About 69 species of reptiles have been recorded in Italy.

[ 18 ] Notable reptiles are the Dice snake , the Green whip snake , the Aesculapian snake , the Smooth snake , the Montpellier snake , the European cat snake , the Walser viper , the Meadow viper , the Horned viper , the Common European adder , the Asp viper , the Hermann's tortoise , the European pond turtle , the Sicilian pond turtle , the Italian wall lizard , the European wall lizard and the European green lizard .

Amphibians [ edit ] See also: List of amphibians of Italy There are 39 species of amphibians in Italy (including introduced and naturalised species) in two orders, Anura and Caudata .

[ 19 ] No Caecilian is known to live in the country.

[ 20 ] Notable amphibians are the Italian tree frog , Agile frog , Italian stream frog , Italian edible frog , Common toad , Balearic green toad , Northern spectacled salamander , Spectacled salamander , Fire salamander , Smooth newt , Italian newt , Alpine newt and Italian crested newt Fishes [ edit ] Fish in Italy are diversified into 623 species.

[ 21 ] Of all the species present about one-fifth live in fresh waters and of these 9 are endemic.

[ 21 ] Notable freshwater fishes are the Brook lamprey , Lombardy lamprey , Italian bleak , Horse barbel , Eurasian carp , European chub , Scardola scardafa , Tench , Northern pike , European perch , Lavaret and River trout .

Invertebrates [ edit ] European owl moth , endemic to Southern Italy The Italian fauna includes 56,213 species of invertebrates, of which 37,303 species of insects.

[ 22 ] Commonly seen insects in Italy are the sail swallowtail , the scarlet dragonfly , Cleopatra butterfly , European praying mantis , cicada , glow-worm , hummingbird hawk-moth , Italian stinkbug , firebug , field cricket , European hornet , cuckoo wasp , carpenter bee , and the rose chafer .

Marine fauna [ edit ] Violescent sea-whip reef in the sea near Palermo , Sicily Characteristic habitat types of the Italian Mediterranean coastal zone are the Cystoseira biocenosis and the Posidonia oceanica seagrass beds, Lithophyllum lichenoides communities form coralligenous reefs which are a spectacular sight the coralline alga is covered with large gorgonian fans, coral, and a diverse array of often colourful invertebrate organisms and hundreds of species of fish.

These communities host sponges ( Porifera ), sea anemones and jellyfish ( Cnidaria ), sea mats and hornwrack ( Bryozoa ), segmented worms ( Annelida ), snails, bivalves, squids and octopuses ( Mollusca ), starfish and sea urchins ( Echinodermata ), crabs, lobsters and shrimps ( Crustacea ), and little known groups such as Echiura , Priapulida , Sipuncula , Brachiopoda , Pogonophora , Phoronida , and Hemichordata .

Amongst the thousand or so species of invertebrates found in the Italian marine environment are Squilla mantis , Mediterranean slipper lobsters , common octopus , common cuttlefish , scribbled nudibranch , Hypselodoris picta , tasselled nudibranch , Flabellina affinis , precious coral , zigzag coral , purple sail , Mediterranean jellyfish , spiny spider crab , circular crab , broad-clawed porcelain crab , noble pen shell , pilgrim’s scallop , ragged sea hare , violet sea hare , Portuguese man o' war , black sea-urchin , purple sea urchin , Mediterranean starfish , sea mouse , and Parazoanthus axinellae .

Strait of Messina [ edit ] Main article: Marine life of the Strait of Messina The Tyrrhenian and Ionian meet in Straits of Messina , generating powerful currents and strong turbulence, aggravated by the abrupt changes of sea bottom topography in the vicinity of the town of Messina. As a consequence, many species known as rare in the Mediterranean are found in large numbers in the straits. It is common to find deep species at the surface and vice versa, or open-sea species along the coast. The upwelling water drags abyssal species to the surface and sometimes strands them on the shore. Made famous in the nineteenth century by the zoologists Nicholas Miklouho-Maclay and Anton Dohrn , the straits have an extraordinary abundance and structure of planktonic , benthic , and nektonic communities.

Introduced species [ edit ] Two monk parakeets , native of South America. Self-sustaining feral populations occur in many places, mainly in North America and Europe.

The Italian fauna is rich in introduced species . Many introductions date from the time of the Roman Empire , such as the common carp .

Examples of more recent—and sometimes unwelcome—arrivals are the Asian tiger mosquito from Southeast Asia , the citrus long-horned beetle from China , the citrus pest cottony cushion scale , the pumpkinseed fish , the mosquitofish , the Louisiana crayfish , the zebra mussel , the strawberry finch , the Eastern grey squirrel , Finlayson's squirrel , and the coypu . Two introduced parrot species, the monk parakeet and the rose-ringed parakeet , are found in city parks.

Lessepsian migration [ edit ] Main article: List of Lessepsian migrants Since the construction of the Suez Canal in 1869, invasive marine species originating from the Red Sea have become a major component of the Mediterranean ecosystem. Known as the Lessepsian migration , the introduced species have caused serious impacts on the Mediterranean ecology, endangering many local and endemic Mediterranean species. About 300 species native to the Red Sea have already been identified in the Mediterranean Sea, and there are probably others yet unidentified.

Conservation [ edit ] Main articles: List of National Parks of Italy , List of regional parks of Italy , and List of Marine Protected Areas of Italy National and regional parks in Italy Italy is a signatory to the Berne Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats and the Habitats Directive both affording protection to Italian fauna and flora.

National parks cover about 5% of the country, [ 23 ] while the total area protected by national parks, regional parks and nature reserves covers about 10.5% of the Italian territory, [ 24 ] to which must be added 12% of coasts protected by marine protected areas .

[ 25 ] Pleistocene fauna [ edit ] European hippopotamus skeleton in the Museo di Storia Naturale di Firenze , Florence Straight-tusked elephant skeleton in the Polo museale Sapienza [ it ] , Rome The Pleistocene large mammals of Italy were primarily Eurasian immigrants fleeing 
extreme cold further north. Typical species are: Cave bear , Ursus spelaeus European cave lion , Panthera leo spelaea European hippopotamus , Hippopotamus antiquus Neanderthal , Homo neanderthalensis Woolly mammoth , Mammuthus primigenius Southern mammoth , Mammuthus meridionalis Straight-tusked elephant , Elephas (Palaeoloxodon) antiquus Woolly rhinoceros , Coelodonta antiquitatis Insular dwarfism [ edit ] Pleistocene dwarf elephants developed as a result of insular dwarfism on the island of Sardinia : Mammuthus lamarmorae (Major, 1883) Elephas antiquus (Acconci, 1881) Elephas melitensi (Caria, 1965)) On the islands of Sicily and Malta : Elephas (Palaeoloxodon) antiquus leonardii (Aguirre, 1969) Elephas (Palaeoloxodon) mnaidriensis (Adams, 1874) Elephas (Palaeoloxodon) melitensis (Falconer, 1868) Elephas (Palaeoloxodon) falconeri (Busk, 1867)) Other Pleistocene animals found on these islands are: Sardinian dhole , Cynotherium sardous Sicilian hippopotamus , Hippopotamus pentlandi Sardinian dwarf mammoth, Mammuthus lamarmorae Zoological museums [ edit ] Sperm whale skeleton in the Museo Civico di Storia Naturale di Milano , Milan Southern mammoth skeleton in the Museo paleontologico di Montevarchi , Montevarchi Museums which contain important collections of the fauna of Italy and which have public galleries devoted to the Italian fauna are: Civico Museo di Storia Naturale di Trieste , Trieste La Specola , the Museum of Zoology and Natural History of Florence Museo Civico di Storia Naturale di Ferrara [ it ] Museo Civico di Storia Naturale di Milano , Milan Museo Civico di Storia Naturale Giacomo Doria , Genoa Museo Civico di Zoologia di Roma, Rome Museo civico di Rovereto [ it ] , Rovereto Museo di Scienze Naturali Enrico Caffi , Bergamo Museo di Storia Naturale di Firenze , University of Florence , Florence Museo storia naturale di Pisa , Pisa Museo tridentino di scienze naturali [ it ] , Trento Turin Museum of Natural History , Turin Zoological Museum of Naples , Naples Stazione Zoologica , Naples Museo paleontologico di Montevarchi [ it ] , Montevarchi Museo civico di storia naturale di Verona [ it ] , Verona .

Museo di storia naturale del Mediterraneo [ it ] , Livorno Museo di storia naturale della Maremma , Grosseto Zoological societies [ edit ] Ente nazionale per la protezione degli animali [ it ] (ENPA) Lega Italiana Protezione Uccelli (LIPU) Unione Zoologica Italiana La Società Entomologica Italiana Societas Herpetologica Italica [ it ] Italian Horse Protection Association Tethys Research Institute See also [ edit ] Animals portal Biology portal Italy portal Flora of Italy Geography of Italy List of extinct and endangered species of Italy List of amphibians of Italy List of birds of Italy List of butterflies of Italy List of mammals of Italy List of moths of Italy List of non-marine molluscs of Italy List of reptiles of Italy List of snakes of Italy References [ edit ] ^ Livy (1797).

The history of Rome . George Baker (trans.). Printed for A. Strahan.

^ Sheri Foster (January 2021).

"What is Italy national animal?" .

Yourtrip.com .

^ James Hansen (June 2018).

"Il lupo grigio degli appennini e l animale dell Italia" .

"affaritaliani.it"> .

^ "Italy's Fifth National Report to the Convention on Biological Diversity" (PDF) . Italian Ministry for the Environment, Land and Sea. p. 7.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 May 2015 . Retrieved 17 May 2015 .

^ "La ricchezza della Biodiversità italiana" (in Italian). Archived from the original on 25 September 2020 . Retrieved 10 March 2022 .

^ "Italy - Main Details" . Convention on Biological Diversity . Retrieved 10 September 2023 .

^ "Biodiversità" (in Italian). 27 June 2021 . Retrieved 10 March 2022 .

^ "Il clima in Italia" (in Italian) . Retrieved 10 March 2022 .

^ "La "nicchia ecologica" di Fonte Santa: storia di un microclima unico in Italia" (in Italian). 20 April 2016 . Retrieved 10 March 2022 .

^ Adriana Rigutti, Meteorologia , Giunti, p. 95, 2009.

^ Thomas A. Blair, Climatology: General and Regional , Prentice Hall pp. 131–132 ^ "Ambiente: oltre 3600 specie animali nelle 40mila grotte italiane" (in Italian). 12 December 2020 . Retrieved 13 March 2022 .

^ "CHECKLIST E DISTRIBUZIONE DELLA FAUNA ITALIANA" (PDF) (in Italian). p. 29 . Retrieved 10 March 2022 .

^ "Lista Rossa delle Farfalle italiane - IUCN" (PDF) (in Italian). p. 13 . Retrieved 10 March 2022 .

^ "Mammiferi d'Italia - Ministero della Transizione Ecologica" (PDF) (in Italian). p. 7 . Retrieved 11 March 2022 .

^ "Passero Italiano: L'uccello nazionale d'Italia" . Conca Ternana Oggi . Retrieved 22 August 2024 .

^ "Uccelli" (in Italian) . Retrieved 11 March 2022 .

^ Peter Uetz; Jakob Hallermann; Jiri Hosek.

"Distribution: italy" .

The Reptile Database . Retrieved 22 June 2021 .

^ "Quali sono gli anfibi autoctoni?" (in Italian) . Retrieved 11 March 2022 .

^ "Animali anfibi: curiosità ed elenco delle specie più strane" (in Italian) . Retrieved 11 March 2022 .

^ a b "All fishes reported from Italy" . Retrieved 10 March 2022 .

^ "Dove operiamo" (in Italian) . Retrieved 11 March 2022 .

^ "National Parks in Italy" . Parks.it. 1995–2010.

Archived from the original on 29 March 2010 . Retrieved 15 March 2010 .

^ "Regione e aree protette" (in Italian) . Retrieved 11 January 2022 .

^ "Le aree protette in Italia" (in Italian) . Retrieved 2 March 2022 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Dobson, M. (1998). "Mammal distributions in the western Mediterranean: the role of human intervention".

Mammal Review .

28 (2): 77– 88.

doi : 10.1046/j.1365-2907.1998.00027.x .

Latella L., 2007. I Musei di Storia Naturale e la gestione del territorio, l’esempio della CKmap e il Museo di Verona. Museologia scientifica (n.s.) 1: 149-151.

Latella L., 2011. Il ruolo dei Musei di Storia Naturale nello Studio, monitoraggio, conservazione e divulgazione della biodiversità. alcuni esempi italiani. In: Pignatti S. (ed.). Aree protette e ricerca scientifica. ETS edizioni, Pisa: 101-112.

Minelli A., Ruffo S., La Posta S. (Eds), 1993-1995 Checklist delle specie della Fauna d'Italia [Checklist of the species of the Italian Fauna] Calderini Ed., Bologna. The first complete inventory of the animal species of a whole country in  Europe.Records 57,422 species (56,168 invertebrates and 1,254 vertebrates). A collaboration between the Nature Conservation Service and the Scientific Committee for the Fauna of Italy, the Italian Zoological Union and the National Academy of Entomology. 272 specialists from 15 countries were involved in the project. Species are (uniquely) identified by numerical codes. The work is divided into 110 issues.

Minelli A., 1996 La checklist delle specie della fauna italiana. Un bilancio del progetto.

Bollettino Museo Civico Storia naturale Verona , 20: 249-261.

Minelli A, Chemin, C., R. Winch & Ruffo S. Ruffo & S.2002 La fauna in Italia .

The fauna in Italy . Touring Editore, Milano e Ministero dell'Ambiente e della Tutela del Territorio, Roma. Touring Editore, Milan and Ministry for the Environment and Territory, Rome. 448 pp.

Sindaco, R., Doria, G., Razzetti, E. and Bernini, F. 2006 (eds) Atlas of Italian Amphibians and Reptiles \A tlante Degli Anfibi E Dei Rettili D'Italia Polistampa.

[1] Logozzo, D., Bassi, E., and Cocchi, L.. 2004. Crossing the sea en route to Africa: autumn migration of some Accipitriformes over two central Mediterranean Islands.

Ring 26:71-78.

Stoche, F., 2000 How many endemic species? Species richness assessment and conservation priorities in Italy.

Belgian Journal of Entomology , 2: 125-133.

Stoche, F., 2004 Banche dati e distribuzione della fauna italiana: gli invertebrati . Quad. Cons. Natura, 18, Min. Ambiente Ist. Naz. Fauna Selvatica: 21-36.

External links [ edit ] [2] FaunaItalia Fauna Europaea Archived 23 April 2008 at the Wayback Machine Wild Wonders of Europe Photo gallery biodiversityhotspots [3] Amphibia Web 48 Species returned for Italy Fishbase Returns 585 species (incomplete) Living Treasures Italy entomologiitaliani Entomology Forum. Many images. In Italian naturamediterraneo Forum. Many images In Italian European Marine Life Marine Research in Medina Archived 22 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine EBN Where to watch birds in Rome Biographies of famous Italian Zoologists Mondo Marino Photogallery Marine life 375 photos from the Mediterranean Scricciolo [ usurped ] Alberto Masi Ornithology Website WWF Federazione Nazionale Pro Natura In English and Italian Conchiglie del Mediterraneo AIAM Faunal index page (Major taxa) Ecoregions Protected areas Scarabeoidea of Italy v t e Fauna of Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard v t e Italy articles History Overview Timeline of Italian history By topic Citizenship Currency and coinage Economy Fashion Flags Genetic Historic states Judaism LGBT Military Music Name Postage Railways Prehistory Prehistory Neolithic Villanovan Terramare Rinaldone Apennine Nuragic Golasecca Canegrate Latial Ancient Ancient peoples Italic peoples Latins Osci Picentes Samnites Umbri Veneti Etruscans Celts Magna Graecia Ligures Messapians Ancient Rome Kingdom Republic Roman conquest Roman Italy Empire Western Empire Middle Ages Middle Ages Italy under Odoacer Ostrogoths Byzantium Lombards Papal States the Holy Roman Empire the Sardinian Judicates Arabs Normans Guelphs and Ghibellines Lombard League Kingdom of Sicily War of the Sicilian Vespers Kingdom of Naples Early modern Italian city-states Florence Siena Milan Maritime republics Venice Genoa Pisa Amalfi Kingdom of Sardinia Grand Duchy of Tuscany Duchy of Savoy Renaissance Italian Wars Early Modern period Napoleonic Italy Austrian occupation and Kingdom of Lombardy-Venetia Kingdom of the Two Sicilies Late modern Unification First War of Independence Second War of Independence Niçard exodus Expedition of the Thousand Proclamation of the Kingdom of Italy Third War of Independence Capture of Rome Monarchy and the World Wars Kingdom of Italy Colonial Empire World War I Fourth War of Independence Fascist Italy World War II Fall of the Fascist regime Resistance and Social Republic Civil War Contemporary Republic Institutional referendum Istrian–Dalmatian exodus Economic Boom Years of Lead Maxi Trial Mani pulite Coronavirus pandemic Geography Italian geographical region Peninsula Climate Climate change Geology Fauna Flora Mountains Prealps Alps Apennines Volcanism Volcanoes Beaches Canals Caves Earthquakes Islands Lakes Marine protected areas National parks Regional parks Rivers Valleys Politics Constitution Elections Foreign relations Government Human rights LGBT rights Judiciary Law Law enforcement Military Nationality Parliament Political parties President ( List ) Prime Minister ( List ) Council of Ministers Regions Provinces Metropolitan cities Cities Comune Municipalities Security and intelligence Economy Economy Italian regions by GDP Agriculture Automotive industry Banking Banks Central Bank Brands Companies Energy Exports Science and technology Southern question Stock exchange Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Trade unions Transport air rail road Welfare Wine Society Aristocracy Censorship Corruption Crime Demographics Education Emigration and diaspora Gambling Health Healthcare Immigration Inventions and discoveries Italians People Languages Italian Regional Life expectancy Orders, decorations, and medals Poverty Prostitution Public administration Racism Religion Social class Terrorism Water supply and sanitation Women Culture Duecento Trecento Quattrocento Cinquecento Seicento Settecento Ottocento Anthem Architecture Art Castles Cathedrals Cinema Coat of arm Cuisine Design Fashion Flag Folklore Gardens Internet Italophilia Libraries Literature Media Museums Music Mythology National symbols Palaces Philosophy Public holidays Sport Television Theatre Traditions World Heritage Sites Italy portal Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.eqiad.main‐74cbc45b88‐jbdvc
Cached time: 20250812020618
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.862 seconds
Real time usage: 1.103 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14117/1000000
Revision size: 32164/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 119982/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7312/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 32/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 100720/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.399/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8316254/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  831.351      1 -total
 26.95%  224.014      1 Template:Reflist
 26.38%  219.275      1 Template:Fauna_of_Europe
 25.90%  215.335      1 Template:Europe_topic
 13.80%  114.715     49 Template:Iso2country
 12.54%  104.255     22 Template:Cite_web
 11.38%   94.578      1 Template:Cite_book
  9.79%   81.392      1 Template:Short_description
  6.93%   57.635      9 Template:Interlanguage_link_multi
  5.85%   48.608      1 Template:Usurped Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:25726602:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812020618 and revision id 1303849738. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fauna_of_Italy&oldid=1303849738 " Categories : Fauna of Italy Biota of Italy Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2022 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 11:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fauna of Italy 2 languages Add topic

