Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Classic reprints 2 History 3 Publications 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Dover Publications 12 languages Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français עברית Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Türkçe Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American book publisher Dover Publications Parent company LSC Communications Founded 1941 ; 84 years ago ( 1941 ) Founder Hayward Cirker and Blanche Cirker Country of origin United States Headquarters location Garden City, New York [ 1 ] Distribution Self-distributed (US) [ 2 ] F&W Media International (UK) [ 3 ] Peribo (Australia) [ 4 ] Intersoft (South Africa) [ 5 ] Publication types Books , sheet music Official website www .doverpublications .com Dover Publications , also known as Dover Books , is an American book publisher founded in 1941 by Hayward and Blanche Cirker. It primarily reissues books that are out of print from their original publishers. These are often, but not always, books in the public domain . The original published editions may be scarce or historically significant. Dover republishes these books, making them available at a significantly reduced cost.

Classic reprints [ edit ] Dover reprints classic works of literature, classical sheet music , and public-domain images from the 18th and 19th centuries. Dover also publishes an extensive collection of mathematical, scientific, and engineering texts. It often targets its reprints at a niche market , such as woodworking .

[ 6 ] Starting in 2015, the company branched out into graphic novel reprints, overseen by Dover acquisitions editor and former comics writer and editor Drew Ford.

[ 7 ] Most Dover reprints are photo facsimiles of the originals, retaining the original pagination and typeset, sometimes with a new introduction. Dover will usually add new and more colorful cover art to its paper-bound editions. They retitle some books to reflect modern dialect and categories. For example, the book Woodward's National Architect was retitled A Victorian Housebuilder's Guide .

[ 8 ] History [ edit ] The Cirkers started the business selling remaindered textbooks by mail.

[ citation needed ] Whilst looking for a name for their company, they settled on naming it after 'The Dover' the name of their apartment building in Forest Hills South, Queens.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] The company published its first book, Jahnke and Emde's Tables of Functions with Formulas and Curves , when the German copyright was voided by the United States as a result of World War II. The book was an unexpected success and established the Dover business model of publishing esoteric works at a low price. One of Dover's best sellers was Albert Einstein 's The Principle of Relativity , which Einstein reluctantly agreed to republish despite his concerns that it was outdated.

Dover helped to transform the paperback book market. In 1951, it issued some of the earliest standard-sized paperbacks, a format that became known as a trade paperback .

[ 11 ] Since the 1960s, the vast majority of Dover's titles have been paper-bound books of various sizes. Dover paperbacks had sewn pages, unlike most paperbacks, which were held together with glue and subject to page drop-out.

Beginning in the 1950s, Dover also issued a series of Listen & Learn language courses prepared primarily using teachers from Columbia University .

[ 12 ] For a time, Dover also published a catalog of LP phonograph records.

[ 13 ] Some, such as selected recordings of Schubert 's solo and chamber works featuring pianist Friedrich Wührer , were reissues of earlier monaural releases from other labels. Noteworthy among Dover's original issues was an extensive series documenting pianist Beveridge Webster in literature ranging from Beethoven 's Hammerklavier sonata to the second piano sonata by Roger Sessions . In keeping with its thrifty philosophy, by using lower recording levels, leading to narrower grooves, Dover was able to include more minutes than usual on each LP; however, the lower recording levels meant more noise and more vulnerability to scratches. Dover's foray into recordings was not as successful as its core business of book republication, and the company eventually abandoned it.

Starting in the 1990s, Dover has published a specialized line of low-cost reprints of public domain literature known as " Dover Thrift Editions ", which are generally priced at US$5 or less.

[ 14 ] They also have several lines of foreign language books.

Hayward Cirker died in 2000 at the age of 82.

[ 15 ] In that same year, Dover Publications was acquired by Courier Corporation.

[ 16 ] Courier was acquired by RR Donnelley in 2015.

[ 17 ] RR Donnelly split into three in 2016; Dover became part of LSC Communications .

[ 18 ] In 2020, LSC Communications, Inc. and 21 affiliated debtors filed Chapter 11 bankruptcy in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York .

[ 19 ] The company was purchased in December 2020 by the private equity holding company Atlas Holdings .

[ 20 ] Blanche Cirker died in 2022.

[ 21 ] Publications [ edit ] This literature-related list is incomplete ; you can help by adding missing items .

( February 2025 ) Textures: A Photographic Album for Artists and Designers (1966) References [ edit ] ^ Questions about Contacting Dover ^ Shipping Rates ^ F&W Media International ^ Titles by Publisher ^ "Computer book distributors in South Africa | Intersoft Books" . Archived from the original on December 14, 2018 . Retrieved November 6, 2017 .

^ Berger, S. E.

, Dictionary of the Book, The ( Lanham MD : Rowman & Littlefield , 2016), p. 75 .

^ Reid, Calvin (October 3, 2014).

"Dover Plans Line of Graphic Novel Reprints" .

Publishers Weekly . Retrieved July 25, 2019 .

^ Woodward, G. E., & Thompson, E. G., A Victorian Housebuilder's Guide: "Woodward's National Architect" of 1869 (New York: Dover, 1988).

^ Dover Publications [@doverpubs] (May 31, 2022).

"Blanche Cirker, Cofounder of Dover Publications, Dies at 104. Dover Publications @doverpubs and Lakeside Book Company are sad to announce the loss of Dover's co-founder, Blanche Cirker, who passed away peacefully last week at the age of 104" ( Tweet ) . Retrieved August 3, 2025 – via Twitter .

^ McKinley, Jesse (March 11, 2000).

"Hayward Cirker, 82, Who Made Dover a Paperback Powerhouse" .

The New York Times .

^ "The Last Paperback Revolutionary" ^ Stephen Walker Travel Resources an Annotated Guide 2009 "The publisher's Listen & Learn series teaches language through cassette and manual" ^ "Mono Stereo at a Low Price" ^ Carpenter, Dave (April 6, 1992).

"Publisher selling books for a buck" .

Kentucky New Era . AP.

Archived from the original on December 8, 2023 – via Google News.

^ McKinley, Jesse (March 11, 2000).

"Hayward Cirker, 82, Who Made Dover a Paperback Powerhouse" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on October 23, 2023.

^ "Courier Corp. Will Acquire Dover Publications for $39M" .

Printing News . HighBeam Research. September 4, 2000. Archived from the original on November 4, 2012.

^ Ryan, Greg (February 5, 2015).

"Courier Corp. takes $261M RR Donnelley offer over rival acquisition bid" .

Boston Business Journal .

Archived from the original on February 12, 2015.

^ Cornell, Joe (May 5, 2016).

"R.R. Donnelley (RRD) to Split into 3 Stocks by October" .

Forbes . Retrieved September 24, 2017 .

^ "Chicago-based LSC Communications files for Ch. 11 bankruptcy after 'unprecedented' drop in print demand" .

Chicago Tribune . April 14, 2020 . Retrieved May 10, 2020 .

^ staff (December 10, 2020).

"Atlas Holdings purchase of LSC Communications completed" .

Gasconade County Republican . Retrieved April 16, 2021 .

^ "Blanche Cirker Obituary" .

Legacy . New York Times. June 12, 2022.

Archived from the original on October 23, 2023.

External links [ edit ] Official website Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Israel Academics CiNii Artists Photographers' Identities People Trove Other Te Papa (New Zealand) Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dover_Publications&oldid=1303981811 " Categories : Book publishing companies based in New York (state) Public domain Publishing companies established in 1941 American record labels Classical music record labels RR Donnelley Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from December 2023 Use American English from December 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in American English All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2021 Incomplete literature lists Incomplete lists from February 2025 Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 06:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dover Publications 12 languages Add topic

