Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Philosophical work Toggle Philosophical work subsection 2.1 Overview 2.2 Thomas Reid's theory of common sense 2.2.1 Exploring sense and language 2.2.2 Influences 2.3 Other philosophical positions 3 Works 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Thomas Reid 34 languages العربية Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Кыргызча Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Scots Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scottish philosopher (1710–1796) For other people named Thomas Reid, see Thomas Reid (disambiguation) .

Thomas Reid FRSE Reid as painted by Henry Raeburn in 1796 Born ( 1710-04-26 ) 26 April 1710 Strachan , Scotland Died 7 October 1796 (1796-10-07) (aged 86) Glasgow , Scotland Nationality Scottish Education Alma mater University of Aberdeen Philosophical work Era 18th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Scottish common sense realism [ 1 ] Scottish Enlightenment Epistemological externalism [ 2 ] Direct realism [ 3 ] Foundationalism [ 2 ] [ 4 ] Correspondence theory of truth [ 5 ] Institutions University of Glasgow Main interests Metaphysics Epistemology Philosophy of perception Ethics Theory of action Natural theology Aesthetics Notable ideas Direct realism Epistemological externalism [ 2 ] Sensation – perception distinction Agent causality Cameo of Thomas Reid by James Tassie, Hunterian Museum, Glasgow Thomas Reid FRSE ( / r iː d / ; 7 May ( O.S.

26 April) 1710 [ 6 ] – 7 October 1796) was a religiously trained Scottish philosopher best known for his philosophical method, his theory of perception , and its wide implications on epistemology , and as the developer and defender of an agent-causal theory of free will. He also focused extensively on ethics , theory of action , language and philosophy of mind .

He was the founder of the Scottish School of Common Sense and played an integral role in the Scottish Enlightenment . In 1783 he was a joint founder of the Royal Society of Edinburgh . A contemporary of David Hume , Reid was also "Hume's earliest and fiercest critic".

[ 7 ] Life [ edit ] Reid was born in the manse at Strachan, Aberdeenshire , on 26 April 1710, [ 6 ] the son of Lewis Reid (1676–1762) and his wife Margaret Gregory, first cousin to James Gregory . He was educated at Kincardine Parish School then the O'Neil Grammar School in Kincardine.

[ 8 ] He went to the University of Aberdeen in 1723 and graduated MA in 1726. He was licensed to preach by the Church of Scotland in 1731 when he came of age. He began his career as a minister of the Church of Scotland but ceased to be a minister when he was given a professorship at King's College, Aberdeen , in 1752. He obtained his doctorate and wrote An Inquiry Into the Human Mind on the Principles of Common Sense (published in 1764). He and his colleagues founded the 'Aberdeen Philosophical Society, popularly known as the 'Wise Club' (a literary-philosophical association).

[ 9 ] Shortly after the publication of his first book, he was given the prestigious Professorship of Moral Philosophy at the University of Glasgow when he was called to replace Adam Smith . He resigned from this position in 1781, after which he prepared his university lectures for publication in two books: Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man (1785) and Essays on the Active Powers of the Human Mind (1788). However, in 1787 he is still listed as "Professor of Moral Philosophy" at the university, but his classes were being taught by Archibald Arthur .

[ 10 ] In 1740 Thomas Reid married his cousin Elizabeth, daughter of the London physician George Reid. His wife and "numerous" children predeceased him, except for a daughter who married Patrick Carmichael.

[ 11 ] Reid died of palsy, in Glasgow. He was buried at Blackfriars Church in the grounds of Glasgow College and when the university moved to Gilmorehill in the west of Glasgow, his tombstone was inserted in the main building.

Philosophical work [ edit ] Overview [ edit ] Reid believed that common sense (in a special philosophical sense of sensus communis ) is, or at least should be, at the foundation of all philosophical inquiry.

[ 12 ] He disagreed with Hume, who asserted that we can never know what an external world consists of as our knowledge is limited to the ideas in the mind, and George Berkeley , who asserted that the external world is merely ideas in the mind. By contrast, Reid claimed that the foundations upon which our sensus communis are built justify our belief that there is an external world.

In his day and for some years into the 19th century, he was regarded as more important than Hume.

[ 13 ] He advocated direct realism , or common sense realism , and argued strongly against the Theory of Ideas advocated by John Locke , René Descartes , and (in varying forms) nearly all Early Modern philosophers who came after them.  He had a great admiration for Hume and had a mutual friend send Hume an early manuscript of Reid's Inquiry.

Hume responded that the work "is wrote in a lively entertaining manner," although he found "there seems to be some Defect in Method", and he criticized Reid's doctrine for implying the presence of innate ideas. (pp. 256–257) [ 14 ] Thomas Reid's theory of common sense [ edit ] Reid's theory of knowledge had a strong influence on his theory of morals. He thought epistemology was an introductory part to practical ethics: When we are confirmed in our common beliefs by philosophy, all we have to do is to act according to them, because we know what is right. His moral philosophy is reminiscent of Roman stoicism in its emphasis on the agency of the subject and self-control. He often quotes Cicero , from whom he adopted the term "sensus communis". Reid's answer to Hume's sceptical and naturalist arguments was to enumerate a set of principles of common sense ( sensus communis ) which constitute the foundations of rational thought. Anyone who undertakes a philosophical argument, for example, must implicitly presuppose certain beliefs like, "I am talking to a real person," and "There is an external world whose laws do not change," among many other positive, substantive claims. For Reid, the belief in the truth of these principles is not rational; rather, reason itself demands these principles as prerequisites, as does the innate "constitution" of the human mind. It is for this reason (and possibly a mocking attitude toward Hume and Berkeley) that Reid sees belief in the principles of common sense as a litmus test for sanity. For example, in The Intellectual Powers of Man he states, "For, before men can reason together, they must agree in first principles; and it is impossible to reason with a man who has no principles in common with you." One of the first principles he goes on to list is that "qualities must necessarily be in something that is figured, coloured, hard or soft, that moves or resists. It is not to these qualities, but to that which is the subject of them, that we give the name body. If any man should think fit to deny that these things are qualities, or that they require any subject, I leave him to enjoy his opinion as a man who denies first principles, and is not fit to be reasoned with." Reid also made positive arguments based in phenomenological insight to put forth a novel mixture of direct realism and ordinary language philosophy . In a typical passage in The Intellectual Powers of Man he asserts that when he has a conception of a centaur, the thing he conceives is an animal, and no idea is an animal; therefore, the thing he conceives is not an idea, but a centaur. This point relies both on an account of the subjective experience of conceiving an object and also on an account of what we mean when we use words. Because Reid saw his philosophy as publicly accessible knowledge, available both through introspection and through the proper understanding of how language is used, he saw it as the philosophy of common sense.

Exploring sense and language [ edit ] Reid started out with a 'common sense' based on a direct experience of an external reality but then proceeded to explore in two directions—external to the senses, and internal to human language—to account more effectively for the role of rationality.

Reid saw language as based on an innate capacity pre-dating human consciousness, and acting as an instrument for that consciousness.  (In Reid's terms: it is an 'artificial' instrument based on a 'natural' capacity.)    On this view, language becomes a means of examining the original form of human cognition.  Reid notes that current human language contains two distinct elements: first, the acoustic element, the sounds; and secondly the meanings—which seem to have nothing to do with the sounds as such.  This state of the language, which he calls 'artificial', cannot be the primeval one, which he terms 'natural', wherein sound was not an abstract sign, but a concrete gesture or natural sign.  Reid looks to the way a child learns language, by imitating sounds, becoming aware of them long before it understands the meaning accorded to the various groups of sounds in the artificial state of contemporary adult speech.  If, says Reid, the child needed to understand immediately the conceptual content of the words it hears, it would never learn to speak at all.  Here Reid distinguishes between natural and artificial signs: "It is by natural signs chiefly that we give force and energy to language; and the less language has of them, it is the less expressive and persuasive.  ...     Artificial signs signify, but they do not express; they speak to the intellect, as algebraic characters may do, but the passions and the affections and the will hear them not: these continue dormant and inactive, till we speak to them in the language of nature , to which they are all attention and obedience."  (p. 52) [ 14 ] His external exploration, regarding the senses, led Reid to his critical distinction between ' sensation ' and ' perception '. While we become aware of an object through the senses, the content of that perception is not identical with the sum total of the sensations caused in our consciousness. Thus, while we tend to focus on the object perceived, we pay no attention to the process leading from sensation to perception, which contains the knowledge of the thing as real.  How, then, do we receive the conviction of the latter's existence?    Reid's answer is, by entering into an immediate intuitive relationship with it, as a child does.  In the case of the adult, the focus is on perceiving, but with the child, it is on receiving of the sensations in their living nature.  For Reid, the perception of the child is different from the adult, and he states that man must become like a child to get past the artificial perception of the adult, which leads to Hume's view that what we perceive is an illusion.  Also, the artist provides a key to the true content of sense experience , as he engages the 'language of nature': "It were easy to show, that the fine arts of the musician, the painter, the actor, and the orator, so far as they are expressive .. are nothing else but the language of nature, which we brought into the world with us, but have unlearned by disuse and so find the greatest difficulty in recovering it."  (p. 53) [ 14 ] "That without a natural knowledge of the connection between these [natural] signs and the things signified by them, the language could never have been invented and established among men; and, That the fine arts are all founded upon this connection, which we may call the natural language of mankind."  (p. 59) [ 14 ] Thus, for Reid, common sense was based on the innate capacity of man in an earlier epoch to directly participate in nature, and one we find to some extent in the child and artist, but one that from a philosophical and scientific perspective, we must re-awaken at a higher level in the human mind above nature. Why does Reid believe that perception is the way to recognize? Well, to him "an experience is purely subjective and purely negative. It supports the validity of a proposition, only on the fact that I find that it is impossible for me not to hold it for true, to suppose it therefore not true" (Reid, 753). To understand this better, it is important to know that Reid divides his definition of perception into two categories: conception, and belief. "Conception is Reid's way of saying to visualize an object, so then we can affirm or deny qualities about that thing. Reid believes that beliefs are our direct thoughts of an object, and what that object is" (Buras, The Functions of Sensations to Reid). So, to Reid, what we see, what we visualize, what we believe of an object, is that object's true reality. Reid believes in direct objectivity, our senses guide us to what is right since we cannot trust our own thoughts. "The worlds of common sense and of philosophy are reciprocally the converse of each other" (Reid, 841). Reid believes that Philosophy overcomplicates the question of what is real. So, what does Common Sense actually mean then? Well, "common sense is the senses being pulled all together to form one idea" (Cambridge Companion to Thomas Reid, 164). Common sense (all the senses combined) is how we truly identify the reality of an object; since all that can be perceived about an object, are all pulled into one perception. How do people reach the point of accessing common sense? That's the trick, everyone is born with the ability to access common sense, that is why it is called common sense. "The principles of common sense are common to all of humanity," (Nichols, Ryan, Yaffe, and Gideon, Thomas Reid).

Common sense works as such: If all men observe an item and believe the same qualities about that item, then the knowledge of that item is universally true.  It is common knowledge, which without explanation is held true by other people; so, what is universally seen is universally believed.  "The real, then, is that which, sooner or later, information and reasoning would finally result in, and which is therefore independent of the vagaries of me and you.  Thus, the very origin of the conception of reality shows that this conception essentially involves the notion of a community, without definite limits, and capable of a definite increase of knowledge," (Reid, 155).  The combination of the same ideas, of a thing, by multiple people, is what confirms the reality of an object.  Reid also believes that the philosophers of his time exaggerated what is truly real.  Where most philosophers believe that what we see is not fully what that thing is, for example, Descartes, Reid counters this argument simply by stating that "such a hypothesis is no more likely to be true than the common-sensical belief that the world is much the way we perceive it to be," (Nichols, Ryan, Yaffe, and Gideon, Thomas Reid).  Reality is what we make it out to be, nothing more.

Reid also claimed that this discovery of the link between the natural sign and the thing signified was the basis of natural philosophy and science, as proposed by Bacon in his radical method of discovery of the innate laws of nature: The great Lord Verulam had a perfect comprehension of this, when he called it an interpretation of nature .  No man ever more distinctly understood, or happily expressed the nature and foundation of the philosophic art.  What is all we know of mechanics, astronomy, and optics, but connections established by nature and discovered by experience or observation, and consequences deduced from them?    (..)    What we commonly call natural causes might, with more propriety, be called natural signs , and what we call effects , the things signified.  The causes have no proper efficiency or causality, as far as we know; and all we can certainly affirm, is, that nature hath established a constant conjunction between them and the things called their effects; (..).  (p. 59) [ 14 ] Influences [ edit ] It has been claimed that Reid's reputation waned after attacks on the Scottish School of Common Sense by Immanuel Kant (although Kant, only 14 years Reid's junior, also bestowed much praise on Scottish philosophy —Kant attacked the work of Reid, but admitted he had never actually read his works) and by John Stuart Mill .  But Reid's was the philosophy taught in the colleges of North America during the 19th century and was championed by Victor Cousin , a French philosopher.  Justus Buchler has shown that Reid was an important influence on the American philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce , who shared Reid's concern to revalue common sense and whose work links Reid to pragmatism .  To Peirce, conceptions of truth and the real involve the notion of a community without definite limits (and thus potentially self-correcting as far as needed), and capable of a definite increase of knowledge.

[ 15 ] Common sense is socially evolved, open to verification much like scientific method, and constantly evolving, as evidence, perception, and practice warrant, albeit with a slowness that Peirce came only in later years to see, at which point he owned his "adhesion, under inevitable modification, to the opinion of...Thomas Reid, in the matter of Common Sense".

[ 16 ] (Peirce called his version "critical common-sensism").  By contrast, on Reid's concept, the sensus communis is not a social evolutionary product but rather a precondition of the possibility that humans could reason with each other.  The work of Thomas Reid influenced the work of Noah Porter and James McCosh in the 19th century United States and is based upon the claim of universal principles of objective truth. Pragmatism is not the development of the work of the Scottish "Common Sense" School—it is the negation of it.  There are clear links between the work of the Scottish Common Sense School and the work of the Oxford Realist philosophers Harold Prichard and Sir William David Ross in the 20th century.

Reid's reputation has revived in the wake of the advocacy of common sense as a philosophical method or criterion by G. E. Moore early in the 20th century, and more recently because of the attention given to Reid by contemporary philosophers, in particular philosophers of religion in the school of Reformed epistemology such as William Alston , [ 17 ] Alvin Plantinga , and Nicholas Wolterstorff , [ 18 ] seeking to rebut charges that theistic belief is irrational where it has no doxastic foundations (that is, where that belief is not inferred from other adequately grounded beliefs).

He wrote a number of important philosophical works, including Inquiry into the Human Mind on the Principles of Common Sense (1764, Glasgow & London), Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man (1785) and Essays on the Active Powers of Man (1788). In 1844, Schopenhauer praised Reid for explaining that the perception of external objects does not result from the raw data that is received through the five senses: Thomas Reid's excellent book, Inquiry into the Human Mind ... affords us a very thorough conviction of the inadequacy of the senses for producing the objective perception of things, and also of the non-empirical origin of the intuition of space and time . Reid refutes Locke's teaching that perception is a product of the senses . This he does by a thorough and acute demonstration that the collective sensations of the senses do not bear the least resemblance to the world known through perception, and in particular by showing that Locke's five primary qualities (extension, figure, solidity, movement, number) cannot possibly be supplied to us by any sensation of the senses...

— The World as Will and Representation , Vol. II, Ch. 2 Other philosophical positions [ edit ] Though known mainly for his epistemology, Reid is also noted for his views in the theory of action and the metaphysics of personal identity . Reid held an incompatibilist or libertarian notion of freedom, holding that we are capable of free actions of which we are the cause, and for which we are morally appraisable.

[ 19 ] Regarding personal identity,  he rejected Locke's account that self-consciousness in the form of memory of one's experiences was the basis of a person's being identical with their self over time. Reid held that continuity of memory was neither necessary nor sufficient to make one numerically the same person at different times.

[ 20 ] Reid also argued that the operation of our mind connecting sensations with belief in an external world is accounted for only by an intentional Creator. In his natural religion lectures, Reid provides five arguments for the existence of God , focusing on two mainly, the cosmological and design. Reid loved and frequently used Samuel Clarke's cosmological argument, which says, in short that the universe either has always been, or began to exist, so there must be a cause (or first principle) for both (Cuneo and Woudenberg 242). As everything is either necessary or contingent, an Independent being is required for contingency (Cuneo and Woudenberg 242). Reid spends even more time on his design argument, but is unclear exactly what he wanted his argument to be, as his lectures only went as far as his students needed. Though there is no perfect interpretation, Reid states that "there are in fact the clearest marks of design and wisdom in the works of nature" (Cuneo and Woudenberg 291) If something carries marks of design (regularity or variety of structure), there must be an intelligent being behind it (Reid EIP 66). This can't be known by experience, fitting with the casual excellence principle, but the cause can be seen in works of nature (Cuneo and Woudenberg 241).

Works [ edit ] 1764.

An Inquiry into the Human Mind on the Principles of Common Sense (translated to modern English) . ( Facsimile of the 1823 edition ) 1785.

Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man . ( Facsimile ) 1788.

Essays on the Active Powers of the Human Mind . ( Facsimile ) Until recently the standard edition of the Inquiry and the Essays has been the sixth edition of Sir William Hamilton (ed.), Edinburgh: Maclachlan and Stewart, 1863. A new critical edition of these titles, plus correspondence and other important material, is being brought out by Edinburgh University Press as The Edinburgh Edition of Thomas Reid.

[ 21 ] An accessible selection from Hamilton's 6th ed. is Thomas Reid's Inquiry and Essays , ed. Ronald Beanblossom and Keith Lehrer , Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1975.

[ 22 ] References [ edit ] ^ Selections from the Scottish Philosophy of Common Sense , ed. by G. A. Johnston (1915), essays by Thomas Reid, Adam Ferguson , James Beattie, and Dugald Stewart ( online version ).

^ a b c Rebecca Copenhaver , Todd Buras (eds.), Thomas Reid on Mind, Knowledge, and Value , Oxford University Press, 2015, p. 214.

^ Patrick Rysiew, New Essays on Thomas Reid , Routledge, 2017, p. 18.

^ Fumerton, Richard (2000).

"Foundationalist Theories of Epistemic Justification" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 19 August 2018 .

^ M. T. Dalgarno, E. H. Matthews (eds.), The Philosophy of Thomas Reid , Springer, 2012, p. 195.

^ a b "Reid, Thomas".

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/23342 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) ^ See Craig G. Bartholomew and Michael W. Goheen, Christian Philosophy p. 138 (Baker Academic, 2013).

^ Biographical Index of Former Fellows of the Royal Society of Edinburgh 1783–2002 (PDF) . The Royal Society of Edinburgh. July 2006.

ISBN 0-902-198-84-X . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 9 March 2018 .

^ See H. Lewis Ulman, The Minutes of the Aberdeen Philosophical Society 1758-1773 (Aberdeen University Press for Aberdeen University Studies Committee, 1990).

^ "(44) - Towns > Glasgow > 1787 - Reprint of Jones's directory; or, Useful pocket companion for the year 1787 - Scottish Directories - National Library of Scotland" .

^ Anderson, William (1863).

The Scottish Nation . Edinburgh: A. Fullarton and Co. pp.

335– 336.

^ Thomas Reid . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2016.

^ See Craig G. Bartholomew and Michael W. Goheen, Christian Philosophy , p. 138 (Baker Academic, 2013).

^ a b c d e Thomas Reid.

An Inquiry into the Human Mind on the Principles of Common Sense.

Ed. Derek R Brookes. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press , 1997. pp. 256–257 ^ Peirce, C. S. (1868), "Some Consequences of Four Incapacities", Journal of Speculative Philosophy 2, pp. 140–157, see p. 155 via Google Books . Reprinted, Collected Papers v. 5, paragraphs 264–317 (see 311), Writings v. 2, pp. 211–42 (see 239), Essential Peirce v. 1, pp. 28–55 (see 52).

^ Peirce, C. S. (1905), "Issues of Pragmaticism", The Monist , v. XV, n. 4, pp. 481–99, see pp.

484–5 via Google Books . Reprinted, Collected Papers v. 5, paragraphs 438–63 (see 444), Essential Peirce v. 2, pp. 346–59 (see 349) ^ Alston invokes Reid in his Perceiving God: The Epistemology of Religious Experience (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1991) pp. 151–155, 162–165.

^ For Wolterstorff's use of Reid in aid of Reformed Epistemology, see his "Can Belief in God be Rational if it has no Foundations?" in Faith and Rationality (Notre Dame, IN: Notre Dame University Press, 1983) ^ Essays on the Active Powers , "Essay Four: Of the Liberty of Moral Agents" ^ Essays on the Intellectual Powers , "Essay Three: Of Memory".

^ "The Edinburgh Edition of Thomas Reid" .

edinburghuniversitypress.com .

Archived from the original on 23 June 2022 . Retrieved 14 April 2024 .

^ Reid, Thomas (1975).

Lehrer, Keith ; Beanblossom, Ronald (eds.).

Thomas Reid's Inquiry and essays . The library of liberal arts. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill.

ISBN 978-0-672-61173-5 .

Further reading [ edit ] Barker, Stephen and Tom Beauchamp, eds., Thomas Reid: Critical Interpretations , University City Science Center, 1976.

Terence Cuneo, René van Woudenberg (eds.), The Cambridge Companion to Thomas Reid , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.

Daniels, Norman.

Thomas Reid's Inquiry: The Geometry of Visibles and the Case for Realism . Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Davis, William C., Thomas Reid's Ethics: Moral Epistemology on Legal Foundations . Continuum International, 2006.

ISBN 0-8264-8809-9 Ducheyne, Steffen. "Reid's Adaptation and Radicalization of Newton's Natural Philosophy".

History of European Ideas 32 (2006) 173–189.

Roger D. Gallie, Thomas Reid and the Way of Ideas , Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1989.

Haldane, John. "Reid, Scholasticism, and Current Philosophy of Mind" in M. Delgano and E. Matthews, eds., The Philosophy of Thomas Reid . Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1989.

Lehrer, Keith.

Thomas Reid . London: Routledge, 1989.

Rowe, William.

Thomas Reid on Freedom and Morality . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1991.

Wolterstorff, N.

Thomas Reid and the Story of Epistemology . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001.

External links [ edit ] Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Reid, Thomas ".

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Thomas Reid (philosopher) .

Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

"Thomas Reid" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

"Thomas Reid's Philosophy of Mind" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

"Thomas Reid's Theory of Action" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

The Papers of Thomas Reid at the University of Aberdeen .

The Edinburgh Edition of Thomas Reid – critical edition of Reid's philosophical treatises and previously unpublished materials Reid's Inquiry into the Human Mind, Essays on the Active Powers..., and Essays on the Intellectual powers...

, slightly modified for easier reading.

Thomas Reid at Google Books Works by or about Thomas Reid at the Internet Archive Works by Thomas Reid at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Common Sense Philosophy , BBC Radio 4 discussion with A.C. Grayling, Melissa Lane & Alexander Broadie ( In Our Time , 21 June 2007) v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category v t e Metaphysics Theories Abstract object theory Action theory Anti-realism Determinism Dualism Enactivism Essentialism Existentialism Free will Idealism Libertarianism Liberty Materialism Meaning of life Monism Naturalism Nihilism Phenomenalism Physicalism Realism Relativism Scientific realism Solipsism Spiritualism Subjectivism Substance theory Theory of forms Truthmaker theory Type theory Concepts Abstract object Anima mundi Category of being Causality Causal closure Cogito, ergo sum Concept Cosmos Embodied cognition Entity Essence Existence Experience Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Importance Information Data Insight Intelligence Intention Linguistic modality Matter Meaning Mental representation Mind Motion Nature Necessity Object Ontology Pattern Perception Physical object Principle Property Qualia Quality Reality Relation Self Soul Subject Substantial form Thought Time Truth Type–token distinction Universal Unobservable Value Metaphysicians Anscombe Aquinas Aristotle Armstrong Averroes Avicenna Baudrillard Bergson Berkeley Boethius Bolzano Carnap Collingwood Davidson Deleuze Descartes Dummett Al-Ghazali Hegel Heidegger Hume Kant Kierkegaard Al-Kindi Kripke Laozi Leibniz Lewis Locke Lotze Lucretius Malebranche Meinong Moore Mozi Newton Nietzsche Parfit Parmenides Peirce Plantinga Plato Plotinus Proclus Putnam Quine Reid Russell Ryle Sartre Schopenhauer Scotus Spinoza Strawson Suárez Whitehead Wittgenstein Wolff more ...

Notable works Sophist (c. 350 BC) Timaeus (c. 350 BC) Nyāya Sūtras (c. 200 BC) De rerum natura (c. 80 BC) Metaphysics (c. 50) Enneads (c. 270) Daneshnameh-ye Alai and Al-Nijat (c. 1000) Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) Ethics (1677) A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) Monadology (1714) Critique of Pure Reason (1781) Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (1783) The Phenomenology of Spirit (1807) The World as Will and Representation (1818) Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments (1846) Being and Time (1927) Being and Nothingness (1943) Simulacra and Simulation (1981) Related topics Axiology Cosmology Epistemology Feminist metaphysics Interpretations of quantum mechanics Mereology Meta- Phenomenology Philosophy of mind Philosophy of psychology Philosophy of self Philosophy of space and time Teleology Category Philosophy portal v t e Epistemology Epistemologists William Alston Aquinas Robert Audi Augustine A. J. Ayer George Berkeley Laurence BonJour Gilles Deleuze Keith DeRose René Descartes John Dewey Fred Dretske Edmund Gettier Alvin Goldman Nelson Goodman Paul Grice Anil Gupta Susan Haack David Hume Immanuel Kant Søren Kierkegaard Peter Klein Saul Kripke Hilary Kornblith David Lewis John Locke G. E. Moore John McDowell Robert Nozick Alvin Plantinga Plato Duncan Pritchard James Pryor Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine Thomas Reid Bertrand Russell Gilbert Ryle Wilfrid Sellars Susanna Siegel Ernest Sosa P. F. Strawson Baruch Spinoza Timothy Williamson Ludwig Wittgenstein Nicholas Wolterstorff Vienna Circle more...

Theories Coherentism Constructivism Contextualism Empiricism Evolutionary epistemology Fallibilism Feminist epistemology Fideism Foundationalism Holism Infinitism Innatism Naïve realism Naturalized epistemology Phenomenalism Positivism Rationalism Reductionism Reliabilism Representational realism Skepticism Transcendental idealism Concepts A priori knowledge A posteriori knowledge Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction Belief Certainty Common sense Descriptive knowledge Exploratory thought Epistemic injustice Epistemic virtue Gettier problem Induction Internalism and externalism Justification Knowledge Meta Objectivity Privileged access Problem of induction Problem of other minds Perception Procedural knowledge Proposition Regress argument Simplicity Truth Uncertainty Related articles Faith and rationality Formal epistemology Metaepistemology Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Category Outline Portal WikiProject Stubs Discussion Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics zbMATH People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐lqpcc
Cached time: 20250817053529
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.700 seconds
Real time usage: 0.948 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5870/1000000
Revision size: 32115/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 171362/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10178/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 87721/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.434/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23927302/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  753.908      1 -total
 24.38%  183.774      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 19.52%  147.152      1 Template:Age_of_Enlightenment
 19.30%  145.496      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 16.85%  127.045      4 Template:Navbox
 16.07%  121.163      1 Template:Reflist
 11.93%   89.932      4 Template:Lang
  9.72%   73.262      3 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
  8.45%   63.718      1 Template:Short_description
  5.39%   40.660      1 Template:Birth_date Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:29780:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817053529 and revision id 1298829591. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thomas_Reid&oldid=1298829591 " Categories : 1710 births 1796 deaths Founder fellows of the Royal Society of Edinburgh People of the Scottish Enlightenment Calvinist and Reformed philosophers British Christian theologians 18th-century Scottish writers 18th-century Scottish male writers 18th-century Scottish philosophers Enlightenment philosophers David Hume Alumni of the University of Aberdeen Academics of the University of Aberdeen Academics of the University of Glasgow Fellows of the Royal Society of Edinburgh 18th-century ministers of the Church of Scotland 18th-century Scottish Presbyterian ministers People from Kincardine and Mearns Scottish mathematicians Scottish librarians British critics of atheism British philosophers of mind Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNB Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2020 Use British English from March 2012 Articles with hCards Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 5 July 2025, at 00:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Thomas Reid 34 languages Add topic

