Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types Toggle Types subsection 1.1 Gaseous mixtures 1.2 Liquid solutions 1.3 Solid solutions 2 Solubility 3 Properties 4 Liquid solution characteristics 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Solution (chemistry) 84 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština ChiShona Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Taqbaylit ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt 文言 Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Homogeneous mixture of a solute and a solvent "Solute" redirects here. For the sole order of the class Homoiostelea, see Solute (echinoderm) .

Making a saline water solution by dissolving table salt ( NaCl ) in water . The salt is the solute and the water the solvent.

In chemistry , a solution is defined by IUPAC as "A liquid or solid phase containing more than one substance, when for convenience one (or more) substance, which is called the solvent, is treated differently from the other substances, which are called solutes. When, as is often but not necessarily the case, the sum of the mole fractions of solutes is small compared with unity, the solution is called a dilute solution. A superscript attached to the ∞ symbol for a property of a solution denotes the property in the limit of infinite dilution." [ 1 ] One parameter of a solution is the concentration , which is a measure of the amount of solute in a given amount of solution or solvent. The term " aqueous solution " is used when one of the solvents is water .

[ 2 ] Types Homogeneous means that the components of the mixture form a single phase.

Heterogeneous means that the components of the mixture are of different phase. The properties of the mixture (such as concentration, temperature, and density) can be uniformly distributed through the volume but only in absence of diffusion phenomena or after their completion. Usually, the substance present in the greatest amount is considered the solvent. Solvents can be gases, liquids, or solids. One or more components present in the solution other than the solvent are called solutes. The solution has the same physical state as the solvent.

Gaseous mixtures If the solvent is a gas , only gases (non-condensable) or vapors (condensable) are dissolved under a given set of conditions. An example of a gaseous solution is air (oxygen and other gases dissolved in nitrogen). Since interactions between gaseous molecules play almost no role, non-condensable gases form rather trivial solutions. In the literature, they are not even classified as solutions, but simply addressed as homogeneous mixtures of gases. The Brownian motion and the permanent molecular agitation of gas molecules guarantee the homogeneity of the gaseous systems. Non-condensable gaseous mixtures (e.g., air/CO 2 , or air/xenon) do not spontaneously demix, nor sediment, as distinctly stratified and separate gas layers as a function of their relative density .

Diffusion forces efficiently counteract gravitation forces under normal conditions prevailing on Earth. The case of condensable vapors is different: once the saturation vapor pressure at a given temperature is reached, vapor excess condenses into the liquid state .

Liquid solutions Liquids dissolve gases, other liquids, and solids.  An example of a dissolved gas is oxygen in water, which allows fish to breathe under water.  An examples of a dissolved liquid is ethanol in water, as found in alcoholic beverages .  An example of a dissolved solid is sugar water, which contains dissolved sucrose .

Solid solutions If the solvent is a solid , then gases, liquids, and solids can be dissolved.

Gas in solids: Hydrogen dissolves rather well in metals, especially in palladium ; this is studied as a means of hydrogen storage .

Liquid in solid: Mercury in gold , forming an amalgam Water in solid salt or sugar , forming moist solids Hexane in paraffin wax Polymers containing plasticizers such as phthalate (liquid) in PVC (solid) Solid in solid: Steel , basically a solution of carbon atoms in a crystalline matrix of iron atoms [ clarification needed ] Alloys like bronze and many others Radium sulfate dissolved in barium sulfate : a true solid solution of Ra in BaSO 4 Solubility Main articles: Solubility and Solvation The ability of one compound to dissolve in another compound is called solubility .

[ clarification needed ] When a liquid can completely dissolve in another liquid the two liquids are miscible . Two substances that can never mix to form a solution are said to be immiscible .

All solutions have a positive entropy of mixing. The interactions between different molecules or ions may be energetically favored or not. If interactions are unfavorable, then the free energy decreases with increasing solute concentration. At some point, the energy loss outweighs the entropy gain, and no more solute particles [ clarification needed ] can be dissolved; the solution is said to be saturated . However, the point at which a solution can become saturated can change significantly with different environmental factors, such as temperature , pressure , and contamination. For some solute-solvent combinations, a supersaturated solution can be prepared by raising the solubility (for example by increasing the temperature) to dissolve more solute and then lowering it (for example by cooling).

Usually, the greater the temperature of the solvent, the more of a given solid solute it can dissolve. However, most gases and some compounds exhibit solubilities that decrease with increased temperature. Such behavior is a result of an exothermic enthalpy of solution . Some surfactants exhibit this behaviour. The solubility of liquids in liquids is generally less temperature-sensitive than that of solids or gases.

Properties The physical properties of compounds such as melting point and boiling point change when other compounds are added. Together they are called colligative properties . There are several ways to quantify the amount of one compound dissolved in the other compounds collectively called concentration . Examples include molarity , volume fraction , and mole fraction .

The properties of ideal solutions can be calculated by the linear combination of the properties of its components. If both solute and solvent exist in equal quantities (such as in a 50% ethanol , 50% water solution), the concepts of "solute" and "solvent" become less relevant, but the substance that is more often used as a solvent is normally designated as the solvent (in this example, water).

Liquid solution characteristics See also: Solvent § Solvent classifications In principle, all types of liquids can behave as solvents: liquid noble gases , molten metals, molten salts, molten covalent networks, and molecular liquids. In the practice of chemistry and biochemistry, most solvents are molecular liquids. They can be classified into polar and non-polar , according to whether their molecules possess a permanent electric dipole moment . Another distinction is whether their molecules can form hydrogen bonds ( protic and aprotic solvents).

Water , the most commonly used solvent, is both polar and sustains hydrogen bonds.

Water is a good solvent for some polar materials because water molecules are polar and capable of forming hydrogen bonds.

Salts dissolve in polar solvents, forming positive and negative ions that are attracted to the negative and positive ends of the solvent molecule, respectively. If the solvent is water, hydration occurs when the charged solute ions become surrounded by water molecules. A standard example is aqueous saltwater. Such solutions are called electrolytes . Whenever salt dissolves in water ion association has to be taken into account.

Polar solutes dissolve in polar solvents, forming polar bonds or hydrogen bonds. As an example, all alcoholic beverages are aqueous solutions of ethanol . On the other hand, non-polar solutes dissolve better in non-polar solvents. Examples are hydrocarbons such as oil and grease that easily mix, while being incompatible with water.

An example of the immiscibility of oil and water is a leak of petroleum from a damaged tanker, that does not dissolve in the ocean water but rather floats on the surface.

See also Look up solution or solute in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Molar solution – Measure of concentration of a chemical Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Percentage solution (disambiguation) Solubility equilibrium – Thermodynamic equilibrium between a solid and a solution of the same compound Total dissolved solids – Measurement in environmental chemistry is a common term in a range of disciplines, and can have different meanings depending on the analytical method used. In water quality, it refers to the amount of residue remaining after the evaporation of water from a sample.

Upper critical solution temperature – Critical temperature of miscibility in a mixture Lower critical solution temperature – Critical temperature below which components of a mixture are miscible for all compositions Coil–globule transition – Collapse of a macromolecule from an expanded coil state to a collapsed globule state References ^ "Solution" .

IUPAC Gold Book .

^ "Solutions" .

Washington University Chemistry Department . Washington University . Retrieved 13 April 2018 .

IUPAC , Compendium of Chemical Terminology , 5th ed. (the "Gold Book") (2025). Online version: (2006–) " solution ".

doi : 10.1351/goldbook.S05746 External links Media related to Solutions at Wikimedia Commons v t e Chemical solutions Solution Ideal solution Aqueous solution Solid solution Buffer solution Flory–Huggins Mixture Suspension Colloid Phase diagram Phase separation Eutectic point Alloy Saturation Supersaturation Serial dilution Dilution (equation) Apparent molar property Miscibility gap Concentration and related quantities Molar concentration Mass concentration Number concentration Volume concentration Normality Molality Mole fraction Mass fraction Isotopic abundance Mixing ratio Ternary plot Total dissolved solids Solubility Solubility equilibrium Solvation Solvation shell Enthalpy of solution Lattice energy Raoult's law Henry's law Solubility table (data) Solubility chart Miscibility Solvent ( Category ) Acid dissociation constant Protic solvent Polar aprotic solvent Inorganic nonaqueous solvent Solvation List of boiling and freezing information of solvents Partition coefficient Polarity Hydrophobe Hydrophile Lipophilic Amphiphile Lyonium ion Lyate ion v t e Routes of administration , dosage forms Oral Digestive tract ( enteral ) Solids Tablet Capsule Pastille Time release technology Osmotic delivery system Liquids Decoction Elixir Electuary Emulsion Effervescent powder or tablet Herbal tea Hydrogel Molecular encapsulation Powder Softgel Solution Suspension Syrup Tincture Oral mucosa ( buccal , sublabial , sublingual , supralingual ) Solids Orally disintegrating tablet Film Lollipop Sublingual drops Lozenges Effervescent tablet Chewing gum Liquids Mouthwash Toothpaste Ointment Spray Respiratory tract ( inhalation ) Solids Dry-powder inhaler Smoking 0 0 Liquids Anesthetic vaporizer Heated humidified high-flow therapy Medical inhalants Metered-dose inhaler (MDI) Nebulizer Vaporizer Gas Oxygen mask and Nasal cannula Oxygen concentrator Anaesthetic machine Medical inhalants Relative analgesia machine Ophthalmic , otic , nasal Nasal spray Ear drops Eye drops Ointment Hydrogel Insufflation Mucoadhesive microdisc Urogenital Ointment Pessary Vaginal ring Douche Intrauterine device (IUD) Extra-amniotic infusion Intravesical infusion Rectal ( enteral ) Ointment Suppository Enema Solution Hydrogel Murphy drip Nutrient enema Dermal ( topical ) Ointment Topical cream Topical gel Liniment Paste Film DMSO solution Iontophoresis Hydrogel Liposomes Transfersome vesicles Cream Lotion Lip balm Medicated shampoo Dermal patch Transdermal patch Transdermal spray Jet injector Parenterals Injections infusions (into tissue/blood) Skin ( transdermal ) Intradermal Subcutaneous Injector pen Transdermal implant Organs Intracavernous Intravitreal Intra-articular Central nervous system Intracerebral Intrathecal Epidural Circulatory , musculoskeletal Intravenous Intracardiac Intramuscular Intraosseous Intraperitoneal Nanocell injection Patient-controlled analgesia pump PIC line Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐b499cfbc7‐msppn
Cached time: 20250815111009
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.484 seconds
Real time usage: 0.689 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2932/1000000
Revision size: 10098/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 87535/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4211/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 34463/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.312/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20260129/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  595.016      1 -total
 24.55%  146.059      7 Template:Annotated_link
 20.39%  121.332      7 Template:Navbox
 13.70%   81.533      1 Template:Reflist
 12.14%   72.221      2 Template:Cite_web
 11.66%   69.365      1 Template:Chemical_solutions
  7.20%   42.841      1 Template:Short_description
  6.63%   39.464      3 Template:Clarify
  6.59%   39.216      1 Template:Pp
  6.08%   36.202      3 Template:Fix-span Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:28729:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815111009 and revision id 1297725967. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Solution_(chemistry)&oldid=1297725967 " Categories : Solutions Homogeneous chemical mixtures Alchemical processes Physical chemistry Colloidal chemistry Drug delivery devices Dosage forms Hidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use British English from December 2019 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2021 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 June 2025, at 03:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Solution (chemistry) 84 languages Add topic

