Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description Toggle Description subsection 1.1 Atomic number 1.2 Isotopes 1.3 Isotopic mass and atomic mass 1.4 Chemically pure and isotopically pure 1.5 Allotropes 1.6 Properties 1.6.1 General properties 1.6.2 States of matter 1.6.3 Melting and boiling points 1.6.4 Densities 1.6.5 Crystal structures 1.6.6 Occurrence and origin on Earth 1.7 Periodic table 2 Nomenclature and symbols Toggle Nomenclature and symbols subsection 2.1 Atomic numbers 2.2 Element names 2.3 Chemical symbols 2.3.1 Specific elements 2.3.2 General chemical symbols 2.3.3 Isotope symbols 3 Origin of the elements 4 Abundance 5 History Toggle History subsection 5.1 Evolving definitions 5.2 Classical definitions 5.3 Chemical definitions 5.3.1 Robert Boyle 5.3.2 Isaac Watts 5.3.3 Antoine Lavoisier, Jöns Jacob Berzelius, and Dmitri Mendeleev 5.4 Atomic definitions 5.5 Discovery and recognition of various elements 5.6 Recently discovered elements 6 List of the 118 known chemical elements 7 See also 8 References 9 Bibliography 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Chemical element 180 languages Acèh Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ अंगिका Ænglisc العربية Aragonés Արեւմտահայերէն অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Bislama Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština ChiShona Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego 贛語 ગુજરાતી 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue IsiXhosa IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული کٲشُر Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova La .lojban.

Lombard Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Malti मराठी მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Мокшень Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Novial Occitan Олык марий ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی ပအိုဝ်ႏဘာႏသာႏ Papiamentu پښتو Patois ភាសាខ្មែរ Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qırımtatarca Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла संस्कृतम् Sardu Scots Seeltersk Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taclḥit Taqbaylit Tarandíne Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Тыва дыл Українська اردو Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Võro 文言 West-Vlams Winaray Wolof 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chemical substance not composed of simpler ones This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Chemical element" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The chemical elements ordered in the periodic table Part of a series on the Periodic table Periodic table forms 18-column 32-column Alternative and extended forms Periodic table history D. Mendeleev 1871 table 1869 predictions Discovery of elements Naming and etymology for people for places controversies ( in East Asia ) Systematic element names Sets of elements By periodic table structure Groups (1–18) 1 ( alkali metals ) 2 (alkaline earth metals) 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 (pnictogens) 16 (chalcogens) 17 (halogens) 18 (noble gases) Periods (1–7, ...) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8+ Blocks (s, p, d, f, ...) Atomic orbitals Aufbau principle By metallic classification Metals alkali alkaline earth transition post-transition lanthanide actinide Metalloids dividing metals and nonmetals Nonmetals nonmetal halogen noble gas By other characteristics Coinage metals Platinum-group metals Precious metals Refractory metals Heavy metals Light metals Native metals Noble metals Main-group elements Rare-earth elements Transuranium elements Major , minor and trans- actinides Elements List of chemical elements by abundance ( in human body ) by atomic properties by isotope stability by symbol Properties of elements Relative atomic mass Crystal structure Electron affinity configuration Electronegativity ( Allen , Pauling ) Goldschmidt classification Nutrition Valence Data pages for elements Abundance Atomic radius Boiling point Critical point Density Elasticity Electrical resistivity Electron affinity / configuration Electronegativity Hardness Heat capacity / of fusion / of vaporization Ionization energy Melting point Oxidation state Speed of sound Thermal conductivity / expansion coefficient Vapor pressure Category Chemistry Portal v t e A chemical element is a chemical substance whose atoms all have the same number of protons . The number of protons is called the atomic number of that element. For example, oxygen has an atomic number of 8: each oxygen atom has 8 protons in its nucleus . Atoms of the same element can have different numbers of neutrons in their nuclei, known as isotopes of the element. Two or more atoms can combine to form molecules . Some elements form molecules of atoms of said element only : e.g. atoms of hydrogen (H) form diatomic molecules (H 2 ).

Chemical compounds are substances made of atoms of different elements; they can have molecular or non-molecular structure.

Mixtures are materials containing different chemical substances; that means (in case of molecular substances) that they contain different types of molecules. Atoms of one element can be transformed into atoms of a different element in nuclear reactions , which change an atom's atomic number.

Historically, the term "chemical element" meant a substance that cannot be broken down into constituent substances by chemical reactions, and for most practical purposes this definition still has validity. There was some controversy in the 1920s over whether isotopes deserved to be recognised as separate elements if they could be separated by chemical means.

[ 1 ] The term "(chemical) element" is used in two different but closely related meanings: [ 2 ] it can mean a chemical substance consisting of a single kind of atom (a free element ), or it can mean that kind of atom as a component of various chemical substances. For example, water (H 2 O) consists of the elements hydrogen (H) and oxygen (O) even though it does not contain the chemical substances (di)hydrogen (H 2 ) and (di)oxygen (O 2 ), as H 2 O molecules are different from H 2 and O 2 molecules. For the meaning "chemical substance consisting of a single kind of atom", the terms "elementary substance" and "simple substance" have been suggested, but they have not gained much acceptance in English chemical literature, whereas in some other languages their equivalent is widely used. For example, French distinguishes élément chimique (kind of atoms) and corps simple (chemical substance consisting of one kind of atom); Russian distinguishes химический элемент and простое вещество .

Almost all baryonic matter in the universe is composed of elements (among rare exceptions are neutron stars ). When different elements undergo chemical reactions, atoms are rearranged into new compounds held together by chemical bonds . Only a few elements, such as silver and gold , are found uncombined as relatively pure native element minerals . Nearly all other naturally occurring elements occur in the Earth as compounds or mixtures.

Air is mostly a mixture of molecular nitrogen and oxygen , though it does contain compounds including carbon dioxide and water , as well as atomic argon , a noble gas which is chemically inert and therefore does not undergo chemical reactions.

The history of the discovery and use of elements began with early human societies that discovered native minerals like carbon , sulfur , copper and gold (though the modern concept of an element was not yet understood). Attempts to classify materials such as these resulted in the concepts of classical elements , alchemy , and similar theories throughout history. Much of the modern understanding of elements developed from the work of Dmitri Mendeleev , a Russian chemist who published the first recognizable periodic table in 1869. This table organizes the elements by increasing atomic number into rows (" periods ") in which the columns (" groups ") share recurring ("periodic") physical and chemical properties . The periodic table summarizes various properties of the elements, allowing chemists to derive relationships between them and to make predictions about elements not yet discovered, and potential new compounds.

By November 2016, the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) recognized a total of 118 elements. The first 94 occur naturally on Earth , and the remaining 24 are synthetic elements produced in nuclear reactions. Save for unstable radioactive elements (radioelements) which decay quickly, nearly all elements are available industrially in varying amounts. The discovery and synthesis of further new elements is an ongoing area of scientific study.

Description The lightest elements are hydrogen and helium , both created by Big Bang nucleosynthesis in the first 20 minutes of the universe [ 3 ] in a ratio of around 3:1 by mass (or 12:1 by number of atoms), [ 4 ] [ 5 ] along with tiny traces of the next two elements, lithium and beryllium . Almost all other elements found in nature were made by various natural methods of nucleosynthesis .

[ 6 ] On Earth, small amounts of new atoms are naturally produced in nucleogenic reactions, or in cosmogenic processes, such as cosmic ray spallation . New atoms are also naturally produced on Earth as radiogenic daughter isotopes of ongoing radioactive decay processes such as alpha decay , beta decay , spontaneous fission , cluster decay , and other rarer modes of decay.

Of the 94 naturally occurring elements, those with atomic numbers 1 through 82 each have at least one stable isotope (except for technetium , element 43 and promethium , element 61, which have no stable isotopes). Isotopes considered stable are those for which no radioactive decay has yet been observed. Elements with atomic numbers 83 through 94 are unstable enough that radioactive decay of all isotopes can be detected. Some of these elements, notably bismuth (atomic number 83), thorium (atomic number 90), and uranium (atomic number 92), have one or more isotopes with half-lives long enough to survive as remnants of the explosive stellar nucleosynthesis that produced the heavy metals before the Solar System formed. At 2 × 10 19 years, over 10 9 times the estimated age of the universe, bismuth-209 has the longest known alpha decay half-life of any nuclide, and is almost always considered on par with the 80 stable elements.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] The heaviest elements (those beyond plutonium, element 94) are radioactive, with half-lives so short that they are not found in nature and must be synthesized .

There are now 118 known elements. "Known" here means observed well enough, even from just a few decay products, to have been differentiated from other elements.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Most recently, the synthesis of element 118 (since named oganesson ) was reported in October 2006, and the synthesis of element 117 ( tennessine ) was reported in April 2010.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Of these 118 elements, 94 occur naturally on Earth. Six of these occur in extreme trace amounts: technetium , atomic number 43; promethium , number 61; astatine , number 85; francium , number 87; neptunium , number 93; and plutonium , number 94. These 94 elements have been detected in the universe at large, in the spectra of stars and also supernovae, where short-lived radioactive elements are newly being made. The first 94 elements have been detected directly on Earth as primordial nuclides present from the formation of the Solar System , or as naturally occurring fission or transmutation products of uranium and thorium.

The remaining 24 heavier elements, not found today either on Earth or in astronomical spectra, have been produced artificially: all are radioactive, with short half-lives; if any of these elements were present when the Earth formed, they are certain to have completely decayed, and if present in novae, are in quantities too small to have been noted. Technetium was the first purportedly non-naturally occurring element synthesized, in 1937, though traces of technetium have since been found in nature (and also the element may have been discovered naturally in 1925).

[ 13 ] This pattern of artificial production and later natural discovery has been repeated with several other radioactive naturally occurring rare elements.

[ 14 ] Lists of elements are available by name, atomic number, density, melting point, boiling point and chemical symbol , as well as ionization energy . The nuclides of stable and radioactive elements are also available as a list of nuclides , sorted by length of half-life for those that are unstable. One of the most convenient, and certainly the most traditional presentation of the elements, is in the form of the periodic table, which groups together elements with similar chemical properties (and usually also similar electronic structures).

Atomic number Main article: Atomic number The atomic number of an element is equal to the number of protons in each atom, and defines the element.

[ 15 ] For example, all carbon atoms contain 6 protons in their atomic nucleus ; so the atomic number of carbon is 6.

[ 16 ] Carbon atoms may have different numbers of neutrons; atoms of the same element having different numbers of neutrons are known as isotopes of the element.

[ 17 ] The number of protons in the nucleus also determines its electric charge , which in turn determines the number of electrons of the atom in its non-ionized state. The electrons are placed into atomic orbitals that determine the atom's chemical properties . The number of neutrons in a nucleus usually has very little effect on an element's chemical properties; except for hydrogen (for which the kinetic isotope effect is significant). Thus, all carbon isotopes have nearly identical chemical properties because they all have six electrons, even though they may have 6 to 8 neutrons. That is why atomic number, rather than mass number or atomic weight , is considered the identifying characteristic of an element.

The symbol for atomic number is Z .

Isotopes Main articles: Isotope , Stable isotope ratio , and List of nuclides Isotopes are atoms of the same element (that is, with the same number of protons in their nucleus), but having different numbers of neutrons . Thus, for example, there are three main isotopes of carbon. All carbon atoms have 6 protons, but they can have either 6, 7, or 8 neutrons. Since the mass numbers of these are 12, 13 and 14 respectively, said three isotopes are known as carbon-12 , carbon-13 , and carbon-14 ( 12 C, 13 C, and 14 C). Natural carbon is a mixture of 12 C (about 98.9%), 13 C (about 1.1%) and about 1 atom per trillion of 14 C.

Most (54 of 94) naturally occurring elements have more than one stable isotope. Except for the isotopes of hydrogen (which differ greatly from each other in relative mass—enough to cause chemical effects), the isotopes of a given element are chemically nearly indistinguishable.

All elements have radioactive isotopes (radioisotopes); most of these radioisotopes do not occur naturally. Radioisotopes typically decay into other elements via alpha decay , beta decay , or inverse beta decay ; some isotopes of the heaviest elements also undergo spontaneous fission . Isotopes that are not radioactive, are termed "stable" isotopes. All known stable isotopes occur naturally (see primordial nuclide ). The many radioisotopes that are not found in nature have been characterized after being artificially produced. Certain elements have no stable isotopes and are composed only of radioisotopes: specifically the elements without any stable isotopes are technetium (atomic number 43), promethium (atomic number 61), and all observed elements with atomic number greater than 82.

Of the 80 elements with at least one stable isotope, 26 have only one stable isotope. The mean number of stable isotopes for the 80 stable elements is 3.1 stable isotopes per element. The largest number of stable isotopes for a single element is 10 (for tin , element 50).

Isotopic mass and atomic mass Main articles: Atomic mass and Relative atomic mass The mass number of an element, A , is the number of nucleons (protons and neutrons) in the atomic nucleus. Different isotopes of a given element are distinguished by their mass number, which is written as a superscript on the left hand side of the chemical symbol (e.g., 238 U). The mass number is always an integer and has units of "nucleons". Thus, magnesium-24 (24 is the mass number) is an atom with 24 nucleons (12 protons and 12 neutrons).

Whereas the mass number simply counts the total number of neutrons and protons and is thus an integer, the atomic mass of a particular isotope (or "nuclide") of the element is the mass of a single atom of that isotope, and is typically expressed in daltons (symbol: Da), aka universal atomic mass units (symbol: u). Its relative atomic mass is a dimensionless number equal to the atomic mass divided by the atomic mass constant , which equals 1 Da. In general, the mass number of a given nuclide differs in value slightly from its relative atomic mass, since the mass of each proton and neutron is not exactly 1 Da; since the electrons contribute a lesser share to the atomic mass as neutron number exceeds proton number; and because of the nuclear binding energy and electron binding energy. For example, the atomic mass of chlorine-35 to five significant digits is 34.969 Da and that of chlorine-37 is 36.966 Da. However, the relative atomic mass of each isotope is quite close to its mass number (always within 1%). The only isotope whose atomic mass is exactly a natural number is 12 C, which has a mass of 12 Da; because the dalton is defined as 1/12 of the mass of a free neutral carbon-12 atom in the ground state.

The standard atomic weight (commonly called "atomic weight") of an element is the average of the atomic masses of all the chemical element's isotopes as found in a particular environment, weighted by isotopic abundance, relative to the atomic mass unit. This number may be a fraction that is not close to a whole number. For example, the relative atomic mass of chlorine is 35.453 u, which differs greatly from a whole number as it is an average of about 76% chlorine-35 and 24% chlorine-37. Whenever a relative atomic mass value differs by more than ~1% from a whole number, it is due to this averaging effect, as significant amounts of more than one isotope are naturally present in a sample of that element.

Chemically pure and isotopically pure Chemists and nuclear scientists have different definitions of a pure element . In chemistry, a pure element means a substance whose atoms all (or in practice almost all) have the same atomic number, or number of protons . Nuclear scientists, however, define a pure element as one that consists of only one isotope.

[ 18 ] For example, a copper wire is 99.99% chemically pure if 99.99% of its atoms are copper, with 29 protons each. However it is not isotopically pure since natural copper consists of two stable isotopes, 69% 63 Cu and 31% 65 Cu, with different numbers of neutrons. (See Isotopes of copper .) However, pure gold would be both chemically and isotopically pure, since ordinary gold consists only of one isotope, 197 Au.

Allotropes Main article: Allotropy Atoms of chemically pure elements may bond to each other chemically in more than one way, allowing the pure element to exist in multiple chemical structures ( spatial arrangements of atoms ), known as allotropes , which differ in their properties. For example, carbon can be found as diamond , which has a tetrahedral structure around each carbon atom; graphite , which has layers of carbon atoms with a hexagonal structure stacked on top of each other; graphene , which is a single layer of graphite that is very strong; fullerenes , which have nearly spherical shapes; and carbon nanotubes , which are tubes with a hexagonal structure (even these may differ from each other in electrical properties). The ability of an element to exist in one of many structural forms is known as 'allotropy'.

The reference state of an element is defined by convention, usually as the thermodynamically most stable allotrope and physical state at a pressure of 1 bar and a given temperature (typically 298.15 K ). However, for phosphorus, the reference state is white phosphorus even though it is not the most stable allotrope, and the reference state for carbon is graphite, because the structure of graphite is more stable than that of the other allotropes. In thermochemistry , an element is defined to have an enthalpy of formation of zero in its reference state.

Properties Several kinds of descriptive categorisations can be applied broadly to the elements, including consideration of their general physical and chemical properties, their states of matter under familiar conditions, their melting and boiling points, their densities, their crystal structures as solids, and their origins.

General properties Several terms are commonly used to characterise the general physical and chemical properties of the chemical elements. A first distinction is between metals , which readily conduct electricity , nonmetals , which do not, and a small group, the metalloids , having intermediate properties and often behaving as semiconductors .

A more refined classification is often shown in coloured presentations of the periodic table. This system restricts the terms "metal" and "nonmetal" to only certain of the more broadly defined metals and nonmetals, adding additional terms for certain sets of the more broadly viewed metals and nonmetals. The version of this classification used in the periodic tables presented here includes: actinides , alkali metals , alkaline earth metals , halogens , lanthanides , transition metals , post-transition metals , metalloids , reactive nonmetals , and noble gases . In this system, the alkali metals, alkaline earth metals, and transition metals, as well as the lanthanides and the actinides, are special groups of the metals viewed in a broader sense. Similarly, the reactive nonmetals and the noble gases are nonmetals viewed in the broader sense. In some presentations, the halogens are not distinguished, with astatine identified as a metalloid and the others identified as nonmetals.

States of matter Another commonly used basic distinction among the elements is their state of matter (phase), whether solid , liquid , or gas , at standard temperature and pressure (STP). Most elements are solids at STP, while several are gases. Only bromine and mercury are liquid at 0 degrees Celsius (32 degrees Fahrenheit) and 1 atmosphere pressure; caesium and gallium are solid at that temperature, but melt at 28.4°C (83.2°F) and 29.8°C (85.6°F), respectively.

Melting and boiling points Melting and boiling points , typically expressed in degrees Celsius at a pressure of one atmosphere, are commonly used in characterizing the various elements. While known for most elements, either or both of these measurements is still undetermined for some of the radioactive elements available in only tiny quantities. Since helium remains a liquid even at absolute zero at atmospheric pressure, it has only a boiling point, and not a melting point, in conventional presentations.

Densities Main article: Densities of the elements (data page) The density at selected standard temperature and pressure (STP) is often used in characterizing the elements. Density is often expressed in grams per cubic centimetre (g/cm 3 ). Since several elements are gases at commonly encountered temperatures, their densities are usually stated for their gaseous forms; when liquefied or solidified, the gaseous elements have densities similar to those of the other elements.

When an element has allotropes with different densities, one representative allotrope is typically selected in summary presentations, while densities for each allotrope can be stated where more detail is provided. For example, the three familiar allotropes of carbon ( amorphous carbon , graphite , and diamond ) have densities of 1.8–2.1, 2.267, and 3.515 g/cm 3 , respectively.

Crystal structures Main article: Crystal structure The elements studied to date as solid samples have eight kinds of crystal structures : cubic , body-centered cubic , face-centered cubic, hexagonal , monoclinic , orthorhombic , rhombohedral , and tetragonal . For some of the synthetically produced transuranic elements, available samples have been too small to determine crystal structures.

Occurrence and origin on Earth Main article: Abundance of elements in Earth's crust Chemical elements may also be categorised by their origin on Earth, with the first 94 considered naturally occurring, while those with atomic numbers beyond 94 have only been produced artificially via human-made nuclear reactions.

Of the 94 naturally occurring elements, 83 are considered primordial and either stable or weakly radioactive. The longest-lived isotopes of the remaining 11 elements have half lives too short for them to have been present at the beginning of the Solar System, and are therefore "transient elements". Of these 11 transient elements, five ( polonium , radon , radium , actinium , and protactinium ) are relatively common decay products of thorium and uranium . The remaining six transient elements (technetium, promethium, astatine, francium , neptunium , and plutonium ) occur only rarely, as products of rare decay modes or nuclear reaction processes involving uranium or other heavy elements.

Elements with atomic numbers 1 through 82, except 43 (technetium) and 61 (promethium), each have at least one isotope for which no radioactive decay has been observed. Observationally stable isotopes of some elements (such as tungsten and lead ), however, are predicted to be slightly radioactive with very long half-lives: [ 19 ] for example, the half-lives predicted for the observationally stable lead isotopes range from 10 35 to 10 189 years. Elements with atomic numbers 43, 61, and 83 through 94 are unstable enough that their radioactive decay can be detected. Three of these elements, bismuth (element 83), thorium (90), and uranium (92) have one or more isotopes with half-lives long enough to survive as remnants of the explosive stellar nucleosynthesis that produced the heavy elements before the formation of the Solar System. For example, at over 1.9 × 10 19 years, over a billion times longer than the estimated age of the universe, bismuth-209 has the longest known alpha decay half-life of any isotope.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] The last 24 elements (those beyond plutonium, element 94) undergo radioactive decay with short half-lives and cannot be produced as daughters of longer-lived elements, and thus are not known to occur in nature at all.

Periodic table Main article: Periodic table v t e Periodic table Group 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 Hydrogen & alkali metals Alkaline earth metals Triels Tetrels Pnicto­gens Chal­co­gens Halo­gens Noble gases Period 1 Hydro­gen 1 H ​ 1.0080 He­lium 2 He ​ 4.0026 2 Lith­ium 3 Li ​ 6.94 Beryl­lium 4 Be ​ 9.0122 Boron 5 B ​ 10.81 Carbon 6 C ​ 12.011 Nitro­gen 7 N ​ 14.007 Oxy­gen 8 O ​ 15.999 Fluor­ine 9 F ​ 18.998 Neon 10 Ne ​ 20.180 3 So­dium 11 Na ​ 22.990 Magne­sium 12 Mg ​ 24.305 Alumin­ium 13 Al ​ 26.982 Sili­con 14 Si ​ 28.085 Phos­phorus 15 P ​ 30.974 Sulfur 16 S ​ 32.06 Chlor­ine 17 Cl ​ 35.45 Argon 18 Ar ​ 39.95 4 Potas­sium 19 K ​ 39.098 Cal­cium 20 Ca ​ 40.078 Scan­dium 21 Sc ​ 44.956 Tita­nium 22 Ti ​ 47.867 Vana­dium 23 V ​ 50.942 Chrom­ium 24 Cr ​ 51.996 Manga­nese 25 Mn ​ 54.938 Iron 26 Fe ​ 55.845 Cobalt 27 Co ​ 58.933 Nickel 28 Ni ​ 58.693 Copper 29 Cu ​ 63.546 Zinc 30 Zn ​ 65.38 Gallium 31 Ga ​ 69.723 Germa­nium 32 Ge ​ 72.630 Arsenic 33 As ​ 74.922 Sele­nium 34 Se ​ 78.971 Bromine 35 Br ​ 79.904 Kryp­ton 36 Kr ​ 83.798 5 Rubid­ium 37 Rb ​ 85.468 Stront­ium 38 Sr ​ 87.62 Yttrium 39 Y ​ 88.906 Zirco­nium 40 Zr ​ 91.224 Nio­bium 41 Nb ​ 92.906 Molyb­denum 42 Mo ​ 95.95 Tech­netium 43 Tc ​[97] Ruthe­nium 44 Ru ​ 101.07 Rho­dium 45 Rh ​ 102.91 Pallad­ium 46 Pd ​ 106.42 Silver 47 Ag ​ 107.87 Cad­mium 48 Cd ​ 112.41 Indium 49 In ​ 114.82 Tin 50 Sn ​ 118.71 Anti­mony 51 Sb ​ 121.76 Tellur­ium 52 Te ​ 127.60 Iodine 53 I ​ 126.90 Xenon 54 Xe ​ 131.29 6 Cae­sium 55 Cs ​ 132.91 Ba­rium 56 Ba ​ 137.33 Lute­tium 71 Lu ​ 174.97 Haf­nium 72 Hf ​ 178.49 Tanta­lum 73 Ta ​ 180.95 Tung­sten 74 W ​ 183.84 Rhe­nium 75 Re ​ 186.21 Os­mium 76 Os ​ 190.23 Iridium 77 Ir ​ 192.22 Plat­inum 78 Pt ​ 195.08 Gold 79 Au ​ 196.97 Mer­cury 80 Hg ​ 200.59 Thallium 81 Tl ​ 204.38 Lead 82 Pb ​ 207.2 Bis­muth 83 Bi ​ 208.98 Polo­nium 84 Po ​[209] Asta­tine 85 At ​[210] Radon 86 Rn ​[222] 7 Fran­cium 87 Fr ​[223] Ra­dium 88 Ra ​[226] Lawren­cium 103 Lr ​[266] Ruther­fordium 104 Rf ​[267] Dub­nium 105 Db ​[268] Sea­borgium 106 Sg ​[269] Bohr­ium 107 Bh ​[270] Has­sium 108 Hs ​[271] Meit­nerium 109 Mt ​[278] Darm­stadtium 110 Ds ​[281] Roent­genium 111 Rg ​[282] Coper­nicium 112 Cn ​[285] Nihon­ium 113 Nh ​[286] Flerov­ium 114 Fl ​[289] Moscov­ium 115 Mc ​[290] Liver­morium 116 Lv ​[293] Tenness­ine 117 Ts ​[294] Oga­nesson 118 Og ​[294] Lan­thanum 57 La ​ 138.91 Cerium 58 Ce ​ 140.12 Praseo­dymium 59 Pr ​ 140.91 Neo­dymium 60 Nd ​ 144.24 Prome­thium 61 Pm ​[145] Sama­rium 62 Sm ​ 150.36 Europ­ium 63 Eu ​ 151.96 Gadolin­ium 64 Gd ​ 157.25 Ter­bium 65 Tb ​ 158.93 Dyspro­sium 66 Dy ​ 162.50 Hol­mium 67 Ho ​ 164.93 Erbium 68 Er ​ 167.26 Thulium 69 Tm ​ 168.93 Ytter­bium 70 Yb ​ 173.05 Actin­ium 89 Ac ​[227] Thor­ium 90 Th ​ 232.04 Protac­tinium 91 Pa ​ 231.04 Ura­nium 92 U ​ 238.03 Neptu­nium 93 Np ​[237] Pluto­nium 94 Pu ​[244] Ameri­cium 95 Am ​[243] Curium 96 Cm ​[247] Berkel­ium 97 Bk ​[247] Califor­nium 98 Cf ​[251] Einstei­nium 99 Es ​[252] Fer­mium 100 Fm ​[257] Mende­levium 101 Md ​[258] Nobel­ium 102 No ​[259] Primordial From decay Synthetic Border shows natural occurrence of the element Standard atomic weight A r, std (E) [ 20 ] Ca: 40.078 — Abridged value (uncertainty omitted here) [ 21 ] Po: [209] — mass number of the most stable isotope s-block f-block d-block p-block The properties of the elements are often summarized using the periodic table, which powerfully and elegantly organizes the elements by increasing atomic number into rows ( "periods" ) in which the columns ( "groups" ) share recurring ("periodic") physical and chemical properties. The table contains 118 confirmed elements as of 2021.

Though earlier precursors to this presentation exist, its invention is generally credited to Russian chemist Dmitri Mendeleev in 1869, who intended the table to illustrate recurring trends in the properties of the elements. The layout of the table has been refined and extended over time as new elements have been discovered and new theoretical models have been developed to explain chemical behavior.

Use of the periodic table is now ubiquitous in chemistry, providing an extremely useful framework to classify, systematize and compare all the many different forms of chemical behavior. The table has also found wide application in physics , geology , biology , materials science , engineering , agriculture , medicine , nutrition , environmental health , and astronomy . Its principles are especially important in chemical engineering .

Nomenclature and symbols The various chemical elements are formally identified by their unique atomic numbers, their accepted names, and their chemical symbols .

Atomic numbers The known elements have atomic numbers from 1 to 118, conventionally presented as Arabic numerals . Since the elements can be uniquely sequenced by atomic number, conventionally from lowest to highest (as in a periodic table), sets of elements are sometimes specified by such notation as "through", "beyond", or "from ... through", as in "through iron", "beyond uranium", or "from lanthanum through lutetium". The terms "light" and "heavy" are sometimes also used informally to indicate relative atomic numbers (not densities), as in "lighter than carbon" or "heavier than lead", though the atomic masses of the elements (their atomic weights or atomic masses) do not always increase monotonically with their atomic numbers.

Element names Main article: Naming of chemical elements The naming of various substances now known as elements precedes the atomic theory of matter, as names were given locally by various cultures to various minerals, metals, compounds, alloys, mixtures, and other materials, though at the time it was not known which chemicals were elements and which compounds. As they were identified as elements, the existing names for anciently known elements (e.g., gold, mercury, iron) were kept in most countries. National differences emerged over the element names either for convenience, linguistic niceties, or nationalism. For example, German speakers use "Wasserstoff" (water stuff) for "hydrogen", "Sauerstoff" (acid stuff) for "oxygen", and "Stickstoff" (smothering stuff) for "nitrogen"; English and some other languages use "sodium" for "natrium", and "potassium" for "kalium"; and the French, Italians, Greeks, Portuguese and Poles prefer "azote/azot/azoto" (from roots meaning "no life") for "nitrogen".

For purposes of international communication and trade, the official names of the chemical elements both ancient and more recently recognised are decided by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC), which has decided on a sort of international English language, drawing on traditional English names even when an element's chemical symbol is based on a Latin or other traditional word, for example adopting "gold" rather than "aurum" as the name for the 79th element (Au). IUPAC prefers the British spellings " aluminium " and "caesium" over the U.S. spellings "aluminum" and "cesium", and the U.S. "sulfur" over British "sulphur". However, elements that are practical to sell in bulk in many countries often still have locally used national names, and countries whose national language does not use the Latin alphabet are likely to use the IUPAC element names.

According to IUPAC, element names are not proper nouns; therefore, the full name of an element is not capitalised in English, even if derived from a proper noun , as in californium and einsteinium . Isotope names are also uncapitalised if written out, e.g., carbon-12 or uranium-235 . Chemical element symbols (such as Cf for californium and Es for einsteinium), are always capitalised (see below).

In the second half of the 20th century, physics laboratories became able to produce elements with half-lives too short for an appreciable amount of them to exist at any time. These are also named by IUPAC, which generally adopts the name chosen by the discoverer. This practice can lead to the controversial question of which research group actually discovered an element, a question that delayed the naming of elements with atomic number of 104 and higher for a considerable amount of time. (See element naming controversy ).

Precursors of such controversies involved the nationalistic namings of elements in the late 19th century. For example, lutetium was named after Paris, France. The Germans were reluctant to relinquish naming rights to the French, often calling it cassiopeium . Similarly, the British discoverer of niobium originally named it columbium , in reference to the New World . It was used extensively as such by American publications before the international standardisation (in 1950).

Chemical symbols For lists of current chemical symbols, symbols not currently used, and other symbols that may look like chemical symbols, see Chemical symbol .

Specific elements Before chemistry became a science , alchemists designed arcane symbols for both metals and common compounds. These were however used as abbreviations in diagrams or procedures; there was no concept of atoms combining to form molecules . With his advances in the atomic theory of matter, John Dalton devised his own simpler symbols, based on circles, to depict molecules.

The current system of chemical notation was invented by Jöns Jacob Berzelius in 1814. In this system, chemical symbols are not mere abbreviations—though each consists of letters of the Latin alphabet . They are intended as universal symbols for people of all languages and alphabets.

Since Latin was the common language of science at Berzelius' time, his symbols were abbreviations based on the Latin names of elements (they may be Classical Latin names of elements known since antiquity or Neo-Latin coinages for later elements). The symbols are not followed by a period (full stop) as with abbreviations. In most cases, Latin names of elements as used by Berzelius have the same roots as the modern English name. For example, hydrogen has the symbol "H" from Neo-Latin hydrogenium , which has the same Greek roots as English hydrogen . However, in eleven cases Latin (as used by Berzelius) and English names of elements have different roots. Eight of them are the seven metals of antiquity and a metalloid also known since antiquity: "Fe" (Latin ferrum ) for iron , "Hg" (Latin hydrargyrum ) for mercury , "Sn" (Latin stannum ) for tin , "Au" (Latin aurum ) for gold, "Ag" (Latin argentum ) for silver , "Pb" (Latin plumbum ) for lead , "Cu" (Latin cuprum ) for copper , and "Sb" (Latin stibium ) for antimony . The three other mismatches between Neo-Latin (as used by Berzelius) and English names are "Na" (Neo-Latin natrium ) for sodium , "K" (Neo-Latin kalium ) for potassium , and "W" (Neo-Latin wolframium ) for tungsten . These mismatches came from different suggestings of naming the elements in the Modern era . Initially Berzelius had suggested "So" and "Po" for sodium and potassium, but he changed the symbols to "Na" and "K" later in the same year.

Elements discovered after 1814 were also assigned unique chemical symbols, based on the name of the element. The use of Latin as the universal language of science was fading, but chemical names of newly discovered elements came to be borrowed from language to language with little or no modification. Symbols of elements discovered after 1814 match their names in English, French (ignoring the acute accent on ⟨é⟩), and German (though German often allows alternate spellings with ⟨k⟩ or ⟨z⟩ instead of ⟨c⟩: e.g., the name of calcium may be spelled Calcium or Kalzium in German, but its symbol is always "Ca"). Other languages sometimes modify element name spellings: Spanish iterbio (ytterbium), Italian afnio (hafnium), Swedish moskovium (moscovium); but those modifications do not affect chemical symbols: Yb, Hf, Mc.

Chemical symbols are understood internationally when element names might require translation. There have been some differences in the past. For example, Germans in the past have used "J" (for the name Jod ) for iodine, but now use "I" and Iod .

The first letter of a chemical symbol is always capitalised, and the subsequent letters, if any, are always lowercase; see the preceding examples.

General chemical symbols There are also symbols in chemical equations for groups of elements, for example in comparative formulas. These are often a single capital letter, and the letters are reserved and not used for names of specific elements. For example, " X " indicates a variable group (usually a halogen) in a class of compounds, while " R " is a radical , meaning a compound structure such as a hydrocarbon chain. The letter " Q " is reserved for "heat" in a chemical reaction. " Y " is also often used as a general chemical symbol, though it is also the symbol of yttrium . " Z " is also often used as a general variable group. " E " is used in organic chemistry to denote an electron-withdrawing group or an electrophile ; similarly " Nu " denotes a nucleophile . " L " is used to represent a general ligand in inorganic and organometallic chemistry . " M " is often used in place of a general metal.

At least two other, two-letter generic chemical symbols are also in informal use, " Ln " for any lanthanide and " An " for any actinide . " Rg " was formerly used for any rare gas element, but the group of rare gases has now been renamed noble gases and " Rg " now refers to roentgenium .

Isotope symbols Isotopes of an element are distinguished by mass number (total protons and neutrons), with this number combined with the element's symbol. IUPAC prefers that isotope symbols be written in superscript notation when practical, for example 12 C and 235 U. However, other notations, such as carbon-12 and uranium-235, or C-12 and U-235, are also used.

As a special case, the three naturally occurring isotopes of hydrogen are often specified as H for 1 H ( protium ), D for 2 H ( deuterium ), and T for 3 H ( tritium ). This convention is easier to use in chemical equations, replacing the need to write out the mass number each time. Thus, the formula for heavy water may be written D 2 O instead of 2 H 2 O.

Origin of the elements Main article: Nucleosynthesis Estimated distribution of dark matter and dark energy in the universe. Only the fraction of the mass and energy labeled "atoms" is composed of elements.

Only about 4% of the total mass of the universe is made of atoms or ions , and thus represented by elements. This fraction is about 15% of the total matter, with the remainder of the matter (85%) being dark matter . The nature of dark matter is unknown, but it is not composed of atoms of elements because it contains no protons, neutrons, or electrons. The remaining non-matter part of the mass of the universe is composed of the even less well understood dark energy .

The 94 naturally occurring elements were produced by at least four classes of astrophysical process. Most of the hydrogen, helium and a very small quantity of lithium were produced in the first few minutes of the Big Bang . This Big Bang nucleosynthesis happened only once; the other processes are ongoing.

Nuclear fusion inside stars produces elements through stellar nucleosynthesis, including all elements from carbon to iron in atomic number. Elements higher in atomic number than iron, including heavy elements like uranium and plutonium, are produced by various forms of explosive nucleosynthesis in supernovae and neutron star mergers . The light elements lithium , beryllium and boron are produced mostly through cosmic ray spallation (fragmentation induced by cosmic rays ) of carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen.

In the early phases of the Big Bang, nucleosynthesis of hydrogen resulted in the production of hydrogen-1 (protium, 1 H) and helium-4 ( 4 He), as well as a smaller amount of deuterium ( 2 H) and tiny amounts (on the order of 10 −10 ) of lithium and beryllium. Even smaller amounts of boron may have been produced in the Big Bang, since it has been observed in some very old stars, while carbon has not.

[ 22 ] No elements heavier than boron were produced in the Big Bang. As a result, the primordial abundance of atoms (or ions) consisted of ~75% 1 H, 25% 4 He, and 0.01% deuterium, with only tiny traces of lithium, beryllium, and perhaps boron.

[ 23 ] Subsequent enrichment of galactic halos occurred due to stellar nucleosynthesis and supernova nucleosynthesis .

[ 24 ] However, the element abundance in intergalactic space can still closely resemble primordial conditions, unless it has been enriched by some means.

Periodic table showing the cosmogenic origin of each element in the Big Bang, or in large or small stars. Small stars can produce certain elements up to sulfur, by the alpha process . Supernovae are needed to produce "heavy" elements (those beyond iron and nickel) rapidly by neutron buildup, in the r-process . Certain large stars slowly produce other elements heavier than iron, in the s-process ; these may then be blown into space in the off-gassing of planetary nebulae On Earth (and elsewhere), trace amounts of various elements continue to be produced from other elements as products of nuclear transmutation processes. These include some produced by cosmic rays or other nuclear reactions (see cosmogenic and nucleogenic nuclides), and others produced as decay products of long-lived primordial nuclides.

[ 25 ] For example, trace (but detectable) amounts of carbon-14 ( 14 C) are continually produced in the air by cosmic rays impacting nitrogen atoms, and argon-40 ( 40 Ar) is continually produced by the decay of primordially occurring but unstable potassium-40 ( 40 K). Also, three primordially occurring but radioactive actinides, thorium, uranium, and plutonium, decay through a series of recurrently produced but unstable elements such as radium and radon , which are transiently present in any sample of containing these metals. Three other radioactive elements, technetium, promethium, and neptunium, occur only incidentally in natural materials, produced as individual atoms by nuclear fission of the nuclei of various heavy elements or in other rare nuclear processes.

Besides the 94 naturally occurring elements, several artificial elements have been produced by nuclear physics technology. By 2016, these experiments had produced all elements up to atomic number 118.

Abundance Main article: Abundance of the chemical elements The following graph (note log scale) shows the abundance of elements in our Solar System. The table shows the 12 most common elements in our galaxy (estimated spectroscopically), as measured in parts per million by mass .

[ 26 ] Nearby galaxies that have evolved along similar lines have a corresponding enrichment of elements heavier than hydrogen and helium. The more distant galaxies are being viewed as they appeared in the past, so their abundances of elements appear closer to the primordial mixture. As physical laws and processes appear common throughout the visible universe , however, scientists expect that these galaxies evolved elements in similar abundance.

The abundance of elements in the Solar System is in keeping with their origin from nucleosynthesis in the Big Bang and a number of progenitor supernova stars. Very abundant hydrogen and helium are products of the Big Bang, but the next three elements are rare since they had little time to form in the Big Bang and are not made in stars (they are, however, produced in small quantities by the breakup of heavier elements in interstellar dust, as a result of impact by cosmic rays). Beginning with carbon, elements are produced in stars by buildup from alpha particles (helium nuclei), resulting in an alternatingly larger abundance of elements with even atomic numbers (these are also more stable). In general, such elements up to iron are made in large stars in the process of becoming supernovas . Iron-56 is particularly common, since it is the most stable nuclide that can easily be made from alpha particles (being a product of decay of radioactive nickel-56, ultimately made from 14 helium nuclei). Elements heavier than iron are made in energy-absorbing processes in large stars, and their abundance in the universe (and on Earth) generally decreases with their atomic number.

The abundance of the chemical elements on Earth varies from air to crust to ocean, and in various types of life. The abundance of elements in Earth's crust differs from that in the Solar System (as seen in the Sun and massive planets like Jupiter) mainly in selective loss of the very lightest elements (hydrogen and helium) and also volatile neon, carbon (as hydrocarbons), nitrogen and sulfur, as a result of solar heating in the early formation of the Solar System. Oxygen, the most abundant Earth element by mass, is retained on Earth by combination with silicon. Aluminium at 8% by mass is more common in the Earth's crust than in the universe and solar system, but the composition of the far more bulky mantle, which has magnesium and iron in place of aluminium (which occurs there only at 2% of mass) more closely mirrors the elemental composition of the solar system, save for the noted loss of volatile elements to space, and loss of iron which has migrated to the Earth's core.

The composition of the human body , by contrast, more closely follows the composition of seawater —save that the human body has additional stores of carbon and nitrogen necessary to form the proteins and nucleic acids , together with phosphorus in the nucleic acids and energy transfer molecule adenosine triphosphate (ATP) that occurs in the cells of all living organisms. Certain kinds of organisms require particular additional elements, for example the magnesium in chlorophyll in green plants, the calcium in mollusc shells , or the iron in the hemoglobin in vertebrates ' red blood cells .

Abundances of the chemical elements in the Solar System. Hydrogen and helium are most common, from the Big Bang. The next three elements (Li, Be, B) are rare because they are poorly synthesised in the Big Bang and also in stars. The two general trends in the remaining stellar-produced elements are: (1) an alternation of abundance in elements as they have even or odd atomic numbers (the Oddo–Harkins rule ), and (2) a general decrease in abundance as elements become heavier. Iron is especially common because it represents the minimum energy nuclide that can be made by fusion of helium in supernovae.

Elements in our galaxy Parts per million by mass Hydrogen 739,000 Helium 240,000 Oxygen 10,400 Carbon 4,600 Neon 1,340 Iron 1,090 Nitrogen 960 Silicon 650 Magnesium 580 Sulfur 440 Potassium 210 Nickel 100 Essential elements [ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] v t e H He Li Be B C N O F Ne Na Mg Al Si P S Cl Ar K Ca Sc Ti V Cr Mn Fe Co Ni Cu Zn Ga Ge As Se Br Kr Rb Sr Y Zr Nb Mo Tc Ru Rh Pd Ag Cd In Sn Sb Te I Xe Cs Ba * Lu Hf Ta W Re Os Ir Pt Au Hg Tl Pb Bi Po At Rn Fr Ra ** Lr Rf Db Sg Bh Hs Mt Ds Rg Cn Nh Fl Mc Lv Ts Og * La Ce Pr Nd Pm Sm Eu Gd Tb Dy Ho Er Tm Yb ** Ac Th Pa U Np Pu Am Cm Bk Cf Es Fm Md No Legend: The six basic organic elements Quantity elements Essential trace elements Essentiality or function in mammals debated No evidence for biological action in mammals, but essential or beneficial in some organisms In the case of the lanthanides , the definition of an essential nutrient as being indispensable and irreplaceable is not completely applicable due to their extreme chemical similarity. The stable early lanthanides La–Nd are known to stimulate the growth of various lanthanide-using organisms, and Sm–Gd show lesser effects for some such organisms. The later elements in the lanthanide series do not appear to have such effects.

[ 30 ] History Evolving definitions The concept of an "element" as an indivisible substance has developed through three major historical phases: Classical definitions (such as those of the ancient Greeks), chemical definitions, and atomic definitions.

Classical definitions Main article: Classical element § Hellenistic philosophy Ancient philosophy posited a set of classical elements to explain observed patterns in nature . These elements originally referred to earth , water , air and fire rather than the chemical elements of modern science.

The term 'elements' ( stoicheia ) was first used by Greek philosopher Plato around 360 BCE in his dialogue Timaeus , which includes a discussion of the composition of inorganic and organic bodies and is a speculative treatise on chemistry. Plato believed the elements introduced a century earlier by Empedocles were composed of small polyhedral forms : tetrahedron (fire), octahedron (air), icosahedron (water), and cube (earth).

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] Aristotle , c.

350 BCE , also used the term stoicheia and added a fifth element, aether , which formed the heavens. Aristotle defined an element as: Element – one of those bodies into which other bodies can decompose, and that itself is not capable of being divided into other.

[ 33 ] Chemical definitions Robert Boyle This article may need to be rewritten to comply with Wikipedia's quality standards , as section.

You can help . The talk page may contain suggestions.

( March 2024 ) Robert Boyle, c.

1740 Title page of The Sceptical Chymist, published in 1661 In 1661, in The Sceptical Chymist , Robert Boyle proposed his theory of corpuscularism which favoured the analysis of matter as constituted of irreducible units of matter (atoms); and, choosing to side with neither Aristotle's view of the four elements nor Paracelsus ' view of three fundamental elements, left open the question of the number of elements. Boyle argued against a pre-determined number of elements—directly against Paracelsus' three principles (sulfur, mercury, and salt), indirectly against the "Aristotelian" elements (earth, water, air, and fire), for Boyle felt that the arguments against the former were at least as valid against the latter.

Much of what I am to deliver ... may be indifferently apply'd to the four Peripatetick Elements, and the three Chymical Principles ... the Chymical Hypothesis seeming to be much more countenanc'd by Experience then the other, it will be expedient to insist chiefly upon the disproving of that; especially since most of the Arguments that are imploy'd against it, may, by a little variation, be made ... at least as strongly against the less plausible, Aristotelian Doctrine.

[ 34 ] Then Boyle stated his view in four propositions. In the first and second, he suggests that matter consists of particles, but that these particles may be difficult to separate. Boyle used the concept of "corpuscles"—or "atomes", [ 35 ] as he also called them—to explain how a limited number of elements could combine into a vast number of compounds.

Propos. I.

... At the first Production of mixt Bodies, the Universal Matter whereof they ... consisted, was actually divided into little Particles.

[ 36 ] ... The Generation ... and wasting of Bodies ... and ... the Chymical Resolutions of mixt Bodies, and ... Operations of ... Fires upon them ... manifest their consisting of parts very minute...

Epicurus ... as you well know, supposes ... all ... Bodies ... to be produc'd by ... Atomes, moving themselves to and fro ... in the ... Infinite Vacuum .

[ 37 ] ...

Propos. II.

... These minute Particles ... were ... associated into minute ... Clusters ... not easily dissipable into such Particles as compos'd them.

[ 38 ] ... If we assigne to the Corpuscles, whereof each Element consists, a peculiar size and shape ... such ... Corpuscles may be mingled in such various Proportions, and ... connected so many ... wayes, that an almost incredible number of ... Concretes may be compos'd of them.

[ 39 ] Boyle explained that gold reacts with aqua regia , and mercury with nitric acid, sulfuric acid, and sulfur to produce various "compounds", and that they could be recovered from those compounds, just as would be expected of elements. Yet, Boyle did not consider gold, [ 40 ] mercury, [ 41 ] or lead [ 40 ] elements, but rather—together with wine [ 42 ] —"perfectly mixt bodies".

Quicksilver ... with Aqua fortis will be brought into a ... white Powder ... with Sulphur it will compose a blood-red ... Cinaber. And yet out of all these exotick Compounds, we may recover the very same running Mercury.

[ 43 ] ...

Propos. III.

... From most of such mixt Bodies ... there may by the Help of the Fire, be actually obtain'd a determinate number (whether Three, Four or Five, or fewer or more) of Substances ...

The Chymists are wont to call the Ingredients of mixt Bodies, Principles , as the Aristotelians name them Elements . ...

Principles ... as not being compounded of any more primary Bodies: and Elements , in regard that all mix'd Bodies are compounded of them.

[ 44 ] Even though Boyle is primarily regarded as the first modern chemist, The Sceptical Chymist still contains old ideas about the elements, alien to a contemporary viewpoint. Sulfur, for example, is not only the familiar yellow non-metal but also an inflammable "spirit".

[ 42 ] Isaac Watts Portrait of Isaac Watts by John Shury, c.

1830 In 1724, in his book Logick , the English minister and logician Isaac Watts enumerated the elements then recognised by chemists. Watts' list of elements included two of Paracelsus' principles (sulfur and salt) and two classical elements (earth and water) as well as "spirit". Watts did, however, note a lack of consensus among chemists.

[ 45 ] Elements are such Substances as cannot be resolved, or reduced, into two or more Substances of different Kinds. ... Followers of Aristotle made Fire, Air, Earth and Water to be the four Elements, of which all earthly Things were compounded; and they suppos'd the Heavens to be a Quintessence, or fifth sort of Body, distinct from all these : But, since experimental Philosophy ... have been better understood, this Doctrine has been abundantly refuted. The Chymists make Spirit, Salt, Sulphur, Water and Earth to be their five Elements, because they can reduce all terrestrial Things to these five :.. tho' they are not all agreed.

Antoine Lavoisier, Jöns Jacob Berzelius, and Dmitri Mendeleev Mendeleev 's 1869 periodic table: An experiment on a system of elements. Based on their atomic weights and chemical similarities.

The first modern list of elements was given in Antoine Lavoisier 's 1789 Elements of Chemistry , which contained 33 elements, including light and caloric .

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] By 1818, Jöns Jacob Berzelius had determined atomic weights for 45 of the 49 then-accepted elements.

Dmitri Mendeleev had 63 elements in his 1869 periodic table.

Dmitri Mendeleev, 1897 From Boyle until the early 20th century, an element was defined as a pure substance that cannot be decomposed into any simpler substance and cannot be transformed into other elements by chemical processes. Elements at the time were generally distinguished by their atomic weights, a property measurable with fair accuracy by available analytical techniques.

Atomic definitions Henry Moseley The 1913 discovery by English physicist Henry Moseley that the nuclear charge is the physical basis for the atomic number, further refined when the nature of protons and neutrons became appreciated, eventually led to the current definition of an element based on atomic number (number of protons). The use of atomic numbers, rather than atomic weights, to distinguish elements has greater predictive value (since these numbers are integers) and also resolves some ambiguities in the chemistry-based view due to varying properties of isotopes and allotropes within the same element. Currently, IUPAC defines an element to exist if it has isotopes with a lifetime longer than the 10 −14 seconds it takes the nucleus to form an electronic cloud.

[ 48 ] By 1914, eighty-seven elements were known, all naturally occurring (see Discovery of chemical elements ). The remaining naturally occurring elements were discovered or isolated in subsequent decades, and various additional elements have also been produced synthetically, with much of that work pioneered by Glenn T. Seaborg . In 1955, element 101 was discovered and named mendelevium in honor of D. I. Mendeleev, the first to arrange the elements periodically.

Discovery and recognition of various elements For a chronological guide, see Discovery of chemical elements .

Ten materials familiar to various prehistoric cultures are now known to be elements: Carbon, copper, gold , iron, lead, mercury, silver, sulfur, tin , and zinc . Three additional materials now accepted as elements, arsenic , antimony , and bismuth , were recognised as distinct substances before 1500 AD.

Phosphorus , cobalt , and platinum were isolated before 1750.

Most of the remaining naturally occurring elements were identified and characterised by 1900, including: Such now-familiar industrial materials as aluminium , silicon , nickel , chromium , magnesium, and tungsten Reactive metals such as lithium , sodium , potassium, and calcium The halogens fluorine , chlorine , bromine , and iodine Gases such as hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, helium, argon , and neon Most of the rare-earth elements , including cerium , lanthanum , gadolinium , and neodymium The more common radioactive elements, including uranium, thorium, and radium Elements isolated or produced since 1900 include: The three remaining undiscovered stable elements: hafnium , lutetium , and rhenium Plutonium , which was first produced synthetically in 1940 by Glenn T. Seaborg , but is now also known from a few long-persisting natural occurrences The three incidentally occurring natural elements ( neptunium , promethium, and technetium), which were all first produced synthetically but later discovered in trace amounts in geological samples Four scarce decay products of uranium or thorium (astatine, francium, actinium , and protactinium ), and All synthetic transuranic elements, beginning with americium and curium Recently discovered elements The first transuranium element (element with an atomic number greater than 92) discovered was neptunium in 1940. Since 1999, the IUPAC/IUPAP Joint Working Party has considered claims for the discovery of new elements. As of January 2016, all 118 elements have been confirmed by IUPAC as being discovered. The discovery of element 112 was acknowledged in 2009, and the name copernicium and the chemical symbol Cn were suggested for it.

[ 49 ] The name and symbol were officially endorsed by IUPAC on 19 February 2010.

[ 50 ] The heaviest element that is believed to have been synthesised to date is element 118, oganesson , on 9 October 2006, by the Flerov Laboratory of Nuclear Reactions in Dubna , Russia.

[ 10 ] [ 51 ] Tennessine , element 117 was the latest element claimed to be discovered, in 2009.

[ 52 ] On 28 November 2016, scientists at the IUPAC officially recognised the names for the four newest elements, with atomic numbers 113, 115, 117, and 118.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] List of the 118 known chemical elements Main article: List of chemical elements The following sortable table shows the 118 known elements.

Atomic number , Element , and Symbol all serve independently as unique identifiers.

Element names are those accepted by IUPAC .

Block indicates the periodic table block for each element: red = s-block, yellow = p-block, blue = d-block, green = f-block.

Group and period refer to an element's position in the periodic table. Group numbers here show the currently accepted numbering; for older numberings, see Group (periodic table) .

v t e List of chemical elements Z Sym.

Element Name origin [ 55 ] [ 56 ] Group Period Block Atomic weight [ a ] ( Da ) Density [ b ] [ c ] ( ⁠ g / cm 3 ⁠ ) Melting point [ d ] ( K ) Boiling point [ e ] ( K ) Specific heat capacity [ f ] ( ⁠ J / g · K ⁠ ) Electro­negativity [ g ] Abundance in Earth's crust [ h ] ( ⁠ mg / kg ⁠ ) Origin [ i ] Phase [ j ] 1 H Hydrogen [ k ] 1 1 s-block 1.0080 0.000 089 88 14.01 20.28 14.304 2.20 1 400 primordial gas 2 He Helium [ l ] 18 1 s-block 4.0026 0.000 1785 – [ m ] 4.22 5.193 – 0.008 primordial gas 3 Li Lithium [ n ] 1 2 s-block 6.94 0.534 453.69 1560 3.582 0.98 20 primordial solid 4 Be Beryllium [ o ] 2 2 s-block 9.0122 1.85 1560 2742 1.825 1.57 2.8 primordial solid 5 B Boron [ p ] 13 2 p-block 10.81 2.34 2349 4200 1.026 2.04 10 primordial solid 6 C Carbon [ q ] 14 2 p-block 12.011 2.267 >4000 4300 0.709 2.55 200 primordial solid 7 N Nitrogen [ r ] 15 2 p-block 14.007 0.001 2506 63.15 77.36 1.04 3.04 19 primordial gas 8 O Oxygen [ s ] 16 2 p-block 15.999 0.001 429 54.36 90.20 0.918 3.44 461 000 primordial gas 9 F Fluorine [ t ] 17 2 p-block 18.998 0.001 696 53.53 85.03 0.824 3.98 585 primordial gas 10 Ne Neon [ u ] 18 2 p-block 20.180 0.000 9002 24.56 27.07 1.03 – 0.005 primordial gas 11 Na Sodium [ v ] 1 3 s-block 22.990 0.968 370.87 1156 1.228 0.93 23 600 primordial solid 12 Mg Magnesium [ w ] 2 3 s-block 24.305 1.738 923 1363 1.023 1.31 23 300 primordial solid 13 Al Aluminium [ x ] 13 3 p-block 26.982 2.70 933.47 2792 0.897 1.61 82 300 primordial solid 14 Si Silicon [ y ] 14 3 p-block 28.085 2.3290 1687 3538 0.705 1.9 282 000 primordial solid 15 P Phosphorus [ z ] 15 3 p-block 30.974 1.823 317.30 550 0.769 2.19 1 050 primordial solid 16 S Sulfur [ aa ] 16 3 p-block 32.06 2.07 388.36 717.87 0.71 2.58 350 primordial solid 17 Cl Chlorine [ ab ] 17 3 p-block 35.45 0.0032 171.6 239.11 0.479 3.16 145 primordial gas 18 Ar Argon [ ac ] 18 3 p-block 39.95 0.001 784 83.80 87.30 0.52 – 3.5 primordial gas 19 K Potassium [ ad ] 1 4 s-block 39.098 0.89 336.53 1032 0.757 0.82 20 900 primordial solid 20 Ca Calcium [ ae ] 2 4 s-block 40.078 1.55 1115 1757 0.647 1.00 41 500 primordial solid 21 Sc Scandium [ af ] 3 4 d-block 44.956 2.985 1814 3109 0.568 1.36 22 primordial solid 22 Ti Titanium [ ag ] 4 4 d-block 47.867 4.506 1941 3560 0.523 1.54 5 650 primordial solid 23 V Vanadium [ ah ] 5 4 d-block 50.942 6.11 2183 3680 0.489 1.63 120 primordial solid 24 Cr Chromium [ ai ] 6 4 d-block 51.996 7.15 2180 2944 0.449 1.66 102 primordial solid 25 Mn Manganese [ aj ] 7 4 d-block 54.938 7.21 1519 2334 0.479 1.55 950 primordial solid 26 Fe Iron [ ak ] 8 4 d-block 55.845 7.874 1811 3134 0.449 1.83 56 300 primordial solid 27 Co Cobalt [ al ] 9 4 d-block 58.933 8.90 1768 3200 0.421 1.88 25 primordial solid 28 Ni Nickel [ am ] 10 4 d-block 58.693 8.908 1728 3186 0.444 1.91 84 primordial solid 29 Cu Copper [ an ] 11 4 d-block 63.546 8.96 1 357 .77 2835 0.385 1.90 60 primordial solid 30 Zn Zinc [ ao ] 12 4 d-block 65.38 7.14 692.88 1180 0.388 1.65 70 primordial solid 31 Ga Gallium [ ap ] 13 4 p-block 69.723 5.91 302.9146 2673 0.371 1.81 19 primordial solid 32 Ge Germanium [ aq ] 14 4 p-block 72.630 5.323 1 211 .40 3106 0.32 2.01 1.5 primordial solid 33 As Arsenic [ ar ] 15 4 p-block 74.922 5.727 1090 [ as ] 887 0.329 2.18 1.8 primordial solid 34 Se Selenium [ at ] 16 4 p-block 78.971 4.81 453 958 0.321 2.55 0.05 primordial solid 35 Br Bromine [ au ] 17 4 p-block 79.904 3.1028 265.8 332.0 0.474 2.96 2.4 primordial liquid 36 Kr Krypton [ av ] 18 4 p-block 83.798 0.003 749 115.79 119.93 0.248 3.00 1 × 10 −4 primordial gas 37 Rb Rubidium [ aw ] 1 5 s-block 85.468 1.532 312.46 961 0.363 0.82 90 primordial solid 38 Sr Strontium [ ax ] 2 5 s-block 87.62 2.64 1050 1655 0.301 0.95 370 primordial solid 39 Y Yttrium [ ay ] 3 5 d-block 88.906 4.472 1799 3609 0.298 1.22 33 primordial solid 40 Zr Zirconium [ az ] 4 5 d-block 91.224 6.52 2128 4682 0.278 1.33 165 primordial solid 41 Nb Niobium [ ba ] 5 5 d-block 92.906 8.57 2750 5017 0.265 1.6 20 primordial solid 42 Mo Molybdenum [ bb ] 6 5 d-block 95.95 10.28 2896 4912 0.251 2.16 1.2 primordial solid 43 Tc Technetium [ bc ] 7 5 d-block [97] 11 2430 4538 – 1.9 ~ 3 × 10 −9 from decay solid 44 Ru Ruthenium [ bd ] 8 5 d-block 101.07 12.45 2607 4423 0.238 2.2 0.001 primordial solid 45 Rh Rhodium [ be ] 9 5 d-block 102.91 12.41 2237 3968 0.243 2.28 0.001 primordial solid 46 Pd Palladium [ bf ] 10 5 d-block 106.42 12.023 1 828 .05 3236 0.244 2.20 0.015 primordial solid 47 Ag Silver [ bg ] 11 5 d-block 107.87 10.49 1 234 .93 2435 0.235 1.93 0.075 primordial solid 48 Cd Cadmium [ bh ] 12 5 d-block 112.41 8.65 594.22 1040 0.232 1.69 0.159 primordial solid 49 In Indium [ bi ] 13 5 p-block 114.82 7.31 429.75 2345 0.233 1.78 0.25 primordial solid 50 Sn Tin [ bj ] 14 5 p-block 118.71 7.265 505.08 2875 0.228 1.96 2.3 primordial solid 51 Sb Antimony [ bk ] 15 5 p-block 121.76 6.697 903.78 1860 0.207 2.05 0.2 primordial solid 52 Te Tellurium [ bl ] 16 5 p-block 127.60 6.24 722.66 1261 0.202 2.1 0.001 primordial solid 53 I Iodine [ bm ] 17 5 p-block 126.90 4.933 386.85 457.4 0.214 2.66 0.45 primordial solid 54 Xe Xenon [ bn ] 18 5 p-block 131.29 0.005 894 161.4 165.03 0.158 2.60 3 × 10 −5 primordial gas 55 Cs Caesium [ bo ] 1 6 s-block 132.91 1.93 301.59 944 0.242 0.79 3 primordial solid 56 Ba Barium [ bp ] 2 6 s-block 137.33 3.51 1000 2170 0.204 0.89 425 primordial solid 57 La Lanthanum [ bq ] f-block groups 6 f-block 138.91 6.162 1193 3737 0.195 1.1 39 primordial solid 58 Ce Cerium [ br ] f-block groups 6 f-block 140.12 6.770 1068 3716 0.192 1.12 66.5 primordial solid 59 Pr Praseodymium [ bs ] f-block groups 6 f-block 140.91 6.77 1208 3793 0.193 1.13 9.2 primordial solid 60 Nd Neodymium [ bt ] f-block groups 6 f-block 144.24 7.01 1297 3347 0.19 1.14 41.5 primordial solid 61 Pm Promethium [ bu ] f-block groups 6 f-block [145] 7.26 1315 3273 – 1.13 2 × 10 −19 from decay solid 62 Sm Samarium [ bv ] f-block groups 6 f-block 150.36 7.52 1345 2067 0.197 1.17 7.05 primordial solid 63 Eu Europium [ bw ] f-block groups 6 f-block 151.96 5.244 1099 1802 0.182 1.2 2 primordial solid 64 Gd Gadolinium [ bx ] f-block groups 6 f-block 157.25 7.90 1585 3546 0.236 1.2 6.2 primordial solid 65 Tb Terbium [ by ] f-block groups 6 f-block 158.93 8.23 1629 3503 0.182 1.2 1.2 primordial solid 66 Dy Dysprosium [ bz ] f-block groups 6 f-block 162.50 8.540 1680 2840 0.17 1.22 5.2 primordial solid 67 Ho Holmium [ ca ] f-block groups 6 f-block 164.93 8.79 1734 2993 0.165 1.23 1.3 primordial solid 68 Er Erbium [ cb ] f-block groups 6 f-block 167.26 9.066 1802 3141 0.168 1.24 3.5 primordial solid 69 Tm Thulium [ cc ] f-block groups 6 f-block 168.93 9.32 1818 2223 0.16 1.25 0.52 primordial solid 70 Yb Ytterbium [ cd ] f-block groups 6 f-block 173.05 6.90 1097 1469 0.155 1.1 3.2 primordial solid 71 Lu Lutetium [ ce ] 3 6 d-block 174.97 9.841 1925 3675 0.154 1.27 0.8 primordial solid 72 Hf Hafnium [ cf ] 4 6 d-block 178.49 13.31 2506 4876 0.144 1.3 3 primordial solid 73 Ta Tantalum [ cg ] 5 6 d-block 180.95 16.69 3290 5731 0.14 1.5 2 primordial solid 74 W Tungsten [ ch ] 6 6 d-block 183.84 19.25 3695 6203 0.132 2.36 1.3 primordial solid 75 Re Rhenium [ ci ] 7 6 d-block 186.21 21.02 3459 5869 0.137 1.9 7 × 10 −4 primordial solid 76 Os Osmium [ cj ] 8 6 d-block 190.23 22.59 3306 5285 0.13 2.2 0.002 primordial solid 77 Ir Iridium [ ck ] 9 6 d-block 192.22 22.56 2719 4701 0.131 2.20 0.001 primordial solid 78 Pt Platinum [ cl ] 10 6 d-block 195.08 21.45 2 041 .4 4098 0.133 2.28 0.005 primordial solid 79 Au Gold [ cm ] 11 6 d-block 196.97 19.3 1 337 .33 3129 0.129 2.54 0.004 primordial solid 80 Hg Mercury [ cn ] 12 6 d-block 200.59 13.534 234.43 629.88 0.14 2.00 0.085 primordial liquid 81 Tl Thallium [ co ] 13 6 p-block 204.38 11.85 577 1746 0.129 1.62 0.85 primordial solid 82 Pb Lead [ cp ] 14 6 p-block 207.2 11.34 600.61 2022 0.129 1.87 ( 2+ ) 2.33 (4+) 14 primordial solid 83 Bi Bismuth [ cq ] 15 6 p-block 208.98 9.78 544.7 1837 0.122 2.02 0.009 primordial solid 84 Po Polonium [ cr ] 16 6 p-block [209] [ a ] 9.196 527 1235 – 2.0 2 × 10 −10 from decay solid 85 At Astatine [ cs ] 17 6 p-block [210] (8.91–8.95) 575 610 – 2.2 3 × 10 −20 from decay unknown phase 86 Rn Radon [ ct ] 18 6 p-block [222] 0.009 73 202 211.3 0.094 2.2 4 × 10 −13 from decay gas 87 Fr Francium [ cu ] 1 7 s-block [223] (2.48) 281 890 – >0.79 [ 58 ] ~ 1 × 10 −18 from decay unknown phase 88 Ra Radium [ cv ] 2 7 s-block [226] 5.5 973 2010 0.094 0.9 9 × 10 −7 from decay solid 89 Ac Actinium [ cw ] f-block groups 7 f-block [227] 10 1323 3471 0.12 1.1 5.5 × 10 −10 from decay solid 90 Th Thorium [ cx ] f-block groups 7 f-block 232.04 11.7 2115 5061 0.113 1.3 9.6 primordial solid 91 Pa Protactinium [ cy ] f-block groups 7 f-block 231.04 15.37 1841 4300 – 1.5 1.4 × 10 −6 from decay solid 92 U Uranium [ cz ] f-block groups 7 f-block 238.03 19.1 1 405 .3 4404 0.116 1.38 2.7 primordial solid 93 Np Neptunium [ da ] f-block groups 7 f-block [237] 20.45 917 4273 – 1.36 ≤ 3 × 10 −12 from decay solid 94 Pu Plutonium [ db ] f-block groups 7 f-block [244] 19.85 912.5 3501 – 1.28 ≤ 3 × 10 −11 from decay solid 95 Am Americium [ dc ] f-block groups 7 f-block [243] 12 1449 2880 – 1.13 – synthetic solid 96 Cm Curium [ dd ] f-block groups 7 f-block [247] 13.51 1613 3383 – 1.28 – synthetic solid 97 Bk Berkelium [ de ] f-block groups 7 f-block [247] 14.78 1259 2900 – 1.3 – synthetic solid 98 Cf Californium [ df ] f-block groups 7 f-block [251] 15.1 1173 (1743) [ b ] – 1.3 – synthetic solid 99 Es Einsteinium [ dg ] f-block groups 7 f-block [252] 8.84 1133 (1269) – 1.3 – synthetic solid 100 Fm Fermium [ dh ] f-block groups 7 f-block [257] (9.7) [ b ] (1125) [ 59 ] (1800) [ 60 ] – – 1.3 – synthetic unknown phase 101 Md Mendelevium [ di ] f-block groups 7 f-block [258] (10.3) (1100) – – 1.3 – synthetic unknown phase 102 No Nobelium [ dj ] f-block groups 7 f-block [259] (9.9) (1100) – – 1.3 – synthetic unknown phase 103 Lr Lawrencium [ dk ] 3 7 d-block [266] (14.4) (1900) – – 1.3 – synthetic unknown phase 104 Rf Rutherfordium [ dl ] 4 7 d-block [267] (17) (2400) (5800) – – – synthetic unknown phase 105 Db Dubnium [ dm ] 5 7 d-block [268] (21.6) – – – – – synthetic unknown phase 106 Sg Seaborgium [ dn ] 6 7 d-block [267] (23–24) – – – – – synthetic unknown phase 107 Bh Bohrium [ do ] 7 7 d-block [270] (26–27) – – – – – synthetic unknown phase 108 Hs Hassium [ dp ] 8 7 d-block [271] (27–29) – – – – – synthetic unknown phase 109 Mt Meitnerium [ dq ] 9 7 d-block [278] (27–28) – – – – – synthetic unknown phase 110 Ds Darmstadtium [ dr ] 10 7 d-block [281] (26–27) – – – – – synthetic unknown phase 111 Rg Roentgenium [ ds ] 11 7 d-block [282] (22–24) – – – – – synthetic unknown phase 112 Cn Copernicium [ dt ] 12 7 d-block [285] (14.0) (283 ± 11) (340 ± 10) [ b ] – – – synthetic unknown phase 113 Nh Nihonium [ du ] 13 7 p-block [286] (16) (700) (1400) – – – synthetic unknown phase 114 Fl Flerovium [ dv ] 14 7 p-block [289] (11.4 ± 0.3) (284 ± 50) [ b ] – – – – synthetic unknown phase 115 Mc Moscovium [ dw ] 15 7 p-block [290] (13.5) (700) (1400) – – – synthetic unknown phase 116 Lv Livermorium [ dx ] 16 7 p-block [293] (12.9) (700) (1100) – – – synthetic unknown phase 117 Ts Tennessine [ dy ] 17 7 p-block [294] (7.1–7.3) (700) (883) – – – synthetic unknown phase 118 Og Oganesson [ dz ] 18 7 p-block [294] (7) (325 ± 15) (450 ± 10) – – – synthetic unknown phase ^ a b Standard atomic weight or A r °(E) ' 1.0080 ': abridged value, uncertainty ignored here '[97]', [ ] notation: mass number of most stable isotope ^ a b c d e Values in ( ) brackets are predictions ^ Density ( sources ) ^ Melting point in kelvin (K) ( sources ) ^ Boiling point in kelvin (K) ( sources ) ^ Heat capacity ( sources ) ^ Electronegativity by Pauling ( source ) ^ Abundance of elements in Earth's crust ^ Primordial (=Earth's origin), from decay, or synthetic ^ Phase at Standard state (25°C [77°F], 100 kPa) ^ Greek roots hydro- + -gen , ' water -forming' ^ Greek hḗlios ' sun ' ^ Melting point: helium does not solidify at a pressure of 1 atmosphere. Helium can only solidify at pressures above 25 atm.

^ Greek líthos ' stone ' ^ Beryl , mineral (ultimately after Belur, Karnataka , India?) [ 57 ] ^ Borax , mineral (from Arabic : bawraq , Middle Persian : * bōrag ) ^ Latin carbo ' coal ' ^ Greek nítron + -gen , ' niter -forming' ^ Greek oxy- + -gen , ' acid -forming' ^ Latin fluo 'to flow' ^ Greek néon 'new' ^ Coined by Humphry Davy who first isolated it, from English soda (specifically caustic soda ), via Italian from Arabic ṣudāʕ 'headache' ^ Magnesia region, eastern Thessaly , Greece ^ Alumina , from Latin alumen (gen.

aluminis ) 'bitter salt, alum ' ^ Latin silex ' flint ' (originally silicium ) ^ Greek phōsphóros 'light-bearing' ^ Latin ^ Greek chlōrós 'greenish yellow' ^ Greek argós 'idle' (it is inert ) ^ Neo-Latin potassa ' potash ', from pot + ash ^ Latin calx ' lime ' ^ Latin Scandia ' Scandinavia ' ^ Titans , children of Gaia and Ouranos ^ Vanadis , a name for Norse goddess Freyja ^ Greek chróma ' colour ' ^ Corrupted from magnesia negra ; see magnesium ^ English, from Proto-Celtic *īsarnom 'iron', from a root meaning 'blood' ^ German Kobold , ' goblin ' ^ Nickel, a mischievous sprite in German miner mythology ^ English, from Latin cuprum , after Cyprus ^ Most likely German Zinke , 'prong, tooth', but some suggest Persian sang 'stone' ^ Latin Gallia ' France ' ^ Latin Germania ' Germany ' ^ Middle English, from Middle French arsenic , from Greek arsenikón 'yellow arsenic' (influenced by arsenikós 'masculine, virile'), from a West Asian wanderword ultimately from Old Persian : * zarniya-ka , lit.

'golden' ^ Arsenic sublimes at 1 atmosphere pressure.

^ Greek selḗnē ' moon ' ^ Greek brômos 'stench' ^ Greek kryptós 'hidden' ^ Latin rubidus 'deep red' ^ Strontian , a village in Scotland , where it was found ^ Ytterby , Sweden , where it was found; see terbium , erbium , ytterbium ^ Zircon , mineral, from Persian zargun 'gold-hued' ^ Niobe , daughter of king Tantalus in Greek myth; see tantalum ^ Greek molýbdaina 'piece of lead ', from mólybdos 'lead', due to confusion with lead ore galena (PbS) ^ Greek tekhnētós 'artificial' ^ Neo-Latin Ruthenia ' Russia ' ^ Greek rhodóeis ' rose-coloured ', from rhódon ' rose ' ^ Pallas , asteroid, then considered a planet ^ English, from Proto-Germanic ^ Neo-Latin cadmia ' calamine ', from King Cadmus , mythic founder of Thebes ^ Latin indicum ' indigo ', the blue color named after India and observed in its spectral lines ^ English, from Proto-Germanic ^ Latin antimonium , of unclear origin : folk etymologies suggest Greek antí 'against' + mónos 'alone', or Old French anti- moine 'monk's bane', but could be from or related to Arabic ʾiṯmid 'antimony' ^ Latin tellus 'ground, earth' ^ French iode , from Greek ioeidḗs 'violet' ^ Greek xénon , neuter of xénos 'strange, foreign' ^ Latin caesius 'sky-blue' ^ Greek barýs 'heavy' ^ Greek lanthánein 'to lie hidden' ^ Ceres (dwarf planet) , then considered a planet ^ Greek prásios dídymos 'green twin' ^ Greek néos dídymos 'new twin' ^ Prometheus , a Titan ^ Samarskite , a mineral named after V. Samarsky-Bykhovets , Russian mine official ^ Europe ^ Gadolinite , a mineral named after Johan Gadolin , Finnish chemist, physicist and mineralogist ^ Ytterby , Sweden, where it was found; see yttrium , erbium , ytterbium ^ Greek dysprósitos 'hard to get' ^ Neo-Latin Holmia ' Stockholm ' ^ Ytterby , where it was found; see yttrium , terbium , ytterbium ^ Thule , the ancient name for an unclear northern location ^ Ytterby , where it was found; see yttrium , terbium , erbium ^ Latin Lutetia ' Paris ' ^ Neo-Latin Hafnia ' Copenhagen ' (from Danish havn , harbor) ^ King Tantalus , father of Niobe in Greek myth; see niobium ^ Swedish tung sten 'heavy stone' ^ Latin Rhenus ' Rhine ' ^ Greek osmḗ ' smell ' ^ Iris , Greek goddess of rainbow ^ Spanish platina 'little silver', from plata 'silver' ^ English, from same Proto-Indo-European root as 'yellow' ^ Mercury , Roman god of commerce, communication, and luck, known for his speed and mobility ^ Greek thallós 'green shoot / twig' ^ English, from Proto-Celtic *ɸloudom, from a root meaning 'flow' ^ German Wismut , via Latin and Arabic from Greek psimúthion 'white lead' ^ Latin Polonia ' Poland ', home country of discoverer Marie Curie ^ Greek ástatos 'unstable'; it has no stable isotopes ^ Radium emanation , originally the name of 222 Rn ^ France , home country of discoverer Marguerite Perey ^ Coined in French by discoverer Marie Curie , from Latin radius ' ray ' ^ Greek aktís 'ray' ^ Thor , the Norse god of thunder ^ English prefix proto- (from Greek prôtos 'first, before') + actinium ; protactinium decays into actinium.

^ Uranus , the seventh planet ^ Neptune , the eighth planet ^ Pluto , dwarf planet, then considered a planet ^ Americas , where the element was first synthesized, by analogy with its homolog europium ^ Pierre and Marie Curie , physicists and chemists ^ Berkeley, California ,  where it was first synthesized ^ California , where it was first synthesized in LBNL ^ Albert Einstein , German physicist ^ Enrico Fermi , Italian physicist ^ Dmitri Mendeleev , Russian chemist who proposed the periodic table ^ Alfred Nobel , Swedish chemist and engineer ^ Ernest Lawrence , American physicist ^ Ernest Rutherford , chemist and physicist from New Zealand ^ Dubna , Russia, where it was discovered in JINR ^ Glenn Seaborg , American chemist ^ Niels Bohr , Danish physicist ^ Neo-Latin Hassia ' Hesse ', a state in Germany ^ Lise Meitner , Austrian physicist ^ Darmstadt , Germany, where it was first synthesized in the GSI labs ^ Wilhelm Röntgen , German physicist ^ Nicolaus Copernicus , Polish astronomer ^ Japanese Nihon ' Japan ', where it was first synthesized in Riken ^ Flerov Laboratory of Nuclear Reactions, part of JINR , where it was synthesized; itself named after Georgy Flyorov , Russian physicist ^ Moscow , Russia, where it was first synthesized in JINR ^ Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in Livermore, California ^ Tennessee , US, home to ORNL ^ Yuri Oganessian , Russian physicist See also Biological roles of the elements Chemical database Discovery of chemical elements Element collecting Fictional element Goldschmidt classification Island of stability List of nuclides List of the elements' densities Mineral (nutrient) Periodic systems of small molecules Prices of chemical elements Systematic element name Table of nuclides Roles of chemical elements References ^ Helge Kragh (2000). Conceptual Changes in Chemistry: The Notion of a Chemical Element, ca. 1900-1925 ^ Chemistry (IUPAC), The International Union of Pure and Applied.

"IUPAC – chemical element (C01022)" .

goldbook.iupac.org .

doi : 10.1351/goldbook.C01022 .

^ See the timeline on p.10 in Oganessian, Yu. Ts.; Utyonkov, V.; Lobanov, Yu.; Abdullin, F.; Polyakov, A.; Sagaidak, R.; Shirokovsky, I.; Tsyganov, Yu. (2006).

"Evidence for Dark Matter" (PDF) .

Physical Review C .

74 (4): 044602.

Bibcode : 2006PhRvC..74d4602O .

doi : 10.1103/PhysRevC.74.044602 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 February 2021 . Retrieved 8 October 2007 .

^ "The Universe Adventure Hydrogen and Helium" . Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory U.S. Department of Energy. 2005. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013.

^ astro.soton.ac.uk (3 January 2001).

"Formation of the light elements" . University of Southampton. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013.

^ "How Stars Make Energy and New Elements" (PDF) . Foothill College. 18 October 2006.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 August 2020 . Retrieved 17 February 2013 .

^ a b Dumé, B. (23 April 2003).

"Bismuth breaks half-life record for alpha decay" .

Physicsworld.com . Bristol, England: Institute of Physics.

Archived from the original on 13 December 2017 . Retrieved 14 July 2015 .

^ a b de Marcillac, P.; Coron, N.; Dambier, G.; Leblanc, J.; Moalic, J-P (2003). "Experimental detection of alpha-particles from the radioactive decay of natural bismuth".

Nature .

422 (6934): 876– 878.

Bibcode : 2003Natur.422..876D .

doi : 10.1038/nature01541 .

PMID 12712201 .

S2CID 4415582 .

^ Sanderson, K. (17 October 2006).

"Heaviest element made – again" .

News@nature .

doi : 10.1038/news061016-4 .

S2CID 121148847 .

Archived from the original on 16 May 2020 . Retrieved 8 March 2007 .

^ a b Schewe, P.; Stein, B.; Castelvecchi, D. (16 October 2006).

"Elements 116 and 118 Are Discovered" .

Physics News Update (797). American Institute of Physics. Archived from the original on 1 January 2012 . Retrieved 19 October 2006 .

^ Glanz, J. (6 April 2010).

"Scientists Discover Heavy New Element" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 19 June 2017 . Retrieved 15 February 2017 .

^ Oganessian, Yu. Ts.; Abdullin, F. Sh.; Bailey, P. D.; Benker, D. E.; Bennett, M. E.; Dmitriev, S. N.; Ezold, J. G.; Hamilton, J. H.; Henderson, R. A.; Itkis, M. G.; Lobanov, Yu. V.; Mezentsev, A. N.; Moody, K. J.; Nelson, S. L.; Polyakov, A. N.; Porter, C. E.; Ramayya, A. V.; Riley, F. D.; Roberto, J. B.; Ryabinin, M. A.; Rykaczewski, K. P.; Sagaidak, R. N.; Shaughnessy, D. A.; Shirokovsky, I. V.; Stoyer, M. A.; Subbotin, V. G.; Sudowe, R.; Sukhov, A. M.; Tsyganov, Yu. S.; et al. (April 2010).

"Synthesis of a New Element with Atomic Number Z=117" .

Physical Review Letters .

104 (14). Physical Review Journals: 142502.

Bibcode : 2010PhRvL.104n2502O .

doi : 10.1103/PhysRevLett.104.142502 .

PMID 20481935 .

^ This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain : "Technetium-99" . United States Environmental Protection Agency Radiation Protection. Archived from the original on 1 September 2015 . Retrieved 26 February 2013 .

^ Chaisson, Eric J.

"Origins of Heavy Elements" .

Cosmic Evolution - From Big Bang to Humankind . Harvard–Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics.

Archived from the original on 25 September 2020 . Retrieved 26 February 2013 .

^ "Atomic Number and Mass Numbers" . ndt-ed.org. Archived from the original on 12 February 2014 . Retrieved 17 February 2013 .

^ periodic.lanl.gov.

"Periodic Table of Elements: LANL Carbon" .

Los Alamos National Laboratory .

Archived from the original on 25 January 2021 . Retrieved 17 February 2013 .

^ Katsuya Yamada.

"Atomic mass, isotopes, and mass number" (PDF) .

Los Angeles Pierce College . Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 January 2014.

^ "Pure element" .

European Nuclear Society . Archived from the original on 13 June 2017 . Retrieved 13 August 2013 .

^ Audi, G.; Kondev, F. G.; Wang, M.; Huang, W. J.; Naimi, S. (2017).

"The NUBASE2016 evaluation of nuclear properties" (PDF) .

Chinese Physics C .

41 (3): 030001.

Bibcode : 2017ChPhC..41c0001A .

doi : 10.1088/1674-1137/41/3/030001 .

^ Meija, Juris; et al. (2016).

"Atomic weights of the elements 2013 (IUPAC Technical Report)" .

Pure and Applied Chemistry .

88 (3): 265– 291.

doi : 10.1515/pac-2015-0305 .

^ Prohaska, Thomas; Irrgeher, Johanna; Benefield, Jacqueline; Böhlke, John K.; Chesson, Lesley A.; Coplen, Tyler B.; Ding, Tiping; Dunn, Philip J. H.; Gröning, Manfred; Holden, Norman E.; Meijer, Harro A. J. (4 May 2022).

"Standard atomic weights of the elements 2021 (IUPAC Technical Report)" .

Pure and Applied Chemistry .

doi : 10.1515/pac-2019-0603 .

ISSN 1365-3075 .

^ Wilford, J.N. (14 January 1992).

"Hubble Observations Bring Some Surprises" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 5 March 2008 . Retrieved 15 February 2017 .

^ Wright, E. L. (12 September 2004).

"Big Bang Nucleosynthesis" .

UCLA , Division of Astronomy.

Archived from the original on 13 January 2018 . Retrieved 22 February 2007 .

^ Wallerstein, George; Iben, Icko; Parker, Peter; Boesgaard, Ann; Hale, Gerald; Champagne, Arthur; Barnes, Charles; Käppeler, Franz; et al. (1999).

"Synthesis of the elements in stars: forty years of progress" (PDF) .

Reviews of Modern Physics .

69 (4): 995– 1084.

Bibcode : 1997RvMP...69..995W .

doi : 10.1103/RevModPhys.69.995 .

hdl : 2152/61093 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 September 2006.

^ Earnshaw, A.; Greenwood, N. (1997).

Chemistry of the Elements (2nd ed.).

Butterworth-Heinemann .

^ Croswell, Ken (1996).

Alchemy of the Heavens . Anchor.

ISBN 978-0-385-47214-2 .

Archived from the original on 13 May 2011 . Retrieved 10 October 2007 .

^ Nielsen, Forrest H. (1999). "Ultratrace minerals". In Maurice E. Shils; James A. Olsen; Moshe Shine; A. Catharine Ross (eds.).

Modern nutrition in health and disease . Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. pp.

283– 303.

hdl : 10113/46493 .

ISBN 978-0683307696 .

^ Zoroddu, Maria Antonietta; Aaseth, Jan; Crisponi, Guido; Medici, Serenella; Peana, Massimiliano; Nurchi, Valeria Marina (2019). "The essential metals for humans: a brief overview".

Journal of Inorganic Biochemistry .

195 : 120– 129.

doi : 10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2019.03.013 .

PMID 30939379 .

^ Remick, Kaleigh; Helmann, John D. (30 January 2023).

"The Elements of Life: A Biocentric Tour of the Periodic Table" .

Advances in Microbial Physiology .

82 : 1– 127.

doi : 10.1016/bs.ampbs.2022.11.001 .

ISBN 978-0-443-19334-7 .

PMC 10727122 .

PMID 36948652 .

^ Daumann, Lena J. (25 April 2019).

"Essential and Ubiquitous: The Emergence of Lanthanide Metallobiochemistry" .

Angewandte Chemie International Edition .

doi : 10.1002/anie.201904090 . Retrieved 15 June 2019 .

^ Plato (2008) [c. 360 BC].

Timaeus . Forgotten Books. p. 45.

ISBN 978-1-60620-018-6 .

Archived from the original on 14 April 2021 . Retrieved 9 November 2020 .

^ Hillar, M. (2004).

"The Problem of the Soul in Aristotle's De anima" .

NASA / WMAP . Archived from the original on 9 September 2006 . Retrieved 10 August 2006 .

^ Partington, J. R. (1937).

A Short History of Chemistry . New York: Dover Publications.

ISBN 978-0-486-65977-0 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Boyle 1661 , p. 36.

^ Boyle 1661 , p. 38.

^ Boyle 1661 , p. 37.

^ Boyle 1661 , pp. 37–38.

^ Boyle 1661 , pp. 38–39.

^ Boyle 1661 , p. 42.

^ a b Boyle 1661 , p. 29.

^ Boyle 1661 , p. 41.

^ a b Boyle 1661 , p. 145.

^ Boyle 1661 , pp. 40–41.

^ Boyle 1661 , p. 46.

^ Watts, Isaac (1726) [1724].

Logick: Or, the right use of reason in the enquiry after truth, with a variety of rules to guard against error in the affairs of religion and human life, as well as in the sciences . Printed for John Clark and Richard Hett. pp.

13– 15.

^ Lavoisier, A. L. (1790).

Elements of chemistry translated by Robert Kerr . Edinburgh. pp.

175– 176.

ISBN 978-0-415-17914-0 .

Archived from the original on 14 April 2021 . Retrieved 24 August 2020 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Lavoisier, Antoine (1790) [1789].

Elements of chemistry: In a new systematic order, containing all the modern discoveries: Illustrated with thirteen copperplates . Translated by Kerr, Robert. William Creech. pp.

175– 176.

^ Transactinide-2 Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine . www.kernchemie.de ^ "IUPAC Announces Start of the Name Approval Process for the Element of Atomic Number 112" (PDF) . IUPAC. 20 July 2009.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 March 2012 . Retrieved 27 August 2009 .

^ "Element 112 is Named Copernicium" . IUPAC. 20 February 2010. Archived from the original on 24 February 2010.

^ Oganessian, Yu. Ts.; Utyonkov, V.; Lobanov, Yu.; Abdullin, F.; Polyakov, A.; Sagaidak, R.; Shirokovsky, I.; Tsyganov, Yu.; et al. (2006).

"Evidence for Dark Matter" .

Physical Review C .

74 (4): 044602.

Bibcode : 2006PhRvC..74d4602O .

doi : 10.1103/PhysRevC.74.044602 .

^ Greiner, W.

"Recommendations" (PDF) .

31st meeting, PAC for Nuclear Physics .

Joint Institute for Nuclear Research . Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 April 2010.

^ Staff (30 November 2016).

"IUPAC Announces the Names of the Elements 113, 115, 117, and 118" .

IUPAC .

Archived from the original on 29 July 2018 . Retrieved 1 December 2016 .

^ St. Fleur, Nicholas (1 December 2016).

"Four New Names Officially Added to the Periodic Table of Elements" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 1 January 2022 . Retrieved 1 December 2016 .

^ "Periodic Table – Royal Society of Chemistry" .

www.rsc.org .

^ "Online Etymology Dictionary" .

etymonline.com .

^ "beryl" .

Merriam-Webster .

Archived from the original on 9 October 2013 . Retrieved 27 January 2014 .

^ Originally assessed as 0.7 by Pauling but never revised after other elements' electronegativities were updated for precision. Predicted to be higher than that of caesium.

^ Konings, Rudy J. M.; Beneš, Ondrej.

"The Thermodynamic Properties of the 𝑓-Elements and Their Compounds. I. The Lanthanide and Actinide Metals" .

Journal of Physical and Chemical Reference Data .

doi : 10.1063/1.3474238 .

^ "Fermium" .

RSC .

Bibliography Boyle, R. (1661).

The Sceptical Chymist: or Chymico-Physical Doubts & Paradoxes, Touching the Spagyrist's Principles Commonly call'd Hypostatical; As they are wont to be Propos'd and Defended by the Generality of Alchymists. Whereunto is præmis'd Part of another Discourse relating to the same Subject . Printed by J. Cadwell for J. Crooke.

Further reading Wikimedia Commons has media related to Chemical elements .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Chemical element .

Wikibooks project Wikijunior has a children's book on The Elements Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: General Chemistry/Chemistries of Various Elements Ball, P. (2004).

The Elements: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-284099-8 .

Emsley, J. (2003).

Nature's Building Blocks: An A–Z Guide to the Elements . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-850340-8 .

Gray, T. (2009).

The Elements: A Visual Exploration of Every Known Atom in the Universe . Black Dog & Leventhal Publishers Inc.

ISBN 978-1-57912-814-2 .

Scerri, E.R. (2007).

The Periodic Table, Its Story and Its Significance . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-530573-9 .

Strathern, P. (2000).

Mendeleyev's Dream: The Quest for the Elements .

Hamish Hamilton Ltd .

ISBN 978-0-241-14065-9 .

Kean, Sam (2011).

The Disappearing Spoon: And Other True Tales of Madness, Love, and the History of the World from the Periodic Table of the Elements . Back Bay Books.

A.D. McNaught; A. Wilkinson, eds. (1997).

Compendium of Chemical Terminology (2nd ed.). Oxford: Blackwell Scientific Publications.

doi : 10.1351/goldbook .

ISBN 978-0-9678550-9-7 .

XML on-line corrected version: created by M. Nic, J. Jirat, B. Kosata; updates compiled by A. Jenkins External links Videos for each element by the University of Nottingham "Chemical Elements" , In Our Time , BBC Radio 4 discussion with Paul Strathern, Mary Archer and John Murrell (25 May 2000) v t e Periodic table Periodic table forms Alternatives Extended periodic table Sets of elements By periodic table structure Groups 1 ( Hydrogen and alkali metals ) 2 (Alkaline earth metals) 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 (Triels) 14 (Tetrels) 15 (Pnictogens) 16 (Chalcogens) 17 (Halogens) 18 (Noble gases) Periods 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8+ Aufbau Fricke Pyykkö Blocks Aufbau principle By metallicity Metals Lanthanides Actinides Transition metals Post-transition metals Metalloids Lists of metalloids by source Dividing line Nonmetals Noble gases Other sets Platinum-group metals (PGM) Rare-earth elements Refractory metals Precious metals Coinage metals Noble metals Heavy metals Native metals Transuranium elements Superheavy elements Major actinides Minor actinides Elements Lists By: Abundance ( in humans ) Atomic properties Nuclear stability Symbol Properties Aqueous chemistry Crystal structure Electron configuration Electronegativity Goldschmidt classification Term symbol Data pages Abundance Atomic radius Boiling point Critical point Density Elasticity Electrical resistivity Electron affinity Electron configuration Electronegativity Hardness Heat capacity Heat of fusion Heat of vaporization Ionization energy Melting point Oxidation state Speed of sound Thermal conductivity Thermal expansion coefficient Vapor pressure History Element discoveries Dmitri Mendeleev 1871 table 1869 predictions Naming etymology controversies for places for people in East Asian languages See also IUPAC nomenclature systematic element name Trivial name Dmitri Mendeleev Category WikiProject v t e Isotopes of the chemical elements Group 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 Period Hydrogen and alkali metals Alkaline earth metals Pnicto­gens Chal­co­gens Halo­gens Noble gases ① Isotopes § List H 1 Isotopes § List He 2 ② Isotopes § List Li 3 Isotopes § List Be 4 Isotopes § List B 5 Isotopes § List C 6 Isotopes § List N 7 Isotopes § List O 8 Isotopes § List F 9 Isotopes § List Ne 10 ③ Isotopes § List Na 11 Isotopes § List Mg 12 Isotopes § List Al 13 Isotopes § List Si 14 Isotopes § List P 15 Isotopes § List S 16 Isotopes § List Cl 17 Isotopes § List Ar 18 ④ Isotopes § List K 19 Isotopes § List Ca 20 Isotopes § List Sc 21 Isotopes § List Ti 22 Isotopes § List V 23 Isotopes § List Cr 24 Isotopes § List Mn 25 Isotopes § List Fe 26 Isotopes § List Co 27 Isotopes § List Ni 28 Isotopes § List Cu 29 Isotopes § List Zn 30 Isotopes § List Ga 31 Isotopes § List Ge 32 Isotopes § List As 33 Isotopes § List Se 34 Isotopes § List Br 35 Isotopes § List Kr 36 ⑤ Isotopes § List Rb 37 Isotopes § List Sr 38 Isotopes § List Y 39 Isotopes § List Zr 40 Isotopes § List Nb 41 Isotopes § List Mo 42 Isotopes § List Tc 43 Isotopes § List Ru 44 Isotopes § List Rh 45 Isotopes § List Pd 46 Isotopes § List Ag 47 Isotopes § List Cd 48 Isotopes § List In 49 Isotopes § List Sn 50 Isotopes § List Sb 51 Isotopes § List Te 52 Isotopes § List I 53 Isotopes § List Xe 54 ⑥ Isotopes § List Cs 55 Isotopes § List Ba 56 Isotopes § List Lu 71 Isotopes § List Hf 72 Isotopes § List Ta 73 Isotopes § List W 74 Isotopes § List Re 75 Isotopes § List Os 76 Isotopes § List Ir 77 Isotopes § List Pt 78 Isotopes § List Au 79 Isotopes § List Hg 80 Isotopes § List Tl 81 Isotopes § List Pb 82 Isotopes § List Bi 83 Isotopes § List Po 84 Isotopes § List At 85 Isotopes § List Rn 86 ⑦ Isotopes § List Fr 87 Isotopes § List Ra 88 Isotopes § List Lr 103 Isotopes § List Rf 104 Isotopes § List Db 105 Isotopes § List Sg 106 Isotopes § List Bh 107 Isotopes § List Hs 108 Isotopes § List Mt 109 Isotopes § List Ds 110 Isotopes § List Rg 111 Isotopes § List Cn 112 Isotopes § List Nh 113 Isotopes § List Fl 114 Isotopes § List Mc 115 Isotopes § List Lv 116 Isotopes § List Ts 117 Isotopes § List Og 118 ⑧ Isotopes § List Uue 119 Isotopes § List Ubn 120 Isotopes § List La 57 Isotopes § List Ce 58 Isotopes § List Pr 59 Isotopes § List Nd 60 Isotopes § List Pm 61 Isotopes § List Sm 62 Isotopes § List Eu 63 Isotopes § List Gd 64 Isotopes § List Tb 65 Isotopes § List Dy 66 Isotopes § List Ho 67 Isotopes § List Er 68 Isotopes § List Tm 69 Isotopes § List Yb 70 Isotopes § List Ac 89 Isotopes § List Th 90 Isotopes § List Pa 91 Isotopes § List U 92 Isotopes § List Np 93 Isotopes § List Pu 94 Isotopes § List Am 95 Isotopes § List Cm 96 Isotopes § List Bk 97 Isotopes § List Cf 98 Isotopes § List Es 99 Isotopes § List Fm 100 Isotopes § List Md 101 Isotopes § List No 102 Table of nuclides Categories: Isotopes Tables of nuclides Metastable isotopes Isotopes by element v t e Branches of chemistry Glossary of chemical formulae List of biomolecules List of inorganic compounds Periodic table Analytical Calorimetry Characterization Chromatography GC HPLC Crystallography Electroanalytical methods Elemental analysis Instrumental chemistry Mass spectrometry EI ICP MALDI Separation process Spectroscopy IR Raman UV-Vis NMR Titration Wet chemistry Theoretical Computational chemistry Mathematical chemistry Molecular modelling Molecular mechanics Molecular dynamics Molecular geometry VSEPR theory Quantum chemistry Physical Chemical kinetics Chemical physics Molecular physics Chemical thermodynamics Cryochemistry Electrochemistry Spectroelectrochemistry Photoelectrochemistry Equilibrium chemistry Femtochemistry Interface and colloid science Micromeritics Mechanochemistry Microwave chemistry Photochemistry Sonochemistry Spectroscopy Spin chemistry Structural chemistry Surface science Thermochemistry Inorganic Ceramic chemistry Cluster chemistry Coordination chemistry Magnetochemistry Organometallic chemistry Organolanthanide chemistry Solid-state chemistry Organic Dynamic covalent chemistry Enantioselective synthesis Fullerene chemistry Organic reactions Organic synthesis Petrochemistry Physical organic chemistry Polymer chemistry Retrosynthetic analysis Stereochemistry Alkane stereochemistry Total synthesis / Semisynthesis Biological Biochemistry Molecular biology Cell biology Bioinorganic chemistry Bioorganic chemistry Bioorganometallic chemistry Biophysical chemistry Chemical biology Bioorthogonal chemistry Clinical chemistry Medicinal chemistry Pharmacology Neurochemistry Interdisciplinarity Nuclear chemistry Radiochemistry Radiation chemistry Actinide chemistry Cosmochemistry / Astrochemistry / Stellar chemistry Geochemistry Biogeochemistry Photogeochemistry Environmental chemistry Atmospheric chemistry Ocean chemistry Clay chemistry Carbochemistry Food chemistry Carbohydrate chemistry Food physical chemistry Agricultural chemistry Soil chemistry Chemistry education Amateur chemistry General chemistry Clandestine chemistry Forensic chemistry Forensic toxicology Post-mortem chemistry Nanochemistry Supramolecular chemistry Chemical synthesis Green chemistry Click chemistry Combinatorial chemistry Biosynthesis Chemical engineering Stoichiometry Materials science Metallurgy Ceramic engineering Polymer science See also History of chemistry Nobel Prize in Chemistry Timeline of chemistry of element discoveries " The central science " Chemical reaction Catalysis Chemical element Chemical compound Atom Molecule Ion Chemical substance Chemical bond Alchemy Quantum mechanics Category Commons Portal WikiProject v t e Elements of nature Universe Space Time Energy Matter chemical elements particles Change Earth Earth science History geological Structure Geology Plate tectonics Oceans Gaia hypothesis Future Weather Meteorology Atmosphere (Earth) Climate Clouds Moonlight Rain Snow Sunlight Tides Wind tornado tropical cyclone Natural environment Ecology Ecosystem Field Radiation Wilderness Wildfires Life Origin (abiogenesis) Evolutionary history Biosphere Hierarchy Biology astrobiology Biodiversity Organism Eukaryota fauna animals flora plants fungi protista Prokaryotes archaea bacteria Viruses See also Nature-based solutions Category v t e Biology Introduction ( Genetics , Evolution ) Outline History Timeline Index Biology Overview Science Life Properties ( Adaptation , Energy processing , Growth , Order , Regulation , Reproduction ( Self-replication ), Response to environment ) Hierarchy of life ( Atom > Molecule > Organelle > Cell > Tissue > Organ > Organ system > Organism > Population > Community > Ecosystem > Biosphere ) Reductionistic Emergent property Mechanistic Scientific method Taxonomic rank Theory Law Peer review Biology journals Common name Chemical basis Atoms Amino acids Carbohydrates Chemical bond Chemical element Lipids Matter Quantum Molecules Monomer Nucleic acids Organic compounds pH Polymer Proteins Water Cells ATP Cell cycle Cell theory Cell signaling Cellular respiration Energy transformation Enzyme Eukaryote Fermentation Metabolism Meiosis Mitosis Photosynthesis Prokaryote Genetics DNA Epigenetics Evolutionary developmental biology Gene expression Gene regulation Genomes Mendelian inheritance Post-transcriptional modification Evolution Adaptation Earliest known life forms Function Genetic drift Gene flow History of life Macroevolution Microevolution Mutation Natural selection Phylogenetics Speciation Taxonomy Diversity Archaea Bacteria Eukaryote Alga Animal Fungus Plant Protist Virus Plant form and function Epidermis (botany) Flower Ground tissue Leaf Phloem Plant stem Root Shoot Vascular plant Vascular tissue Xylem Animal form and function Breathing Circulatory system Endocrine system Digestive system Homeostasis Immune system Internal environment Muscular system Nervous system Reproductive system Respiratory system Ecology Biogeochemical cycle Biological interaction Biomass Biomes Biosphere Climate Climate change Community Conservation Ecosystem Habitat niche Microbiome Population dynamics Resources Research methods Laboratory techniques Genetic engineering Transformation Gel electrophoresis Chromatography Centrifugation Cell culture DNA sequencing DNA microarray Green fluorescent protein vector Enzyme assay Protein purification Western blot Northern blot Southern blot Restriction enzyme Polymerase chain reaction Two-hybrid screening in vivo in vitro in silico Field techniques Belt transect mark and recapture species discovery curve Branches Abiogenesis Aerobiology Agronomy Agrostology Anatomy Anthropogeny Anthropology Astrobiology Bacteriology Biochemistry Biogeography Biogeology Bioinformatics Biological engineering Biomathematics Biomechanics Biophysics Biosemiotics Biostatistics Biotechnology Botany Cell biology Cellular microbiology Chemical biology Chronobiology Cognitive biology Computational biology Conservation biology Cryobiology Cytogenetics Dendrology Developmental biology Ecological genetics Ecology Embryology Epidemiology Epigenetics Evolutionary biology Freshwater biology Generative biology Genetics Genomics Geobiology Gerontology Herpetology Histology Human biology Ichthyology Immunology Lipidology Mammalogy Marine biology Microbiology Molecular biology Mycology Neontology Neuroscience Nutrition Ornithology Osteology Paleontology Parasitology Pathology Pharmacology Photobiology Phycology Phylogenetics Physiology Pomology Primatology Proteomics Protistology Quantum biology Relational biology Reproductive biology Sociobiology Structural biology Synthetic biology Systematics Systems biology Taxonomy Teratology Toxicology Virology Virophysics Welfare biology Xenobiology Zoology Glossaries Biology Botanical terms Ecological terms Plant morphology terms Biology portal Category Commons WikiProject Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐nkq74
Cached time: 20250816145538
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 9.718 seconds
Real time usage: 10.108 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 463634/1000000
Revision size: 77840/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 1563301/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 355016/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 27/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 352930/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 4.796/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23274067/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 9429.017      1 -total
 56.30% 5308.799      1 Template:List_of_chemical_elements
 53.92% 5084.589    118 Template:List_of_chemical_elements/row
 42.60% 4016.891   3838 Template:In_string
 23.51% 2216.679     12 Template:Navbox
 22.99% 2167.735    354 Template:Infobox_element/symbol-to-block
 22.74% 2143.764    354 Template:Infobox_element/symbol-to-block/format1
 22.46% 2118.183    354 Template:Infobox_element/symbol-to-block/format2
 21.98% 2072.545      1 Template:Navbox_element_isotopes
 21.40% 2017.704    120 Template:Element_cell/isotopes Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:5659:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816145538 and revision id 1301612782. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chemical_element&oldid=1301612782 " Categories : Chemical elements Chemistry Hidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Middle Persian-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Old Persian (ca. 600-400 B.C.)-language text Articles containing Persian-language text Articles containing Old French (842-ca. 1400)-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Danish-language text Articles containing Swedish-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text Source attribution CS1 errors: ISBN date Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Use Oxford spelling from July 2025 Use dmy dates from August 2021 Articles needing additional references from July 2025 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Russian-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Wikipedia articles needing rewrite from March 2024 All articles needing rewrite Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 20:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chemical element 180 languages Add topic

