Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Advantages over hub dynamos 2 Disadvantages over hub dynamos 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Bottle dynamo 6 languages Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Nederlands پنجابی Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Electrical generator for bicycle lights Bottle dynamo mounted on a bicycle.

Dismantled bottle dynamo. Left: Housing with internal permanent magnet rotating through the friction wheel. Right: Induction coil A bottle dynamo or sidewall dynamo is a small electrical generator for bicycles employed to power a bicycle's lights . The traditional bottle dynamo (pictured) is not actually a dynamo at all (which creates DC power), but a low-power magneto that generates AC . Newer models can include a rectifier to create DC output to charge batteries for electronic devices including cellphones or GPS receivers .

[ 1 ] Named after their resemblance to bottles, these generators are also called sidewall dynamos because they operate using a roller placed on the sidewall of a bicycle tire . When the bicycle is in motion and the dynamo roller is engaged, electricity is generated as the tire spins the roller.

Two other dynamo systems used on bicycles are hub dynamos and bottom bracket dynamos.

Advantages over hub dynamos [ edit ] No extra resistance when disengaged When engaged, a dynamo requires the bicycle rider to exert more effort to maintain a given speed than would otherwise be necessary when the dynamo is not present or disengaged. Bottle dynamos can be completely disengaged when they are not in use, whereas a hub dynamo will always have added drag (though it may be so low as to be irrelevant or unnoticeable to the rider, and it is reduced significantly when lights are not being powered by the hub).

Easy retrofitting A bottle dynamo may be more feasible than a hub dynamo to add to an existing bicycle, as it does not require a replacement or rebuilt wheel .

Price A bottle dynamo is generally cheaper than a hub dynamo, but not always.

Disadvantages over hub dynamos [ edit ] Positioning of a bottle dynamo Slippage In wet conditions, the roller on a bottle dynamo can slip against the surface of a tire, which interrupts or reduces the amount of electricity generated. This can cause the lights to go out completely or intermittently. Hub dynamos do not need traction and are sealed from the elements.

Increased resistance Bottle dynamos typically create more drag than hub dynamos.  However, when they are properly adjusted, the drag may be so low as to be trivial, and there is no resistance when the bottle dynamo is disengaged.

Tire wear Because bottle dynamos rub against the sidewall of a tire to generate electricity, they cause added wear on the side of tire. Hub dynamos do not.

Noise Bottle dynamos make an easily audible mechanical humming or whirring sound when engaged.  Hub dynamos are silent.

Switching Bottle dynamos must be physically repositioned to engage them, to turn on the lamps.  Hub dynamos are switched on electrically.  Hub dynamos can be engaged automatically by using electronic ambient light detection, providing zero-effort activation.

Positioning Bottle dynamos must be carefully adjusted to touch the sidewall at correct angles, height and pressure. Bottle dynamos can be knocked out of position if the bike falls, or if the mounting screws are too loose. A badly positioned bottle dynamo will make more noise and drag, slip more easily, and can in worst case fall into the spokes. Some dynamo mounts have tabs to try to prevent the latter.

See also [ edit ] Bicycle dynamo Hub dynamo Third-brush dynamo List of bicycle parts References [ edit ] ^ "Pedal & Power" .

TreeHugger . March 20, 2005.

Archived from the original on 29 March 2017 . Retrieved 25 September 2018 .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bottle dynamos .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bottle_dynamo&oldid=1288054915 " Categories : Bicycle lighting Electrical generators Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 April 2025, at 03:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bottle dynamo 6 languages Add topic

