Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Achievements and contributions Toggle Achievements and contributions subsection 1.1 Devices 1.2 Logic 1.3 Mathematics 1.4 Philosophy 1.5 Physics 2 Personal life Toggle Personal life subsection 2.1 Family 3 Major works by Leibniz 4 Manuscript archives and translations of Leibniz's works 5 Journals focused on Leibniz studies 6 Organizations named after Leibniz 7 Prizes named after Leibniz 8 Publications about Leibniz 9 See also 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Outline of Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Overview of and topical guide to Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz: Gottfried Wilhelm (von) Leibniz (1 July 1646 [O.S. 21 June] – 14 November 1716); German polymath, philosopher logician, mathematician.

[ 1 ] Developed differential and integral calculus at about the same time and independently of Isaac Newton. Leibniz earned his keep as a lawyer, diplomat, librarian, and genealogist for the House of Hanover, and contributed to diverse areas. His impact continues to reverberate, especially his original contributions in logic and binary representations.

[ 2 ] Achievements and contributions [ edit ] Devices [ edit ] Leibniz calculator Logic [ edit ] Alphabet of human thought Calculus ratiocinator Mathematics [ edit ] Calculus General Leibniz rule Leibniz formula for π Leibniz integral rule Philosophy [ edit ] Best of all possible worlds Characteristica universalis Identity of indiscernibles Pre-established harmony Principle of sufficient reason Physics [ edit ] Personal life [ edit ] Leibniz's political views Leibniz's religious views Family [ edit ] Major works by Leibniz [ edit ] De Arte Combinatoria Discourse on Metaphysics , ( text at wikisource ) Monadology , ( text at wikisource ) New Essays on Human Understanding Nova Methodus pro Maximis et Minimis Protogaea Théodicée Manuscript archives and translations of Leibniz's works [ edit ] Leibniz Archive (Hannover) at the Leibniz Research Center - Hannover Leibniz Archive (Potsdam) at the Brandenburg Academy of Humanities and Sciences Leibniz Archive (Munster) , Leibniz-Forschungsstelle Münster digital edition Leibniz Archive (Berlin) , digital edition Donald Rutherford 's translations at UCSD Lloyd Strickland 's translations at leibniz-translations.com Journals focused on Leibniz studies [ edit ] The Leibniz Review Studia Leibnitiana Organizations named after Leibniz [ edit ] Leibniz Association Leibniz College [ de ] , affiliated with the University of Tübingen Leibniz Institute of European History Leibniz Institute for Polymer Research Leibniz Society of North America Leibniz Supercomputing Center Leibniz University Hannover ZBW – Leibniz Information Centre for Economics Leibniz Schools in Germany [ de ] Prizes named after Leibniz [ edit ] Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Prize . It is regarded as the highest German award.

[ 3 ] Leibniz Ring [ de ] awarded by the Hannover Press Club.

Berlin Leibniz Medal [ de ] originally awarded by the Royal Prussian Academy of Sciences; currently awarded by the Berlin-Brandenburg Academy of Sciences and Humanities .

Leibniz Medal (Mainz) [ de ] awarded by the Mainz Academy of Sciences and Literature .

Publications about Leibniz [ edit ] Maria Rosa Antognazza 's 2009 Leibniz biography is a major recent resource.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz bibliography German Wikipedia Leibniz page ; it contains additional information.

References [ edit ] ^ Rescher, N. (2003).

On Leibniz , Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh University Press.

^ Davis, M. (2011).

The universal computer: The road from Leibniz to Turing , (AK Peters/CRC Press).

^ Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Prize ^ Antognazza, M. R. (2009).

Leibniz: an intellectual biography , (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press , winner of the 2010 Pfizer Award ) External links [ edit ] Webpage at the Leibniz Association Leibniz on Wikisource Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity v t e Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Bibliography Outline Mathematics and philosophy Alternating series test Best of all possible worlds Calculus controversy Calculus ratiocinator Characteristica universalis Compossibility Difference Dynamism Identity of indiscernibles Individuation Law of continuity Leibniz wheel Leibniz's gap Leibniz's notation Lingua generalis Mathesis universalis Pre-established harmony Plenitude Sufficient reason Salva veritate Theodicy Transcendental law of homogeneity Rationalism Universal science Vis viva Works De Arte Combinatoria (1666) Discourse on Metaphysics (1686) New Essays on Human Understanding (1704) Théodicée (1710) Monadology (1714) Leibniz–Clarke correspondence (1715–1716) Category v t e Wikipedia outlines General reference Culture and the arts Geography and places Health and fitness History and events Mathematics and logic Natural and physical sciences People and self Philosophy and thinking Religion and belief systems Society and social sciences Technology and applied sciences Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Outline_of_Gottfried_Wilhelm_Leibniz&oldid=1284413875 " Categories : Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Outlines of mathematics and logic Outlines of people Outlines Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using Sister project links with default search This page was last edited on 7 April 2025, at 12:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Outline of Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Add languages Add topic

