Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Early beliefs 3 Ancient philosophy Toggle Ancient philosophy subsection 3.1 Spring and Autumn period 3.1.1 Confucianism 3.1.2 Taoism 3.2 Warring States period 3.2.1 Legalism 3.2.2 Naturalists 3.2.3 Mohism 3.2.4 Logicians 3.2.5 Agriculturalists 4 Early imperial era philosophy Toggle Early imperial era philosophy subsection 4.1 History 4.1.1 Qin and Han dynasties 4.1.2 Six Dynasties 4.2 Schools of thought 4.2.1 Xuanxue 4.2.2 Buddhism 5 Mid to late imperial era philosophy Toggle Mid to late imperial era philosophy subsection 5.1 History 5.2 Schools of thought 5.2.1 Neo-Confucianism 6 Modern era Toggle Modern era subsection 6.1 New Confucianism 7 Philosophers 8 Chinese philosophy as a philosophy 9 Concepts 10 See also 11 References 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Chinese philosophy 62 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса Български བོད་ཡིག Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kriyòl gwiyannen Latina Lietuvių Magyar Македонски მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Patois Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Русский Shqip Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Tolışi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of philosophy Chinese philosophy A dialogue between two civilizations.

Chinese name Traditional Chinese 中國哲學 Simplified Chinese 中国哲学 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Zhōngguó zhéxué Bopomofo ㄓㄨㄥ ㄍㄨㄛˊ ㄓㄜˊ ㄒㄩㄝˊ Gwoyeu Romatzyh Jonggwo jershyue Wade–Giles Chung 1 -kuo 2 che 2 -hsüeh 2 Tongyong Pinyin Jhong-guó jhé-syué IPA [ʈʂʊ́ŋ.kwǒ ʈʂɤ̌.ɕɥě] Wu Romanization Tson-kueʔ tseʔ-ghoʔ Hakka Romanization Zung 1 -get 5 ziet 5 -hok 6 Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Jūng-gwok jit-hohk Jyutping zung1 gwok3 zit3 hok6 IPA [tsʊŋ˥ kʷɔk̚˧ tsit̚˧ hɔk̚˨] Southern Min Hokkien POJ Tiong-kok tiat-ha̍k Vietnamese name Vietnamese Triết học Trung Quốc Chữ Hán 哲學中國 Korean name Hangul 중국 철학 Hanja 中國哲學 Transcriptions Revised Romanization Jungguk cheolhak McCune–Reischauer Chungguk ch'ŏrhak Japanese name Kanji 中国哲学 Hiragana ちゅうごくてつがく Katakana チュウゴクテツガク Transcriptions Romanization Chūgoku tetsugaku Kunrei-shiki Tyûgoku tetugaku Part of a series on Eastern philosophy China Confucianism Classical Confucius Mencius Xun Zi Dong Zhongshu Zheng Xuan Wang Yun Neo-Confucianism Han Yu Zhou Dunyi Zhang Zai Cheng Hao Cheng Yi Shao Yong Zhu Xi Lu Jiuyuan Wang Shouren Liu Zongzhou Li Zhi Wang Fuzhi Huang Zongxi Gu Yanwu Dai Zhen New Confucianism Kang Youwei Tan Sitong Liang Shuming Xiong Shili Feng Youlan Mou Zongsan Du Weiming Buddhism Han Buddhism Tientai Zhiyi Huayan school Fazang Guifeng Zongmi East Asian Mādhyamaka Jizang Kumārajīva Yogācāra Xuanzang Chinese Chan Bodhidharma Huineng Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Tibetan Buddhism Sakya Sakya Pandita Nyingma Longchenpa Gelug Tsongkhapa Four Tenets system Rangtong-Shentong Svatantrika-Prasaṅgika distinction Daoism Classical Laozi Zhuangzi Lie Yukou Neo-Daoism Wang Bi Ruan Ji Guo Xiang Ge Hong Cheng Xuanying Hundred Schools of Thought Legalism Guan Zhong Han Feizi Shang Yang Li Si Mohism Mozi Military and Strategy Sun Tzu Wu Qi Modern Hong Xiuquan Hong Rengan Yan Fu Zhang Taiyan Sun Yat-sen Lu Xun Dai Jitao Li Dazhao Chen Duxiu Ai Siqi Mao Zedong Liu Shaoqi Zhang Chunqiao Teng Wensheng Wang Huning Yi Junqing Zhao Tingyang Wang Hui Qin Hui Li Zehou India Āstika (orthodox) Vedic philosophy Agastya Aruni Ashtavakra Atri Vashistha Yajnavalkya Mimamsa Jaimini Vedanta Advaita Badarayana Gaudapada Adi Shankara Dvaita Madhvacharya Svābhāvika Bhedābheda Nimbarka Srinivasacharya Sri Vaishnavism Ramanuja Neo-Vedanta Vivekananda Aurobindo Samkhya Kapila Yoga Patanjali Nyaya Gotama Navya-Nyāya Gangesha Upadhyaya Vaisheshika Kanada Nāstika (heterodox) Ājīvika Charvaka Kashmir Shaivism Abhinavagupta Pratyabhijna Tantra Tamil Valluvam Valluvar Other Chanakya General topics Ahimsa Atomism Atman Ātman (Hinduism) Ātman (Buddhism) Ātman (Jainism) Artha Anekantavada Brahman Dharma Indian logic Karma Kama Maya Moksha Nondualism Samadhi Pramana Yoga Jainism Haribhadra Umaswati Buddhism The Buddha Traditions Madhyamika Nagarjuna Yogacara Vasubandhu Dharmakirti Indian logic Dignāga Topics Dukkha Anatta Anicca Maitrī Nirvana Pratītyasamutpāda Emptiness Japan Traditions Japanese Buddhism Japanese Zen Sōtō school Dogen Rinzai school Eisai Shingon Kukai Japanese Confucianism Tokugawa Mitsukuni Fujiwara Seika Hayashi Razan Nakae Tōju Itō Jinsai Ogyū Sorai Kokugaku Motoori Norinaga Modern Thought Statism Fukuzawa Yukichi Tokutomi Soho Kita Ikki Kyoto School Kitaro Nishida Hajime Tanabe Jun Tosaka Shūzō Kuki Tetsuro Watsuji Kiyoshi Miki Keiji Nishitani Shin'ichi Hisamatsu Masao Abe D. T. Suzuki liberalism and Marxism Masao Maruyama Kojin Karatani Hiroki Azuma Chizuko Ueno Korea Traditions Korean Buddhism Wonhyo Uisang Hwaeom Uicheon Cheontae Jinul Seon Korean Confucianism Persons Chŏng Tojŏn Sŏ Kyŏngdŏk Yi Ŏnjŏk Yi Hwang Yi I Yi Ik Pak Chiwŏn Chŏng Yagyong Kim Chŏnghŭi Choe Han-gi Topics Silhak , Seohak Donghak Choe Je-u Modern Thought Persons Jaegwon Kim Topics Minjung theology Juche Philosophy portal v t e Chinese philosophy ( simplified Chinese : 中国哲学; traditional Chinese : 中國哲學) refers to the philosophical traditions that originated and developed within the historical and cultural context of China. It encompasses systematic reflections on issues such as existence, knowledge, ethics, and politics. Evolving over more than two millennia, Chinese philosophy includes classical traditions such as Confucianism , Daoism , and Buddhism , as well as modern responses to Western philosophical currents. As a cultural form of philosophy, it addresses universal philosophical concerns while also reflecting the specific historical and social conditions of China.

[ 1 ] The historical development of Chinese philosophy began during the Spring and Autumn and Warring States periods, a time known as the " Hundred Schools of Thought ".

[ 2 ] Major schools such as Confucianism , Daoism , Mohism , and Legalism emerged with distinct views on human nature, social order, and political authority. During the Han dynasty , Confucianism was established as the official ideology , shaping China's intellectual and political systems for centuries. In subsequent eras, Chinese philosophy integrated influences from Indian Buddhism , giving rise to new developments such as Neo-Confucianism in the Song and Ming dynasties.

[ 3 ] In the modern period, Chinese thinkers engaged with Western thought, resulting in the emergence of Three Principles of the People , Chinese Marxism , New Confucianism , and other philosophical movements.

[ 4 ] Throughout the 20th century, these traditions were reshaped by political upheaval and continue to evolve today.

Chinese philosophy, like other philosophical traditions, engages with fundamental questions in metaphysics , epistemology , ethics , and political philosophy . Thinkers across various schools explored debates about the nature of human goodness, the source of moral knowledge, and the foundations of social order. Confucianism emphasizes ethical cultivation and political responsibility; Daoism advocates a life in accordance with nature and spontaneity; and Buddhist and Neo-Confucian thinkers developed detailed theories of consciousness and moral practice.

[ 5 ] Beyond abstract theorizing, Chinese philosophy has played a significant role in shaping Chinese education, governance, and cultural life.

[ 1 ] In the modern era, Chinese philosophers continue to reinterpret classical ideas while engaging with global philosophical discourse.

Chinese philosophy has exerted significant influence across East Asia . Buddhist thought and Neo-Confucian philosophy spread to Korea , Japan , and Vietnam , where they shaped local intellectual and educational traditions.

[ 6 ] During the 17th and 18th centuries, Confucianism attracted the interest of European Enlightenment thinkers—often through idealized or inaccurate interpretations—which nonetheless played a role in debates about reason, morality, and secular governance.

[ 7 ] In the contemporary era, Chinese philosophy is gaining greater visibility in global academia, though challenges remain regarding its integration into broader philosophical discourse beyond cultural or regional frameworks.

Overview [ edit ] The development of Chinese philosophy began in earnest during the Spring and Autumn and Warring States periods (c. 770–221 BCE), an era later known as the " Hundred Schools of Thought " (诸子百家). Thinkers such as Confucius , Mencius , Laozi , Zhuangzi , Mozi , Han Fei , and Xunzi laid the foundations for enduring traditions like Confucianism (儒家), Daoism (道家), Mohism (墨家), and Legalism (法家).

[ 1 ] These schools addressed questions of ethics, governance, human nature, and the ideal social order, reflecting the intellectual ferment of a politically fragmented age.

[ 5 ] Legalism as a coherent philosophy disappeared largely due to its relationship with the unpopular authoritarian rule of Qin Shi Huang . However, many of its ideas and institutions would continue to influence Chinese philosophy throughout the Han dynasty and after.

[ 8 ] During the early Han dynasty , these competing traditions began to merge in practice, but it was not until the reign of Emperor Wu (141–87 BCE) that Confucianism, through the work of Dong Zhongshu , was officially adopted as state ideology.

[ 8 ] This institutionalization of a mysticized form of Confucianism, infused with cosmological elements from Yin-Yang and Five Elements theories (阴阳五行)—often summarized as "rejecting the Hundred Schools, honoring Confucianism alone" (罢黜百家，独尊儒术)—would shape Chinese education, bureaucracy, and political thought for centuries.

[ 2 ] Daoism, meanwhile, developed into an organized religion, while Buddhism (佛教) entered China from India and gained increasing prominence in the centuries that followed.

[ 5 ] Buddhism entered China during the Han dynasty and developed into a major philosophical force through the translation efforts of figures like Kumārajīva and Xuanzang , who introduced Madhyamaka (中观) and Yogācāra (唯识) thought, which profoundly influenced Chinese metaphysics , epistemology , and soteriology .

[ 9 ] In the 5th–7th centuries, Indian monk Bodhidharma transmitted the foundations of Chan ( Zen ) Buddhism (禅宗), which was later transformed by Huineng into a distinctly Chinese tradition emphasizing sudden awakening (顿悟) and direct experience.

[ 10 ] Over time, Buddhist metaphysics and moral psychology significantly influenced Daoist thought and provoked Confucian responses, laying the groundwork for later syntheses such as Neo-Confucianism.

[ 3 ] Beginning in the mid- Tang dynasty, certain scholars with a strong sense of cultural identity initiated efforts to revive Confucianism in response to what they perceived as moral nihilism in Buddhism.

[ 3 ] Han Yu was a leading figure in this movement; he criticized Buddhist monastics for being unproductive and for undermining the Confucian ethic of social responsibility. Following two major waves of Buddhist suppression (三武一宗灭佛) under Emperor Wuzong of Tang and Emperor Shizong of Later Zhou , Buddhism's dominance in political and intellectual life declined.

[ 10 ] During the Song dynasty, Confucian scholar-officials critically absorbed elements of Buddhist and Daoist philosophy and practice, laying the foundations for what became Neo-Confucianism (宋明理学).

Zhang Zai articulated a philosophy of qi (matter, 气) as the material basis of all existence. The Cheng brothers (Cheng Hao and Cheng Yi) emphasized li (principle, 理) and the necessity of internal cultivation to eliminate selfish desires and restore moral nature.

[ 5 ] [ 3 ] Building on these earlier thinkers, Zhu Xi systematized Neo-Confucian thought into a comprehensive metaphysical and ethical framework. He posited li (principle) as the underlying structure of the cosmos, advocated for "investigation of things" (格物) as the path to knowledge, and emphasized the importance of preserving tianli (Heavenly Principle, 天理) by eliminating personal desire.

[ 11 ] From the Yuan dynasty onward, the School of Principle (程朱理学) became state orthodoxy and the basis of the imperial examination system throughout the Ming and Qing dynasties, playing a central role in governance, education, and moral regulation.

[ 2 ] During the late Ming period, rapid commercial expansion and a flourishing publishing industry gave rise to new currents of thought, many of which challenged Zhu Xi's doctrines.

[ 12 ] The most influential among them was Wang Yangming 's School of Mind (陆王心学), which replaced external investigation with introspective moral awareness (良知) and emphasized the unity of knowledge and action to solve Zhu's epistemology paradox.

[ 13 ] Wang's philosophy gained wide support and even political traction, though it never supplanted the School of Principle as the state-sanctioned orthodoxy. After the fall of the Ming , Confucian scholars entered a period of deep reflection. Among them, Wang Fuzhi developed an integrative synthesis drawing from Neo-Confucianism, Buddhism, and Daoism.

[ 14 ] Though his influence was limited during his lifetime, his ideas gained renewed interest in the late Qing and would later be reinterpreted as a source of inspiration for modern political ideologies, including aspects of Maoist thought.

[ 15 ] The Qing dynasty saw the rise of evidential scholarship (乾嘉学派) and philology, though official ideology remained conservative, especially during the height of literary inquisition.

[ 4 ] Beginning in the late Qing dynasty, Chinese philosophy underwent a profound transformation in response to national crisis, Western imperialism , and the collapse of the dynastic worldview. Thinkers such as Yan Fu introduced liberalism , Social Darwinism , and utilitarian thought through translations of Western works, while reformers like Kang Youwei sought to modernize Confucianism into a national religion (立教改制).

[ 16 ] During the early Republic of China period, the New Culture Movement promoted science and democracy while denouncing traditional morality, leading to the marginalization of classical Confucianism. Meanwhile, under the influence of Abraham Lincoln , Sun Yat-sen developed the Three Principles of the People (三民主义)— nationalism (民族), democracy (民权), and people's livelihood (民生)—as a political-philosophical framework that blended Western republicanism with Chinese moral values.

[ 17 ] The ideology of the Nationalist Party ( Kuomintang , 国民党) incorporated this system into its governance strategy, creating a modernist yet culturally rooted foundation for the Chinese state.

[ 16 ] Following the April 12 Purge , Chiang Kai-shek 's Nationalist right-wing synthesized the Three Principles of the People with Confucianism, authoritarian governance , and nationalist ideology, developing a framework explicitly opposed to both liberalism and Marxism which often referred to as Chiangism (蒋介石主义).

[ 18 ] Mao Zedong Thought (毛泽东思想) drew from Soviet Marxism–Leninism (马克思列宁主义), particularly Stalinist doctrine (斯大林主义), as well as late Qing Hunanese intellectual traditions and the anti-elitist, anti-capitalist sentiments prevalent in Republican-era China .

[ 4 ] [ 15 ] [ 19 ] In the struggle for ideological leadership within the Communist Party against Wang Ming , Mao reinterpreted Marxist terminology and developed a distinctive theoretical system centered on concepts like practice (实践), contradiction (矛盾), and dialectical materialism (辩证唯物主义), which gained institutional authority following his political success and became the unquestioned orthodoxy.

[ 20 ] Following the Communist victory in 1949 , Maoism became the dominant state ideological system. During the later stages of the Cultural Revolution , its discourse became increasingly ritualized and detached from theoretical coherence.

[ 21 ] Although the Maoist period ended in 1976, Mao Zedong Thought remains one of the guiding ideologies of the Chinese Communist Party , and its paradigmatic impact on philosophical discourse, institutional norms, and modes of intellectual expression continues to shape Chinese thought.

[ 22 ] Since the 1980s, Chinese philosophy has gradually diversified under conditions of economic reform .

New Confucianism , initially developed by scholars in Taiwan and Hong Kong such as Mou Zongsan and Tang Junyi , was reintroduced into the mainland and engaged in dialogue with Western humanism .

[ 23 ] At the same time, Marxist humanism , existentialism , phenomenology , Frankfurt School , Rawlsianism , and analytic philosophy gained influence in academic circles.

[ 24 ] State ideology shifted toward " Socialism with Chinese Characteristics " (中国特色社会主义), emphasizing pragmatism and national rejuvenation while selectively drawing on traditional values. Though political constraints remain, contemporary philosophers have attempted to develop original frameworks addressing global ethics, language, and subjectivity. Nevertheless, the legacy of revolutionary philosophy and ongoing state involvement in ideology continue to shape the structure and limits of philosophical inquiry in China.

[ 4 ] In addition to the Confucian, Daoist, and Buddhist traditions rooted in Han cultural regions, other philosophical systems developed across China's multiethnic landscape.

Tibetan Buddhism (藏传佛教), which took shape from the Yuan dynasty onward, formed a systematic tradition incorporating Madhyamaka thought and Buddhist logic ( pramāṇa , 因明), particularly through the Gelug school (格鲁学派) founded by Tsongkhapa . This tradition had a major influence on Mongolian and Manchu political institutions and continues to play a central role in Tibetan intellectual life.

[ 25 ] Beginning in the 17th century, Catholic missionaries, especially Jesuits like Matteo Ricci and Johann Adam Schall von Bell , introduced Aristotelian and Thomistic philosophy to China. They translated Western philosophical concepts into Confucian terminology and attempted to establish a dialogue between Catholic theology and Chinese ethical traditions. Although controversial, these efforts created an enduring legacy of cross-cultural exchange that shaped the development of modern Chinese intellectual history.

[ 13 ] Islamic philosophy in China—often referred to as Islamic Heavenly Studies (天方理学)—flourished particularly during the Ming and Qing dynasties. Muslim scholars such as Liu Zhi and Ma Zhu synthesized Islamic theology with Confucian ethics, developing distinctive metaphysical and ethical frameworks known as "Hui Confucianism" (回儒). Their works reflected efforts to reconcile Islamic and Chinese thought within a shared intellectual world.

[ 13 ] Early beliefs [ edit ] Early Shang dynasty thought was based on cycles like the 10 stems and 12 earthly branches . This notion stems from what the people of the Shang dynasty could observe around them: day and night cycles, the seasons progressed again and again, and even the moon waxed and waned until it waxed again. Thus, this notion, which remained relevant throughout Chinese history , reflects the order of nature. In juxtaposition, it also marks a fundamental distinction from western philosophy , in which the dominant view of time is a linear progression. During the Shang, Ancestor worship was present and universally recognized.

[ citation needed ] When the Shang were overthrown by the Zhou a new political, religious and philosophical concept was introduced called the Mandate of Heaven . This mandate was said to be taken when rulers became unworthy of their position and provided a justification for Zhou rule it is said that the Duke of Zhou made the early solar terms by measuring with a gnomon that was added to make the complete solar terms . He is also said to have used try squares and wrote the Zhoubi Suanjing [ 26 ] with his astrologer. Several early beliefs might be found in the Guicang and perhaps the earliest Chinese book, the small calendar of the Xia in Da Dai Liji, though debated to exist the Xia dynasty is said to be its origin.

[ 27 ] Ancient philosophy [ edit ] Part of a series on Chinese folk religion Concepts Tian — Shangdi Qi Shen Ling Xian ling Yinyang Hundun Mingyun Yuanfen Baoying Wu Theory Chinese theology Chinese gods and immortals Chinese mythology Chinese astrology Chinese zodiac Chinese creation myth Chinese spiritual world concepts Model humanity: Xian Zhenren Wen and wu Practices Fenxiang Jingxiang Feng shui Miaohui Wu shamanism Jitong mediumship Precious scrolls Institutions and temples Associations of good-doing Lineage associations or churches Chinese temple Ancestral shrine Chinese Folk Temples' Association Festivals Qingming Zhongyuan Zhongqiu Jiuhuangye Qixi Duanwu Nian Internal traditions Major cultural forms Chinese ancestral religion Chinese communal deity religion Chinese food therapy Chinese geomancy Chinese mother goddess worship Northeast China folk religion Traditional Chinese medicine Qigong Main philosophical traditions: Confucianism ( state rites ) Taoism Three teachings Other schools ( Mohism ) Ritual traditions: Folk ritual masters' orders Jitong mediumship Nuo folk religion Chinese shamanism Devotional traditions: Mazuism Ong Yah worship Zhenkong, "Void of Truth".

Salvation churches and sects : De teaching Jiugongdao Luo teaching Maitreya teachings Tiandi teachings Tianxian miaodao Xia teaching Xiantiandao Yiguandao Zaili teaching Confucian churches and sects: Holy Confucian Church Indonesian Confucian Church Universal Church of the Way and its Virtue Phoenix churches Xuanyuanism Taigu school Related religions and movements Benzhuism Bimoism Bon Dongbaism Han Buddhism Miao folk religion Vietnamese folk religion Qiang folk religion Yao folk religion Zhuang folk religion House church (China) Religion portal v t e Spring and Autumn period [ edit ] Main article: Hundred Schools of Thought Around 500 BCE, after the Zhou state weakened and China moved into the Spring and Autumn period , the classic period of Chinese philosophy began. This is known as the Hundred Schools of Thought ( 諸子百家 ; zhūzǐ bǎijiā ; "various scholars, hundred schools"). This period is considered the golden age of Chinese philosophy. Of the many schools founded at this time and during the subsequent Warring States period , the four most influential ones were Confucianism , Daoism (often spelled "Taoism"), Mohism and Legalism .

[ 8 ] [ 28 ] Confucianism [ edit ] Kong Fuzi ( Latin : Confucius ) Main article: Confucianism Confucianism is a philosophical school developed from the teachings of Confucius collected and written by his disciples after his death in The Analects , and in the Warring States period , Mencius in The Mencius and Xunzi in The Xunzi . It is a system of moral , social , political , and religious thought that has had tremendous influence on Chinese history, thought, and culture down to the 20th century. Some Westerners have considered it to have been the " state religion " of imperial China because of its lasting influence on Asian culture. Its influence also spread to Korea, Japan, Vietnam and many other Asian countries.

[ citation needed ] Confucianism reached its peak of influence during the Tang and Song dynasties under a rebranded Confucianism called Neo-Confucianism . Confucius expanded on the already present ideas of Chinese religion and culture to reflect the time period and environment of political chaos during the Warring States period . Because Confucius embedded the Chinese culture so heavily into his philosophy it was able to resonate with the people of China. However, the relationship between Confucianism and contemporary Chinese society is continuously transforming, reflecting the evolving cultural, political, and social landscape of modern China.

[ 29 ] The major Confucian concepts include filial piety , loyalty ( 忠 ; zhōng ), li (ritual), ren (humanity or humaneness), the rectification of names (i.e., to ensure everything is what its name implies it should be),.

[ 30 ] Confucius taught both positive and negative versions of the Golden Rule . The concepts yin and yang represent two opposing forces that are permanently in conflict with each other, leading to perpetual contradiction and change. The Confucian idea of "Rid of the two ends, take the middle" is a Chinese equivalent of the idea of "thesis, antithesis, and synthesis", often attributed to Hegel , which is a way of reconciling opposites, arriving at some middle ground combining the best of both.

[ citation needed ] Confucius heavily emphasized the idea of microcosms in society (subunits of family and community) success's were the foundations for a successful state or country. Confucius believed in the use of education to further knowledge the people in ethics, societal behavior, and reverence in other humans. With the combination of education, successful family, and his ethical teachings he believed he could govern a well established society in China.

[ citation needed ] Taoism [ edit ] Chinese glazed stoneware statue of a Daoist deity, from the Ming dynasty , 16th century Main article: Taoist philosophy Bagua : Modern Taijitu with I Ching trigrams Taoism arose as a philosophy and later also developed into a religion based on the texts the Tao Te Ching (ascribed to Laozi ) and the Zhuangzi (partly ascribed to Zhuang Zhou ). The word Tao ( 道 ; also transliterated as Dao ) literally means 'path' or 'way'. However, in Taoism it refers more often to a meta-physical force that encompasses the entire universe but which cannot be described nor felt.

All major Chinese philosophical schools have investigated the correct Way to go about a moral life, but in Taoism it takes on the most abstract meanings, leading this school to be named after it. It advocated nonaction ( wu wei ), the strength of softness, spontaneity, and relativism. Although it serves as a rival to Confucianism, a school of active morality, this rivalry is compromised and given perspective by the idiom "practice Confucianism on the outside, Taoism on the inside." Most of Taoism's focus is on the notion that human attempts to make the world better actually make the world worse. Therefore, it is better to strive for harmony, minimising potentially harmful interference with nature or in human affairs.

[ 31 ] Warring States period [ edit ] Legalism [ edit ] Main article: Legalism (Chinese philosophy) Philosopher Han Fei synthesized together earlier the methods of his predecessors, which famous historian Sima Tan posthumously termed Legalism. With an essential principle like "when the epoch changed, the ways changed", late pre- Han dynasty reformers emphasized rule by law.

In Han Fei's philosophy, a ruler should govern his subjects by the following trinity: Fa ( 法 ; fǎ ): law or principle.

Shu ( 術 ; shù ): method, tactic, art, or statecraft.

Shi ( 勢 ; shì ): legitimacy, power, or charisma.

What has been termed by some as the intrastate Realpolitik of the Warring States period was highly progressive, and extremely critical of the Confucian and Mohist schools. But that of the Qin dynasty would be blamed for creating a totalitarian society, thereby experiencing decline. Its main motto is: "Set clear strict laws, or deliver harsh punishment". In Han Fei's philosophy the ruler possessed authority regarding reward and penalty, enacted through law. Shang Yang and Han Fei promoted absolute adherence to the law, regardless of the circumstances or the person. Ministers were only to be rewarded if their words were accurate to the results of their proposals. Legalism, in accordance with Shang Yang's interpretation, could encourage the state to be a militaristic autarky .

Naturalists [ edit ] Main article: School of Naturalists The School of Naturalists or the School of Yin-yang ( Chinese : 陰陽家 ; pinyin : Yīnyángjiā ; Wade–Giles : Yin-yang-chia ; lit.

'School of Yin-Yang') was a Warring States era philosophy that synthesized the concepts of yin-yang and the wuxing ; Zou Yan is considered the founder of this school.

[ 32 ] His theory attempted to explain the universe in terms of basic forces in nature: the complementary agents of yin (dark, cold, female, negative) and yang (light, hot, male, positive) and the Five Elements or Five Phases (water, fire, wood, metal, and earth).

In its early days, this theory was most strongly associated with the states of Yan and Qi . In later periods, these epistemological theories came to hold significance in both philosophy and popular belief.  This school was absorbed into Taoism's alchemic and magical dimensions as well as into the Chinese medical framework. The earliest surviving recordings of this are in the Mawangdui texts and Huangdi Neijing .

Mohism [ edit ] Main article: Mohism Mohism (Moism), founded by Mozi , promotes universal love with the aim of mutual benefit. Everyone must love each other equally and impartially to avoid conflict and war. Mozi was strongly against Confucian ritual, instead emphasizing pragmatic survival through farming, fortification , and statecraft . Tradition is inconsistent, and human beings need an extra-traditional guide to identify which traditions are acceptable. The moral guide must then promote and encourage social behaviors that maximize general benefit. As motivation for his theory, Mozi brought in the Will of Heaven , but rather than being religious his philosophy parallels utilitarianism .

Logicians [ edit ] Main article: School of Names The logicians (School of Names) were concerned with logic, paradoxes, names and actuality (similar to Confucian rectification of names). The logician Hui Shi was a friendly rival to Zhuangzi , arguing against Taoism in a light-hearted and humorous manner. Another logician, Gongsun Long , originated the famous When a White Horse is Not a Horse dialogue.

Agriculturalists [ edit ] Main article: Agriculturalism Agriculturalism was an early agrarian social and political philosophy that advocated peasant utopian communalism and egalitarianism .

[ 33 ] The philosophy is founded on the notion that human society originates with the development of agriculture , and societies are based upon "people's natural propensity to farm." [ 34 ] The Agriculturalists believed that the ideal government, modeled after the semi-mythical governance of Shennong , is led by a benevolent king, one who works alongside the people in tilling the fields. The Agriculturalist king is not paid by the government through its treasuries; his livelihood is derived from the profits he earns working in the fields, not his leadership.

[ 35 ] Unlike the Confucians, the Agriculturalists did not believe in the division of labour , arguing instead that the economic policies of a country need to be based upon an egalitarian self sufficiency . The Agriculturalists supported the fixing of prices , in which all similar goods, regardless of differences in quality and demand, are set at exactly the same, unchanging price.

[ 35 ] Early imperial era philosophy [ edit ] History [ edit ] Qin and Han dynasties [ edit ] A Western Han (202 BC – 9 AD) fresco depicting Confucius (and Laozi ), from a tomb of Dongping County , Shandong province , China The short founder Qin dynasty , where Legalism was the official philosophy, quashed Mohist and Confucianist schools . Legalism remained influential during the early Han dynasty under the Taoist-Realist ideology Huang-Lao until Emperor Wu of Han adopted Confucianism as official doctrine. Confucianism and Taoism became the determining forces of Chinese thought until the introduction of Buddhism .

Confucianism was particularly strong during the Han dynasty, whose greatest thinker was Dong Zhongshu , who integrated Confucianism with the thoughts of the Zhongshu School and the theory of the Five Elements. He also was a promoter of the New Text school, which considered Confucius as a divine figure and a spiritual ruler of China, who foresaw and started the evolution of the world towards the Universal Peace.

In contrast, there was an Old Text school that advocated the use of Confucian works written in ancient language (from this comes the denomination Old Text ) that were so much more reliable. In particular, they refuted the assumption of Confucius as a godlike figure and considered him as the greatest sage, but simply a human and mortal Six Dynasties [ edit ] The 3rd and 4th centuries saw the rise of the Xuanxue (mysterious learning), also called Neo-Taoism .

Buddhism arrived in China around the 1st century AD, but it was not until the Northern and Southern , Sui and Tang dynasties that it gained considerable influence and acknowledgement. At the beginning, it was considered a sort of Taoist sect.

Mahayana Buddhism was far more successful in China than its rival Hinayana , and both Indian schools and local Chinese sects arose from the 5th century. Two chiefly important monk philosophers were Sengzhao and Daosheng . But probably the most influential and original of these schools was the Chan sect, which had an even stronger impact in Japan as the Zen sect.

In the mid-Tang Buddhism reached its peak, and reportedly there were 4,600 monasteries, 40,000 hermitages and 260,500 monks and nuns. The power of the Buddhist clergy was so great and the wealth of the monasteries so impressive, that it instigated criticism from Confucian scholars, who considered Buddhism as a foreign religion. In 845 Emperor Wuzong ordered the Great Anti-Buddhist Persecution , confiscating the riches and returning monks and nuns to lay life. From then on, Buddhism lost much of its influence.

Schools of thought [ edit ] Xuanxue [ edit ] Main article: Xuanxue Xuanxue was a philosophical school that combined elements of Confucianism and Taoism to reinterpret the I Ching , Tao Te Ching , and Zhuangzi .

The most important philosophers of this movement were Wang Bi , Xiang Xiu and Guo Xiang . The main question of this school was whether Being came before Not-Being (in Chinese, ming and wuming ). A peculiar feature of these Taoist thinkers, like the Seven Sages of the Bamboo Grove , was the concept of feng liu (lit. wind and flow), a sort of romantic spirit which encouraged following the natural and instinctive impulse.

Buddhism [ edit ] The Sakyamuni Buddha , by artist Zhang Shengwen, 1173–1176 CE, Song dynasty Main article: Chinese Buddhism Buddhism is a religion, a practical philosophy , and arguably a psychology , focusing on the teachings of Gautama Buddha , who lived on the Indian subcontinent most likely from the mid-6th to the early 5th century BCE. When used in a generic sense, a Buddha is generally considered to be someone who discovers the true nature of reality .

Buddhism until the 4th century AD had little impact on China but in the 4th century its teachings hybridized with those of Taoism.

[ 36 ] Buddhism brought to China the idea of many hells, where sinners went, but the deceased sinners souls could be saved by pious acts.

[ 36 ] Since Chinese traditional thought focused more on ethics rather than metaphysics , the merging of Buddhist and Taoist concepts developed several schools distinct from the originating Indian schools.

The most prominent examples with philosophical merit are Sanlun , Tiantai , Huayan , and Chan (a.k.a. Zen). They investigate consciousness , levels of truth, whether reality is ultimately empty, and how enlightenment is to be achieved. Buddhism has a spiritual aspect that complements the action of Neo-Confucianism , with prominent Neo-Confucians advocating certain forms of meditation.

Mid to late imperial era philosophy [ edit ] History [ edit ] Neo-Confucianism was a revived version of old Confucian principles that appeared around the Song dynasty , with Buddhist , Taoist , and Legalist features. The first philosophers, such as Shao Yong , Zhou Dunyi and Chang Zai , were cosmologists and worked on the I Ching . The Cheng brothers , Cheng Yi and Cheng Hao , are considered the founders of the two main schools of thought of Neo-Confucianism: the School of Principle the first, the School of Mind the latter.

The School of Principle gained supremacy during the Song dynasty with the philosophical system elaborated by Zhu Xi , which became mainstream and officially adopted by the government for the imperial examinations under the Yuan dynasty .

The School of Mind was developed by Lu Jiuyuan , Zhu Xi's main rival, but was soon forgotten. Only during the Ming dynasty was the School of Mind revived by Wang Shouren , whose influence is equal to that of Zhu Xi. This school was particularly important in Japan.

During the Qing dynasty many philosophers objected against Neo-Confucianism and there was a return to the Han dynasty Confucianism, and also the reprise of the controversy between Old Text and New Text. In this period also started the penetration of Western culture, but most Chinese thought that the Westerners were maybe more advanced in technology and warfare, but that China had primacy in moral and intellectual fields.

Chinese culture was highly influential on the traditions of other East Asian states, and its philosophy directly influenced Korean philosophy , Vietnamese philosophy and Japanese philosophy .

[ 37 ] During later Chinese dynasties like the Ming dynasty (1368–1644), as well as in the Korean Joseon dynasty (1392–1897), a resurgent Neo-Confucianism led by thinkers such as Wang Yangming (1472–1529) became the dominant school of thought and was promoted by the imperial state. In Japan, the Tokugawa shogunate (1603–1867) was also strongly influenced by Confucian philosophy.

[ 38 ] Schools of thought [ edit ] Neo-Confucianism [ edit ] Main articles: Neo-Confucianism and Yangmingism Despite Confucianism losing popularity to Taoism and Buddhism, Neo-Confucianism combined those ideas into a more metaphysical framework. Its concepts include li (principle, akin to Plato 's forms ), qi (vital or material force), taiji (the Great Ultimate), and xin (mind).

Song dynasty philosopher Zhou Dunyi (1017–1073) is commonly seen as the first true "pioneer" of Neo-Confucianism, using Daoist metaphysics as a framework for his ethical philosophy.

[ 39 ] Neo-Confucianism developed both as a renaissance of traditional Confucian ideas, and as a reaction to the ideas of Buddhism and religious Daoism. Although the Neo-Confucianists denounced Buddhist metaphysics, Neo-Confucianism did borrow Daoist and Buddhist terminology and concepts.

[ 40 ] Neo-Confucianist philosophers like Zhu Xi and Wang Yangming are seen as the most important figures of Neo-Confucianism.

Zhu Xi was a leading figure in Neo-Confucianism.

Wang Yangming was an important figure in Neo-Confucianism.

Modern era [ edit ] See also: Chinese nationalism , Maoism , and Chinese Marxist Philosophy During the Industrial and Modern Ages, Chinese philosophy had also begun to integrate concepts of Western philosophy, as steps toward modernization. Chinese philosophy never developed the concept of human rights , so that classical Chinese lacked words for them. In 1864, W.A.P. Martin had to invent the word quanli ( Chinese : 權利 ) to translate the Western concept of "rights" in the process of translating Henry Wheaton 's Elements of International Law into classical Chinese.

[ 41 ] By the time of the Xinhai Revolution in 1911, there were many calls such as the May Fourth Movement to completely abolish the old imperial institutions and practices of China. There have been attempts to incorporate democracy , republicanism , and industrialism into Chinese philosophy, notably by Sun Yat-Sen at the beginning of the 20th century.

Mao Zedong added Marxism , Stalinism , Chinese Marxist Philosophy and other communist thought.

[ citation needed ] When the Chinese Communist Party took over in 1949, previous schools of thought were denounced as backward, and later purged during the Cultural Revolution as part of the campaign against the Four Olds .

[ 42 ] During the Xi Jinping general secretaryship , the People's Republic of China has promoted a revival in Chinese philosophy. In 2024, East China Normal University established the Chinese Zhuzi Research Institute to promote the study of Chinese philosophies.

[ 43 ] New Confucianism [ edit ] This paragraph is an excerpt from New Confucianism .

[ edit ] New Confucianism ( Chinese : 新儒家 ; pinyin : Xīn Rújiā ; lit.

'New Confucianism') is an intellectual movement of Confucianism that began in the early 20th century in Republican China , and further developed in post- Mao era contemporary China . It primarily developed during the May Fourth Movement .

[ 44 ] It is deeply influenced by, but not identical to, the neo-Confucianism of the Song and Ming dynasties.

[ 45 ] Philosophers [ edit ] Main article: List of Chinese philosophers Confucius , seen as the Great Master but sometimes ridiculed by Taoists.

Mencius , Confucius' follower having idealist inspiration Xun Zi , another Confucius' follower, closer to realism, teacher of Han Fei and Li Si Zhu Xi , founder of Neo-Confucianism Wang Yangming , most influential proponent of "state of mind." ( Xinxue [ zh ] ) Laozi , the semi-mythical founder of Taoist school.

Zhuang Zhou , said to be the author of the Zhuangzi .

Lie Yukou , said to be the author of the Liezi .

Yang Zhu , proposed ethical egoism and founded Yangism .

Mozi , the founder of Mohist school.

Shang Yang , Legalist founder and pivotal Qin reformer Han Fei , one of the most notable theoreticians of Legalism Li Si , major proponent and practitioner of Legalism Chinese philosophy as a philosophy [ edit ] Main article: Legitimacy of Chinese philosophy The debate over whether the thought of ancient Chinese masters should be called philosophy has been discussed since the introduction of this academic discipline into China.

[ 46 ] See Legitimacy of Chinese philosophy for details.

Concepts [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( June 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Although the individual philosophical schools differ considerably, they nevertheless share a common vocabulary and set of concerns.

Among the terms commonly found in Chinese philosophy are: 道 Dao (the Way, or one's doctrine) 德 De (virtue, power) 理 Li (principle, Law ) 氣 Qi (vital energy or material force) 太極 The Tai-chi ( Great Heavenly Axis ) forms a unity of the two complementary polarities, Yin and Yang . The word Yin originally referred to a hillside facing away from the sun. Philosophically, it stands the dark, passive, feminine principle; whereas Yang (the hillside facing the sun) stands for the bright, active, masculine principle. Yin and Yang are not antagonistic, they alternate in inverse proportion to one another—like the rise and fall of a wave and are known by their comparison.

Among the commonalities of Chinese philosophies are: The tendency not to view man as separate from nature.

Questions about the nature and existence of a monotheistic deity , which have profoundly influenced Western philosophy, have not been important in Chinese philosophies or a source of great conflict in Chinese traditional religion .

The belief that the purpose of philosophy is primarily to serve as an ethical and practical guide.

The political focus: most scholars of the Hundred Schools were trying to convince the ruler to behave in the way they defended.

See also [ edit ] China portal Taiwan portal Hong Kong portal Singapore portal Philosophy portal Chinese classic texts History of China Chinese philosophers Confucianism Culture of China Eastern philosophy Five Elements Hun and po List of Chinese philosophers Taoism Thirteen Classics References [ edit ] ^ a b c Li, Zehou (2008).

中国古代思想史论 [ On the History of Thought in Ancient China ] (in Chinese).

ISBN 9787108028976 .

^ a b c Ebrey, Patricia (2010).

The Cambridge Illustrated History of China . Cambridge University Press. p. 42.

^ a b c d Chen, Lai (2020).

宋明理学 [ Neo-Confucianism ] (in Chinese).

ISBN 9787301303665 .

^ a b c d Li, Zehou.

中国现代思想史论 [ On the History of Thought in Modern China ] (in Chinese).

ISBN 9787108028969 .

^ a b c d Lao, Siguang.

新编中国哲学史 [ A New History of Chinese Philosophy ] (in Chinese).

ISBN 9787108067050 .

^ Maruyama, Masao.

日本政治思想史研究 [ Studies on the History of Japanese Political Thought ] (in Japanese).

ISBN 9784130300056 .

^ "Confucius in the European Enlightenment" .

^ a b c Garfield, Jay L.; Edelglass, William, eds. (2011). "Chinese Philosophy".

The Oxford Handbook of World Philosophy . Oxford: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 9780195328998 .

^ Hirakawa, Akira (1990).

A History of Indian Buddhism . University of Hawai'i Press.

ISBN 9780824812034 .

^ a b Shi, Shunyin (2010).

中国禅宗史 [ History of Chinese Zen Buddhism ] (in Chinese).

ISBN 9787101074826 .

^ Chen, Lai (2010).

朱子哲学研究 [ Study on Zhu Xi's Philosophy ] (in Chinese).

ISBN 9787108035523 .

^ Wei, Qingyuan (2023).

暮日耀光 [ Sunset Glow ] (in Chinese).

ISBN 9787203128830 .

^ a b c Zhang, Xuezhi (2012).

明代哲学史 [ History of Philosophy in the Ming Dynasty ] (in Chinese).

ISBN 9787300157320 .

^ Chen, Bin (2002).

回归真实的存在：王船山哲学的阐释 [ Returning to the real existence: an interpretation of Wang Fuzhi's philosophy ] (in Chinese).

ISBN 9787309033090 .

^ a b Platt, Stephen R. (2007).

Provincial Patriots: The Hunanese and Modern China . Harbard University Press.

ISBN 9780674026650 .

^ a b Li, Zehou (2008).

中国近代思想史论 [ On the History of Near Modern Chinese Thought ] (in Chinese).

ISBN 9787108028983 .

^ Sun, Wen.

三民主义 [ Three Principles of the People ] (in Chinese).

ISBN 9787510703973 .

^ 中國國民革命與戴季陶主義 at Wikisource (Chinese) ^ Li, Youxin (2001). "青年毛泽东与杨昌济的思想关系及其湘学渊源".

船山学刊 .

01 : 80-84 – via 中国知网.

^ Gao, Hua.

红太阳是怎样升起的: 延安整风运动的来龙去脉 [ How the Red Sun Rises: The Origins and Development of the Yan'an Rectification Movement ] (in Chinese). The Chinese University of Hong Kong Press.

ISBN 9789881756329 .

^ Gao, Hua.

历史笔记 [ Historical Notes ] (in Chinese). Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199445370 .

^ Jin, Guantao (2009).

观念史研究：中国现代重要政治术语的形成 [ Research on the History of Ideas: The Formation of Important Political Terms in Modern China ] (in Chinese).

ISBN 9787511801333 .

^ Zhang, Junmian.

新儒家思想史 [ History of New Confucian Thought ] (in Chinese).

ISBN 9787300075754 .

^ Chou, Li-Quan.

"Great Changes in Marxist Philosophy in China Since 1978" .

Philosophy East and West .

^ Banban, Duojie.

藏传佛教思想史纲 [ An Outline of the History of Tibetan Buddhist Thought ] (in Chinese).

ISBN 9787010161525 .

^ Cullen, Christopher (18 January 2007).

Astronomy and Mathematics in Ancient China: The 'Zhou Bi Suan Jing' . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-03537-8 .

^ Shaughnessy, Edward L. (15 April 2014).

Unearthing the Changes: Recently Discovered Manuscripts of the Yi Jing (I Ching) and Related Texts . Columbia University Press.

ISBN 978-0-231-53330-0 .

^ Ebrey, Patricia (2010).

The Cambridge Illustrated History of China . New York: Cambridge University Press. p. 42.

^ Lai, Chen (21 November 2018).

Confucius and the Modern World (1 ed.). New York : Routledge, 2019. | Series: Routledge studies in contemporary Chinese philosophy: Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9781351268929 .

ISBN 978-1-351-26892-9 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location ( link ) ^ Steinkraus, Warren (1980). "Socrates, Confucius, and the Rectification of Names".

Philosophy East and West .

30 (2): 261– 64.

doi : 10.2307/1398850 .

JSTOR 1398850 .

^ A Source Book in Chinese Philosophy . Translated by Wing-tsit Chan. Princeton University Press. 2008. p. 137.

ISBN 9781400820030 .

^ "Zou Yan" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 26 April 2015 . Retrieved 1 March 2011 .

^ Deutsch, Eliot; Ronald Bontekoei (1999).

A companion to world philosophies . Wiley Blackwell. p. 183.

^ Sellmann, James Daryl (2010).

Timing and rulership in Master Lü's Spring and Autumn annals . SUNY Press. p. 76.

^ a b Denecke, Wiebke (2011).

The Dynamics of Masters Literature: Early Chinese Thought from Confucius to Han Feizi . Harvard University Press. p. 38.

^ a b Shawn Eichman (2000).

Taoism and the Arts of China . University of California Press. pp.

45 –.

ISBN 978-0-520-22785-9 .

^ "Chinese Religions and Philosophies" .

Asia Society .

Archived from the original on 16 January 2021 . Retrieved 21 January 2021 .

^ Perez, Louis G. (1998).

The History of Japan . Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. pp.

57– 59.

ISBN 978-0-313-30296-1 .

^ Chan 1963 , p. 460.

^ Huang, Siu-chi (1999).

Essentials of Neo-Confucianism: Eight Major Philosophers of the Song and Ming Periods . Westport: Greenwood Press . p. 5.

^ Cao, Deborah (2004).

Chinese Law: A Language Perspective . Ashgate Publishing. pp.

71– 72.

^ Ho, Dahpon David (22 March 2006), Esherick, Joseph W.; Pickowicz, Paul G.; Walder, Andrew G. (eds.), "THREE To Protect and Preserve: Resisting the Destroy the Four Olds Campaign, 1966-1967", The Chinese Cultural Revolution as History , Stanford University Press, pp.

64– 95, doi : 10.1515/9780804767989-004 , ISBN 978-0-8047-6798-9 ^ Liang, Xinlu (1 December 2024).

"China looks beyond Confucius in latest move to win narrative war with West" .

South China Morning Post .

Archived from the original on 2 December 2024 . Retrieved 1 December 2024 .

^ Solé-Farràs, Jesús. "Harmony in Contemporary New Confucianism and in Socialism with Chinese Characteristics".

China Media Research : 3.

^ Makeham, John, ed. (2003).

New Confucianism: A Critical Examination . New York: Palgrave.

ISBN 978-1-4039-6140-2 .

^ Is There Such a Thing as Chinese Philosophy Arguments of an Implicit Debate. Carine Defoort.

Philosophy East and West 51 (3):393–413 (2001) Further reading [ edit ] Bo Mou (Editor), History of Chinese Philosophy , Routledge, 2009.

Chan, Wing-tsit (1963), A Sourcebook of Chinese Philosophy , Princeton: Princeton University Press, ISBN 978-0-691-07137-4 {{ citation }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Antonio S. Cua (Editor), Encyclopedia of Chinese Philosophy , Routledge, 2003.

Feng Youlan , A History of Chinese Philosophy (Princeton Paperbacks), tr.

Derk Bodde , 1983.

Herrlee Glessner Creel , Chinese Thought, from Confucius to Mao Zedong , 1971.

A. C. Graham, Disputers of the Tao; Philosophical Argument in Ancient China , 1989.

Christoph Harbsmeier, Logic and Language in Ancient China , Joseph Needham, Science and Civilisation in China , Volume 7, Part I, Cambridge University Press, 1998.

Philip J. Ivanhoe and Bryan W. Van Norden (Editors), Readings in Classical Chinese Philosophy , 2nd edition, Indianapolis:  Hackett Publishing, 2005.

Karyn Lai, Introduction to Chinese Philosophy , Cambridge University Press, 2008.

Lin Yutang , The Importance of Living , William Morrow Paperbacks, 1998.

Jana S. Rošker , Searching for the Way: Theory of Knowledge in Pre-modern and Modern Chinese Philosophy Hong Kong Chinese University Press, 2008.

Roel Sterckx , Chinese Thought. From Confucius to Cook Ding.

London: Penguin, 2019.

Roel Sterckx , Ways of Heaven. An Introduction to Chinese Thought.

New York: Basic Books, 2019.

Justin Tiwald and Bryan W. Van Norden (Editors), Readings in Later Chinese Philosophy: Han Dynasty to the 20th Century , Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing, 2014.

Bryan W. Van Norden , Introduction to Classical Chinese Philosophy , Indianapolis:  Hackett Publishing, 2011.

Arthur Waley , Three Ways of Thought in Ancient China , 1983.

External links [ edit ] Perkins, Franklin.

"Metaphysics in Chinese Philosophy" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Wong, David.

"Comparative Philosophy: Chinese and Western" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

"Translating and Interpreting Chinese Philosophy" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Rošker, Jana.

"Epistemology in Chinese Philosophy" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Littlejohn, Ronnie.

"Chinese Philosophy: Overview of Topics" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Sikri, Rohan.

"Language in Classical Chinese Philosophy" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Yu, Yih-Hsien.

"Modern Chinese Philosophy" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Chinese philosophy at the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project Article "The Chinese Concept of Space" Article "The Chinese Concept of Time" The Hundred Schools of Thought Chinese Text Project – Chinese philosophy texts in classical Chinese with English and modern Chinese translations Contesting Confucius Henry Zhao, New Left Review 44, March–April 2007 Encyclopédie ou Dictionnaire raisonné des sciences, des arts et des métiers , 1751–1772, " "Philosophie des Chinois " [in French] v t e Chinese philosophy Schools Agriculturalism Buddhism Confucianism Han learning Neo-Confucianism New Confucianism Huang–Lao Legalism Mohism Marxism School of Diplomacy School of Names Naturalism Taoism Daoxue Xuanxue Yangism Mixed School Nine Schools of Thought Hundred Schools of Thought Philosophers Eastern Zhou Bu Shang Chunyu Kun Confucius Deng Xi Duanmu Ci Gaozi Gongsun Long Guan Zhong Han Fei Hui Shi Laozi Li Kui Li Si Lie Yukou Mencius Mozi Shang Yang Shen Buhai Shen Dao Su Qin Sun Tzu Wu Qi Ximen Bao Xu Xing Xunzi Yang Zhu Yuan Xian Zhang Yi Zhuang Zhou Zichan Zisi Zou Yan Qin Han Ban Zhao Dong Zhongshu Dongfang Shuo Dou Wu Huan Tan Jia Yi Jia Kui Jing Fang Kong Anguo Liu An Lu Jia Liu Xiang Ma Rong Wang Chong Wang Fu Xun Yue Yang Xiong Three Kingdoms Jin Northern and Southern Bao Jingyan Fan Zhen Fan Ye Ge Hong Guo Xiang Fu Xuan He Yan Huiyuan Ji Kang Sengzhao Wang Su Wang Bi Xiahou Xuan Xie Daoyun Xun Can Yan Zhitui Zhi Dun Sui Tang Fu Yi Jizang Wang Tong Zhang Zhihe Han Yu Li Ao Liu Yuxi Liu Zongyuan Linji Yixuan Five Dynasties Ten Kingdoms Song Cheng Hao Cheng Yi Fan Zhongyan Hu Hong Lu Jiuyuan Shao Yong Shen Kuo Su Song Wang Anshi Wang Chongyang Wang Chuyi Ye Shi Zhang Zai Zhou Dunyi Zhu Xi Yuan Ming Chen Jiru Huang Zongxi Hong Zicheng Jiao Hong Jiao Yu Lai Zhide Li Zhi Liu Bowen Liu Zongzhou Luo Rufang Qian Dehong Wang Ji Wang Gen Wang Yangming Wu Cheng Xu Ai Zhan Ruoshui Qing Chen Hongmou Chen Menglei Dai Zhen Fang Bao Fang Lanfen Fang Quan Feng Guifen Gong Zizhen Gu Yanwu Hong Liangji Ji Yun Ma Qixi Lin Zexu Liu Yiming Pan Pingge Tan Sitong Tang Zhen Wang Fuzhi Wei Yuan Yan Yuan Yu Yue Yu Zhengxie Zhang Xuecheng Zhuang Cunyu Zeng Guofan 20th century Cai Yuanpei Carsun Chang P. C. Chang Chen Daqi Chen Duxiu Chung-ying Cheng Ch'ien Mu Chu Anping Fang Keli Feng Youlan Gan Yang Gu Su Gu Zhun He Guanghu Hu Qiaomu Hu Shih Hua Gang Ray Huang Jiang Qing Jin Yuelin Kang Youwei Lee Shui-chuen Li Shicen Li Zehou Liang Qichao Liang Shuming Lin Yutang Liu Xiaofeng Lu Xun Mao Zedong Mou Zongsan Qiu Renzong Sun Yat-sen Tang Chun-i Tang Yijie Tsang Lap Chuen Xiong Shili Xu Fuguan Yang Changji Yin Haiguang Yu Dunkang Zhang Dongsun Zhang Shenfu Zhou Guoping Zhou Zuoren Concepts Tao De Fa Jian'ai Jing Jing zuo Li Confucianism Neo-Confucianism Ming yun Qi Qing Ren Three teachings Shen Si Ti Tian Mandate of Heaven Wu wei Filial piety Xin Human nature Self-cultivation Yi Yin and yang Yong Zhengming Ziran Topics Logic Theology Metaphysics Politics Ethics Role ethics State consequentialism Ink wash Shan shui Society Epistemology Metaphilosophy Legitimacy v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e China articles History Overviews History Timeline Historiography Military history Language Economic before 1912 1912–1949 1949–present Ethnic groups Foreign relations Dynasties Monarchs Prehistoric Paleolithic Neolithic Yellow River Yangtze Liao Ancient Xia Shang Late Zhou Western Zhou Spring and Autumn Warring States Imperial Qin Han Three Kingdoms Wei Han Wu Jin (266–420) Sixteen Kingdoms Northern and Southern dynasties Sui Tang Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms Liao Song Jin (1115–1234) Yuan Ming Qing High Qing Century of humiliation Taiping Rebellion Eunuch Modern 1911 Revolution Republic of China Chinese Civil War Chinese Communist Revolution People's Republic of China Cultural Revolution Reform and opening up Tiananmen Square COVID-19 persecution of Uyghurs List of massacres in China Geography Borders Extreme points Geology Natural disasters Regions East Northeast North South Central Central South Western Northwestern Southwestern Terrain Bays Canyons Caves Deserts Grasslands Hills Islands Mountains ranges passes Peninsulas Northeast / North / Central Plains Valleys Volcanoes Water Canals Lakes Rivers Waterfalls Wetlands Water resources Seas Bohai Yellow East China South China Environment Climate change Climate policy Environmental issues Environmental policy Protected areas National parks Nature reserves UNESCO Biosphere Reserves Wildlife Fauna Flora Subdivisions Baseline islands Border crossings Cities Province-level subdivisions Politics Law Judicial system Human rights LGBT in Tibet Law enforcement Penal system Naming laws Nationality law Terrorism Government Civil service Constitution Democracy Pro-democratisation Elections Environmental policy Foreign relations Laogai National People's Congress Standing Committee National security Political parties and movements Chinese Communist Party General Secretary Politburo Democratic parties (China) United front Political Consultative Conference System of multi-party cooperation and political consultation Socialism with Chinese characteristics Primary stage of socialism President Vice President State Council Premier Vice Premier Whole-process people's democracy One country, two systems Military Outline of military history Central Military Commission Cyberwarfare and China Ministry of National Defense People's Liberation Army Ground Navy Air Rocket Strategic Support People's Armed Police Coast Guard Militia Maritime Militia Economy Agriculture Aquaculture Banking Central bank Chinese property sector crisis (2020–present) Currency Economic history Reform and opening up Special economic zones E-commerce Online advertising Economic inequality in China Energy Coal Petroleum Renewable Forced evictions Foreign aid received Foreign aid program Historical GDP Housing Income inequality in China Industry Chemical Gold mining Semiconductors Steel Textiles Labor relations Poverty Real estate Standard of living Taxation Tourism Trade Underoccupied developments Unemployment Infrastructure Architecture Housing Telecommunications Internet Water supply and sanitation Transport Automotive industry Civil aviation Rail Shipping industry Space program Society Abortion Censorship Chinese Dream Chinese language Standard Chinese Written Chinese Crime Corruption Prostitution Sex trafficking Education Literacy Freedom of the press Harmonious Society Health Food safety incidents HIV/AIDS Intellectualism Internment camps Martyrdom Surveillance Propaganda Protest ”Mass incidents” Public holidays Rural society Science and technology history Sexuality Social issues Patriarchy Racism Regional discrimination Suicide Social relations Structure Tang ping Time Urban society Welfare Culture Archaeology Archives Art Calligraphy Cinema Cuisine Dance Libraries Literature Poetry Martial arts Mass media Music Names Philosophy Smoking Sport Tea culture Variety art Major Historical and Cultural Sites World Heritage Sites Fours of China Four Treasures of the Study Four Great Inventions Four Gentlemen Flowers of the Four Seasons Four Beauties Four Classic Novels Four arts Four Symbols Four Holy Beasts Four Pillars of Destiny Four Paragons of the Early Tang Four Masters of the Ming dynasty Four Masters of the Yuan dynasty Four Wangs Gang of Four Four Olds Four Pests campaign Demographics Emigration Ethnic groups Eunuchs Internal migration Languages Life expectancy Statistics Population history " Post-80s " " Post-90s " Urbanization Women Religion Buddhism Chinese Buddhism Tibetan Buddhism Confucianism Folk religion Christianity Catholic Church in China Protestantism Freedom of religion History of religion Irreligion Islam Taoism Symbols Anthem Emblem Flag Outline Index Category Portal Authority control databases National United States Japan Czech Republic Latvia Korea Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chinese_philosophy&oldid=1299108579 " Categories : Chinese philosophy Chinese literature Cultural history of China Hidden categories: CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja) CS1 maint: location Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2024 Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing Vietnamese-language text Articles containing Korean-language text Articles containing Japanese-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2024 Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Articles with unsourced statements from December 2024 Articles with excerpts Articles needing additional references from June 2010 All articles needing additional references CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 16:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chinese philosophy 62 languages Add topic

