Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins 2 Start of McCarthy's involvement 3 Institutions Toggle Institutions subsection 3.1 Executive branch 3.1.1 Loyalty-security reviews 3.1.2 J. Edgar Hoover and the FBI 3.1.3 Allen Dulles and the CIA 3.2 Congress 3.2.1 House Committee on Un-American Activities 3.2.2 Senate committees 3.3 Blacklists 3.4 Laws and arrests 3.5 Repression in the individual states 4 Popular support 5 Portrayals of communists 6 Victims of McCarthyism 7 Critical reactions 8 Decline Toggle Decline subsection 8.1 Notable events 8.2 Warren Court 9 Repercussions Toggle Repercussions subsection 9.1 Study and reactions to Constitutional implications 9.2 Historical study on anti-communism and Soviet espionage 9.3 Later political usage of term 10 Cultural depictions 11 See also 12 References Toggle References subsection 12.1 Citations 12.2 Sources 12.3 Historiography 13 Further reading 14 External links Toggle the table of contents McCarthyism 51 languages العربية Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Қазақша Latina Latviešu Magyar مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Phenomenon of US political rhetoric after WWII This article is about the events during the Cold War. For general information about the phenomenon, see Red Scare .

Second Red Scare Part of the Cold War American anti-communist propaganda of the 1950s, specifically addressing the entertainment industry Duration 1947–1959 Location United States Cause Fall of China , Korean War Participants House Un-American Activities Committee Senator Joseph McCarthy J. Edgar Hoover Outcome Decline of membership in the Communist Party USA Persecution of thousands of innocent people Senate censure of McCarthy Inquiries Smith Act trials of Communist Party leaders Army–McCarthy hearings Accused Alleged communists including: Hollywood Ten This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Part of a series on Anti-communism History Conflicts and military engagements Revolutions and violence after 1917 Russia White movement Basmachi Finland Whites Hungary Germany Chinese Civil War Spanish Civil War Bando nacional World War II and aftermath Axis powers Anti-Comintern Pact Collaboration Eastern Front Anti-Soviet insurgencies Yugoslav Front Chetniks Post-war period in Germany Resistance in Poland (1944–1989) Greek Civil War Reverse Course Malayan Emergency Korean War Indochina wars Vietnam War Central American crisis New Order Afghan conflict Afghan mujahideen Operation Cyclone Revolutions of 1989 Repression and mass killings White Terror Russia Pogroms Hungary China Shanghai Spain Greece Taiwan Finnish Civil War prison camps First Red Scare Palmer Raids The Holocaust Bodo League massacre Guatemalan genocide Indonesian mass killings of 1965–66 Operation Condor 1981–1982 Iran Massacres East Timor genocide Miscellaneous McCarthyism Decommunization Russia Ukraine Ideologies Anti-imperialism Anti-Marxism Anti-Stalinist Left Liberal socialism Anti-Sovietism Christian democracy Class collaboration Conservatism Authoritarian Neo- Fascism Nazism Neo- Para- Post- Islamism Liberalism Classical Cold War Neo- Personal ideologies Chiangism Fujimorism Khomeinism Metaxism Orthodox Peronism Pinochetism Reaganism Thatcherism Nationalisms Afghan Chinese French Révolution nationale Hong Kong Hungarian Szeged Idea Indonesian Pancasila Korean Ilminism Polish Romanian Russian Spanish National Catholicism Taiwanese Huadu Ukrainian Natsdems Vietnamese Person Dignity Theory Prominent figures Adenauer Antonescu Bandera Batista Berlusconi Boris III Bordaberry Buckley Bush Castelo Branco Chiang Churchill Cohn Dollfuss Dulles Duvalier (François) Duvalier (Jean-Claude) Eisenhower Franco Fujimori Goldwater Habre Habyarimana Hácha Hitler Hoover Horthy John Paul II Johnson Kennedy Khomeini Kishi Kohl Kolchak Lee K. Y.

MacArthur Mannerheim Marcos McCarthy Médici Metaxas Mihailović Milei Montt Mulroney Mussolini Nedić Ngo Nicholas II Nol Pahlavi II Palmer Papadopoulos Park Pavelić Pétain Piłsudski Pinochet Pius XII Poroshenko Reagan Rhee Sann Saakashvili Salazar Selassie Smith Stroessner Suharto Thanom Thatcher Tiso Tunku Vargas (earlier) Videla Wałęsa Welch Yeltsin Political parties Croatian Democratic Union Democratic Party (United States) Democratic Progressive Party Democratic Republican Party (South Korea) FET y de las JONS Golkar Greater Japan Patriotic Party Independent Anti-Communist Party of the West Kataeb Party Khmer Serei Kuomintang (historical, now factions) Law and Justice Liberal Democratic Party (Japan) Liberal Party Brazil South Korea Liberty Korea Party Nazi Party National Fascist Party Republican Party Chile United States Social Republican Party VMRO-DPMNE Organisations Anti-Communist Action Argentine Anticommunist Alliance CIA activities Indonesia Italy Japan Vietnam Contras Falun Gong The Epoch Times Freikorps Iron Front John Birch Society National Revolutionary Army NATO Pancasila Youth Propaganda Due Ukrainian Insurgent Army Unification Church Victims of Communism Memorial Foundation World League for Freedom and Democracy By region China Central and Eastern Europe Japan Tenkō Uyoku dantai Taiwan " Green Terror " Laws and systems Anti-Socialist Laws Peace Preservation Law Temporary Provisions (Taiwan) National Security Act (South Korea) Decree against Communism Communist Control Act of 1954 Ukrainian decommunization laws Anti-Infiltration Act Crucial Communism Teaching Act See also Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric Lavender Scare Anti-national sentiments Chinese PRC Jewish Judeo-Bolshevism North Korean Soviet Union Russian Anti anti-communism Capitalism Cold War Post Second Comparison of Nazism and Stalinism Totalitarianism Western Bloc " Free World " Pro-Americanism Pro-ROC sentiment " Free China " Red Scare Red-baiting U.S. policy toward authoritarian governments Communism portal Politics portal v t e McCarthyism is a political practice defined by the political repression and persecution of left-wing individuals and a campaign spreading fear of communist and Soviet influence on American institutions and of Soviet espionage in the United States during the late 1940s through the 1950s, heavily associated with the Second Red Scare , also known as the McCarthy Era .

[ 1 ] After the mid-1950s, U.S. senator Joseph McCarthy , who had spearheaded the campaign, gradually lost his public popularity and credibility after several of his accusations were found to be false.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The U.S. Supreme Court under Chief Justice Earl Warren made a series of rulings on civil and political rights that overturned several key laws and legislative directives, and helped bring an end to the Second Red Scare.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Historians have suggested since the 1980s that as McCarthy's involvement was less central than that of others, a different and more accurate term should be used instead that more accurately conveys the breadth of the phenomenon, and that the term McCarthyism is, in the modern day, outdated. Ellen Schrecker has suggested that Hooverism , after FBI head J. Edgar Hoover , is more appropriate.

[ 7 ] Following the end of the Cold War , unearthed documents revealed substantial Soviet spy activity in the United States, although many of the agents were never properly identified by McCarthy.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Origins [ edit ] See also: US Strike wave of 1945–1946 President Harry S. Truman's Executive Order 9835 of March 21, 1947, required that all federal civil-service employees be screened for "loyalty". The order said that one basis for determining disloyalty would be a finding of "membership in, affiliation with or sympathetic association" with any organization determined by the attorney general to be "totalitarian, fascist, communist or subversive" or advocating or approving the forceful denial of constitutional rights to other persons or seeking "to alter the form of Government of the United States by unconstitutional means".

[ 10 ] What became known as the McCarthy era began before McCarthy's rise to national fame. Following the breakdown of the wartime East-West alliance with the Soviet Union , and with many remembering the First Red Scare , President Harry S. Truman signed an executive order in 1947 to screen federal employees for possible association with organizations deemed " totalitarian , fascist , communist , or subversive ", or advocating "to alter the form of Government of the United States by unconstitutional means." The following year, the Czechoslovak coup by the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia heightened concern in the West about Communist parties seizing power and the possibility of subversion. In 1949, a high-level State Department official was convicted of perjury in a case of espionage, and the Soviet Union tested a nuclear bomb . The Korean War started the next year, significantly raising tensions and fears of impending communist upheavals in the United States. In a speech in February 1950, McCarthy claimed to have a list of members of the Communist Party USA working in the State Department, which attracted substantial press attention, and the term McCarthyism was published for the first time in late March of that year in The Christian Science Monitor , along with a political cartoon by Herblock in The Washington Post . The term has since taken on a broader meaning, describing the excesses of similar efforts to crack down on alleged "subversive" elements. In the early 21st century, the term is used more generally to describe reckless and unsubstantiated accusations of treason and far-left extremism, along with demagogic personal attacks on the character and patriotism of political adversaries.

The primary targets for persecution were government employees, prominent figures in the entertainment industry, academics, left-wing politicians, and labor union activists. Suspicions were often given credence despite inconclusive and questionable evidence, and the level of threat posed by a person's real or supposed leftist associations and beliefs was often exaggerated. Many people suffered loss of employment and the destruction of their careers and livelihoods as a result of the crackdowns on suspected communists, and some were outright imprisoned. Most of these reprisals were initiated by trial verdicts that were later overturned, [ 11 ] laws that were later struck down as unconstitutional, [ 12 ] dismissals for reasons later declared illegal [ 13 ] or actionable , [ 14 ] and extra-judiciary procedures, such as informal blacklists by employers and public institutions, that would come into general disrepute, though by then many lives had been ruined. The most notable examples of McCarthyism include the investigations of alleged communists that were conducted by Senator McCarthy, and the hearings conducted by the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC).

The historical period that came to be known as the McCarthy era began well before Joseph McCarthy's own involvement in it. Many factors contributed to McCarthyism, some of them with roots in the First Red Scare (1917–20), inspired by communism's emergence as a recognized political force and widespread social disruption in the United States related to unionizing and anarchist activities. Owing in part to its success in organizing labor unions and its early opposition to fascism , and offering an alternative to the ills of capitalism during the Great Depression , the Communist Party of the United States increased its membership through the 1930s, reaching a peak of about 75,000 members in 1940–41.

[ 15 ] While the United States was engaged in World War II and allied with the Soviet Union , the issue of anti-communism was largely muted. With the end of World War II, the Cold War began almost immediately, as the Soviet Union installed communist puppet régimes in areas it had occupied across Central and Eastern Europe. In a March 1947 address to Congress, Truman enunciated a new foreign policy doctrine that committed the United States to opposing Soviet geopolitical expansion. This doctrine came to be known as the Truman Doctrine , and it guided United States support for anti-communist forces in Greece and later in China and elsewhere.

[ 16 ] Although the Igor Gouzenko and Elizabeth Bentley affairs had raised the issue of Soviet espionage in 1945, events in 1949 and 1950 sharply increased the sense of threat in the United States related to communism. The Soviet Union tested an atomic bomb in 1949, earlier than many analysts had expected, raising the stakes in the Cold War. That same year, Mao Zedong 's communist army gained control of mainland China despite heavy American financial support of the opposing Kuomintang . In 1950, the Korean War began, pitting U.S., U.N., and South Korean forces against communists from North Korea and China.

During the following year, evidence of increased sophistication in Soviet Cold War espionage activities was found in the West. In January 1950, Alger Hiss , a high-level State Department official, was convicted of perjury . Hiss was in effect found guilty of espionage; the statute of limitations had run out for that crime, but he was convicted of having perjured himself when he denied that charge in earlier testimony before the HUAC. In Britain, Klaus Fuchs confessed to committing espionage on behalf of the Soviet Union while working on the Manhattan Project at Los Alamos National Laboratory during the War.

Julius and Ethel Rosenberg were arrested in 1950 in the United States on charges of stealing atomic-bomb secrets for the Soviets, and were executed in 1953.

Other forces encouraged the rise of McCarthyism. The more conservative politicians in the United States had historically referred to progressive reforms, such as child labor laws and women's suffrage , as "communist" or "Red plots", trying to raise fears against such changes.

[ 17 ] They used similar terms during the 1930s and the Great Depression when opposing the New Deal policies of President Franklin D. Roosevelt . Many conservatives equated the New Deal with socialism or Communism, and thought the policies were evidence of too much influence by allegedly communist policy makers in the Roosevelt administration.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] In general, the vaguely defined danger of "Communist influence" was a more common theme in the rhetoric of anti-communist politicians than was espionage or any other specific activity. An example of this was Leland Olds , an economist who was Chairman of the Federal Power Commission but failed renomination due to earlier suspected Communist sympathies.

Start of McCarthy's involvement [ edit ] Senator Joseph McCarthy in 1954 McCarthy's involvement in these issues began publicly with a speech he made on Lincoln Day , February 9, 1950, to the Republican Women's Club of Wheeling, West Virginia . He brandished a piece of paper, which he claimed contained a list of known communists working for the State Department. McCarthy is usually quoted as saying: "I have here in my hand a list of 205—a list of names that were made known to the Secretary of State as being members of the Communist Party and who nevertheless are still working and shaping policy in the State Department." [ 20 ] This speech resulted in a flood of press attention to McCarthy and helped establish his path to becoming one of the most recognized politicians in the United States.

The first recorded use of the term "McCarthyism" was in the Christian Science Monitor on March 28, 1950 ("Their little spree with McCarthyism is no aid to consultation").

[ 21 ] The paper became one of the earliest and most consistent critics of the Senator.

[ 22 ] The next recorded use happened on the following day, in a political cartoon by Washington Post editorial cartoonist Herbert Block (Herblock) . The cartoon depicts four leading Republicans trying to push an elephant (the traditional symbol of the Republican Party ) to stand on a platform atop a teetering stack of ten tar buckets, the topmost of which is labeled "McCarthyism". Block later wrote: "Nothing [was] particularly ingenious about the term, which is simply used to represent a national affliction that can hardly be described in any other way. If anyone has a prior claim on it, he's welcome to the word and to the junior senator from Wisconsin along with it. I will also throw in a set of free dishes and a case of soap." [ 23 ] Institutions [ edit ] A number of anti-communist committees, panels, and "loyalty review boards" in federal, state, and local governments, as well as many private agencies, carried out investigations for small and large companies concerned about possible Communists in their work forces.

In Congress, the primary bodies that investigated Communist activities were the HUAC, the Senate Internal Security Subcommittee , and the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations . Between 1949 and 1954, a total of 109 investigations were carried out by these and other committees of Congress.

[ 24 ] On December 2, 1954, the United States Senate voted 67 to 22 [ 25 ] to condemn McCarthy for "conduct that tends to bring the Senate into dishonor and disrepute".

Executive branch [ edit ] Loyalty-security reviews [ edit ] Executive Order 9835, signed by President Truman in 1947 In the federal government, President Truman's Executive Order 9835 initiated a program of loyalty reviews for federal employees in 1947. It called for dismissal if there were "reasonable grounds ... for belief that the person involved is disloyal to the Government of the United States." [ 26 ] Truman, a Democrat , was probably reacting in part to the Republican sweep in the 1946 Congressional election and felt a need to counter growing criticism from conservatives and anti-communists.

[ 27 ] When President Dwight Eisenhower took office in 1953, he strengthened and extended Truman's loyalty review program, while decreasing the avenues of appeal available to dismissed employees.

Hiram Bingham , chairman of the Civil Service Commission Loyalty Review Board , referred to the new rules he was obliged to enforce as "just not the American way of doing things." [ 28 ] The following year, J. Robert Oppenheimer , scientific director of the Manhattan Project that built the first atomic bomb, then working as a consultant to the Atomic Energy Commission , was stripped of his security clearance after a four-week hearing . Oppenheimer had received a top-secret clearance in 1947, but was denied clearance in the harsher climate of 1954.

Similar loyalty reviews were established in many state and local government offices and some private industries across the nation. In 1958, an estimated one of every five employees in the United States was required to pass some sort of loyalty review.

[ 29 ] Once a person lost a job due to an unfavorable loyalty review, finding other employment could be very difficult. "A man is ruined everywhere and forever," in the words of the chairman of President Truman's Loyalty Review Board. "No responsible employer would be likely to take a chance in giving him a job." [ 30 ] The Department of Justice started keeping a list of organizations that it deemed subversive beginning in 1942. This list was first made public in 1948, when it included 78 groups. At its longest, it comprised 154 organizations, 110 of them identified as Communist. In the context of a loyalty review, membership in a listed organization was meant to raise a question, but not to be considered proof of disloyalty. One of the most common causes of suspicion was membership in the Washington Bookshop Association , a left-leaning organization that offered lectures on literature, classical music concerts, and discounts on books.

[ 31 ] J. Edgar Hoover and the FBI [ edit ] J. Edgar Hoover in 1961 FBI director J. Edgar Hoover designed President Truman's loyalty-security program, and its background investigations of employees were carried out by FBI agents. This was a major assignment that led to the number of agents in the bureau being increased from 3,559 in 1946 to 7,029 in 1952. Hoover's sense of the communist threat and the standards of evidence applied by his bureau resulted in thousands of government workers losing their jobs. Due to Hoover's insistence upon keeping the identity of his informers secret, most subjects of loyalty-security reviews were not allowed to cross-examine or know the identities of those who accused them. In many cases, they were not even told of what they were accused.

[ 32 ] Hoover's influence extended beyond federal government employees and beyond the loyalty-security programs. The records of loyalty review hearings and investigations were supposed to be confidential, but Hoover routinely gave evidence from them to congressional committees such as HUAC.

[ 33 ] From 1951 to 1955, the FBI operated a secret " Responsibilities Program " that distributed anonymous documents with evidence from FBI files of communist affiliations on the part of teachers, lawyers, and others. Many people accused in these "blind memoranda" were fired without any further process.

[ 34 ] The FBI engaged in a number of illegal practices in its pursuit of information on communists, including burglaries, opening mail, and illegal wiretaps.

[ 35 ] The members of the left-wing National Lawyers Guild (NLG) were among the few attorneys who were willing to defend clients in communist-related cases, and this made the NLG a particular target of Hoover's; the office of the NLG was burgled by the FBI at least 14 times between 1947 and 1951.

[ 36 ] Among other purposes, the FBI used its illegally obtained information to alert prosecuting attorneys about the planned legal strategies of NLG defense lawyers.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] The FBI also used illegal undercover operations to disrupt communist and other dissident political groups. In 1956, Hoover was becoming increasingly frustrated by Supreme Court decisions that limited the Justice Department's ability to prosecute communists. At this time, he formalized a covert "dirty tricks" program under the name COINTELPRO .

[ 35 ] COINTELPRO actions included planting forged documents to create the suspicion that a key person was an FBI informer, spreading rumors through anonymous letters, leaking information to the press, calling for IRS audits, and the like. The COINTELPRO program remained in operation until 1971.

Historian Ellen Schrecker calls the FBI "the single most important component of the anti-communist crusade" and writes: "Had observers known in the 1950s what they have learned since the 1970s, when the Freedom of Information Act opened the Bureau's files, 'McCarthyism' would probably be called 'Hooverism'." [ 39 ] Allen Dulles and the CIA [ edit ] In March 1950, McCarthy had initiated a series of investigations into potential infiltration of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) by communist agents and came up with a list of security risks that matched one previously compiled by the Agency itself. At the request of CIA director Allen Dulles , President Eisenhower demanded that McCarthy discontinue issuing subpoenas against the CIA. Documents made public in 2004 revealed that the CIA, under Dulles' orders, had broken into McCarthy's Senate office and fed disinformation to him in order to discredit him and stop his investigation from proceeding any further.

[ 40 ] Congress [ edit ] House Committee on Un-American Activities [ edit ] Main article: House Un-American Activities Committee The House Committee on Un-American Activities (commonly referred to as the HUAC) was the most prominent and active government committee involved in anti-communist investigations. Formed in 1938 and known as the Dies Committee, named for Rep. Martin Dies , who chaired it until 1944, HUAC investigated a variety of "activities", including those of German-American Nazis during World War II . The committee soon focused on communism, beginning with an investigation into communists in the Federal Theatre Project in 1938. A significant step for HUAC was its investigation of the charges of espionage brought against Alger Hiss in 1948. This investigation ultimately resulted in Hiss's trial and conviction for perjury, and convinced many of the usefulness of congressional committees for uncovering communist subversion.

HUAC achieved its greatest fame and notoriety with its investigation into the Hollywood film industry . In October 1947 , the committee began to subpoena screenwriters, directors, and other movie-industry professionals to testify about their known or suspected membership in the Communist Party, association with its members, or support of its beliefs. At these testimonies, this question was asked: "Are you now or have you ever been a member of the Communist Party of the United States?" [ 41 ] [ 42 ] [ better source needed ] Among the first film industry witnesses subpoenaed by the committee were ten who decided not to cooperate. These men, who became known as the " Hollywood Ten ", cited the First Amendment 's guarantee of free speech and free assembly, which they believed legally protected them from being required to answer the committee's questions. This tactic failed, and the ten were sentenced to prison for contempt of Congress . Two of them were sentenced to six months, the rest to a year.

In the future, witnesses (in the entertainment industries and otherwise) who were determined not to cooperate with the committee would claim their Fifth Amendment protection against self-incrimination.

William Grooper and Rockwell Kent , the only two visual artists to be questioned by McCarthy, both took this approach, and emerged relatively unscathed by the experience.

[ 43 ] However, while this usually protected witnesses from a contempt-of-Congress citation, it was considered grounds for dismissal by many government and private-industry employers. The legal requirements for Fifth Amendment protection were such that a person could not testify about his own association with the Communist Party and then refuse to "name names" of colleagues with communist affiliations.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] Thus, many faced a choice between "crawl[ing] through the mud to be an informer," as actor Larry Parks put it, or becoming known as a "Fifth Amendment Communist"—an epithet often used by Senator McCarthy.

[ 46 ] Senate committees [ edit ] In the Senate, the primary committee for investigating communists was the Senate Internal Security Subcommittee (SISS), formed in 1950 and charged with ensuring the enforcement of laws relating to "espionage, sabotage, and the protection of the internal security of the United States". The SISS was headed by Democrat Pat McCarran and gained a reputation for careful and extensive investigations. This committee spent a year investigating Owen Lattimore and other members of the Institute of Pacific Relations . As had been done numerous times before, the collection of scholars and diplomats associated with Lattimore (the so-called China Hands ) were accused of "losing China", and while some evidence of pro-communist attitudes was found, nothing supported McCarran's accusation that Lattimore was "a conscious and articulate instrument of the Soviet conspiracy". Lattimore was charged with perjuring himself before the SISS in 1952. After many of the charges were rejected by a federal judge and one of the witnesses confessed to perjury, the case was dropped in 1955.

[ 47 ] McCarthy headed the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations in 1953 and 1954, and during that time, used it for a number of his communist-hunting investigations. McCarthy first examined allegations of communist influence in the Voice of America , and then turned to the overseas library program of the State Department.

Card catalogs of these libraries were searched for works by authors McCarthy deemed inappropriate. McCarthy then recited the list of supposedly pro-communist authors before his subcommittee and the press. Yielding to the pressure, the State Department ordered its overseas librarians to remove from their shelves "material by any controversial persons, Communists, fellow travelers , etc." Some libraries actually burned the newly forbidden books.

[ 48 ] Though he did not block the State Department from carrying out this order, President Eisenhower publicly criticized the initiative as well, telling the graduating class of Dartmouth College President in 1953: "Don't join the book burners! ... Don't be afraid to go to the library and read every book so long as that document does not offend our own ideas of decency—that should be the only censorship." [ 49 ] The president then settled for a compromise by retaining the ban on Communist books written by Communists, while also allowing the libraries to keep books on Communism written by anti-Communists.

[ 50 ] McCarthy's committee then began an investigation into the United States Army . This began at the Army Signal Corps laboratory at Fort Monmouth . McCarthy garnered some headlines with stories of a dangerous spy ring among the Army researchers, but ultimately nothing came of this investigation.

[ 51 ] McCarthy next turned his attention to the case of a U.S. Army dentist who had been promoted to the rank of major despite having refused to answer questions on an Army loyalty review form. McCarthy's handling of this investigation, including a series of insults directed at a brigadier general , led to the Army–McCarthy hearings , with the Army and McCarthy trading charges and counter-charges for 36 days before a nationwide television audience. While the official outcome of the hearings was inconclusive, this exposure of McCarthy to the American public resulted in a sharp decline in his popularity.

[ 52 ] In less than a year, McCarthy was censured by the Senate, and his position as a prominent force in anti-communism was essentially ended.

[ 53 ] Blacklists [ edit ] Main article: Hollywood blacklist On November 25, 1947, the day after the House of Representatives approved citations of contempt for the Hollywood Ten, Eric Johnston , president of the Motion Picture Association of America , issued a press release on behalf of the heads of the major studios that came to be referred to as the Waldorf Statement . This statement announced the firing of the Hollywood Ten and stated: "We will not knowingly employ a Communist or a member of any party or group which advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States..." This marked the beginning of the Hollywood blacklist . In spite of the fact that hundreds were denied employment, the studios, producers, and other employers did not publicly admit that a blacklist existed.

At this time, private loyalty review boards and anti-communist investigators began to appear to fill a growing demand among certain industries to certify that their employees were above reproach. Companies that were concerned about the sensitivity of their business, or which, like the entertainment industry, felt particularly vulnerable to public opinion, made use of these private services. For a fee, these teams investigated employees and questioned them about their politics and affiliations.

At such hearings, the subject usually did not have a right to the presence of an attorney, and as with HUAC, the interviewee might be asked to defend himself against accusations without being allowed to cross-examine the accuser. These agencies kept cross-referenced lists of leftist organizations, publications, rallies, charities, and the like, as well as lists of individuals who were known or suspected communists. Books such as Red Channels and newsletters such as Counterattack and Confidential Information were published to keep track of communist and leftist organizations and individuals.

[ 54 ] Insofar as the various blacklists of McCarthyism were actual physical lists, they were created and maintained by these private organizations.

[ citation needed ] [ further explanation needed ] Laws and arrests [ edit ] See also: Smith Act trials of Communist Party leaders Efforts to protect the United States from the perceived threat of communist subversion were particularly enabled by several federal laws. The Hatch Act of 1939 banned membership in subversive organizations, which was interpreted as being anti-labor legislation.

[ 55 ] The Hatch Act would allow for the reduction of influence of the Workers' Alliance , which was claimed to have been created by the Soviet Union based on a model of their unemployed councils.

[ 55 ] The Alien Registration Act or Smith Act of 1940 made the act of "knowingly or willfully advocate, abet, advise or teach the ... desirability or propriety of overthrowing the Government of the United States or of any State by force or violence, or for anyone to organize any association which teaches, advises or encourages such an overthrow, or for anyone to become a member of or to affiliate with any such association" a criminal offense.

Hundreds of communists and others were prosecuted under this law between 1941 and 1957. Eleven leaders of the Communist Party were convicted under the Smith Act in 1949 in the Foley Square trial . Ten defendants were given sentences of five years and the eleventh was sentenced to three years. The defense attorneys were cited for contempt of court and given prison sentences.

[ 56 ] In 1951, 23 other leaders of the party were indicted, including Elizabeth Gurley Flynn , a founding member of the American Civil Liberties Union . Many were convicted on the basis of testimony that was later admitted to be false.

[ 57 ] By 1957, 140 leaders and members of the Communist Party had been charged under the law, of whom 93 were convicted.

[ 58 ] The McCarran Internal Security Act , which became law in 1950, has been described by scholar Ellen Schrecker as "the McCarthy era's only important piece of legislation" [ 59 ] (the Smith Act technically antedated McCarthyism). However, the McCarran Act had no real effect beyond legal harassment. It required the registration of Communist organizations with the U.S. Attorney General and established the Subversive Activities Control Board to investigate possible communist-action and communist-front organizations so they could be required to register. Due to numerous hearings, delays, and appeals, the act was never enforced, even with regard to the Communist Party of the United States itself, and the major provisions of the act were found to be unconstitutional in 1965 and 1967.

[ 60 ] In 1952, the Immigration and Nationality, or McCarran–Walter, Act was passed. This law allowed the government to deport immigrants or naturalized citizens engaged in subversive activities and also to bar suspected subversives from entering the country.

The Communist Control Act of 1954 was passed with overwhelming support in both houses of Congress after very little debate. Jointly drafted by Republican John Marshall Butler and Democrat Hubert Humphrey , the law was an extension of the Internal Security Act of 1950, and sought to outlaw the Communist Party by declaring that the party, as well as "Communist-Infiltrated Organizations" were "not entitled to any of the rights, privileges, and immunities attendant upon legal bodies." While the Communist Control Act had an odd mix of liberals and conservatives among its supporters, it never had any significant effect.

The act was successfully applied only twice. In 1954 it was used to prevent Communist Party members from appearing on the New Jersey state ballot, and in 1960, it was cited to deny the CPUSA recognition as an employer under New York state's unemployment compensation system. The New York Post called the act "a monstrosity", "a wretched repudiation of democratic principles," while The Nation accused Democratic liberals of a "neurotic, election-year anxiety to escape the charge of being 'soft on Communism' even at the expense of sacrificing constitutional rights." [ 61 ] Repression in the individual states [ edit ] In addition to the federal laws and responding to the worries of the local opinion, several states enacted anti-communist statutes.

By 1952, several states had enacted statutes against criminal anarchy , criminal syndicalism , and sedition; banned communists and "subversives" from public employment, or even from receiving public aid; demanded on loyalty oaths from public servants; and severely restricted or banned the Communist Party. In addition, six states had equivalents to the HUAC.

[ 62 ] The California Senate Factfinding Subcommittee on Un-American Activities [ 63 ] and the Florida Legislative Investigation Committee were established by their respective legislatures.

Some of these states had very severe, or even extreme, laws against communism. In 1950, Michigan enacted life imprisonment for subversive propaganda; the following year, Tennessee enacted the death penalty for advocating the violent overthrow of the government.

[ 62 ] The death penalty for membership in the Communist Party was discussed in Texas by Governor Allan Shivers , who described it as "worse than murder." [ 64 ] [ 65 ] Municipalities and counties also enacted anti-communist ordinances: Los Angeles banned any communist or "Muscovite model of police-state dictatorship" from owning arms, while Birmingham, Alabama and Jacksonville, Florida banned any communist from being within the city's limits.

[ 62 ] Popular support [ edit ] Flier issued in May 1955 by the Keep America Committee urging readers to "fight communistic world government" by opposing public health programs McCarthyism was supported by a variety of groups, including the American Legion and various other anti-communist organizations. One core element of support was a variety of militantly anti-communist women's groups such as the American Public Relations Forum and the Minute Women of the U.S.A.

These organized tens of thousands of housewives into study groups, letter-writing networks, and patriotic clubs that coordinated efforts to identify and eradicate what they saw as subversion.

[ 66 ] Although right-wing radicals were the bedrock of support for McCarthyism, they were not alone. A broad "coalition of the aggrieved" found McCarthyism attractive, or at least politically useful. Common themes uniting the coalition were opposition to internationalism, particularly the United Nations ; opposition to social welfare provisions , particularly the various programs established by the New Deal ; and opposition to efforts to reduce inequalities in the social structure of the United States .

[ 67 ] One focus of popular McCarthyism concerned the provision of public health services, particularly vaccination , mental health care services, and fluoridation , all of which were denounced by some to be communist plots to poison or brainwash the American people. Such viewpoints led to collisions between McCarthyite radicals and supporters of public-health programs, most notably in the case of the Alaska Mental Health Bill controversy of 1956.

[ 68 ] William F. Buckley Jr.

, the founder of the influential conservative political magazine National Review , wrote a defense of McCarthy, McCarthy and his Enemies , in which he asserted that "McCarthyism ... is a movement around which men of good will and stern morality can close ranks." [ 69 ] In addition, as Richard Rovere points out, many ordinary Americans became convinced that there must be "no smoke without fire" and lent their support to McCarthyism. The Gallup poll found that at his peak in January 1954, 50% of the American public supported McCarthy, while 29% had an unfavorable opinion. His support fell to 34% in June 1954.

[ 70 ] Republicans tended to like what McCarthy was doing and Democrats did not, though McCarthy had significant support from traditional Democratic ethnic groups, especially Catholics, as well as many unskilled workers and small-business owners. (McCarthy himself was a Catholic.) He had very little support among union members and Jews.

[ 71 ] Portrayals of communists [ edit ] Those who sought to justify McCarthyism did so largely through their characterization of communism, and American communists in particular. Proponents of McCarthyism claimed that the CPUSA was so completely under Moscow's control that any American communist was a puppet of the Soviet intelligence services. This view, if restricted to the Communist Party's leadership [ 72 ] is supported by recent documentation from the archives of the KGB [ 73 ] as well as post-war decodes of wartime Soviet radio traffic from the Venona project , [ 74 ] showing that Moscow provided financial support to the CPUSA and had significant influence on CPUSA policies. J. Edgar Hoover commented in a 1950 speech, "Communist members, body and soul, are the property of the Party." According to historian Richard G. Powers, McCarthy added "bogus specificity" to "sweeping accusation[s]", gaining support among "countersubversive anticommunists" on one hand, who sought to find and punish perceived communists. On the other hand, "liberal anticommunists" believed that the Communist Party was "despicable and annoying" but ultimately politically irrelevant.

[ 75 ] President Harry Truman, who pursued the anti-Soviet Truman Doctrine , called McCarthy "the greatest asset the Kremlin has" by "torpedo[ing] the bipartisan foreign policy of the United States." [ 76 ] Historian Landon R. Y. Storrs writes that the CPUSA's "secretiveness, its authoritarian internal structure, and the loyalty of its leaders to the Kremlin were fundamental flaws that help explain why and how it was demonized. On the other hand, most American Communists were idealists attracted by the party's militance against various forms of social injustice." Furthermore, based on later declassified evidence, "The paradoxical lesson from several decades of scholarship is that the same organization that inspired democratic idealists in the pursuit of social justice also was secretive, authoritarian, and morally compromised by ties to the Stalin regime." [ 77 ] In the mid 20th century, this attitude was not confined to arch-conservatives. In 1940, the American Civil Liberties Union ejected founding member Elizabeth Gurley Flynn, saying that her membership in the Communist Party was enough to disqualify her as a civil libertarian . In the government's prosecutions of Communist Party members under the Smith Act (see above), the prosecution case was based not on specific actions or statements by the defendants, but on the premise that a commitment to violent overthrow of the government was inherent in the doctrines of Marxism–Leninism. Passages of the CPUSA constitution that specifically rejected revolutionary violence were dismissed as deliberate deception.

[ 78 ] In addition, it was often claimed that the party didn't allow members to resign; thus someone who had been a member for a short time decades previously could be thought a current member. Many of the hearings and trials of McCarthyism featured testimony by former Communist Party members such as Elizabeth Bentley , Louis Budenz , and Whittaker Chambers , speaking as expert witnesses.

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] Various historians and pundits have discussed alleged Soviet-directed infiltration of the U.S. government and the possible collaboration of high U.S. government officials.

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] [ 83 ] [ 84 ] Victims of McCarthyism [ edit ] See also: List of films by the Hollywood Ten , Hollywood blacklist , and Lavender scare This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( January 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Estimating the number of victims of McCarthy is difficult. The number imprisoned is in the hundreds, and some ten or twelve thousand lost their jobs.

[ 85 ] In many cases, simply being subpoenaed by HUAC or one of the other committees was sufficient cause to be fired.

[ 86 ] For the vast majority, both the potential for them to do harm to the nation and the nature of their communist affiliation were tenuous.

[ 87 ] After the extremely damaging " Cambridge Five " spy scandal ( Guy Burgess , Donald Maclean , Kim Philby , Anthony Blunt and John Cairncross ), suspected homosexuality was also a common cause for being targeted by McCarthyism. The hunt for "sexual perverts", who were presumed to be subversive by nature, resulted in over 5,000 federal workers being fired, and thousands were harassed and denied employment.

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] Many have termed this aspect of McCarthyism the " lavender scare ".

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] Homosexuality was classified as a psychiatric disorder in the 1950s.

[ 92 ] However, in the context of the highly politicized Cold War environment, homosexuality became framed as a dangerous, contagious social disease that posed a potential threat to state security.

[ 92 ] As the family was believed to be the cornerstone of American strength and integrity, [ 93 ] the description of homosexuals as "sexual perverts" meant that they were both unable to function within a family unit and presented the potential to poison the social body.

[ 94 ] This era also witnessed the establishment of widely spread FBI surveillance intended to identify homosexual government employees.

[ 95 ] The McCarthy hearings and according "sexual pervert" investigations can be seen to have been driven by a desire to identify individuals whose ability to function as loyal citizens had been compromised.

[ 94 ] McCarthy began his campaign by drawing upon the ways in which he embodied traditional American values to become the self-appointed vanguard of social morality.

[ 96 ] Dalton Trumbo and his wife, Cleo, at the HUAC in 1947 In the film industry, more than 300 actors, authors, and directors were denied work in the U.S. through the unofficial Hollywood blacklist . Blacklists were at work throughout the entertainment industry, in universities and schools at all levels, in the legal profession, and in many other fields. A port-security program initiated by the Coast Guard shortly after the start of the Korean War required a review of every maritime worker who loaded or worked aboard any American ship, regardless of cargo or destination. As with other loyalty-security reviews of McCarthyism, the identities of any accusers and even the nature of any accusations were typically kept secret from the accused. Nearly 3,000 seamen and longshoremen lost their jobs due to this program alone.

[ 97 ] Some of the notable people who were blacklisted or suffered some other persecution during McCarthyism include: Larry Adler , musician Nelson Algren , writer [ 98 ] Lucille Ball , actress, model, and film studio executive.

[ 99 ] Robert N. Bellah , sociologist Walter Bernstein , screenwriter Alvah Bessie , Abraham Lincoln Brigade , writer, journalist, screenwriter, Hollywood Ten Elmer Bernstein , composer and conductor [ 100 ] Leonard Bernstein , conductor, pianist, composer [ 101 ] David Bohm , physicist and philosopher [ 102 ] Bertolt Brecht , poet, playwright, screenwriter Archie Brown, Abraham Lincoln Brigade , veteran of World War II, union leader, imprisoned. Successfully challenged Landrum–Griffin Act provision [ 103 ] Esther Brunauer , forced from the U.S. State Department [ 104 ] Luis Buñuel , film director, producer [ 105 ] Charlie Chaplin , actor and director [ 106 ] Aaron Copland , composer [ 107 ] Bartley Crum , attorney [ 108 ] Howard da Silva , actor [ 109 ] Jules Dassin , director [ 110 ] Chandler Davis , mathematician Natalie Zemon Davis , historian Dolores del Río , actress [ 111 ] Edward Dmytryk , director, Hollywood Ten W.E.B. Du Bois , civil rights activist and author [ 112 ] Barrows Dunham , philosopher George A. Eddy , pre-Keynesian Harvard economist, US Treasury monetary policy specialist [ 113 ] Albert Einstein , Nobel Prize -winning physicist, philosopher, mathematician, activist [ 114 ] Hanns Eisler , composer [ 115 ] Howard Fast , writer [ 116 ] Lion Feuchtwanger , novelist and playwright [ 117 ] Carl Foreman , writer of High Noon John Garfield , actor [ 107 ] C.H. Garrigues , journalist [ 118 ] Jack Gilford , actor [ 109 ] Ruth Gordon , actress [ 109 ] Lee Grant , actress [ 119 ] Dashiell Hammett , author [ 107 ] Hananiah Harari , American painter and illustrator Elizabeth Hawes , clothing designer, author, equal rights activist [ 120 ] Lillian Hellman , playwright [ 107 ] Dorothy Healey , union organizer, CPUSA official [ 121 ] Lena Horne , singer [ 109 ] Langston Hughes , writer, poet, playwright [ 107 ] Lester C. Hunt , U.S. Senator [ 122 ] Marsha Hunt , actress Sam Jaffe , actor [ 107 ] Theodore Kaghan , diplomat [ 123 ] Garson Kanin , writer and director [ 107 ] Ernst Kantorowicz , historian Danny Kaye , comedian, singer [ 124 ] [ full citation needed ] Benjamin Keen , historian [ 125 ] Otto Klemperer , conductor and composer [ 126 ] Gypsy Rose Lee , actress and stripper [ 107 ] Harold Lewis , physicist Cornelius Lanczos , mathematician and physicist [ 127 ] Ring Lardner Jr.

, screenwriter, Hollywood Ten Arthur Laurents , playwright [ 109 ] Philip Loeb , actor [ 128 ] Jacob Loewenberg , philosopher Joseph Losey , director [ 107 ] Albert Maltz , screenwriter, Hollywood Ten Heinrich Mann , novelist [ 129 ] Klaus Mann , writer [ 129 ] Thomas Mann , Nobel Prize winning novelist and essayist [ 129 ] Thomas McGrath , poet Burgess Meredith , actor [ 107 ] Arthur Miller , playwright and essayist [ 107 ] Jessica Mitford , author, muckraker . Refused to testify to HUAC.

Dimitri Mitropoulos , conductor, pianist, composer [ 130 ] Zero Mostel , actor [ 107 ] Charles Muscatine , literary scholar Joseph Needham , biochemist, sinologist, historian of science J. Robert Oppenheimer , theoretical physicist, director of the Manhattan Project Dorothy Parker , writer, humorist [ 107 ] Linus Pauling , chemist, Nobel prizes for Chemistry and Peace [ 131 ] Samuel Reber , diplomat [ 132 ] Al Richmond , union organizer, editor [ 133 ] Martin Ritt , actor and director [ 134 ] Paul Robeson , actor, athlete, singer, writer, political activist [ 135 ] Edward G. Robinson , actor [ 107 ] Waldo Salt , screenwriter [ 136 ] David S. Saxon , physicist Jean Seberg , actress [ 137 ] Pete Seeger , folk singer, songwriter [ 107 ] Robert Serber , physicist Artie Shaw , jazz musician, bandleader, author [ 107 ] Irwin Shaw , writer [ 109 ] William L. Shirer , journalist, author [ 138 ] Lionel Stander , actor [ 139 ] Jack Steinberger , physicist Dirk Jan Struik , mathematician, historian of maths [ 140 ] Paul Sweezy , economist and founder-editor of Monthly Review [ 141 ] Charles W. Thayer , diplomat [ 142 ] Edward C. Tolman , psychologist Dalton Trumbo , screenwriter, Hollywood Ten Tsien Hsue-shen , physicist [ 143 ] Sam Wanamaker , actor, director, responsible for recreating Shakespeare's Globe Theatre in London, England.

Gene Weltfish , anthropologist fired from Columbia University [ 144 ] Gian Carlo Wick , physicist In 1953, Robert K. Murray, a young professor of history at Pennsylvania State University who had served as an intelligence officer in World War II, was revising his dissertation on the Red Scare of 1919–20 for publication until Little, Brown and Company decided that "under the circumstances ... it wasn't wise for them to bring this book out." He learned that investigators were questioning his colleagues and relatives. The University of Minnesota press published his volume, Red Scare: A Study in National Hysteria, 1919–1920 , in 1955.

[ 145 ] Critical reactions [ edit ] The nation was by no means united behind the policies and activities that have come to be associated with McCarthyism. The critics of various aspects of McCarthyism included many figures not generally noted for their liberalism. In his overridden veto of the McCarran Internal Security Act of 1950, President Truman wrote, "In a free country, we punish men for the crimes they commit, but never for the opinions they have." [ 146 ] Truman also unsuccessfully vetoed the Taft–Hartley Act , which among other provisions denied trade unions National Labor Relations Board protection unless union leaders signed affidavits swearing they were not and had never been Communists. In 1953, after he left office, Truman criticized the contemporary Eisenhower administration: It is now evident that the present Administration has fully embraced, for political advantage, McCarthyism. I am not referring to the Senator from Wisconsin. He is only important in that his name has taken on the dictionary meaning of the word. It is the corruption of truth, the abandonment of the due process law. It is the use of the big lie and the unfounded accusation against any citizen in the name of Americanism or security. It is the rise to power of the demagogue who lives on untruth; it is the spreading of fear and the destruction of faith in every level of society.

[ 147 ] On June 1, 1950, Senator Margaret Chase Smith , a Maine Republican, delivered a speech to the Senate she called a " Declaration of Conscience ". In a clear attack upon McCarthyism, she called for an end to " character assassinations " and named "some of the basic principles of Americanism: The right to criticize; the right to hold unpopular beliefs; the right to protest; the right of independent thought". She said " freedom of speech is not what it used to be in America", and decried "cancerous tentacles of 'know nothing, suspect everything' attitudes".

[ 148 ] Six other Republican senators— Wayne Morse , Irving M. Ives , Charles W. Tobey , Edward John Thye , George Aiken , and Robert C. Hendrickson —joined Smith in condemning the tactics of McCarthyism.

Joseph N. Welch (left) and Senator McCarthy, June 9, 1954 Elmer Davis , one of the most highly respected news reporters and commentators of the 1940s and 1950s, often spoke out against what he saw as the excesses of McCarthyism. On one occasion he warned that many local anti-communist movements constituted a "general attack not only on schools and colleges and libraries, on teachers and textbooks, but on all people who think and write ... in short, on the freedom of the mind".

[ 149 ] In 1952, the Supreme Court upheld a lower-court decision in Adler v. Board of Education , thus approving a law that allowed state loyalty review boards to fire teachers deemed "subversive". In his dissenting opinion, Justice William O. Douglas wrote: "The present law proceeds on a principle repugnant to our society—guilt by association.... What happens under this law is typical of what happens in a police state. Teachers are under constant surveillance; their pasts are combed for signs of disloyalty; their utterances are watched for clues to dangerous thoughts." [ 150 ] Broadcast journalist Edward R. Murrow One of the most influential opponents of McCarthyism was the famed CBS newscaster and analyst Edward R. Murrow . On October 20, 1953, Murrow's show See It Now aired an episode about the dismissal of Milo Radulovich , a former reserve Air Force lieutenant who was accused of associating with Communists. The show was strongly critical of the Air Force 's methods, which included presenting evidence in a sealed envelope that Radulovich and his attorney were not allowed to open.

On March 9, 1954, See It Now aired another episode on the issue of McCarthyism, this one attacking Joseph McCarthy himself. Titled "A Report on Senator Joseph R. McCarthy", it used footage of McCarthy speeches to portray him as dishonest, reckless, and abusive toward witnesses and prominent Americans. In his concluding comment, Murrow said: We must not confuse dissent with disloyalty. We must remember always that accusation is not proof and that conviction depends upon evidence and due process of law. We will not walk in fear, one of another. We will not be driven by fear into an age of unreason, if we dig deep in our history and our doctrine, and remember that we are not descended from fearful men.

[ 46 ] This broadcast has been cited as a key episode in bringing about the end of McCarthyism.

[ 151 ] In April 1954, McCarthy was also under attack in the Army–McCarthy hearings . These hearings were televised live on the new American Broadcasting Company network, allowing the public to view first-hand McCarthy's interrogation of individuals and his controversial tactics. In one exchange, McCarthy reminded the attorney for the Army, Joseph Welch , that he had an employee in his law firm who had belonged to an organization that had been accused of Communist sympathies. In an exchange that reflected the increasingly negative public opinion of McCarthy, Welch rebuked the senator: "Have you no sense of decency, sir? At long last, have you left no sense of decency?" [ 152 ] Decline [ edit ] In the mid and late 1950s, the attitudes and institutions of McCarthyism slowly weakened. Changing public sentiments heavily contributed to the decline of McCarthyism. Its decline may also be charted through a series of court decisions.

Notable events [ edit ] A key figure in the end of the blacklisting of McCarthyism was John Henry Faulk . Host of an afternoon comedy radio show, Faulk was a leftist active in his union, the American Federation of Television and Radio Artists . He was scrutinized by AWARE, Inc., one of the private firms that examined individuals for signs of communist "disloyalty". Marked by AWARE as unfit, he was fired by CBS Radio . Almost uniquely among the many victims of blacklisting, Faulk decided to sue AWARE in 1957 and finally won the case in 1962.

[ 153 ] With this court decision, the private blacklisters and those who used them were put on notice that they were legally liable for the professional and financial damage they caused. Although some informal blacklisting continued, the private "loyalty checking" agencies were soon a thing of the past.

[ 154 ] Even before the Faulk verdict, many in Hollywood had decided it was time to break the blacklist. In 1960, Dalton Trumbo , one of the best known members of the Hollywood Ten , was publicly credited with writing the films Exodus and Spartacus .

Warren Court [ edit ] Much of the undoing of McCarthyism came at the hands of the U.S. Supreme Court under Chief Justice Earl Warren .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] As Richard Rovere wrote in his biography of Joseph McCarthy, "[T]he United States Supreme Court took judicial notice of the rents McCarthy was making in the fabric of liberty and thereupon wrote a series of decisions that have made the fabric stronger than before." [ 155 ] Two Eisenhower appointees to the court— Earl Warren (who was made Chief Justice) and William J. Brennan, Jr.

—proved to be more liberal than Eisenhower had anticipated.

[ 156 ] The Warren Court made a series of rulings that helped bring an end to the McCarthyism.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] In 1956, the Warren Court heard the case of Slochower v. Board of Education .

Harry Slochower was a professor at Brooklyn College who had been fired by New York City for invoking the Fifth Amendment when McCarthy's committee questioned him about his past membership in the Communist Party. The court prohibited such actions, ruling "...we must condemn the practice of imputing a sinister meaning to the exercise of a person's constitutional right under the Fifth Amendment... The privilege against self-incrimination would be reduced to a hollow mockery if its exercise could be taken as equivalent either to a confession of guilt or a conclusive presumption of perjury." [ 157 ] In addition, the 1956 Cole v. Young ruling also greatly weakened the ability to discriminate in the federal civilian workforce.

[ 158 ] Another key decision was in the 1957 case Yates v. United States , in which the convictions of fourteen Communists were reversed. In Justice Black's opinion, he wrote of the original "Smith Act" trials: "The testimony of witnesses is comparatively insignificant. Guilt or innocence may turn on what Marx or Engels or someone else wrote or advocated as much as a hundred years or more ago... When the propriety of obnoxious or unfamiliar view about government is in reality made the crucial issue, ...prejudice makes conviction inevitable except in the rarest circumstances." [ 159 ] Also in 1957, the Supreme Court ruled on the case of Watkins v. United States , curtailing the power of HUAC to punish uncooperative witnesses by finding them in contempt of Congress. Justice Warren wrote in the decision: "The mere summoning of a witness and compelling him to testify, against his will, about his beliefs, expressions or associations is a measure of governmental interference. And when those forced revelations concern matters that are unorthodox, unpopular, or even hateful to the general public, the reaction in the life of the witness may be disastrous." [ 160 ] [ 161 ] In its 1958 decision in Kent v. Dulles , the Supreme Court halted the State Department from using the authority of its own regulations to refuse or revoke passports based on an applicant's communist beliefs or associations.

[ 162 ] Repercussions [ edit ] Study and reactions to Constitutional implications [ edit ] The political divisions McCarthyism created in the United States continue to make themselves manifest, and the politics and history of anti-communism in the United States are still contentious. Portions of the massive security apparatus established during the McCarthy era still exist.

Loyalty oaths are still required by the California Constitution for all officials and employees of the government of California (which is highly problematic for Quakers and Jehovah's Witnesses whose beliefs preclude them from pledging absolute loyalty to the state).

[ 163 ] At the federal level, a few portions of the McCarran Internal Security Act remain in effect. However, the act's detention provision was repealed in 1971.

[ 164 ] The McCarran Act's Communist registration requirement was declared unconstitutional in the 1965 Supreme Court ruling in Albertson v. Subversive Activities Control Board as well. The McCarran Act's Subversive Activities Control Board , which enforced the law's investigation requirement for persons alleged to be involved in "subversive activities", was officially abolished through Congressional legislation in 1972 as well.

[ 165 ] Historical study on anti-communism and Soviet espionage [ edit ] McCarthyism also attracts controversy purely as a historical issue. Through declassified documents from Soviet archives and Venona project decryptions of coded Soviet messages, the Soviet Union was found to have engaged in substantial espionage activities in the United States during the 1940s. The Communist Party USA also was substantially funded and its policies controlled by the Soviet Union, and accusations existed that CPUSA members were often recruited as spies.

[ 166 ] [ 167 ] Liberal anti-communists like Edward Shils and Daniel Moynihan had a contempt for McCarthyism. Sociologist Edward Shils criticized an excessive policy of secrecy during the Cold War, that led to the misdirection of McCarthyism, which was addressed during the 1994–1997 Moynihan Commission . As Moynihan put it, "reaction to McCarthy took the form of a modish anti-anti-Communism that considered impolite any discussion of the very real threat Communism posed to Western values and security." After revelations of Soviet spy networks from the declassified Venona project, Moynihan wondered: "Might less secrecy have prevented the liberal overreaction to McCarthyism as well as McCarthyism itself?" He described the situation during the McCarthy era as "ignorant armies clashed by night". With McCarthy advocating an extremist view, the discussion of communist subversion was made into a civil rights issue instead of a counterintelligence one.

[ 72 ] In the view of some contemporary commentators, the revelations from Venona and other archives on espionage stand as at least a partial vindication of McCarthyism.

[ 168 ] Some, such as Goldberg, feel that a genuinely dangerous subversive element was in the United States, and that this danger justified extreme measures.

[ 169 ] The opposing view holds that, recent revelations notwithstanding, by the time McCarthyism began in the late 1940s, the CPUSA was an ineffectual fringe group, and the damage done to U.S. interests by Soviet spies after World War II was minimal.

[ 170 ] Historian Ellen Schrecker states, " in this country, McCarthyism did more damage to the constitution than the American Communist Party ever did." [ 171 ] Historian John Earl Haynes , while acknowledging that inexcusable excesses occurred during McCarthyism, argues that some contemporary historians of McCarthyism underplay the un-democratic nature of the CPUSA.

[ 172 ] At the same time, Haynes, who studied the Venona decryptions extensively, argued that McCarthy's attempts to "make anti-communism a partisan weapon" actually "threatened [the post-War] anti-Communist consensus", thereby ultimately harming anti-Communist efforts more than helping them.

[ 173 ] Of the 159 people who were identified on lists used or referenced by McCarthy, evidence only substantially proved that nine of them had aided Soviet espionage efforts—while several hundred Soviet spies were actually known based on Venona and other evidence, most were never named by McCarthy.

[ 174 ] [ 175 ] Later political usage of term [ edit ] A number of observers have compared the oppression of liberals and leftists during the McCarthy period to 2000s-era actions against suspected terrorists, most of them Muslims. In The Age of Anxiety: McCarthyism to Terrorism , author Haynes Johnson compares the "abuses suffered by aliens thrown into high-security U.S. prisons in the wake of 9/11" to the excesses of the McCarthy era.

[ 176 ] Similarly, David D. Cole has written that the Patriot Act "in effect resurrects the philosophy of McCarthyism, simply substituting 'terrorist' for 'communist'." [ 177 ] From the opposite pole, conservative writer Ann Coulter devotes much of her book Treason to drawing parallels between past opposition to McCarthy and McCarthyism and the policies and beliefs of modern-day liberals, arguing that the former hindered the anti-communist cause and the latter hindered the War on Terrorism .

[ 178 ] Other authors who have drawn on a comparison between current anti-terrorism policies and McCarthyism include Geoffrey R. Stone , [ 179 ] Ted Morgan , [ 180 ] and Jonah Goldberg .

[ 169 ] Since the time of McCarthy, the word McCarthyism has entered American speech as a general term for a variety of practices: aggressively questioning a person's patriotism, making poorly supported accusations, using accusations of disloyalty to pressure a person to adhere to conformist politics or to discredit an opponent, subverting civil and political rights in the name of national security, and the use of demagoguery are all often referred to as McCarthyism .

[ 181 ] [ 182 ] [ 183 ] Cultural depictions [ edit ] The 1951 novel The Troubled Air by Irwin Shaw tells the story of the director of a (fictional) radio show, broadcast live at the time, who is given a deadline to investigate his cast for alleged links to communism. The novel recounts the devastating effects on all concerned.

[ 184 ] The 1952 Arthur Miller play The Crucible used the Salem witch trials as a metaphor for McCarthyism, suggesting that the process of McCarthyism-style persecution can occur at any time or place. The play focused on the fact that once accused, a person had little chance of exoneration, given the irrational and circular reasoning of both the courts and the public. Miller later wrote: "The more I read into the Salem panic, the more it touched off corresponding images of common experiences in the fifties." [ 185 ] The 1976 film The Front starring Woody Allen dealt with the McCarthy-era Hollywood blacklist. The film was made by those blacklisted: producer and director Martin Ritt ; writer Walter Bernstein ; and actors Zero Mostel , Herschel Bernardi , Michael Murphy , John Randolph , Lloyd Gough , and Joshua Shelley .

[ 186 ] The 2005 film Good Night, and Good Luck by George Clooney starred David Strathairn as broadcast journalist Edward R. Murrow and contained archival footage of McCarthy.

[ 187 ] See also [ edit ] Conservatism portal Communism portal Socialism portal 1950s portal Cancel culture Censorship of school curricula in the United States Deplatforming Enemy of the people Indonesian mass killings of 1965-1966 Litmus test (politics) McCarthyism and antisemitism Mundt–Ferguson Communist Registration Bill of 1950 Ostracism Palmer Raids Red-baiting Red-tagging in the Philippines Red Purge Trumpism Vietnam stab-in-the-back myth Witch-hunt References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Storrs, Landon R. Y. (July 2, 2015).

"McCarthyism and the Second Red Scare" .

American History .

doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780199329175.013.6 .

ISBN 978-0199329175 .

Archived from the original on July 3, 2018 . Retrieved July 3, 2018 .

^ a b Lichtman, Robert M.

"UI Press | Robert M. Lichtman | The Supreme Court and McCarthy-Era Repression: One Hundred Decisions" .

www.press.uillinois.edu .

Archived from the original on May 12, 2019 . Retrieved October 20, 2019 .

^ a b "Revisiting McCarthyism in the Patriot Act Era" .

NPR.org .

Archived from the original on October 20, 2019 . Retrieved October 20, 2019 .

^ a b Horwitz, Morton J. (1999).

The Warren Court and the Pursuit of Justice . Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0809016259 .

Archived from the original on November 13, 2020 . Retrieved October 19, 2020 .

^ a b "Yates v. United States" .

Oyez .

Archived from the original on August 24, 2019 . Retrieved October 20, 2019 .

^ a b "Watkins v. United States" .

Oyez .

Archived from the original on October 20, 2019 . Retrieved October 20, 2019 .

^ Schrecker 1998 , p. 203.

^ Haynes, John Earl; Klehr, Harvey (April 10, 1999).

Venona: Decoding Soviet Espionage in America . Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-12987-8 .

^ "They Led Two Lives" .

archive.nytimes.com . Retrieved June 21, 2025 .

^ Robert J, Goldstein (2006).

"Prelude to McCarthyism: The Making of a Blacklist" .

Prologue Magazine . Washington, DC: National Archives and Records Administration.

Archived from the original on January 18, 2017 . Retrieved January 16, 2017 .

^ For example, Yates v. United States (1957) and Watkins v. United States (1957): Fried 1997 , pp. 205, 207 ^ For example, California's "Levering Oath" law, declared unconstitutional in 1967: Fried 1997 , p. 124 ^ For example, Slochower v. Board of Education (1956): Fried 1997 , p. 203 ^ For example, Faulk vs. AWARE Inc., et al.

(1962): Fried 1997 , p. 197 ^ Weir 2007 , pp. 148–149.

^ Merrill, Dennis (2006). "The Truman Doctrine: Containing Communism and Modernity".

Presidential Studies Quarterly .

36 (1): 27– 37.

doi : 10.1111/j.1741-5705.2006.00284.x .

^ Fried 1990 , p. 41.

^ Brinkley 1995 , p. 141.

^ Fried 1990 , pp. 6, 15, 78–80.

^ Griffith 1970 , p. 49.

^ "McCarthyism, n." .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ; citing Christian Science Monitor , March 28, 1950, p. 20.

^ Strout, Lawrence N. (1999).

Covering McCarthyism: how the 'Christian Science Monitor' handled Joseph R. McCarthy, 1950–1954 . Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. "Introduction".

^ Block 1952 , p. 152.

^ Fried 1990 , p. 150.

^ "S. Res. 301 Congressional Record, Dec 2, 1954" (PDF) .

www.senate.gov .

^ McCoy, Donald R. (1991).

"The Constitution of the Truman Presidency and the Post–World War II Era" . In Fausold, Martin; Shank, Alan (eds.).

The Constitution and the American Presidency . SUNY Press. p.

116 .

ISBN 978-0791404683 .

^ Fried 1997 .

^ Fried 1990 , p. 133.

^ Brown 1958 .

^ Schrecker 1998 , p. 271.

^ Fried 1990 , p. 70.

^ Schrecker 1998 , pp. 211, 266 et seq.

^ Schrecker 2002 , p. 65.

^ Schrecker 1998 , p. 212.

^ a b Cox & Theoharis 1988 , p. 312.

^ Schrecker 1998 , p. 225.

^ Schrecker 1998 , p. 224.

^ Yoder, Traci (April 2014).

"Breach of Privilege: Spying on Lawyers in the United States" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on September 25, 2018 . Retrieved February 5, 2019 .

^ Schrecker 1998 , pp. 239, 203.

^ Weiner 2007 , pp. 105–106.

^ Case, Sue-Ellen; Reinelt, Janelle G., eds. (1991).

The Performance of Power: Theatrical Discourse and Politics .

University of Iowa Press . p. 153.

ISBN 978-1587290343 .

Archived from the original on November 7, 2020 . Retrieved October 19, 2020 .

^ Dmytryk, Edward (1996).

Odd Man Out: A Memoir of the Hollywood Ten . Southern Illinois University Press. p. 59.

ISBN 978-0809319992 .

In the early days of the Martin Dies Committee [...] the question had simply been, Are you a member of the Communist Party of the United States? As a countermeasure, the Party adopted a rule that automatically cancelled a Communist's membership the moment the question was asked. He could then answer 'No' without perjuring himself. The final wording [...] was adopted to circumvent the Party's tactic.

^ nublockmuseum (May 31, 2013).

"Behind Blacklisted" .

Stories From The Block .

Archived from the original on July 27, 2020 . Retrieved July 27, 2020 .

^ Fried 1990 , pp. 154–155.

^ Schrecker 2002 , p. 68.

^ a b "See it Now: A Report on Senator Joseph R. McCarthy (transcript)" . CBS-TV. March 9, 1954.

Archived from the original on November 10, 2015 . Retrieved March 16, 2007 .

^ Fried 1990 , pp. 145–150.

^ Griffith 1970 , p. 216.

^ "The Horrible, Oppressive History of Book Burning in America" . The New Republic. June 26, 1953.

Archived from the original on February 12, 2020 . Retrieved February 12, 2020 .

^ Kareem Abdul-Jabbar; Raymond Obstfeld (2016).

Writings on the Wall: Searching for a New Equality Beyond Black and White . Time Inc. Books. pp. 53–.

ISBN 978-1618935434 .

^ Stone 2004 , p. 384.

^ Fried 1990 , p. 138.

^ 83rd U.S. Congress (July 30, 1954).

"Senate Resolution 301: Censure of Senator Joseph McCarthy" . U.S. National Archives and Records Administration.

Archived from the original on November 1, 2013 . Retrieved October 30, 2013 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Fried 1997 , p. 116.

^ a b Goldstein, Robert Justin (2014).

Little 'Red Scares' : Anti-Communism and Political Repression in the United States, 1921–1946 . Farnham: Ashgate Publishing Ltd.

ISBN 978-1472413772 .

OCLC 879022662 .

^ Fried 1997 , pp. 13, 15, 27, 110–112, 165–168.

^ Fried 1997 , pp. 201–202.

^ Levin, Daniel, "Smith Act", in Paul Finkelman, ed. (2006).

Encyclopedia of American Civil Liberties . CRC Press. p. 1488.

ISBN 0415943426 .

^ Schrecker1998 , p. 141.

^ Fried 1990 , p. 187.

^ McAuliff 1978 , p. 142.

^ a b c Linfield, Michael (1990).

Freedom Under Fire: U.S. Civil Liberties in Times of War . South End Press. pp.

107–111 .

ISBN 978-0896083745 .

^ "California Creates Un-American Activities Committee" .

Today in Civil Liberties History . May 28, 2013.

Archived from the original on September 24, 2017 . Retrieved July 9, 2017 .

^ Richards, Dave (August 19, 2009).

"So Long to the Communist Threat" .

The Texas Observer .

Archived from the original on September 26, 2017 . Retrieved July 9, 2017 .

^ McEnteer, James (2004).

Deep in the Heart: The Texas Tendency in American Politics . Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 87.

ISBN 978-0275983062 .

Archived from the original on August 6, 2020 . Retrieved September 4, 2017 .

^ Nickerson, Michelle M., " Women, Domesticity, and Postwar Conservatism Archived March 10, 2003, at the Wayback Machine ", OAH Magazine of History 17 (January 2003).

ISSN 0882-228X .

^ Rovere 1959 , pp. 21–22.

^ Marmor, Judd, Viola W. Bernard, and Perry Ottenberg, "Psychodynamics of Group Opposition to Mental Health Programs", in Judd Marmor (1994).

Psychiatry in Transition (2nd ed.). Transaction. pp.

355– 373.

ISBN 1560007362 .

^ Buckley 1954 , p. 335.

^ Robert Griffith (1987).

The Politics of Fear: Joseph R. McCarthy and the Senate . Univ of Massachusetts Press. p.

263 .

ISBN 0870235559 .

^ Arthur Herman (2000).

Joseph McCarthy: Reexamining the Life and Legacy of America's Most Hated Senator . Simon and Schuster. pp.

160–161 .

ISBN 978-0684836256 .

^ a b Moynihan, Daniel Patrick (1998).

Secrecy: The American Experience . Yale University Press. pp.

15–16 .

ISBN 978-0300080797 .

^ Andrew, Christopher; Vasili Mitrokhin (1999).

The Sword and the Shield . New York: Basic Books. pp.

108, 110, 122, 148, 164, 226, 236– 237, 279– 280, 294–306 .

ISBN 0465003109 .

^ Haynes, John; Harvey Klehr (1999).

Venona – Decoding Soviet Espionage in America . Connecticut: Yale University. pp.

221– 226.

ISBN 0300077718 .

^ Powers, Richard Gid (1995).

Not Without Honor: The History of American Anticommunism . Free Press. pp. 129, 214, 240.

ISBN 978-0684824277 .

^ "President Harry S. Truman Responds to Senator Joseph R. McCarthy's Accusations of Disloyalty" .

historymatters.gmu.edu .

^ Storrs, Landon R. Y. (July 2, 2015).

"McCarthyism and the Second Red Scare" .

Oxford Research Encyclopedia of American History .

doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780199329175.013.6 .

ISBN 978-0199329175 . Retrieved November 2, 2022 .

^ Schrecker 1998 , pp. 161, 193–194.

^ Chambers, Whittaker (1952).

Witness . New York: Random House. p. 799.

ISBN 978-0848809584 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Schrecker 1998 , pp. 130–137.

^ Herman 2000 , pp. 5–6.

^ Allen Weinstein and Alexander Vassiliev, The Haunted Wood: Soviet Espionage in America – The Stalin Era (New York: Modern Library, 2000) ISBN 978-0375755361 , pp. 48, 158, 162, 169, 229 ^ M. Stanton Evans.

Blacklisted by History : The Untold Story of Senator Joe McCarthy and His Fight against America's Enemies . Crown Forum, 2007 pp. 19–21.

^ John Earl Haynes, Harvey Klehr.

Venona: Decoding Soviet Espionage in America . Yale University Press, 1999, p. 18.

^ Schrecker 1998 , p. xiii.

^ Schrecker 2002 , pp. 63–64.

^ Schrecker (1998), p. 4.

^ Sears, Brad; Hunter, Nan D.; Mallory, Christy (2009). "5: The Legacy of Discriminatory State Laws, Policies, and Practices, 1945–Present".

Documenting Discrimination on the Basis of Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity in State Employment (PDF) . Los Angeles: The Williams Institute on Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Law and Public Policy at UCLA School of Law. p. 5-3. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 6, 2017 . Retrieved December 16, 2017 .

From 1947 to 1961, more than 5,000 allegedly homosexual federal civil servants lost their jobs in the purges for no reason other than sexual orientation, and thousands of applicants were also rejected for federal employment for the same reason. During this period, more than 1,000 men and women were fired for suspected homosexuality from the State Department alone—a far greater number than were dismissed for their membership in the Communist party. The Cold War and anticommunist efforts provided the setting in which a sustained attack upon gay men and lesbians took place. The history of this 'lavender scare' by the federal government has been extensively documented by historian David Johnson, who has demonstrated that during this era, government officials intentionally engaged in campaigns to associate homosexuality with Communism: 'homosexual' and 'pervert' became synonyms for 'Communist' and 'traitor.' LGBT people were treated as a national-security threat, demanding the attention of Congress, the courts, statehouses, and the media.

^ D'Emilio 1998 , pp. 41–49..

^ David K. Johnson, The Lavender Scare: The Cold War Persecution of Gays and Lesbians in the Federal Government . (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009.), p. 10 ^ "An interview with David K. Johnson author of The Lavender Scare: The Cold War Persecution of Gays and Lesbians in the Federal Government" .

press.uchicago.edu . The University of Chicago. 2004.

Archived from the original on April 28, 2019 . Retrieved December 16, 2017 .

The Lavender Scare helped fan the flames of the Red Scare. In popular discourse, communists and homosexuals were often conflated. Both groups were perceived as hidden subcultures with their own meeting places, literature, cultural codes, and bonds of loyalty. Both groups were thought to recruit to their ranks the psychologically weak or disturbed. And both groups were considered immoral and godless. Many people believed that the two groups were working together to undermine the government.

^ a b Gary Kinsman and Patrizia Gentile.

The Canadian War on Queers: National Security as Sexual Regulation . Vancouver: UBC Press, 2010, p. 65.

^ Elizabeth Lapovsky Kennedy and Madeline Davis.

Boots of Leather, Slippers of Gold . New York: Routledge, 1993, p. 75.

^ a b Kinsman and Gentile, p. 8.

^ John D'Emilio and Estelle B. Freedman.

Intimate Matters: A History of Sexuality in America , 3rd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012, p. 316.

^ David K. Johnson, p. 96.

^ Schrecker 1998 , p. 267.

^ Publication canceled after FBI contact: Horvath, Brooke (2005).

Understanding Nelson Algren . University of South Carolina Press. p. 84.

ISBN 1570035741 .

^ Investigated by the FBI and brought before HUAC for having registered as a Communist supporter in 1936: "Lucille Ball" .

FBI Records: The Vault . Federal Bureau of Investigation.

Archived from the original on September 5, 2015 . Retrieved September 9, 2015 .

^ On Hollywood "graylist": "Composer Elmer Bernstein Dead at 82" . Today.com. Associated Press. August 19, 2004.

Archived from the original on April 20, 2017 . Retrieved February 27, 2009 .

^ Schrecker 2002 , p. 244.

^ Lost his job, exiled: Jessica Wang (1999).

American Science in an Age of Anxiety: scientists, anticommunism, & the cold war . The University of North Carolina Press. pp.

277– 278.

ISBN 978-0807824474 .

^ "Obituary" Archived March 31, 2017, at the Wayback Machine , The New York Times , November 25, 1990. Retrieved June 10, 2014.

^ "McCarthy Target Ousted" (PDF) .

The New York Times . November 21, 1952.

Archived (PDF) from the original on March 1, 2021 . Retrieved April 4, 2014 .

^ Buhle, Paul & David Wagner (2003b).

Blacklisted: The Film Lover's Guide to the Hollywood Blacklist . Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 140396145X .

^ Harassed by anti-Communist groups, denied reentry to United States while traveling abroad: Lev, Peter (1999).

Transforming the Screen, 1950–1959 . University of California Press. p. 159.

ISBN 0520249666 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p On the Red Channels blacklist of artists and entertainers: Schrecker 2002 , p. 244 ^ Blacklisted in his profession, committed suicide in 1959: Bosworth, Patricia (1998).

Anything Your Little Heart Desires: An American Family Story . Touchstone.

ISBN 0684838486 .

^ a b c d e f "The Authentic History Center: Red Channels, The Blacklist" . Retrieved July 21, 2010 .

[ dead link ] ^ On Hollywood blacklist: Buhle & Wagner 2003 , p. 105 ^ Harassed by anti-Communist groups, denied reentry to United States, thus prevented from acting in the movie Broken Lance : Ramón, David (1997).

Dolores del Río . Clío. p. 44.

ISBN 9686932356 .

^ Indicted under the Foreign Agents Registration Act : Du Bois, W.E.B. (1968).

The Autobiography of W.E.B. Du Bois . International Publishers.

ISBN 0717802345 .

^ Craig, R. Bruce (2004).

Treasonable Doubt . University Press of Kansas. p. 496.

ISBN 978-0700613113 .

^ Jerome, Fred (2002).

The Einstein File: J. Edgar Hoover's Secret War Against the World's Most Famous Scientist . St. Martin's Press.

ISBN 0312288565 .

^ Herman, Jan (1995).

A Talent for Trouble: The Life of Hollywood's Most Acclaimed Director, William Wyler . Cambridge, Mass.: Da Capo.

ISBN 030680798X .

^ Blacklisted, imprisoned for three months for contempt of Congress: Sabin (1999), p. 75.

^ Alexander, Stephan (2007).

Überwacht. Ausgebürgert. Exiliert: Schriftsteller und der Staat . Bielefeld: Aisthesis Verlag. pp.

36– 52.

ISBN 978-3895286346 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Investigation of Communist Activities in the Los Angeles Area – Part 5, United States Congress, House Committee on Un-American Activities ^ On Hollywood blacklist: Buhle & Wagner 2003 , p. 31 ^ Berch, Bettina (1988).

Radical By Design: The Life and Style of Elizabeth Hawes . Dutton Adult.

ISBN 0525247157 .

^ "Dorothy Healey Lifelong Communist Fought for Workers" , Los Angeles Times , Dennis McLellan, August 8, 2006. Retrieved June 11, 2014.

^ "The Shocking Death of Senator Lester Hunt" . June 20, 2016.

^ " "Theodore Kaghan, 77; Was in Foreign Service Archived 2020-11-13 at the Wayback Machine ".

The New York Times , August 11, 1989. Accessed March 7, 2011.

^ "Subject: Danny Kaye" . Federal Bureau of Investigation.

Archived from the original on May 12, 2013 . Retrieved June 29, 2013 .

^ Keith Haynes " Benjamin Keen 1913–2002 " Hispanic American Historical Review 83.2 (2003) 357–359 ^ Heyworth, Peter (1996).

Otto Klemperer: Vol. 2, 1933–1973: His Life and Times . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521244886 .

^ Louis Komzsik (2003).

The Lanczos Method:Evolution and Application . SIAM. p.

79 .

ISBN 978-0898715378 .

^ Blacklisted and unemployed, committed suicide in 1955: Fried 1990 , p. 156 ^ a b c Stephan, Alexander (1995).

Im Visier des FBI: deutsche Exilschriftsteller in den Akten amerikanischer Geheimdienste . Metzler.

ISBN 3476013812 .

^ Trotter, William R. (1995).

Priest of Music. The Life of Dimitri Mitropoulos . Amadeus Press.

ISBN 0931340810 .

^ Repeatedly denied passport: Thompson, Gail & R. Andrew Viruleg.

"Linus Pauling" . Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation. Archived from the original on December 24, 2007 . Retrieved December 11, 2007 .

^ Robert D. Dean, The Imperial Brotherhood: Gender and the Making of Cold War Foreign Policy ( University of Massachusetts Press , 2001), 65, 127, 140 ^ "Obituary" Archived May 10, 2017, at the Wayback Machine , The New York Times , November 9, 1987. Retrieved June 10, 2014.

^ On Hollywood blacklist: Buhle & Wagner 2003 , p. 18 ^ Blacklisted, passport revoked: Manning, Marable; McMillian, John; Frazier ), Nishani, eds. (2003).

Freedom on My Mind: The Columbia Documentary History of the African American Experience . Columbia University Press. p.

559 .

ISBN 0231108907 .

^ On Hollywood blacklist: Buhle & Wagner 2003 , p. 208 ^ Brodeur, Paul (1997).

A Writer in the Cold War . Faber and Faber. pp.

159–165 .

ISBN 978-0571199075 .

^ Herbert Mitgang. " William L. Shirer, Author, Is Dead at 89 Archived 2017-05-01 at the Wayback Machine ".

The New York Times , December 29, 1993. Accessed March 5, 2011.

^ Lawrence Van Gelder. " Lionel Stander Dies at 86; Actor Who Defied Blacklist Archived 2017-02-19 at the Wayback Machine ".

The New York Times , December 2, 1994. Accessed March 5, 2011.

^ [1] Archived March 16, 2014, at the Wayback Machine p. 7 ^ Subpoenaed by New Hampshire Attorney General, indicted for contempt of court: Heale, M. J. (1998).

McCarthy's Americans: Red Scare Politics in State and Nation, 1935–1965 . University of Georgia Press. p. 73.

ISBN 0820320269 .

^ Robert D. Dean, Imperial Brotherhood: Gender and the Making of Cold War Foreign Policy (Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts Press , 2001), 141–144 ^ Passport revoked, incarcerated: Chang, Iris (1996).

Thread of the Silkworm . Basic Books.

ISBN 0465006787 .

^ David H. Price. 2004. Threatening Anthropology: McCarthyism and the FBI's Surveillance of Activist Anthropologists. Duke University Press, March 30, 2004 ^ Organization of American Historians: Lee W. Formwalt, "Robert Murray's Two Red Scares," in OAH Newsletter, November 2003 Archived September 4, 2013, at the Wayback Machine , accessed January 28, 2011 ^ Truman, Harry S. (September 1950).

"Veto of the Internal Security Bill" . Truman Presidential Museum and Library. Archived from the original on March 1, 2007 . Retrieved August 7, 2006 .

^ Doherty 2005 , pp. 14–15.

^ Smith, Margaret Chase (June 1, 1950).

"Declaration of Conscience" . Margaret Chase Smith Library. Archived from the original on October 8, 2006 . Retrieved August 4, 2006 .

^ Fried 1990 , p. 29.

^ Fried 1997 , p. 114.

^ Streitmatter 1998 , p. 154.

^ Doherty 2005 , p. 207.

^ Faulk, John Henry (1963).

Fear on Trial . University of Texas Press.

ISBN 029272442X .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Fried 1997 , p. 197.

^ Rovere 1959 , p. 264.

^ Sabin 1999 , p. 5..

^ Fried 1997 , p. 203.

^ "Cole v. Young 351 U.S. 536 (1956)" .

Justia .

Archived from the original on March 27, 2019 . Retrieved October 1, 2016 .

^ Fried 1997 , p. 205.

^ Fried 1997 , p. 207.

^ full text Archived June 14, 2018, at the Wayback Machine , Caselaw , Findlaw.

^ Fried 1997 , p. 211.

^ Paddock, Richard C. (May 11, 2008), "Loyalty oath poses ethical dilemmas" , San Francisco Chronicle ^ Izumi, Masumi (May 2005). "Prohibiting 'American Concentration Camps' ".

Pacific Historical Review .

74 (2): 166.

doi : 10.1525/phr.2005.74.2.165 .

JSTOR 10.1525/phr.2005.74.2.165 .

^ Kesaris, Paul L. (ed.).

"Records of the Subversive Activities Control Board" (PDF) .

University Publications of America . Archived from the original (PDF) on March 4, 2016 . Retrieved February 4, 2022 .

^ Marshall, Joshua, "Exhuming McCarthy" [ permanent dead link ] , American Prospect 10, no. 43 (1999).

^ Storrs, Landon R. Y. (July 2, 2015).

"McCarthyism and the Second Red Scare" .

Oxford Research Encyclopedia of American History .

doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780199329175.013.6 .

ISBN 978-0199329175 .

^ David Aaronovitch McCarthy: There Were Reds Under the Bed Archived March 30, 2015, at the Wayback Machine BBC Radio 4 airdate August 9, 2010 ^ a b Goldberg, Jonah (February 26, 2003).

"Two Cheers for 'McCarthyism'?" .

National Review Online . Archived from the original on December 10, 2006 . Retrieved January 25, 2007 .

^ Theoharis, Athan (2002).

Chasing Spies: How the FBI Failed in Counter-Intelligence But Promoted the Politics of McCarthyism in the Cold War Years . Ivan R. Dee.

ISBN 1566634202 .

^ Schrecker, Ellen (Winter 2000).

"Comments on John Earl Haynes' The Cold War Debate Continues " .

Journal of Cold War Studies . Harvard University – Faculty of Arts and Sciences.

Archived from the original on May 15, 2017 . Retrieved February 27, 2009 .

Emphasis in original.

^ Haynes, John Earl .

"Reflections on Ellen Schrecker and Maurice Isserman's essay, 'The Right's Cold War Revision' " .

Archived from the original on March 15, 2015 . Retrieved September 9, 2010 .

^ Haynes, John Earl (February 2000).

"Exchange with Arthur Herman and Venona book talk" . Retrieved July 11, 2007 .

^ Haynes, John Earl (2006).

"Senator Joseph McCarthy's Lists and Venona" . Retrieved August 31, 2006 .

^ Haynes & Klehr 2000 .

^ Johnson, Haynes (2005).

The Age of Anxiety: McCarthyism to Terrorism . Harcourt. p.

471 .

ISBN 0151010625 .

^ Cole, David, " National Security State Archived 2007-02-11 at the Wayback Machine ", The Nation (December 17, 2001). See also Cole, David, "The New McCarthyism: Repeating History in the War on Terrorism", Harvard Civil Rights–Civil Liberties Law Review 38, no. 1 (Winter 2003).

^ Coulter, Ann (2003).

Treason: Liberal Treachery from the Cold War to the War on Terrorism . Three Rivers Press.

ISBN 1400050324 .

^ Geoffrey R. Stone (October 17, 2004).

"America's new McCarthyism" .

Chicago Tribune .

Archived from the original on January 4, 2018 . Retrieved January 3, 2018 .

^ Morgan, Ted (2004).

Reds: McCarthyism in Twentieth-Century America . Random House. pp. 597 et seq.

ISBN 081297302X .

^ Rosenthal, Jack (October 7, 1984).

"President vs. Demagogue" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on September 4, 2017 . Retrieved December 20, 2017 .

^ Boot, Max (April 2000).

"Joseph McCarthy by Arthur Herman" .

Commentary . Archived from the original on July 21, 2010 . Retrieved April 11, 2013 .

^ What Qualifies as Demagoguery? (October 19, 2004).

"What Qualifies as Demagoguery?" . History News Network.

Archived from the original on July 25, 2013 . Retrieved December 20, 2017 .

^ "The Troubled Air" . Open Road Media. April 16, 2013.

Archived from the original on September 11, 2016 . Retrieved September 9, 2016 .

^ Miller, Arthur (October 21, 1996).

"Why I Wrote The Crucible" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on September 28, 2013 . Retrieved February 20, 2020 .

^ Georgakas, Dan.

"The Hollywood Blacklist" .

www.english.illinois.edu .

Archived from the original on August 26, 2018 . Retrieved August 15, 2018 .

^ " 'Good Night and Good Luck': Murrow vs. McCarthy" .

NPR.org .

Archived from the original on October 26, 2017 . Retrieved April 5, 2018 .

Sources [ edit ] Block, Herbert (1952).

The Herblock Book . Beacon.

ISBN 149925346X .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Brinkley, Alan (1995).

The End of Reform: New Deal Liberalism in Recession and War . Vintage.

ISBN 0679753141 .

Brown, Ralph S. (1958).

Loyalty and Security: Employment Tests in the United States . Yale University Press.

ISBN 0306702185 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Buckley, William F. (1954).

McCarthy and His Enemies: The Record and Its Meaning . Regnery.

ISBN 0895264722 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Buhle, Paul; Wagner, David (2003).

Hide in Plain Sight: The Hollywood Blacklistees in Film and Television, 1950–2002 . Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 1403961441 .

Cox, John Stuart; Theoharis, Athan G. (1988).

The Boss: J. Edgar Hoover and the Great American Inquisition . Temple University Press.

ISBN 087722532X .

D'Emilio, John (1998).

Sexual Politics, Sexual Communities (2d ed.). University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0226142671 .

Doherty, Thomas (2005).

Cold War, Cool Medium: Television, McCarthyism, and American Culture . Columbia University Press.

ISBN 023112953X .

Fried, Albert (1997).

McCarthyism, The Great American Red Scare: A Documentary History . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0195097017 .

Fried, Richard M. (1990).

Nightmare in Red: The McCarthy Era in Perspective . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0195043618 .

Griffith, Robert (1970).

The Politics of Fear: Joseph R. McCarthy and the Senate .

University of Massachusetts Press .

ISBN 0870235559 .

Haynes, John Earl ; Klehr, Harvey (2000).

Venona: Decoding Soviet Espionage in America . Yale University Press.

ISBN 0300-084625 .

Herman, Arthur (2000).

Joseph McCarthy: Reexamining the Life and Legacy of America's Most Hated Senator . The Free Press.

ISBN 0684836254 .

McAuliff, Mary Sperling (1978).

Crisis on the Left: Cold War Politics and American Liberals, 1947–1954 .

University of Massachusetts Press .

ISBN 087023241X .

Rovere, Richard H. (1959).

Senator Joe McCarthy . University of California Press.

ISBN 0520204727 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Sabin, Arthur J. (1999).

In Calmer Times: The Supreme Court and Red Monday . University of Pennsylvania Press.

ISBN 081223507X .

Schrecker, Ellen (1998).

Many Are the Crimes: McCarthyism in America . Little, Brown.

ISBN 0316774707 .

Schrecker, Ellen (2002).

The Age of McCarthyism: A Brief History with Documents (2d ed.). Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 0312294255 .

Stone, Geoffrey R. (2004).

Perilous Times: Free Speech in Wartime from the Sedition Act of 1798 to the War on Terrorism . W. W. Norton.

ISBN 0393-058808 .

Streitmatter, Rodger (1998).

Mightier Than the Sword: How the News Media Have Shaped American History . Westview Press.

ISBN 0813332117 .

Weiner, Tim (2007).

Legacy of Ashes: The History of the Central Intelligence Agency . New York: Doubleday .

ISBN 978-0-385-51445-3 .

Weir, Robert E. (2007).

Class in America: An Encyclopedia . Greenwood Press.

ISBN 978-0313337208 .

Historiography [ edit ] Haynes, John Earl. "The Cold War debate continues: A traditionalist view of historical writing on domestic Communism and anti-Communism." Journal of Cold War Studies 2.1 (2000): 76–115.

Hixson Jr, William B.

Search for the American right wing: An analysis of the social science record, 1955–1987 (Princeton University Press, 2015).

Reeves, Thomas C. "McCarthyism: Interpretations since Hofstadter." Wisconsin Magazine of History (1976): 42–54.

online Selverstone, Marc J. "A Literature So Immense: The Historiography of Anticommunism." Organization of American Historians Magazine of History 24.4 (2010): 7–11.

Further reading [ edit ] Andrew, Christopher ; Mitrokhin, Vasili (2000).

The Sword and the Shield: The Mitrokhin Archive and the Secret History of the KGB . Basic Books.

ISBN 0465-003125 .

Buckley, William F. (1977).

A Hymnal: The Controversial Arts . G.P. Putnam's Sons.

ISBN 0399122273 .

Byman, Jeremy (2004).

Showdown at High Noon: Witch-hunts, Critics, and the End of the Western . Scarecrow Press.

ISBN 0810849984 .

Archived from the original on May 10, 2017 . Retrieved October 19, 2020 .

Caballero, Raymond.

McCarthyism vs. Clinton Jencks.

Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 2019.

Caute, David (1978).

The Great Fear: The Anti-Communist Purge Under Truman and Eisenhower . Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 0671226827 .

Coulter, Ann (2003).

Treason: Liberal Treachery from the Cold War to the War on Terrorism . Crown Forum.

ISBN 1400050308 .

Evans, M. Stanton (2007).

Blacklisted by History: The Untold Story of Senator Joe McCarthy and His Fight Against America's Enemies . Crown Publishing.

ISBN 978-1400081059 .

Haynes, John Earl (2000).

Red Scare or Red Menace?: American Communism and Anti Communism in the Cold War Era . Ivan R. Dee.

ISBN 156663-0916 .

Haynes, John Earl & Harvey Klehr (2003).

In Denial: Historians, Communism, and Espionage . Encounter.

ISBN 1893554724 .

Latham, Earl (ed.).

The Meaning of McCarthyism (1965). excerpts from primary and secondary sources Lichtman, Robert M.

The Supreme Court and McCarthy-Era Repression: One Hundred Decisions.

Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 2012.

McDaniel, Rodger.

Dying for Joe McCarthy's Sins: The Suicide of Wyoming Senator Lester Hunt.

WordsWorth, 2013.

Morgan, Ted (2004).

Reds: McCarthyism in Twentieth-Century America . Random House.

ISBN 081297302X .

Navasky, Victor S.

(1980).

Naming Names . Hill and Wang.

ISBN 08090-01837 .

Powers, Richard Gid (1997).

Not Without Honor: A History of American Anticommunism . Free Press.

ISBN 0300-07470-0 .

Schrecker, Ellen (1994).

The Age of McCarthyism: A Brief History with Documents . Bedford Books of St. Martin's Press.

ISBN 0312-083491 .

Storrs, Landon R.Y., The Second Red Scare and the Unmaking of the New Deal Left.

Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2013.

Weinstein, Allen ; Vassiliev, Alexander (2000).

The Haunted Wood: Soviet Espionage in America – The Stalin Era . Modern Library.

ISBN 0375755365 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to McCarthyism .

Badash, Lawrence (October 30, 2007).

"Science in the McCarthy Period: Training Ground for Scientists as Public Citizens" . Oregon State University.

Archived from the original on February 5, 2008 . Retrieved January 16, 2008 .

Beyer, Mary & Michael Beyer (January 2006).

"McCarthyism Today" . International Journal of Baudrillard Studies. Archived from the original on October 1, 2006 . Retrieved November 2, 2006 .

"McCarthyism / The "Red Scare" " .

Dwight D. Eisenhower Online Documents . Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library, Museum, and Boyhood Home.

Archived from the original on November 1, 2013 . Retrieved October 30, 2013 .

Navasky, Victor S. (June 28, 2001).

"Cold War Ghosts" .

The Nation .

Archived from the original on April 14, 2009 . Retrieved November 2, 2006 .

Rusher, William A.

(Fall 2004).

"A Closer Look Under The Bed" .

Claremont Review of Books . Claremont Institute. Archived from the original on January 27, 2012 . Retrieved December 27, 2011 .

v t e Cold War United States Soviet Union NATO Warsaw Pact ANZUS METO SEATO NEATO Rio Pact Non-Aligned Movement 1940s Morgenthau Plan Jamaican political conflict Dekemvriana Guerrilla war in the Baltic states Operation Priboi Operation Jungle Occupation of the Baltic states Cursed soldiers Operation Unthinkable Gouzenko Affair Division of Korea Chinese Civil War Chinese Communist Revolution Indonesian National Revolution Civil conflicts in Vietnam (1945–1949) Operation Beleaguer Operation Blacklist Forty Iran crisis of 1946 Greek Civil War Baruch Plan Corfu Channel incident Hukbalahap rebellion Turkish Straits crisis Restatement of Policy on Germany First Indochina War 1947 Polish parliamentary election Truman Doctrine Asian Relations Conference May 1947 crises Partition of India Indo-Pakistani war of 1947–1948 1947–1949 Palestine war 1947–1948 civil war in Mandatory Palestine 1948 Arab–Israeli War 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight Marshall Plan Comecon 1948 Czechoslovak coup d'état Incapacitation of the Allied Control Council Al-Wathbah uprising Tito–Stalin split Berlin Blockade Annexation of Hyderabad Madiun Affair Western betrayal Iron Curtain Eastern Bloc Western Bloc Malayan Emergency March 1949 Syrian coup d'état Operation Valuable 1950s Bamboo curtain McCarthyism First Indochina War Korean War Arab Cold War (1952–1979) 1952 Egyptian revolution Iraqi Intifada (1952) Mau Mau rebellion East German uprising of 1953 1953 Iranian coup d'état Pact of Madrid Bricker Amendment 1954 Syrian coup d'état Petrov Affair Domino theory 1954 Geneva Conference 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état Capture of the Tuapse First Taiwan Strait Crisis Jebel Akhdar War Algerian War Kashmir Princess Bandung Conference Geneva Summit (1955) Cyprus Emergency " On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences " 1956 Poznań protests Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Polish October Suez Crisis " We will bury you " Operation Gladio Syrian Crisis of 1957 Sputnik crisis Ifni War Iraqi 14 July Revolution 1958 Lebanon crisis Second Taiwan Strait Crisis 1959 Mosul uprising 1959 Tibetan uprising Kitchen Debate Cuban Revolution Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution Sino-Soviet split Night Frost Crisis 1960s Congo Crisis Laotian Civil War Vietnam War Simba rebellion 1960 U-2 incident John F. Kennedy Bay of Pigs Invasion 1960 Turkish coup d'état Albanian–Soviet split Iraqi–Kurdish conflict First Iraqi–Kurdish War Berlin Crisis of 1961 Berlin Wall Annexation of Goa Papua conflict Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation Sand War Portuguese Colonial War Angolan War of Independence Guinea-Bissau War of Independence Mozambican War of Independence Cuban Missile Crisis El Porteñazo Sino-Indian War Communist insurgency in Sarawak Ramadan Revolution Eritrean War of Independence North Yemen civil war 1963 Syrian coup d'état Assassination of John F. Kennedy Lyndon B. Johnson Aden Emergency Cyprus crisis of 1963–1964 Shifta War Mexican Dirty War Tlatelolco massacre Guatemalan Civil War Colombian conflict 1964 Brazilian coup d'état Dominican Civil War Rhodesian Bush War Indonesian mass killings of 1965–1966 Transition to the New Order (Indonesia) ASEAN Declaration 1966 Syrian coup d'état Cultural Revolution Cambodian Civil War Argentine Revolution South African Border War Korean DMZ Conflict 12-3 incident Greek junta 1967 Hong Kong riots Years of Lead (Italy) Six-Day War War of Attrition Dhofar War Al-Wadiah War Nigerian Civil War Protests of 1968 May 68 Prague Spring USS Pueblo incident 1968 Polish political crisis Communist insurgency in Malaysia Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia 17 July Revolution 1968 Peruvian coup d'état Revolutionary Government 1969 Sudanese coup d'état 1969 Libyan revolution Goulash Communism Sino-Soviet border conflict New People's Army rebellion Note Crisis 1970s Détente Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Black September Alcora Exercise Corrective Movement (Syria) Western Sahara conflict Communist insurgency in Thailand 1970 Polish protests Koza riot Realpolitik Ping-pong diplomacy 1971 JVP insurrection Corrective revolution (Egypt) 1971 Turkish military memorandum 1971 Sudanese coup d'état 1971 Bolivian coup d'état Four Power Agreement on Berlin Bangladesh Liberation War 1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China North Yemen-South Yemen Border conflict of 1972 First Yemenite War Munich massacre 1972–1975 Bangladesh insurgency Eritrean Civil Wars Paris Peace Accords 1973 Uruguayan coup d'état 1973 Afghan coup d'état 1973 Chilean coup d'état Yom Kippur War 1973 oil crisis Carnation Revolution Ethiopian Civil War Vietnam War Spanish transition to democracy Metapolitefsi Strategic Arms Limitation Talks Second Iraqi–Kurdish War Turkish invasion of Cyprus 15 August 1975 Bangladeshi coup d'état Siege of Dhaka (1975) Sipahi-Janata revolution Angolan Civil War Indonesian invasion of East Timor Cambodian genocide June 1976 protests Mozambican Civil War Oromo conflict Ogaden War 1978 Somali coup attempt Western Sahara War Lebanese Civil War Sino-Albanian split Third Indochina War Cambodian–Vietnamese War Cambodian conflict Operation Condor Dirty War (Argentina) 1976 Argentine coup d'état Egyptian–Libyan War German Autumn Korean Air Lines Flight 902 Nicaraguan Revolution Uganda–Tanzania War NDF Rebellion Chadian–Libyan War Second Yemenite War Grand Mosque seizure Iranian revolution Saur Revolution Sino-Vietnamese War New Jewel Movement 1979 Herat uprising Seven Days to the River Rhine Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union 1980s Salvadoran Civil War Soviet–Afghan War Eritrean Civil Wars 1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics boycotts Gera Demands Peruvian Revolution Gdańsk Agreement Solidarity 1980 Turkish coup d'état Ugandan Bush War Gulf of Sidra incident Martial law in Poland Casamance conflict Falklands War 1982 Ethiopian–Somali Border War Ndogboyosoi War United States invasion of Grenada Able Archer 83 Star Wars 1985 Geneva Summit Iran–Iraq War Somali Rebellion Reykjavík Summit 1986 Black Sea incident South Yemen civil war Toyota War 1987 Lieyu massacre Operation Denver 1987–1989 JVP insurrection Lord's Resistance Army insurgency 1988 Black Sea bumping incident 8888 Uprising Solidarity ( Soviet reaction ) Contras Central American crisis Operation RYAN Korean Air Lines Flight 007 People Power Revolution Glasnost Perestroika Bougainville conflict First Nagorno-Karabakh War Afghan Civil War United States invasion of Panama 1988 Polish strikes Polish Round Table Agreement 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre Revolutions of 1989 Fall of the Berlin Wall Fall of the inner German border Velvet Revolution Romanian Revolution Peaceful Revolution 1990s Mongolian Revolution of 1990 Min Ping Yu No. 5540 incident Gulf War Min Ping Yu No. 5202 German reunification Yemeni unification Fall of communism in Albania Breakup of Yugoslavia Dissolution of the Soviet Union 1991 August Coup Dissolution of Czechoslovakia Frozen conflicts Abkhazia China-Taiwan Korea Kosovo South Ossetia Transnistria Sino-Indian border dispute North Borneo dispute Foreign policy Truman Doctrine Containment Eisenhower Doctrine Domino theory Hallstein Doctrine Kennedy Doctrine Peaceful coexistence Ostpolitik Johnson Doctrine Brezhnev Doctrine Nixon Doctrine Ulbricht Doctrine Carter Doctrine Reagan Doctrine Paasikivi–Kekkonen doctrine Rollback Kinmen Agreement Ideologies Capitalism Liberalism Chicago school Conservatism American conservatism Keynesianism Libertarianism Monetarism Neoclassical economics Reaganomics Supply-side economics Democratic capitalism Socialism Communism Marxism–Leninism Castroism Eurocommunism Guevarism Hoxhaism Juche Ho Chi Minh Thought Maoism Trotskyism Stalinism Titoism Other Imperialism Anti-imperialism Nationalism Ultranationalism Chauvinism Ethnic nationalism Racism Zionism Anti-Zionism Fascism Neo-Nazism Islamism Totalitarianism Authoritarianism Autocracy Liberal democracy Illiberal democracy Guided democracy Social democracy Third-worldism White supremacy White nationalism White separatism Apartheid Finlandization Organizations NATO SEATO METO EEC Warsaw Pact Comecon Non-Aligned Movement NN States ASEAN SAARC Safari Club Propaganda Pro-communist Active measures Izvestia Neues Deutschland Pravda Radio Moscow Rudé právo Trybuna Ludu TASS Soviet Life Pro-Western Amerika Crusade for Freedom Paix et Liberté Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty Red Scare Voice of America Technological competition Arms race Nuclear arms race Space Race Historians Gar Alperovitz Thomas A. Bailey Michael Beschloss Archie Brown Warren H. Carroll Adrian Cioroianu John Costello Michael Cox Nicholas J. Cull Norman Davies Willem Drees Robert D. English Herbert Feis Robert Hugh Ferrell André Fontaine Anneli Ute Gabanyi John Lewis Gaddis Lloyd Gardner Timothy Garton Ash Gabriel Gorodetsky Fred Halliday Jussi Hanhimäki John Earl Haynes Patrick J. Hearden Tvrtko Jakovina Tony Judt Harvey Klehr Gabriel Kolko Walter LaFeber Walter Laqueur Melvyn P. Leffler Geir Lundestad Vojtech Mastny Jack F. Matlock Jr.

Thomas J. McCormick Timothy Naftali Marius Oprea David S. Painter William B. Pickett Ronald E. Powaski Yakov M. Rabkin M. E. Sarotte Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.

Ellen Schrecker Giles Scott-Smith Shen Zhihua Timothy Snyder Athan Theoharis Andrew Thorpe Vladimir Tismăneanu Patrick Vaughan Alex von Tunzelmann Odd Arne Westad William Appleman Williams Jonathan Reed Winkler Rudolph Winnacker Ken Young Espionage and intelligence List of Eastern Bloc agents in the United States Soviet espionage in the United States Russian espionage in the United States American espionage in the Soviet Union and Russian Federation CIA and the Cultural Cold War CIA MI5 MI6 United States involvement in regime change Soviet involvement in regime change MVD KGB Stasi See also Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War Soviet Union–United States relations Soviet Union–United States summits Russia–NATO relations War on terror Brinkmanship Pax Atomica Second Cold War Russian Revolution Category List of conflicts Timeline v t e History of the United States Timeline Outline Events Pre-Colonial Geological Pre-Columbian era Colonial Exploration of North America European colonization Native American epidemics Settlement of Jamestown Thirteen Colonies Atlantic slave trade King William's War Queen Anne's War Dummer's War First Great Awakening War of Jenkins' Ear King George's War Prelude to Revolution American Enlightenment French and Indian War Proclamation of 1763 Sugar Act Stamp Act Congress Sons of Liberty Boston Massacre Boston Tea Party Intolerable Acts First Continental Congress Continental Association 1776–1789 American Revolution War Second Continental Congress Lee Resolution Declaration of Independence Treaty of Paris Confederation period Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union Pennsylvania Mutiny Shays' Rebellion Northwest Ordinance Drafting and ratification of the Constitution 1789–1815 Bill of Rights Federalist Era Whiskey Rebellion Quasi-War Jeffersonian era Louisiana Purchase War of 1812 1815–1849 Era of Good Feelings Missouri Compromise Monroe Doctrine Jacksonian era Trail of Tears Nat Turner's slave rebellion Nullification crisis Westward expansion Mexican–American War Seneca Falls Convention First Industrial Revolution Second Great Awakening 1849–1865 Antebellum Era California Gold Rush Greater Reconstruction Prelude to War Compromise of 1850 Fugitive Slave Act Kansas–Nebraska Act Bleeding Kansas Dred Scott decision Election of Lincoln Secession Civil War Emancipation Proclamation Assassination of Abraham Lincoln 1865–1917 Reconstruction era Amendments First transcontinental railroad Ku Klux Klan Enforcement Acts Compromise of 1877 Second Industrial Revolution Gilded Age The Gospel of Wealth Assassination of James A. Garfield Chinese Exclusion Act Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act Haymarket affair Sherman Antitrust Act Progressive Era Spanish–American War Imperialism Assassination of William McKinley Square Deal Nadir of American race relations 1917–1945 World War I Paris Peace Conference First Red Scare Roaring Twenties Prohibition Women's suffrage Tulsa race massacre Second Klan Bath School disaster Harlem Renaissance Great Depression Wall Street crash of 1929 Dust Bowl New Deal World War II Pearl Harbor home front Manhattan Project Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki 1945–1964 Strike wave of 1945–1946 Start of Cold War Truman Doctrine Early Cold War North Atlantic Treaty Korean War Ivy Mike McCarthyism Post-war boom Project Mercury Civil Rights Movement Early–mid Cold War Cuban Missile Crisis Assassination of John F. Kennedy 1964–1980 Great Society Space Race Project Gemini Apollo program Mid Cold War Détente Vietnam War Fall of Saigon Assassination of Martin Luther King Jr.

Counterculture Second-wave feminism Gay liberation Stonewall riots Watergate scandal Pardon of Richard Nixon Iran hostage crisis Moral Majority 1980–1991 Reagan era Reaganomics Iran–Contra affair Crack epidemic Late Cold War Invasion of Grenada Reagan Doctrine End of the Cold War Space Shuttle program War on drugs Invasion of Panama 1991–2016 Gulf War NAFTA Los Angeles riots WTC bombing Waco siege Republican Revolution Oklahoma City bombing Columbine Bush v. Gore September 11 attacks War on terror War in Afghanistan Iraq War Hurricane Katrina Virginia Tech shooting Great Recession Killing of Osama bin Laden Rise in mass shootings Tucson Aurora Sandy Hook Orlando Black Lives Matter Obergefell v. Hodges 2016–present Unite the Right rally Continued rise in mass shootings Las Vegas Parkland El Paso Uvalde COVID-19 pandemic recession George Floyd protests January 6 insurrection Afghanistan withdrawal Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization Support of Ukraine Indictments of Donald Trump Topics American Century Antisemitism Cultural Cinema Music Newspapers Sports Demography Immigration Economy Banking Education Higher education Flag Government Abortion Capital punishment Civil Rights Corruption The Constitution Debt ceiling Direct democracy Foreign policy Law enforcement Postal service Taxation Voting rights Journalism Merchant Marine Military Army Marine Corps Navy Air Force Space Force Coast Guard Party Systems First Second Third Fourth Fifth Sixth Religion Genocide Slavery Sexual slavery Technology and industry Agriculture Labor Lumber Medicine Railway Groups African American Asian American Chinese American Filipino American Indian American Japanese American Korean American Thai American Vietnamese American European American Albanian American English American Estonian American Finnish American Irish American Italian American Lithuanian American Polish American Serbian American Hispanic and Latino American Mexican American Jewish American Middle Eastern American Egyptian American Iranian American Iraqi American Lebanese American Palestinian American Saudi American Native Americans Cherokee Comanche Women LGBTQ Gay men Lesbians Transgender people Places Territorial evolution Admission to the Union Historical regions American frontier Manifest destiny Indian removal Regions New England The South The West Coast States Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Federal District Washington, D.C.

Insular areas American Samoa Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico U.S. Virgin Islands Outlying islands Baker Island Howland Island Jarvis Island Johnston Atoll Kingman Reef Midway Atoll Navassa Island Palmyra Atoll Wake Island Cities Urban history Cities List of years Historiography Category Portal v t e Socialism in the United States History Utopian socialism Bishop Hill Commune Brook Farm Icarians Looking Backward New Harmony Oneida Community Progressive Era 1877 St. Louis general strike 1912 Lawrence textile strike Catholic Worker Movement Green Corn Rebellion Labor unionization Haymarket affair May Day Women's suffrage Repression and persecution American Defense Society American Protective League Communist Party USA and African Americans Communists in the labor movement 1919–1937 1937–1957 Espionage Act of 1917 First Red Scare John Birch Society McCarthyism Seattle General Strike Smith Act Smith Act trials Anti-war and civil rights movements Black power movement COINTELPRO " I Have a Dream " March on Washington New Left Poor People's Campaign Contemporary 1999 Seattle WTO protests 2008 financial crisis Occupy Wall Street 2011 Wisconsin protests 2018–2019 education workers' strikes in the United States Parties and organizations Active Black Riders Liberation Party Colorado Springs Socialists Committees of Correspondence for Democracy and Socialism Communist Party USA Democratic Socialists of America Freedom Road Socialist Organization Freedom Socialist Party Industrial Workers of the World Legal Marijuana Now Party New Afrikan Black Panther Party New Students for a Democratic Society Party for Socialism and Liberation Peace and Freedom Party Progressive Labor Party Redneck Revolt Revolutionary Communist Party, USA Social Democrats, USA Socialist Action Socialist Alternative Socialist Equality Party Socialist Party USA Socialist Rifle Association Socialist Workers Party Spartacist League/U.S.

Workers World Party World Socialist Party of the United States Former American Labor Party American Workers Party Black Panther Party Communist League of America Communist Workers' Party Democratic Socialist Federation Democratic Socialist Organizing Committee Farmer–Labor Party International Socialist Organization Maoist Internationalist Movement New American Movement Proletarian Party of America Puerto Rican Socialist Party Social Democracy of America Social Democratic Federation Social Democratic Party of America Socialist Labor Party of America Socialist Party of America Students for a Democratic Society Weather Underground White Panther Party Workers Party of the United States Youth International Party People Martin Abern Stephen Pearl Andrews Paul Avrich Kuwasi Balagoon Jack Barnes Edward Bellamy Victor L. Berger Alexander Berkman Murray Bookchin Earl Browder Étienne Cabet James P. Cannon Stokely Carmichael Noam Chomsky Voltairine de Cleyre Angela Davis Dorothy Day Eugene V. Debs Daniel De Leon Clarissa Dixon Farrell Dobbs W. E. B. Du Bois Albert Einstein James W. Ford William Z. Foster Luigi Galleani Benjamin Gitlow Emma Goldman William Batchelder Greene Gus Hall Michael Harrington Harry Hay Bill Haywood Harry Haywood Chris Hedges Angela Heywood Ezra Heywood Joe Hill Morris Hillquit Daniel Hoan Abbie Hoffman Martin Luther King Jr.

Jo Labadie Jay Lovestone Dyer Lum David McReynolds Charlene Mitchell Johann Most Huey P. Newton Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Phil Ochs Robert Owen Albert Parsons Lucy Parsons A. Philip Randolph George Ripley John Reed Rudolf Rocker Bayard Rustin C. E. Ruthenberg Nicola Sacco Bernie Sanders Kshama Sawant Bobby Seale Emil Seidel Max Shachtman Upton Sinclair Lysander Spooner Paul Sweezy Norman Thomas Benjamin Tucker Bartolomeo Vanzetti Josiah Warren Hasan Piker Cornel West Malcolm X Frank Zeidler John Zerzan Literature Appeal to Reason Daily Worker International Socialist Review Jacobin The Jungle Looking Backward Monopoly Capital Monthly Review The Other America Voluntary Socialism Why Socialism?

Related topics American Left Anarchism Anarchism in the United States Anarchist communism Anarcho-primitivism Anarcho-syndicalism Democratic socialism Green anarchism Individualist anarchism Individualist anarchism in the United States Labor history Labor laws Labor unions Libertarian socialism Marxism Marxism–Leninism Minimum wage Mutualism Post-left anarchy Scientific socialism Social democracy Socialism Utopian socialism Politics portal Socialism portal Authority control databases National France BnF data Czech Republic Other NARA NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐2k6c9
Cached time: 20250818105458
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.357 seconds
Real time usage: 2.719 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 15424/1000000
Revision size: 122573/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 604602/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 15620/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 22/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 529349/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.391/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 11056249/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2044.517      1 -total
 40.81%  834.271      1 Template:Reflist
 25.75%  526.366     79 Template:Cite_book
 11.20%  229.031     57 Template:Sfn
 10.86%  221.937     36 Template:Cite_web
  7.03%  143.773      1 Template:Conservatism_US
  5.45%  111.488      5 Template:Cite_journal
  3.51%   71.797      1 Template:Short_description
  3.21%   65.588      6 Template:Fix
  3.06%   62.569      1 Template:Infobox_event Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:43805:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818105458 and revision id 1301130101. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=McCarthyism&oldid=1301130101 " Categories : 1940s in the United States 1950s in the United States Anti-Chinese sentiment in the United States Anti-communism in the United States Cold War terminology Conspiracy theories in the United States Conspiracy theories involving communism Democratic backsliding in the United States Eponymous political ideologies McCarthyism Moral panic New Right (United States) Political and cultural purges Political repression in the United States Presidency of Harry S. Truman Presidency of Dwight D. Eisenhower Red Scare Hidden categories: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: ISBN date All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2010 CS1 maint: publisher location Articles with dead external links from October 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from November 2023 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from October 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2016 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2016 Articles that may contain original research from January 2023 All articles that may contain original research All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from August 2013 This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 07:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents McCarthyism 51 languages Add topic

