Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ancestry 2 Early life Toggle Early life subsection 2.1 Early childhood 2.2 Working and teaching at Jackson's Mill 2.3 Brother against sister 3 Early military career Toggle Early military career subsection 3.1 West Point 3.2 U.S. Army and the Mexican War 4 Lexington and the Virginia Military Institute Toggle Lexington and the Virginia Military Institute subsection 4.1 Slavery 4.2 Marriages and family life 4.3 John Brown raid aftermath 5 Civil War Toggle Civil War subsection 5.1 First Battle of Bull Run 5.2 Valley Campaign 5.3 Peninsula 5.4 Second Bull Run to Fredericksburg 5.5 Chancellorsville 6 Death 7 Personal life Toggle Personal life subsection 7.1 Physical ailments 7.2 Religion 7.3 Command style 7.4 Horsemanship 7.5 Mourning his death 7.6 Legacy 7.7 Descendants 7.8 Commemorations 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Stonewall Jackson 50 languages العربية Aragonés Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kapampangan Latina Magyar მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Scots Simple English Ślůnski Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Confederate States Army general (1824–1863) This article is about the Confederate general. For the country music artist of the same name, see Stonewall Jackson (singer) . For other people, see Stonewall Jackson (disambiguation) .

Stonewall Jackson Jackson in uniform, 1863 Birth name Thomas Jonathan Jackson Nickname(s) Stonewall Old Jack Old Blue Light Tom Fool Born ( 1824-01-21 ) January 21, 1824 [ 1 ] Clarksburg, Virginia (now West Virginia ), U.S.

Died May 10, 1863 (1863-05-10) (aged 39) Guinea Station , Virginia Buried Oak Grove Cemetery Lexington, Virginia Allegiance United States Confederate States Branch United States Army (USA) Confederate States Army (CSA) Years of service 1846–1852 (USA) 1861–1863 (CSA) Rank First Lieutenant (USA) Brevet Major (USA) Lieutenant General (CSA) Commands Stonewall Brigade Second Corps, Army of Northern Virginia Battles / wars See battles Mexican–American War American Civil War Great Train Raid of 1861 Battle of Falling Waters First Battle of Bull Run (First Manassas)  ( WIA ) Romney Expedition Battle of Hancock Jackson's Valley Campaign First Battle of Kernstown Battle of McDowell Battle of Front Royal First Battle of Winchester Battle of Port Republic Seven Days Battles Battle of Gaines's Mill Battle of Savage's Station Battle of White Oak Swamp Battle of Malvern Hill Northern Virginia Campaign Battle of Cedar Mountain First Battle of Rappahannock Station Manassas Station Second Battle of Bull Run (Second Manassas) Battle of Chantilly Maryland Campaign Battle of Harpers Ferry Battle of Antietam Battle of Fredericksburg Battle of Chancellorsville ( DOW ) Alma mater United States Military Academy Spouse(s) Elinor Jackson ​ ​ ( m.

1853; died 1854) ​ Mary Anna Jackson ​ ( m.

1857) ​ Children 2 Signature Thomas Jonathan " Stonewall " Jackson (January 21, 1824 – May 10, 1863) was a Confederate general and military officer who served during the American Civil War . He played a prominent role in nearly all military engagements in the eastern theater of the war until his death. Military historians regard him as one of the most gifted tactical commanders in U.S. history .

[ 2 ] Born in what was then part of Virginia (now in West Virginia ), Jackson received an appointment to the United States Military Academy , graduating in the class of 1846. He served in the United States Army during the Mexican–American War , distinguishing himself at the Battle of Chapultepec . From 1851 to 1861, he taught at the Virginia Military Institute .

When Virginia seceded from the United States in May 1861 after the Battle of Fort Sumter , Jackson joined the Confederate States Army . He distinguished himself commanding a brigade at the First Battle of Bull Run in July, providing crucial reinforcements and beating back a fierce Union assault. Thus Barnard E. Bee compared him to a "stone wall", which became his enduring nickname.

[ 3 ] Jackson performed exceptionally well in various campaigns over the next two years. On May 2, 1863, he was accidentally shot by Confederate pickets .

[ 4 ] He lost his left arm to amputation. Weakened by his wounds, he died of pneumonia eight days later. Jackson's death proved a severe setback for the Confederacy . After his death, his military exploits developed a legendary quality, becoming an important element of the pseudohistorical ideology of the " Lost Cause ".

[ 5 ] Ancestry Thomas Jonathan Jackson [ 6 ] was a great-grandson of John Jackson (1715/1719–1801) and Elizabeth Cummins (also known as Elizabeth Comings and Elizabeth Needles) (1723–1828). John Jackson was an Irish Protestant from Coleraine , County Londonderry , Ireland. While living in London, England, he was convicted of the capital crime of larceny for stealing £170 (equivalent to £33,781 in 2023); the judge at the Old Bailey sentenced him to seven years penal transportation . Elizabeth, a strong, blonde woman almost 6 feet (180 cm) tall, born in London, was also convicted of felony larceny in an unrelated case for stealing 19 pieces of silver, jewelry, and fine lace, and received a similar sentence. They both were transported on the merchant ship Litchfield , which departed London in May 1749 with 150 convicts . John and Elizabeth met on board and were in love by the time the ship arrived at Annapolis, Maryland . Although they were sent to different locations in Maryland for their bond service, the couple married in July 1755.

[ 7 ] The family migrated west across the Blue Ridge Mountains to settle near Moorefield, Virginia (now West Virginia ) in 1758. In 1770, they moved farther west to the Tygart Valley . They began to acquire large parcels of virgin farming land near the present-day town of Buckhannon , including 3,000 acres (12 km 2 ) in Elizabeth's name. John and his two teenage sons were early recruits for the American Revolutionary War , fighting in the Battle of Kings Mountain on October 7, 1780; John finished the war as captain and served as a lieutenant of the Virginia militia after 1787. While the men were in the Army, Elizabeth converted their home to a haven, "Jackson's Fort", for refugees from Indian attacks.

[ 8 ] John and Elizabeth had eight children. Their second son was Edward Jackson (1759–1828), and Edward's third son [ 9 ] was Jonathan Jackson, Thomas's father.

[ 10 ] Jonathan's mother died on April 17, 1796. Three years later, on October 13, 1799, his father married Elizabeth Wetherholt, and they had nine more children.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Early life Early childhood Thomas Jackson was born in the town of Clarksburg, Harrison County, Virginia , on January 21, 1824. He was the third child of Julia Beckwith (née Neale) Jackson (1798–1831) and Jonathan Jackson (1790–1826), an attorney. Both of Jackson's parents were natives of Virginia. The family already had two young children and were living in Clarksburg, in what is now West Virginia, when Thomas was born. He was named for his maternal grandfather. There is some dispute about the actual location of Jackson's birth. A historical marker on the floodwall in Parkersburg, West Virginia , claims that he was born in a cabin near that spot when his mother was visiting her parents who lived there. There are writings which indicate that in Jackson's early childhood, he was called "The Real Macaroni", though the origin of the nickname and whether it really existed are unclear.

[ 13 ] Thomas's sister Elizabeth (age six) died of typhoid fever on March 6, 1826, with two-year-old Thomas at her bedside. His father also died of typhoid fever on March 26, 1827, after nursing his daughter. Jackson's mother gave birth to his sister Laura Ann the day after Jackson's father died.

[ 14 ] Julia Jackson thus was widowed at 28 and was left with much debt and three young children (including the newborn). She sold the family's possessions to pay the debts. She declined family charity and moved into a small rented one-room house. Julia took in sewing and opened a private school to support herself and her three young children for about four years.

In 1830, Julia Neale Jackson remarried, against the wishes of her friends. Her new husband, Captain Blake B. Woodson, [ 15 ] an attorney, did not like his stepchildren. Warren, Julia's eldest son, moved to live with his uncle Alfred Neale near Parkersburg, and at the age of sixteen, he was hired to teach in Upshur County. Julia moved to Fayette County with her other two children, Thomas and Laura. Julia remained in such poor health, and caring for the children was such a strain on her strength, that she agreed to let their Grandmother Jackson take them to her home in Lewis County, about four miles north of Weston, where she lived with her unmarried daughters and sons. One of these sons was sent to Fayette County to care for the children by the grandmother. When he arrived and the purpose of his visit was revealed, there was quite a commotion among the children, who were very reluctant to leave their mother. Thomas, now six years old, slipped away to the nearby woods, where he hid, only returning to the house at nightfall. After a day or two of coaxing and numerous bribes, the uncle finally persuaded the children to make the trip, which took several days, with the help of their mother. When they arrived at their destination, they became the pets of an indulgent grandmother, two maiden aunts, and several bachelor uncles, all of whom were known for their great kindness of heart and strong family attachment. Thomas and Laura were indulged in every way, and to an extent well calculated to spoil them. In August 1835, Thomas and Laura's grandmother died.

The following year, after giving birth to Thomas's half-brother Willam Wirt Woodson, Julia died of complications, leaving her three older children orphaned.

[ 16 ] Julia was buried in an unmarked grave in a homemade coffin in Westlake Cemetery along the James River and Kanawha Turnpike in Fayette County within the corporate limits of present-day Ansted , West Virginia.

Working and teaching at Jackson's Mill Jackson's Mill As their mother's health continued to fail, Jackson and his sister Laura Ann were sent to live with their half-uncle, Cummins Jackson , who owned a grist mill in Jackson's Mill (near present-day Weston in Lewis County in central West Virginia). Their older brother, Warren, went to live with other relatives on his mother's side of the family, but he later died of tuberculosis in 1841 at the age of twenty. Thomas and Laura Ann returned from Jackson's Mill in November 1831 to be at their dying mother's bedside. They spent four years together at the Mill before being separated—Laura Ann was sent to live with her mother's family, Thomas to live with his Aunt Polly (his father's sister) and her husband, Isaac Brake, on a farm four miles from Clarksburg. Thomas was treated by Brake as an outsider and, having suffered verbal abuse for over a year, ran away from the family. When his cousin in Clarksburg urged him to return to Aunt Polly's, he replied, "Maybe I ought to, ma'am, but I am not going to." He walked eighteen miles through mountain wilderness to Jackson's Mill, where he was welcomed by his uncles and he remained there for the following seven years.

[ 17 ] Cummins Jackson was strict with Thomas, who looked up to Cummins as a schoolteacher. Jackson helped around the farm, tending sheep with the assistance of a sheepdog , driving teams of oxen and helping harvest wheat and corn. Formal education was not easily obtained, but he attended school when and where he could. Much of Jackson's education was self-taught. He once made a deal with one of his uncle's slaves to provide him with pine knots in exchange for reading lessons; Thomas would stay up at night reading borrowed books by the light of those burning pine knots. Virginia law forbade teaching a slave, free black or mulatto to read or write; nevertheless, Jackson secretly taught the slave, as he had promised. Once literate, the young slave fled to Canada via the Underground Railroad .

[ 18 ] In his later years at Jackson's Mill, Thomas served as a schoolteacher.

First lieutenant Thomas J. Jackson sometime after West Point graduation in the late 1840s Brother against sister The Civil War has sometimes been referred to as a war of "brother against brother", but in the case of the Jackson family, it was brother against sister. Laura Jackson Arnold was close to her brother Thomas until the Civil War period. As the war loomed, she became a staunch Unionist in a somewhat divided Harrison County . She was so strident in her beliefs that she expressed mixed feelings upon hearing of Thomas's death. One Union officer said that she seemed depressed at hearing the news, but her Unionism was stronger than her family bonds. In a letter, he wrote that Laura had said that she "would rather know that he was dead than to have him a leader in the rebel army". Her Union sentiment also estranged her later from her husband, Jonathan Arnold.

[ 19 ] Early military career Main article: Military career of Stonewall Jackson West Point In 1842, Jackson was accepted to the United States Military Academy at West Point , New York. Because of his inadequate schooling, he had difficulty with the entrance examinations and began his studies at the bottom of his class. Displaying a dogged determination that was to characterize his life, he became one of the hardest working cadets in the academy, and moved steadily up the academic rankings. Jackson graduated 17th out of 59 students in the Class of 1846.

[ 20 ] General Daniel Harvey Hill later remembered that Jackson's peers at West Point had said of Jackson, "If the course had been one year longer he would have graduated at the head of his class".

[ 21 ] U.S. Army and the Mexican War Jackson began his United States Army career as a second lieutenant in Company K of the 1st U.S. Artillery Regiment. His unit proceeded through Pennsylvania, down the Ohio and Mississippi Rivers to New Orleans, and from there the troops embarked for Point Isabel, Texas, from where they were sent to fight in the Mexican–American War . Jackson's unit was directed to report to General Taylor and proceed immediately via Matamoros and Camargo to Monterey and then to Saltillo. Prior to the Battle of Buena Vista, Lieutenant Jackson's unit was ordered to withdraw from General Taylor's army and march to the mouth of the Rio Grande, where they would be transferred to Veracruz. He served at the Siege of Veracruz and the battles of Contreras , Chapultepec , and Mexico City , eventually earning two brevet promotions , and the regular army rank of first lieutenant . It was in Mexico that Jackson first met Robert E. Lee .

During the Battle of Chapultepec on September 13, 1847, he refused what he felt was a "bad order" to withdraw his troops. Confronted by his superior, he explained his rationale, claiming withdrawal was more hazardous than continuing his overmatched artillery duel. His judgment proved correct, and a relieving brigade was able to exploit the advantage Jackson had broached. In contrast to this display of strength of character, he obeyed what he also felt was a "bad order" when he raked a civilian throng with artillery fire after the Mexican authorities failed to surrender Mexico City at the hour demanded by the U.S. forces.

[ 22 ] The former episode, and later aggressive action against the retreating Mexican army, earned him field promotion to the brevet rank of major.

[ 20 ] After the war, Jackson was briefly assigned to units in New York, and later to Florida during the Second Interbellum of the Seminole Wars , during which the Americans were attempting to force the remaining Seminoles to move west. He was stationed briefly at Fort Casey before being named second-in-command at Fort Meade , a small fort about thirty miles south of Tampa .

[ 23 ] His commanding officer was Major William H. French . Jackson and French disagreed often, and filed numerous complaints against each other. Jackson stayed in Florida less than a year.

[ 24 ] Lexington and the Virginia Military Institute Stonewall Jackson In the spring of 1851, [ 25 ] Jackson accepted a newly created teaching position at the Virginia Military Institute (VMI). He became Professor of Natural and Experimental Philosophy, or Physics, and Instructor of Artillery.

Jackson was disliked as a teacher, with his students nicknaming him "Tom Fool", believing that Jackson "could never be anything more than a martinet colonel, half soldier and half preacher".

[ 26 ] He memorized his lectures and then recited them to the class. Students who came to ask for help were given the same explanation as before. If a student asked for help a second time, Jackson simply repeated the explanation slower and more deliberately.

[ 27 ] In 1856, a group of alumni attempted to have Jackson removed from his position.

[ 28 ] The founder of VMI and one of its first two faculty members was John Thomas Lewis Preston . Preston's second wife, Margaret Junkin Preston , was the sister of Jackson's first wife, Elinor . In addition to working together on the VMI faculty, Preston taught Sunday School with Jackson and served on his staff during the Civil War.

[ 29 ] Slavery Stonewall Jackson in 1855 Jackson was not known to the white inhabitants of Lexington, instead mostly being known by many of the African Americans in town, both slaves and free blacks.

[ 30 ] In 1855, he organized Sunday School classes for blacks at the Presbyterian Church. His second wife, Mary Anna Jackson , taught with Jackson, as "he preferred that my labors should be given to the colored children, believing that it was more important and useful to put the strong hand of the Gospel under the ignorant African race, to lift them up".

[ 31 ] The pastor, Dr. William Spottswood White, described the relationship between Jackson and his Sunday afternoon students: "In their religious instruction he succeeded wonderfully. His discipline was systematic and firm, but very kind. ... His servants reverenced and loved him, as they would have done a brother or father. ... He was emphatically the black man's friend." He addressed his students by name and they referred to him as "Marse Major".

[ 32 ] Jackson owned six slaves in the late 1850s. Three (Hetty, Cyrus, and George, a mother and two teenage sons) were received as part of the dowry at his marriage to Mary Anna Jackson.

[ 33 ] Another slave, Albert, requested that Jackson purchase him and allow him to work for his freedom; he was employed as a waiter in one of the Lexington hotels and Jackson rented him to VMI. Amy also requested that Jackson purchase her from a public slave auction and she served the family as a cook and housekeeper. The sixth, Emma, was a four-year-old orphan with a learning disability , accepted by Jackson from an aged widow and presented to his second wife, Mary Anna, as a welcome-home gift.

[ 34 ] After Jackson was shot at Chancellorsville, a slave "Jim Lewis, had stayed with Jackson in the small house as he lay dying".

[ 35 ] Mary Anna Jackson, in her 1895 memoir, said, "our servants ... without the firm guidance and restraint of their master, the excitement of the times proved so demoralizing to them that he deemed it best for me to provide them with good homes among the permanent residents".

[ 36 ] James Robertson wrote about Jackson's view on slavery: Jackson neither apologized for nor spoke in favor of the practice of slavery. He probably opposed the institution. Yet in his mind the Creator had sanctioned slavery, and man had no moral right to challenge its existence. The good Christian slaveholder was one who treated his servants fairly and humanely at all times.

[ 37 ] Marriages and family life House owned by Stonewall Jackson in Lexington While an instructor at VMI in 1853, Thomas Jackson married Elinor "Ellie" Junkin , whose father, George Junkin , was president of Washington College (later named Washington and Lee University ) in Lexington. An addition was built onto the president's residence for the Jacksons, and when Robert E. Lee became president of Washington College he lived in the same home, now known as the Lee–Jackson House.

[ 38 ] Ellie gave birth to a stillborn son on October 22, 1854, experiencing a hemorrhage an hour later that proved fatal.

[ 39 ] After a tour of Europe, Jackson married again, in 1857.

Mary Anna Morrison was from North Carolina, where her father was the first president of Davidson College . Her sister, Isabella Morrison, was married to Daniel Harvey Hill . Mary Anna had a daughter named Mary Graham on April 30, 1858, but the baby died less than a month later. Another daughter was born in 1862, shortly before her father's death. The Jacksons named her Julia Laura, after his mother and sister.

Jackson purchased the only house he ever owned while in Lexington. Built in 1801, the brick town house at 8 East Washington Street was purchased by Jackson in 1859. He lived in it for two years before being called to serve in the Confederacy. Jackson never returned to his home.

John Brown raid aftermath In November 1859, at the request of the governor of Virginia , Major William Gilham led a contingent of the VMI Cadet Corps to Charles Town to provide an additional military presence at the hanging of militant abolitionist John Brown on December 2, following his raid on the federal arsenal at Harpers Ferry on October 16. Major Jackson was placed in command of the artillery, consisting of two howitzers manned by twenty-one cadets.

Civil War The Colonel Lewis T. Moore house, which served as the Winchester Headquarters of Lt. Gen.

T. J. "Stonewall" Jackson (photo 2007) In April 1861, after Virginia seceded from the Union and as the American Civil War broke out, Jackson was ordered by the Governor of Virginia to report with the VMI cadet corps to Richmond and await further orders. Upon arrival, Jackson was appointed a Major of Engineers in the Provisional Army of Virginia , which was a short lived force commanded by Robert E. Lee , prior to Virginia fully augmenting into forces of the Confederacy. After Jackson protested such a low rank, the Virginia Governor appointed him a Colonel of Virginia Infantry which in May 1861 was augmented to a Colonel in the Confederate Army . Jackson then became a drill master for some of the many new recruits in the Confederate Army .

On April 27, 1861, Virginia Governor John Letcher ordered Colonel Jackson to take command at Harpers Ferry, where he would assemble and command the unit which later gained fame as the " Stonewall Brigade ", consisting of the 2nd, 4th, 5th, 27th, and 33rd Virginia Infantry regiments. These units were from the Shenandoah Valley region of Virginia, where Jackson located his headquarters throughout the first two years of the war, as well as counties in western Virginia .

[ 40 ] Jackson became known for his relentless drilling of his troops; he believed discipline was vital to success on the battlefield. Following raids on the B&O Railroad on May 24, he was promoted to brigadier general on June 17, 1861. Jackson continued to wear a blue Union Army uniform up to this point, having only access to his old VMI major's jacket, and would not be issued with a gray Confederate uniform until 1862.

[ 41 ] First Battle of Bull Run Main article: Winchester, Virginia in the American Civil War General Jackson by Augusto Ferrer-Dalmau Jackson rose to prominence and earned his most famous nickname at the First Battle of Bull Run (First Manassas) on July 21, 1861. As the Confederate lines began to crumble under heavy Union assault, Jackson's brigade provided crucial reinforcements on Henry House Hill, demonstrating the discipline he instilled in his men. While under heavy fire for several continuous hours, Jackson received a wound, breaking the middle finger of his left hand about midway between the hand and knuckle, the ball passing on the side next to the index finger. The troops of South Carolina, commanded by Gen.

Barnard E. Bee had been overwhelmed, and he rode up to Jackson in despair, exclaiming, "They are beating us back!" "Then," said Jackson, "we will give them the bayonet!" As he rode back to his command, Bee exhorted his own troops to re-form by shouting, "There is Jackson standing like a stone wall. Let us determine to die here, and we will conquer. Rally behind the Virginians!" [ 42 ] There is some controversy over Bee's statement and intent, which could not be clarified because he was killed almost immediately after speaking and none of his subordinate officers wrote reports of the battle. Major Burnett Rhett, chief of staff to General Joseph E. Johnston , claimed that Bee was angry at Jackson's failure to come immediately to the relief of Bee's and Francis S. Bartow 's brigades while they were under heavy pressure. Those who subscribe to this opinion believe that Bee's statement was meant to be pejorative: "Look at Jackson standing there like a stone wall!" [ 43 ] Regardless of the controversy and the delay in relieving Bee, Jackson's brigade, which would thenceforth be known as the Stonewall Brigade , stopped the Union assault and suffered more casualties than any other Southern brigade that day; Jackson has since then been generally known as Stonewall Jackson.

[ 44 ] During the battle, Jackson displayed a gesture common to him and held his left arm skyward with the palm facing forward – interpreted by his soldiers variously as an eccentricity or an entreaty to God for success in combat. His hand was struck by a bullet or a piece of shrapnel and he suffered a small loss of bone in his middle finger. He refused medical advice to have the finger amputated.

[ 45 ] After the battle, Jackson was promoted to major general (October 7, 1861) [ 41 ] and given command of the Valley District , with headquarters in Winchester .

Valley Campaign Further information: Valley Campaign This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( April 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In the spring of 1862, Union Maj. Gen.

George B. McClellan 's Army of the Potomac approached Richmond from the southeast in the Peninsula Campaign . Maj. Gen.

Irvin McDowell 's large corps was poised to hit Richmond from the north, and Maj. Gen.

Nathaniel P. Banks 's army threatened the Shenandoah Valley. Jackson was ordered by Richmond to operate in the Valley to defeat Banks's threat and prevent McDowell's troops from reinforcing McClellan.

Jackson possessed the attributes to succeed against his poorly coordinated and sometimes timid opponents: a combination of great audacity, excellent knowledge and shrewd use of the terrain, and an uncommon ability to inspire his troops to great feats of marching and fighting.

Historical marker marking the end of Gen. Stonewall Jackson's pursuit of the Federals after the Battle of McDowell, May 12, 1862 The campaign started with a tactical defeat at Kernstown on March 23, 1862, when faulty intelligence led him to believe he was attacking a small detachment. But it became a strategic victory for the Confederacy, because his aggressiveness suggested that he possessed a much larger force, convincing President Abraham Lincoln to keep Banks' troops in the Valley and McDowell's 30,000-man corps near Fredericksburg , subtracting about 50,000 soldiers from McClellan's invasion force. As it transpired, it was Jackson's only defeat in the Valley.

By adding Maj. Gen.

Richard S. Ewell 's large division and Maj. Gen.

Edward "Allegheny" Johnson's small division, Jackson increased his army to 17,000 men. He was still significantly outnumbered, but attacked portions of his divided enemy individually at McDowell , defeating both Brig. Gens.

Robert H. Milroy and Robert C. Schenck . He defeated Banks at Front Royal and Winchester , ejecting him from the Valley. Lincoln decided that the defeat of Jackson was an immediate priority (though Jackson's orders were solely to keep Union forces occupied and away from Richmond). He ordered Irvin McDowell to send 20,000 men to Front Royal and Maj. Gen.

John C. Frémont to move to Harrisonburg . If both forces could converge at Strasburg, Jackson's only escape route up the Valley would be cut.

After a series of maneuvers, Jackson defeated Frémont's command at Cross Keys and Brig. Gen.

James Shields at Port Republic on June 8–9. Union forces were withdrawn from the Valley.

It was a classic military campaign of surprise and maneuver. Jackson pressed his army to travel 646 miles (1,040 km) in 48 days of marching and won five significant victories with a force of about 17,000 against a combined force of 60,000. Stonewall Jackson's reputation for moving his troops so rapidly earned them the oxymoronic nickname " foot cavalry ". He became the most celebrated soldier in the Confederacy (until he was eventually eclipsed by Lee) and lifted the morale of the Southern public.

Peninsula McClellan's Peninsula Campaign toward Richmond stalled at the Battle of Seven Pines on May 31 and June 1. After the Valley Campaign ended in mid-June, Jackson and his troops were called to join Robert E. Lee 's Army of Northern Virginia in defense of the capital. By using a railroad tunnel under the Blue Ridge Mountains and then transporting troops to Hanover County on the Virginia Central Railroad , Jackson and his forces made a surprise appearance in front of McClellan at Mechanicsville . Reports had last placed Jackson's forces in the Shenandoah Valley; their presence near Richmond added greatly to the Union commander's overestimation of the strength and numbers of the forces before him. This proved a crucial factor in McClellan's decision to re-establish his base at a point many miles downstream from Richmond on the James River at Harrison's Landing, essentially a retreat that ended the Peninsula Campaign and prolonged the war almost three more years.

Jackson's troops served well under Lee in the series of battles known as the Seven Days Battles , but Jackson's own performance in those battles is generally considered to be poor.

[ 46 ] He arrived late at Mechanicsville and inexplicably ordered his men to bivouac for the night within clear earshot of the battle. He was late at Savage's Station . At White Oak Swamp he failed to employ fording places to cross White Oak Swamp Creek, attempting for hours to rebuild a bridge, which limited his involvement to an ineffectual artillery duel and a missed opportunity to intervene decisively at the Battle of Glendale , which was raging nearby. At Malvern Hill Jackson participated in the futile, piecemeal frontal assaults against entrenched Union infantry and massed artillery, and suffered heavy casualties (but this was a problem for all of Lee's army in that ill-considered battle). The reasons for Jackson's sluggish and poorly coordinated actions during the Seven Days are disputed, although a severe lack of sleep after the grueling march and railroad trip from the Shenandoah Valley was probably a significant factor. Both Jackson and his troops were completely exhausted. An explanation for this and other lapses by Jackson was tersely offered by his colleague and brother in-law General Daniel Harvey Hill: "Jackson's genius never shone when he was under the command of another." [ 47 ] Second Bull Run to Fredericksburg Jackson and Little Sorrel , painting by David Bendann Montage of Thomas J. Jackson and staff The military reputations of Lee's corps commanders are often characterized as Stonewall Jackson representing the audacious, offensive component of Lee's army, whereas his counterpart, James Longstreet , more typically advocated and executed defensive strategies and tactics. Jackson has been described as the army's hammer, Longstreet its anvil.

[ 48 ] In the Northern Virginia Campaign of August 1862 this stereotype did not hold true. Longstreet commanded the Right Wing (later to become known as the First Corps) and Jackson commanded the Left Wing. Jackson started the campaign under Lee's orders with a sweeping flanking maneuver that placed his corps into the rear of Union Maj. Gen.

John Pope 's Army of Virginia . The Hotchkiss journal shows that Jackson, most likely, originally conceived the movement. In the journal entries for March 4 and 6, 1863, General Stuart tells Hotchkiss that "Jackson was entitled to all the credit" for the movement and that Lee thought the proposed movement "very hazardous" and "reluctantly consented" to the movement.

[ 49 ] At Manassas Junction, Jackson was able to capture all of the supplies of the Union Army depot. Then he had his troops destroy all of it, for it was the main depot for the Union Army. Jackson then retreated and then took up a defensive position and effectively invited Pope to assault him. On August 28–29, the start of the Second Battle of Bull Run (Second Manassas), Pope launched repeated assaults against Jackson as Longstreet and the remainder of the army marched north to reach the battlefield.

On August 30, Pope came to believe that Jackson was starting to retreat, and Longstreet took advantage of this by launching a massive assault on the Union army's left with over 25,000 men. Although the Union troops put up a furious defense, Pope's army was forced to retreat in a manner similar to the embarrassing Union defeat at First Bull Run, fought on roughly the same battleground.

When Lee decided to invade the North in the Maryland Campaign , Jackson took Harpers Ferry , then hastened to join the rest of the army at Sharpsburg, Maryland , where they fought McClellan in the Battle of Antietam (Sharpsburg). Antietam was primarily a defensive battle against superior odds, although McClellan failed to exploit his advantage. Jackson's men bore the brunt of the initial attacks on the northern end of the battlefield and, at the end of the day, successfully resisted a breakthrough on the southern end when Jackson's subordinate, Maj. Gen.

A. P. Hill , arrived at the last minute from Harpers Ferry. The Confederate forces held their position, but the battle was extremely bloody for both sides, and Lee withdrew the Army of Northern Virginia back across the Potomac River , ending the invasion. On October 10, Jackson was promoted to lieutenant general , being ranked just behind Lee and Longstreet and his command was redesignated the Second Corps.

Before the armies camped for winter, Jackson's Second Corps held off a strong Union assault against the right flank of the Confederate line at the Battle of Fredericksburg , in what became a Confederate victory. Just before the battle, Jackson was delighted to receive a letter about the birth of his daughter, Julia Laura Jackson, on November 23.

[ 50 ] Also before the battle, Maj. Gen.

J. E. B. Stuart , Lee's dashing and well-dressed cavalry commander, presented to Jackson a fine general's frock coat that he had ordered from one of the best tailors in Richmond. Jackson's previous coat was threadbare and colorless from exposure to the elements, its buttons removed by admiring ladies. Jackson asked his staff to thank Stuart, saying that although the coat was too handsome for him, he would cherish it as a souvenir. His staff insisted that he wear it to dinner, which caused scores of soldiers to rush to see him in uncharacteristic garb. Jackson was so embarrassed with the attention that he did not wear the new uniform for months.

[ 51 ] Chancellorsville Main article: Battle of Chancellorsville At the Battle of Chancellorsville , the Army of Northern Virginia faced a serious threat by the Army of the Potomac , led by its new commanding general, Major General Joseph Hooker .  Lee decided to employ a risky tactic to take the initiative and offensive away from Hooker's new southern thrust – he decided to divide his forces. Jackson and his entire corps went on an aggressive flanking maneuver to the right of the Union lines. While riding with his infantry in a wide berth well south and west of the Federal line of battle, Jackson employed Maj. Gen.

Fitzhugh Lee 's cavalry to provide for better reconnaissance regarding the exact location of the Union right and rear. The results were far better than even Jackson could have hoped. Fitzhugh Lee found the entire right side of the Federal lines in the middle of open field, guarded merely by two guns that faced westward, as well as the supplies and rear encampments. The men were eating and playing games in carefree fashion, completely unaware that an entire Confederate corps was less than a mile away. What happened next is given in Fitzhugh Lee's own words: [ citation needed ] Jackson's "Chancellorsville" portrait, taken at a Spotsylvania County farm on April 26, 1863, seven days before he was mortally wounded in the Battle of Chancellorsville Lower right photograph of trees shattered by artillery shells near where Jackson was shot on Orange Plank Road So impressed was I with my discovery, that I rode rapidly back to the point on the Plank road where I had left my cavalry, and back down the road Jackson was moving, until I met "Stonewall" himself. "General", said I, "if you will ride with me, halting your column here, out of sight, I will show you the enemy's right, and you will perceive the great advantage of attacking down the Old turnpike instead of the Plank road, the enemy's lines being taken in reverse. Bring only one courier, as you will be in view from the top of the hill." Jackson assented, and I rapidly conducted him to the point of observation. There had been no change in the picture.
I only knew Jackson slightly. I watched him closely as he gazed upon Howard's troops. It was then about 2 pm. His eyes burned with a brilliant glow, lighting up a sad face. His expression was one of intense interest, his face was colored slightly with the paint of approaching battle, and radiant at the success of his flank movement. To the remarks made to him while the unconscious line of blue was pointed out, he did not reply once during the five minutes he was on the hill, and yet his lips were moving. From what I have read and heard of Jackson since that day, I know now what he was doing then. Oh! "beware of rashness", General Hooker. Stonewall Jackson is praying in full view and in rear of your right flank! While talking to the Great God of Battles, how could he hear what a poor cavalryman was saying. "Tell General Rodes", said he, suddenly whirling his horse towards the courier, "to move across the Old plank road; halt when he gets to the Old turnpike, and I will join him there." One more look upon the Federal lines, and then he rode rapidly down the hill, his arms flapping to the motion of his horse, over whose head it seemed, good rider as he was, he would certainly go. I expected to be told I had made a valuable personal reconnaissance—saving the lives of many soldiers, and that Jackson was indebted to me to that amount at least. Perhaps I might have been a little chagrined at Jackson's silence, and hence commented inwardly and adversely upon his horsemanship. Alas! I had looked upon him for the last time.

— Fitzhugh Lee, address to the Association of the Army of Northern Virginia, 1879 Jackson immediately returned to his corps and arranged his divisions into a line of battle to charge directly into the oblivious Federal right. The Confederates marched silently until they were merely several hundred feet from the Union position, then released a cry and full charge. Many of the Federal soldiers were captured without a shot fired, the rest were driven into a full rout. Jackson pursued back toward the center of the Federal line until dusk.

[ citation needed ] As Jackson and his staff were returning to camp on May 2, sentries of the 18th North Carolina Infantry Regiment mistook the group for a Union cavalry force. The sentries shouted "Halt, who goes there?", but fired before evaluating the reply; frantic shouts by Jackson's staff identifying the party were replied to by Major John D. Barry with the retort, "It's a damned Yankee trick! Fire!" [ 52 ] A second volley was fired in response. Jackson was hit by three bullets: two in the left arm and one in the right hand. Several of Jackson's men and many horses were killed in the attack. Incoming artillery rounds and darkness led to confusion, and Jackson was dropped from his stretcher while being evacuated. Surgeon Hunter McGuire amputated Jackson's left arm , and Jackson was moved to Fairfield plantation at Guinea Station . Thomas Chandler, the owner, offered the use of his home for Jackson's treatment, but Jackson suggested using Chandler's plantation office building instead.

[ 53 ] Death The plantation office building where Stonewall Jackson died in Guinea Station, Virginia Confederate General Robert E. Lee wrote Jackson after learning of Jackson's injuries, stating: "Could I have directed events, I would have chosen for the good of the country to be disabled in your stead." [ 54 ] Jackson died of complications from pneumonia on May 10, 1863, eight days after he was shot.

Dr. McGuire wrote an account of Jackson's final hours and last words: A few moments before he died he cried out in his delirium, 'Order A.P. Hill to prepare for action! Pass the infantry to the front rapidly! Tell Major Hawks—' then stopped, leaving the sentence unfinished. Presently a smile of ineffable sweetness spread itself over his pale face, and he said quietly, and with an expression, as if of relief, 'Let us cross over the river, and rest under the shade of the trees.' [ 55 ] Jackson's fatal bullet was withdrawn, examined, and found to be 67 caliber (0.67 inches, 17 mm), a type in service with the Confederate forces; Union troops in the area were using 58 caliber balls. This was one of the first instances of forensic ballistics identification derived from a firearm projectile.

[ 56 ] His body was moved to the Governor's Mansion in Richmond for the public to mourn, and he was then moved to be buried in Oak Grove Cemetery in Lexington, Virginia . The arm that was amputated on May 2 was buried separately by Jackson's chaplain (Beverly Tucker Lacy), at the J. Horace Lacy house, "Ellwood" , (now preserved at the Fredericksburg National Battlefield) in the Wilderness of Orange County , near the field hospital.

[ 57 ] Jackson's body was buried in "ordinary dress," but wearing a military coat. His coffin was draped with a Confederate flag and had a glass plate so that his face could be seen during public mourning. His funeral proceeded with great pomp: all pallbearers were generals (including James Longstreet ), four white horses pulled the hearse, and a crowd two miles long followed the procession. In the course of public mourning, 20,000 people visited the body.

[ 58 ] Upon hearing of Jackson's death, Robert E. Lee mourned the loss of both a friend and a trusted commander. As Jackson lay dying, Lee sent a message through Chaplain Lacy, saying: "Give General Jackson my affectionate regards, and say to him: he has lost his left arm but I my right." [ 59 ] The night Lee learned of Jackson's death, he told his cook: "William, I have lost my right arm", and, "I'm bleeding at the heart." [ 60 ] Harper's Weekly reported Jackson's death on May 23, 1863, as follows: DEATH OF STONEWALL JACKSON.

General "Stonewall" Jackson was badly wounded in the arm at the battles of Chancellorsville, and had his arm amputated. Jackson initially appeared to be healing, but he died from pneumonia on May 10, 1863.

[ 61 ] Personal life Jackson's sometimes unusual command style and personality traits, combined with his frequent success in battle, contribute to his legacy as one of the greatest generals of the Civil War.

[ 62 ] He was martial and stern in attitude and profoundly religious, a deacon in the Presbyterian Church . One of his many nicknames was "Old Blue Lights", [ 63 ] a term applied to a military man whose evangelical zeal burned with the intensity of the blue light used for night-time display.

[ 64 ] Physical ailments Jackson held a lifelong belief that one of his arms was longer than the other, and thus usually held the "longer" arm up to equalize his circulation. He was described as a "champion sleeper", and occasionally even fell asleep with food in his mouth. Jackson suffered a number of ailments, for which he sought relief via contemporary practices of his day including hydrotherapy , popular in America at that time, visiting establishments at Oswego, New York (1850) and Round Hill, Massachusetts (1860) although with little evidence of success.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] Jackson also suffered a significant hearing loss in both of his ears as a result of his prior service in the U.S. Army as an artillery officer.

A recurring story concerns Jackson's love of lemons, which he allegedly gnawed whole to alleviate symptoms of dyspepsia (indigestion). General Richard Taylor , son of President Zachary Taylor , wrote a passage in his war memoirs about Jackson eating lemons: "Where Jackson got his lemons 'no fellow could find out,' but he was rarely without one." [ 67 ] However, recent research by his biographer, James I. Robertson, Jr.

, has found that none of Jackson's contemporaries, including members of his staff, his friends, or his wife, recorded any unusual obsessions with lemons. Jackson thought of a lemon as a "rare treat ... enjoyed greatly whenever it could be obtained from the enemy's camp". Jackson was fond of all fruits, particularly peaches, "but he enjoyed with relish lemons, oranges, watermelons, apples, grapes, berries, or whatever was available".

[ 68 ] Religion Jackson's religion has often been discussed. His biographer, Robert Lewis Dabney , suggested that "It was the fear of God which made him so fearless of all else." [ 69 ] Jackson himself had said, "My religious belief teaches me to feel as safe in battle as in bed." [ 70 ] Prayer in "Stonewall" Jackson's camp , 1866 Stephen W. Sears states that "Jackson was fanatical in his Presbyterian faith, and it energized his military thought and character. Theology was the only subject he genuinely enjoyed discussing. His dispatches invariably credited an ever-kind Providence ." According to Sears, "this fanatical religiosity had drawbacks. It warped Jackson's judgment of men, leading to poor appointments; it was said he preferred good Presbyterians to good soldiers." [ 71 ] James I. Robertson, Jr.

suggests that Jackson was "a Christian soldier in every sense of the word". According to Robertson, Jackson "thought of the war as a religious crusade", and "viewed himself as an Old Testament warrior—like David or Joshua —who went into battle to slay the Philistines ".

[ 72 ] Jackson encouraged the Confederate States Army revival that occurred in 1863, [ 73 ] although it was probably more of a grass-roots movement than a top-down revival.

[ 74 ] Jackson strictly observed the Sunday Sabbath.

James I. Robertson, Jr.

notes that "no place existed in his Sunday schedule for labor, newspapers, or secular conversation".

[ 75 ] Command style A portrait of Stonewall Jackson (1864, J. W. King) in the National Portrait Gallery In command, Jackson was extremely secretive about his plans and extremely meticulous about military discipline. This secretive nature did not stand him in good stead with his subordinates, who were often not aware of his overall operational intentions until the last minute, and who complained of being left out of key decisions.

[ 76 ] Robert E. Lee could trust Jackson with deliberately undetailed orders that conveyed Lee's overall objectives, what modern doctrine calls the "end state". This was because Jackson had a talent for understanding Lee's sometimes unstated goals, and Lee trusted Jackson with the ability to take whatever actions were necessary to implement his end state requirements. Few of Lee's subsequent corps commanders had this ability. At Gettysburg, this resulted in lost opportunities. With a defeated and disorganized Union Army trying to regroup on high ground near town and vulnerable, Lee sent one of his new corps commanders, Richard S. Ewell , discretionary orders that the heights ( Cemetery Hill and Culp's Hill ) be taken "if practicable". Without Jackson's intuitive grasp of Lee's orders or the instinct to take advantage of sudden tactical opportunities, Ewell chose not to attempt the assault, and this failure is considered by historians to be the greatest missed opportunity of the battle.

[ 77 ] Horsemanship Jackson had a poor reputation as a horseman. One of his soldiers, Georgia volunteer William Andrews, wrote that Jackson was "a very ordinary looking man of medium size, his uniform badly soiled as though it had seen hard service. He wore a cap pulled down nearly to his nose and was riding a rawboned horse that did not look much like a charger, unless it would be on hay or clover. He certainly made a poor figure on a horseback, with his stirrup leather six inches too short, putting his knees nearly level with his horse's back, and his heels turned out with his toes sticking behind his horse's foreshoulder. A sorry description of our most famous general, but a correct one." [ 78 ] His horse was named "Little Sorrel" (also known as "Old Sorrel"), a small chestnut gelding which was a captured Union horse from a Connecticut farm.

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] He rode Little Sorrel throughout the war, and was riding him when he was shot at Chancellorsville. Little Sorrel died at age 36 and is buried near a statue of Jackson on the parade grounds of VMI. (His mounted hide is on display in the VMI Museum.) [ 81 ] Mourning his death General Lee's Last Visit to Stonewall Jackson's Grave , painting by Louis Eckhardt , 1872 After the war, Jackson's wife and young daughter Julia moved from Lexington to North Carolina.

Mary Anna Jackson wrote [ 82 ] two books about her husband's life, including some of his letters. She never remarried, and was known as the "Widow of the Confederacy", living until 1915. His daughter Julia married, and bore children, but she died of typhoid fever at the age of 26 years.

[ 83 ] Legacy Many theorists through the years have postulated that if Jackson had lived, Lee might have prevailed at Gettysburg .

[ 84 ] Certainly Jackson's discipline and tactical sense were sorely missed.

As a boy, General George Patton (of World War II fame) prayed next to two portraits of Robert E. Lee and Stonewall Jackson, whom he assumed were God and Jesus.

[ 85 ] He once told Dwight D. Eisenhower "I will be your Jackson." [ 86 ] General Douglas MacArthur called Robert L. Eichelberger his Stonewall Jackson.

[ 87 ] Chesty Puller idolized Jackson, and carried George Henderson 's biography of Jackson with him on campaigns.

[ 88 ] Alexander Vandegrift also idolized Jackson.

His last words, "Let us cross over the river, and rest under the shade of the trees" were the inspiration for the title of Ernest Hemingway 's 1950 novel Across the River and into the Trees .

Descendants Jackson's grandson and great-grandson, both namesakes, Thomas Jonathan Jackson Christian (1888–1952) and Thomas Jonathan Jackson Christian Jr.

(1915–1944), both graduated from West Point. The elder Christian was a career US Army officer who served during both World Wars and rose to the rank of brigadier general. Thomas Jonathan Jackson Christian's parents were William Edmund Christian and Julia Laura Christian. Julia was the daughter of Stonewall Jackson and his bride Mary Anna Morrison.

The younger Christian was a colonel in command of the 361st Fighter Group flying P-51 Mustangs in the European Theater of Operations in World War II when he was killed in action in August 1944; his personal aircraft, Lou IV , was one of the most photographed P-51s in the war.

[ 89 ] Commemorations Main article: List of memorials to Stonewall Jackson As an important element of the ideology of the " Lost Cause ", Jackson has been commemorated in numerous ways, including with statues, currency, and postage.

[ 5 ] A poem penned during the war soon became a popular song, " Stonewall Jackson's Way ". The Stonewall Brigade Band is still active today.

West Virginia 's Stonewall Jackson State Park is named in his honor. Nearby, at Stonewall Jackson's historical childhood home, his uncle's grist mill is the centerpiece of a historical site at the Jackson's Mill Center for Lifelong Learning and State 4-H Camp . The facility, located near Weston , serves as a special campus for West Virginia University and the WVU Extension Service.

During a training exercise in Virginia by U.S. Marines in 1921, the Marine commander, General Smedley Butler , was told by a local farmer that Stonewall Jackson's arm was buried nearby under a granite marker, to which Butler replied, "Bosh! I will take a squad of Marines and dig up that spot to prove you wrong!" [ 90 ] Butler found the arm in a box under the marker. He later replaced the wooden box with a metal one, and reburied the arm. He left a plaque on the granite monument marking the burial place of Jackson's arm; the plaque is no longer on the marker but can be viewed at the Chancellorsville Battlefield Visitor Center.

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] Beginning in 1904 the Commonwealth of Virginia celebrated Jackson's birthday as a state holiday ; the observance was eliminated, with Election Day as a replacement holiday, effective July 2020.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] Jackson is featured on the 1925 Stone Mountain Memorial half-dollar .

A Stonewall Jackson Monument was unveiled on October 11, 1919, [ 94 ] in Richmond, Virginia. It was removed on July 1, 2020, during the 2020–2021 United States racial unrest .

[ 95 ] [ 96 ] Robert E. Lee,  Stonewal Jackson and Stratford Hall, Army Issue of 1936 Portrait on the 1864 Confederate $500 banknote ; Jackson was the only general featured on Confederate currency [ 97 ] The 1863 sheet music The Stonewall Brigade, Dedicated to the Memory of Stonewall Jackson, the Immortal Southern Hero, and His Brave Veterans Jackson on an 1863 Confederate loan Davis, Lee, and Jackson on Stone Mountain The Thomas Jonathan Jackson sculpture in downtown Charlottesville, Virginia Statue of Jackson in downtown Clarksburg, West Virginia Bust of Jackson at the Washington-Wilkes Historical Museum The Stonewall Jackson Monument in Richmond, Virginia being removed in 2020 Jackson reading the Bible in a Confederate camp in a stained glass window of the Washington National Cathedral . The windows were removed in 2017.

[ 98 ] See also American Civil War portal Biography portal Virginia portal William B. Ebbert , 1st Lt., W. Virginia Infantry, Union Army. (1923 quote recalling battle of Winchester, March 1862) List of American Civil War generals (Confederate) Stonewall Jackson's Headquarters Museum List of memorials to Stonewall Jackson Stonewall Jackson's arm Removal of Confederate monuments and memorials Stonewall Brigade Notes ^ Eicher, High Commands , p. 316; Robertson, p. 7. The physician, Dr. James McCally, recalls delivering baby Thomas on January 20, 1809, just before midnight, but the family has insisted since then that he was born in the first minutes of January 21. The later date is the one generally acknowledged in biographies.

^ James I. Robertson, Stonewall Jackson: The Man, the Soldier, the Legend (1997).

^ Hamner, Christopher. " The Possible Path of Barnard Bee ." Teachinghistory.org . Accessed July 12, 2011.

^ "Stonewall Jackson Timeline" . Virginia Military Institute . Retrieved December 11, 2023 .

^ a b Wallace Hettle, Inventing Stonewall Jackson: A Civil War Hero in History and Memory (Louisiana State University Press, 2011) ^ Farwell,  p. xi, states that the overwhelmingly common usage of the middle name Jonathan was never documented and that Jackson did not acknowledge it; he instead used the signature form "T. J. Jackson." Robertson, p. 19, states that a county document on February 28, 1841, was the first recorded instance of Jackson's using a middle initial, although "whether it stood for his father Jonathan's name is not known." All of the other references to this article cite his full name as Thomas Jonathan Jackson.

^ Robertson, pp. 1–2.

^ Robertson, pp. 2–3.

^ Edward's second son was David Edward Jackson .

Talbot, Vivian Linford (1996).

David E. Jackson: Field Captain of the Rocky Mountain Fur Trade . Jackson Hole: Jackson Hole Historical Society and Museum. p. 17.

^ VMI Jackson genealogy site ; Robertson, p. 4.

^ Talbot, op. cit., p. 18 ^ "Jackson Family Genealogy" .

Virginia Military Institute . Retrieved September 4, 2018 .

^ "Was Stonewall Jackson born in Parkersburg? – NewsandSentinel.com | News, Sports, Jobs, Community Information – Parkersburg News and Sentinel" . NewsandSentinel.com . Retrieved September 12, 2013 .

^ Robertson, p. 7.

^ Robertson, p. 8.

^ Robertson, p. 10.

^ Robertson, pp. 9–16. Robertson refers to multiple bachelor uncles in residence at the mill, but does not name them.

^ Robertson, p. 17.

^ "Laura Jackson Arnold: Sister of General Thomas Jonathan Stonewall Jackon" .

Civil War Women Blog . November 29, 2010. Archived from the original on December 23, 2010 . Retrieved June 24, 2015 .

^ a b George Cullum.

"Register of Officers and Graduates of the United States Military Academy Class of 1846" . Retrieved November 1, 2014 .

^ Henderson, George Francis Robert (1898).

Stonewall Jackson and the American Civil War (1st ed.). Longmans, Green and Company. p. 69.

^ Robertson, p. 69.

^ Eiedson, George T. (June 13, 1993).

"Before He Was 'Stonewall,' Jackson Served in Florida" .

Orlando Sentinel . Retrieved August 8, 2016 .

^ Gwynne, S. C.

Rebel Yell: The Violence, Passion, and Redemption of Stonewall Jackson . New York: Scribner, 2014, pp. 110–18.

^ Robertson, pp. 108–10. He left the Army on March 21, 1851, but stayed on the rolls, officially on furlough, for nine months. His resignation took effect formally on February 2, 1852, and he joined the VMI faculty in August 1851.

^ Eggleston, George Cary (1875).

A Rebel's Recollections . Putnam. p. 152.

^ Vandiver, Frank E.

(1989).

Mighty Stonewall . Texas A&M University Press. p. 77.

ISBN 9780890963913 .

^ "Stonewall Jackson – Frequently Asked Questions – VMI Archives" .

Virginia Military Institute Archives . 2001. Archived from the original on December 31, 2006 . Retrieved September 7, 2015 .

^ Johnson, Clint (2002).

In the Footsteps of Stonewall Jackson . Winston-Salem, North Carolina: John F. Blair. p. 122.

ISBN 0-89587-244-7 .

^ Chisholm, Hugh (1910).

The Encyclopaedia Britannica : a dictionary of arts, sciences, literature and general information . Internet Archive. New York: Encyclopaedia Britannica. p. 110.

^ Jackson, Mary Anna, 1895 , p. 78 ^ Robertson, p. 169.

^ Knadler, Jessie (May 15, 2018).

"New Research Sheds Light On Slaves Owned By Stonewall Jackson" .

www.wvtf.org . Retrieved July 1, 2020 .

^ Robertson, pp. 191–92.

^ Palmer, Brian; Wessler, Seth Freed (December 2018).

"The Costs of the Confederacy" .

Smithsonian Magazine . Retrieved December 5, 2018 .

^ Jackson, 152.

^ Robertson, p. 191.

^ Isbell, Sherman.

"Archibald Alexander Travelogue" . Archived from the original on September 14, 2005 . Retrieved December 17, 2008 .

^ Robertson, p. 157.

^ Snell, Mark A., West Virginia and the Civil War , History Press, 2011, pg.45 ^ a b Eicher, High Commands , p. 316.

^ Freeman, Lee's Lieutenants , vol. 1, p. 82; Robertson, p. 264. McPherson, p. 342, reports the quotation after "stone wall" as being "Rally around the Virginians!" ^ See, for instance, Goldfield, David, et al., The American Journey: A History of the United States , Prentice Hall, 1999, ISBN 0-13-088243-7 . There are additional controversies about what Bee said and whether he said anything at all. See Freeman, Lee's Lieutenants , vol. 1, pp. 733–34.

^ McPherson, p. 342.

^ Robertson, pp. 263, 268.

^ See, for instance, Freeman, R.E. Lee , vol. 2, p.  247.

^ Henderson, George Francis Robert (1903).

Stonewall Jackson and the American Civil War . Vol. II. New York: Longmans, Green. p. 17.

OCLC 793450187 .

^ Wert, p. 206.

^ "Origin of the Movement Around Pope's Army of Virginia, August 1862 by Michael Collie. Retrieved September 27, 2017 [1] and Archie P. McDonald , ed., Make Me a Map of the Valley: the Civil War Journal of Jackson's Topographer, (Dallas 1973) pp. 117–18; and James I. Robertson, Jr., Stonewall Jackson: the Man, the Soldier, and the Legend, (New York 1997) p. 547, n130 p. 887 ^ Robertson, p. 645.

^ Robertson, p. 630.

^ Foote, Shelby, The Civil War: A Narrative, Vol. 2 ^ Apperson, p. 430.

^ Robertson, p. 739 ^ McGuire, pp. 162–63.

^ Grieve, Taylor Nicole (2013).

Objective Analysis of Toolmarks in Forensics (MS thesis thesis). Iowa State University. p. 6.

hdl : 20.500.12876/27203 .

Archived from the original on May 1, 2019.

^ Sorensen, James. " Stonewall Jackson's Arm Archived January 15, 2012, at the Wayback Machine " American Heritage , April/May 2005.

^ jackson, mary (1895).

"Memoirs of Stonewall Jackson by his widow, Mary Anna Jackson" .

^ Robertson, p. 746.

^ Hall, Kenneth (2005).

Stonewall Jackson and religious faith in military command . McFarland.

ISBN 978-0786420858 .

^ "Death of Stonewall Jackson" , Harpers Weekly , May 23, 1863 ^ "Stonewall Jackson: Popular Questions" . Virginia Military Institute . Retrieved May 6, 2009 .

^ "Stonewall Jackson's Way" . Retrieved December 24, 2011 .

^ Gareth Atkins, review of Evangelicals in the Royal Navy, 1775–1815: Blue Lights and Psalm-Singers by Richard Blake (review no. 799). Retrieved December 24, 2011, at www.history.ac.uk/reviews/review/799 ^ Cartmell, Donald (2001). "The Legend of Stonewall".

The Civil War Book of Lists . Franklin Lakes, New Jersey: The Career Press Inc. pp.

187– 92.

ISBN 1-56414-504-2 .

^ Samaritan Medical Center (September 2008). "Stonewall Jackson and the Henderson Hydropath".

in Samaritan Medical Center Newsletter (PDF) . Vol. 42. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 7, 2020 . Retrieved December 13, 2009 .

^ Taylor, p. 50 ^ Robertson, p. xi.

^ Dabney, Robert L.

"True Courage: A Memorial Sermon for General Thomas J. "Stone-wall Jackson" (PDF) . Retrieved February 26, 2013 .

^ Selby, John Millin (2000).

Stonewall Jackson As Military Commander . p. 25.

^ Sears, Stephen W.

(March 16, 1997).

"Onward, Christian Soldier" .

The New York Times . Retrieved February 26, 2013 .

^ White, Davin (October 15, 2010).

"Stonewall Jackson biographer says religion drove Civil War general" .

The Charleston Gazette . Archived from the original on April 12, 2013 . Retrieved February 26, 2013 .

^ Duewel, Wesley L. (2010).

Revival Fire .

Zondervan . p. 128.

ISBN 978-0310877097 .

^ Summers, Mark.

"The Great Harvest: Revival in the Confederate Army during the Civil War" .

Religion & Liberty .

21 (3) . Retrieved February 26, 2013 .

^ Robertson, James I .

"Stonewall Jackson: Christian Soldier" (PDF) . Virginia Center for Civil War Studies. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 28, 2013 . Retrieved February 26, 2013 .

^ Robertson, p. xiv.

^ Pfanz, p. 344; Eicher, Longest Night , p. 517; Sears, p. 228; Trudeau, p. 253. Both Sears and Trudeau record "if possible".

^ Robertson, p. 499.

^ Robertson, p. 230.

^ "Little Sorrel, Connecticut's Confederate War Horse" . ConnecticutHistory.org . Retrieved September 12, 2013 .

^ "Little Sorrel Buried at VMI July 20, 1997" Archived October 20, 2016, at the Wayback Machine ; Robertson, p. 922, n. 16.

^ Jackson, Mary Anna, Jackson Memoirs, 1895 ^ "Stonewall Jackson FAQ – Virginia Military Institute Archives" .

www.vmi.edu . Retrieved January 5, 2020 .

^ See, for instance, Sears, Gettysburg , pp. 233–34. Alternative theories about Gettysburg are prominent ideas in the literature about the Lost Cause .

^ Robert H. Patton, The Pattons: A Personal History of an American Family (New York: Crown Publishers, 1994), 90.

^ Matthew F. Holland (2001).

Eisenhower Between the Wars: The Making of a General and Statesman . Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 98–.

ISBN 978-0-275-96340-8 .

^ Major Matthew H. Fath (2015).

Eichelberger – Intrepidity, Iron Will, And Intellect: General Robert L. Eichelberger And Military Genius . Verdun Press. pp. 21–.

ISBN 978-1-78625-238-8 .

^ Major Mickey L. Quintrall USAF (2015).

The Chesty Puller Paragon: Leadership Dogma Or Model Doctrine?

. Lucknow Books. pp. 18–.

ISBN 978-1-78625-075-9 .

^ "Thomas Jonathan Christian Jackson Christian Jr: American Air Museum in Britain" .

^ a b Farwell, 1993, p. 513 ^ Horwitz, 1999, p. 232 ^ Vozzella, Laura (January 21, 2020).

"Virginia Senate votes to eliminate Lee-Jackson Day, create new Election Day holiday" .

Washington Post . Retrieved January 23, 2020 .

^ Virginia General Assembly SB 601 Legal holidays; Election Day ^ "General Thomas J. (Stonewall) Jackson Equestrian, (sculpture)" .

Smithsonian Institution . Retrieved July 1, 2020 .

^ Times-Dispatch, MARK ROBINSON Richmond (July 2020).

"UPDATE: Crews on scene preparing for removal of Jackson statue on Monument Avenue" .

Richmond Times-Dispatch . Retrieved July 1, 2020 .

^ "Stonewall Jackson removed from Richmond's Monument Avenue" .

AP NEWS . July 1, 2020 . Retrieved August 22, 2020 .

^ Levin, Kevin M. (April 21, 2016).

"When Dixie Put Slaves on the Money" .

The Daily Beast . Retrieved August 24, 2023 .

^ Boorstein, Michelle (September 6, 2017).

"Washington National Cathedral to remove stained glass windows honoring Robert E. Lee, Stonewall Jackson" .

The Washington Post .

References Alexander, Bevin .

Lost Victories: The Military Genius of Stonewall Jackson . New York: Holt, 1992, ISBN 978-0-8050-1830-1 .

Apperson, John Samuel.

Repairing the "March of Mars": The Civil War diaries of John Samuel Apperson, hospital steward in the Stonewall Brigade, 1861–1865 . Macon, GA: Mercer University Press, 2001.

ISBN 0-86554-779-3 .

Bryson, Bill .

A Walk in the Woods . New York: Broadway Books, 1998.

ISBN 0-7679-0251-3 .

Cleary, Ben.

Searching for Stonewall Jackson: A Quest for Legacy in a Divided America , 2019.

Description and arrow-searchable & scrollable preview . Reviews at Kirkus & Publishers Weekly .  Grand Central Publishing.

Eicher, David J.

The Longest Night: A Military History of the Civil War . New York: Simon & Schuster, 2001.

ISBN 978-0-684-84944-7 .

Eicher, John H.

, and David J. Eicher .

Civil War High Commands . Stanford, California: Stanford University Press, 2001.

ISBN 978-0-8047-3641-1 .

Farwell, Byron .

Stonewall: A Biography of General Thomas J. Jackson . New York: W. W. Norton and Co., 1993.

ISBN 978-0-393-31086-3 .

Freeman, Douglas S.

Lee's Lieutenants: A Study in Command . 3 vols. New York: Scribner, 1946.

ISBN 978-0-684-85979-8 .

Freeman, Douglas S.

R. E. Lee, A Biography . 4 vols. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1934–35.

ISBN 978-0-684-15485-5 .

Henderson, G. F. R.

Stonewall Jackson and the American Civil War . New York: Smithmark, 1995.

ISBN 0-8317-3288-1 . First published in 1898 by Longman, Greens, and Co. ( The 1900 version has an introduction by Field Marshal Viscount Wolseley .) Hettle, Wallace.

Inventing Stonewall Jackson: A Civil War Hero in History and Memory (Louisiana State University Press, 2011) Jackson, Mary Anna (1895).

Memoirs of Stonewall Jackson . Louisville, Ky. : Prentice Press, Courier-Journal job Print. Co.

Johnson, Robert Underwood , and Clarence C. Buel, eds.

Battles and Leaders of the Civil War Archived December 12, 2008, at the Wayback Machine . 4 vols. New York: Century Co., 1884–1888.

OCLC 2048818 .

McGuire, Hunter .

"Death of Stonewall Jackson" .

Southern Historical Society Papers 14 (1886).

McPherson, James M.

Battle Cry of Freedom: The Civil War Era . Oxford History of the United States. New York: Oxford University Press, 1988.

ISBN 978-0-19-503863-7 .

Pfanz, Harry W.

Gettysburg – The First Day . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2001.

ISBN 978-0-8078-2624-9 .

Robertson, James I., Jr.

Stonewall Jackson: The Man, The Soldier, The Legend . New York: Macmillan Publishing, 1997.

ISBN 0-02-864685-1 .

Sears, Stephen W.

Gettysburg . Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2003.

ISBN 978-0-395-86761-7 .

Sharlet, Jeff . "Through a Glass, Darkly: How the Christian Right is Reimagining U.S. History." Harpers , December 2006.

Taylor, Richard.

Destruction and Reconstruction: Personal Experiences of the Late War . Nashville, Tennessee: J.S. Sanders & Co., 2001.

ISBN 1-879941-21-X . First published 1879 by D. Appleton.

Trudeau, Noah Andre .

Gettysburg: A Testing of Courage . New York: HarperCollins, 2002.

ISBN 978-0-06-019363-8 .

Wert, Jeffry D.

General James Longstreet: The Confederacy's Most Controversial Soldier: A Biography . New York: Simon & Schuster, 1993.

ISBN 978-0-671-70921-1 .

Jackson genealogy site at Virginia Military Institute Further reading Austin, Aurelia (1967).

Georgia boys with "Stonewall" Jackson: James Thomas Thompson and the Walton Infantry . Athens: University of Georgia Press.

ISBN 978-0820335230 . Retrieved February 20, 2018 .

Chambers, Lenoir.

Stonewall Jackson . New York: Morrow, 1959.

OCLC 186539122 .

Cooke, John Esten ; Hoge, Moses Drury; Jones, John William (1876).

Stonewall Jackson: A Military Biography . New York: D. Appleton and Company.

OCLC 299589 .

Cozzens, Peter.

Shenandoah 1862: Stonewall Jackson's Valley Campaign . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2008.

ISBN 978-0-8078-3200-4 .

Dabney, R. L.

Life of Lieut.-Gen. Thomas J. Jackson (Stonewall Jackson) . London: James Nisbet and Co., 1866.

OCLC 457442354 .

Douglas, Henry Kyd.

I Rode with Stonewall: The War Experiences of the Youngest Member of Jackson's Staff . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1940.

ISBN 0-8078-0337-5 .

Gwynne, S. C.

Rebel Yell: The Violence, Passion, and Redemption of Stonewall Jackson . New York: Simon & Schuster , 2014.

ISBN 978-1-4516-7328-9 .

King, Benjamin .

A Bullet for Stonewall , Pelican Publishing Company, 1990,.

ISBN 0882897683 .

Lively, Mathew W.

Calamity at Chancellorsville: The Wounding and Death of Confederate General Stonewall Jackson . El Dorado Hills, California: Savas Beatie, 2013.

ISBN 978-1-61121-138-2 .

Mackowski, Chris, and Kristopher D. White.

The Last Days of Stonewall Jackson: The Mortal Wounding of the Confederacy's Greatest Icon . El Dorado Hills, California: Savas Beatie, 2013.

ISBN 978-1-61121-150-4 .

Randolph, Sarah N.

(1876).

The Life of General Thomas J. Jackson . Lippincott & Co.

Robertson, James I., Jr.

Stonewall Jackson's Book of Maxims . Nashville, Tennessee: Cumberland House, 2002.

ISBN 1-58182-296-0 .

Shackel, Paul A.

Archaeology and Created Memory: Public History in a National Park . New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, 2000.

ISBN 978-0-306-46177-4 .

White, Henry A.

Stonewall Jackson . Philadelphia: G.W. Jacobs and Co., 1909.

OCLC 3911913 .

Wilkins, J. Steven.

All Things for Good: The Steadfast Fidelity of Stonewall Jackson . Nashville, Tennessee: Cumberland House Publishing, 2004.

ISBN 1-58182-225-1 .

External links Wikiquote has quotations related to Stonewall Jackson .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Stonewall Jackson .

Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Jackson, Thomas Jonathan ".

English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Stonewall Jackson's Last Battle Virginia Military Institute Archives Stonewall Jackson Resources before-death-on-maryland Stonewall Jackson Original Letter as Lieutenant General, Near Fredericksburg, 1863 Archived February 1, 2014, at the Wayback Machine Shapell Manuscript Foundation Jackson genealogy site "Death of 'Stonewall' Jackson" Archived July 20, 2011, at the Wayback Machine , Southern Confederacy, May 12, 1863.

Atlanta Historic Newspapers Archive . Digital Library of Georgia.

Fitzhugh Lee's 1879 address on Chancellorsville The Stonewall Jackson House Animated history of the campaigns of Stonewall Jackson Archived December 4, 2014, at the Wayback Machine Details on John Jackson's larceny trial in the Court Records of the Old Bailey Stonewall Jackson's Headquarters, Winchester, VA Guinea Station, the place where Thomas Jackson died Military offices Preceded by (none) Commander of the Stonewall Brigade April 27, 1861 – October 28, 1861 Succeeded by Richard B. Garnett v t e Virginia Military Institute Lexington, Virginia Academics Academic Rankings Academic Programs Military Service Athletics Football Basketball Baseball Men's Soccer Wrestling Cameron Hall Cormack Field House Gray–Minor Stadium Patchin Field Campus VMI Campus Barracks History Life Triads Students Admission of women United States v. Virginia The Cadet Student life Ratline Traditions Honor code Clubs and activities People Alumni Stonewall Jackson Francis Henney Smith John Thomas Lewis Preston Commons Category v t e Stonewall Jackson Leadership Instructor, Virginia Military Institute Colonel, Virginia Militia Stonewall Brigade Second Corps of the Army of Northern Virginia Mexican–American War Siege of Veracruz Battle of Contreras Battle of Chapultepec Battle for Mexico City American Civil War raids and expeditions Great Train Raid of 1861 Romney Expedition American Civil War battles and campaigns First Battle of Manassas Valley Campaign Seven Days Battles Northern Virginia Campaign Maryland Campaign Battle of Fredericksburg Battle of Chancellorsville Historic items Thomas Jonathan Jackson (sculpture) Winchester Headquarters Stonewall Jackson House Stone Mountain Stone Mountain Memorial half dollar Monument Avenue Stonewall Jackson's arm CSS Stonewall USS Stonewall USS Stonewall Jackson Works about " Stonewall Jackson's Way " (1862 poem) Stonewall Jackson and the American Civil War (1898 book) Stonewall Jackson: The Good Soldier (1928 book) A Dream of Kings (1955 novel) Gods and Generals (1996 novel) Gods and Generals (2003 drama film) Shenandoah 1862 (2008 book) Related Lee–Jackson Day v t e Stonewall Brigade Leadership Stonewall Jackson Richard B. Garnett Charles Sidney Winder William S. Baylor Andrew J. Grigsby Elisha F. Paxton James A. Walker William Terry Regiments 2nd Virginia Infantry 4th Virginia Infantry 5th Virginia Infantry ( Band ) 27th Virginia Infantry 33rd Virginia Infantry v t e Frederick County, Virginia, in the American Civil War Battles First Battle of Kernstown First Battle of Winchester Second Battle of Winchester Battle of Snicker's Ferry Battle of Rutherford's Farm Second Battle of Kernstown Battle of Berryville Third Battle of Winchester Battle of Cedar Creek (or Belle Grove) Raids and expeditions Great Train Raid of 1861 John Brown's Raid on Harpers Ferry Virginia v. John Brown Romney Expedition Units 33rd Virginia Infantry People Turner Ashby Nathaniel Banks Watson Brown John A. Copeland Shields Green Frederick W. M. Holliday Stonewall Jackson Mary Greenhow Lee James M. Mason Cornelia Peake McDonald Hunter McGuire Richard Parker Places and tourism Belle Grove Plantation Cedar Creek and Belle Grove National Historical Park Fort Collier Museum of the Shenandoah Valley Shenandoah Valley Civil War Museum Stonewall Confederate Cemetery Stonewall Jackson's Headquarters Museum Third Winchester Battlefield Park Winchester Medical College Winchester National Cemetery v t e American Civil War Origins Origins Timeline leading to the War Bleeding Kansas Border states Compromise of 1850 John Brown's raid on Harpers Ferry Kansas-Nebraska Act Lincoln–Douglas debates Missouri Compromise Nullification crisis Panic of 1857 Popular sovereignty Secession South Carolina Declaration of Secession States' rights Proclamation 80 Slavery African Americans Cornerstone Speech Crittenden Compromise Dred Scott v. Sandford Emancipation Proclamation Fire-Eaters Fugitive slave laws Plantations in the American South Positive good Slave Power Treatment of slaves in the United States Uncle Tom's Cabin Abolitionism Abolitionism in the United States Susan B. Anthony James G. Birney John Brown Frederick Douglass William Lloyd Garrison Lane Debates on Slavery Elijah Parish Lovejoy J. Sella Martin Lysander Spooner George Luther Stearns Thaddeus Stevens Charles Sumner Caning Harriet Tubman Underground Railroad Combatants Theaters Campaigns Battles States Combatants Union Army Navy Marine Corps Revenue Cutter Service Confederacy Army Navy Marine Corps Theaters Eastern Western Lower Seaboard Trans-Mississippi Pacific Coast Union naval blockade Major campaigns Anaconda Plan Blockade runners New Mexico Jackson's Valley Peninsula Northern Virginia Maryland Stones River Vicksburg Tullahoma Gettysburg Morgan's Raid Bristoe Knoxville Red River Overland Atlanta Valley 1864 Bermuda Hundred Richmond-Petersburg Franklin–Nashville Price's Missouri Expedition Sherman's March Carolinas Mobile Appomattox Major battles Fort Sumter 1st Bull Run Wilson's Creek Fort Donelson Pea Ridge Hampton Roads Shiloh New Orleans Corinth Seven Pines Seven Days 2nd Bull Run Antietam Perryville Fredericksburg Stones River Chancellorsville Gettysburg Vicksburg Chickamauga Chattanooga Wilderness Fort Pillow Spotsylvania Cold Harbor Atlanta Crater Mobile Bay Franklin Nashville Five Forks Involvement States and territories Alabama Arkansas Arizona California Colorado Connecticut Dakota Territory District of Columbia Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indian Territory Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina Ohio Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Cities Atlanta Charleston Chattanooga New Orleans Richmond Washington, D.C.

Winchester Leaders Confederate Military R. H. Anderson Beauregard Bragg Buchanan Cooper Early Ewell Forrest Gorgas Hill Hood Jackson A. S. Johnston J. E. Johnston Lee Longstreet Morgan Mosby Polk Price Semmes E. K. Smith Stuart Taylor Wheeler Civilian Benjamin Bocock Breckinridge Davis Hunter Mallory Memminger Seddon Stephens Union Military Anderson Buell Burnside Butler Du Pont Farragut Foote Frémont Grant Halleck Hooker Hunt McClellan McDowell Meade Meigs Ord Pope D. D. Porter Rosecrans Scott Sheridan Sherman Thomas Civilian Adams Chase Ericsson Hamlin Lincoln Pinkerton Seward Stanton Stevens Wade Welles Aftermath Constitution Reconstruction Amendments 13th Amendment 14th Amendment 15th Amendment Reconstruction Alabama Claims Brooks–Baxter War Carpetbaggers Colfax riot of 1873 Compromise of 1877 Confederate refugees Confederados Eufaula riot of 1874 Freedmen's Bureau Freedman's Savings Bank Homestead Acts Southern Homestead Act of 1866 Timber Culture Act of 1873 Impeachment of Andrew Johnson trial efforts timeline first inquiry second inquiry impeachment managers investigation Kirk–Holden war Knights of the White Camelia Ku Klux Klan Ethnic violence Memphis riots of 1866 Meridian riot of 1871 New Orleans riot of 1866 Pulaski (Tennessee) riot of 1867 South Carolina riots of 1876 Reconstruction acts Habeas Corpus Act of 1867 Enforcement Act of 1870 Enforcement Act of February 1871 Enforcement Act of April 1871 Reconstruction era Reconstruction military districts Reconstruction Treaties Indian Council at Fort Smith Red Shirts Redeemers Scalawags South Carolina riots of 1876 Southern Claims Commission White League Post- Reconstruction Commemoration Centennial Civil War Discovery Trail Civil War Roundtables Civil War Trails Program Civil War Trust Confederate History Month Confederate Memorial Day Decoration Day Historical reenactment Robert E. Lee Day Confederate Memorial Hall Disenfranchisement Black Codes Jim Crow Historiographic issues Lost Cause mythology Modern display of the Confederate flag Red Shirts Sons of Confederate Veterans Sons of Union Veterans of the Civil War Daughters of Union Veterans of the Civil War National Society Daughters of the Union 1861-1865 Southern Historical Society United Confederate Veterans United Daughters of the Confederacy Children of the Confederacy Wilmington insurrection of 1898 Monuments and memorials Union List Grand Army of the Republic memorials to Lincoln Confederate List artworks in Capitol memorials to Davis memorials to Lee Removal Cemeteries Ladies' Memorial Associations U.S. national cemeteries Veterans 1913 Gettysburg reunion 1938 Gettysburg reunion Confederate Memorial Hall Confederate Veteran Grand Army of the Republic Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the U.S.

Old soldiers' homes Southern Cross of Honor United Confederate Veterans Related topics Military Arms Armies Campaign Medal Cavalry Confederate Home Guard Confederate railroads Confederate revolving cannon Field artillery Infantry Medal of Honor recipients Medicine Naval battles Official Records Partisan rangers POW camps Rations Signal Corps Turning point Union corps badges U.S. Balloon Corps U.S. Home Guard U.S. Military Railroad Political Committee on the Conduct of the War Confederate States presidential election of 1861 Confiscation Act of 1861 Confiscation Act of 1862 Copperheads Diplomacy Emancipation Proclamation Habeas Corpus Act of 1863 Hampton Roads Conference National Union Party Politicians killed Radical Republicans Trent Affair Union Leagues U.S. Presidential Election of 1864 War Democrats Music Battle Hymn of the Republic Dixie John Brown's Body A Lincoln Portrait Marching Through Georgia Maryland, My Maryland Names from the War When Johnny Comes Marching Home Daar kom die Alibama By ethnicity African Americans German Americans Irish Americans Italian Americans Native Americans Catawba Cherokee Choctaw Seminole Other topics Baltimore riot of 1861 Battlefield preservation Bibliography Confederate war finance Confederate States dollar Espionage Confederate Secret Service Great Hanging at Gainesville Great Revival of 1863 Gender issues Juneteenth Naming the war New York City Gold Hoax of 1864 New York City riots of 1863 Photographers Richmond riots of 1863 Salt Supreme Court cases Tokens U.S. Sanitary Commission Women soldiers Related List of films and television shows about the American Civil War Category Portal v t e Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees John Adams John Quincy Adams Jane Addams Louis Agassiz Susan B. Anthony John James Audubon George Bancroft Clara Barton Henry Ward Beecher Alexander Graham Bell Daniel Boone Edwin Booth Louis Brandeis Phillips Brooks William Cullen Bryant Luther Burbank Andrew Carnegie George Washington Carver William Ellery Channing Rufus Choate Henry Clay Grover Cleveland James Fenimore Cooper Peter Cooper Charlotte Cushman James Buchanan Eads Thomas Alva Edison Jonathan Edwards Ralph Waldo Emerson David Farragut Stephen Foster Benjamin Franklin Robert Fulton Josiah W. Gibbs William C. Gorgas Ulysses S. Grant Asa Gray Alexander Hamilton Nathaniel Hawthorne Joseph Henry Patrick Henry Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr.

Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.

Mark Hopkins Elias Howe Washington Irving Andrew Jackson Thomas J. Jackson Thomas Jefferson John Paul Jones James Kent Sidney Lanier Robert E. Lee Abraham Lincoln Henry Wadsworth Longfellow James Russell Lowell Mary Lyon Edward MacDowell James Madison Horace Mann John Marshall Matthew Fontaine Maury Albert A. Michelson Maria Mitchell James Monroe Samuel F. B. Morse William T. G. Morton John Lothrop Motley Simon Newcomb Thomas Paine Alice Freeman Palmer Francis Parkman George Peabody William Penn Edgar Allan Poe Walter Reed Franklin D. Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Augustus Saint-Gaudens William Tecumseh Sherman John Philip Sousa Joseph Story Harriet Beecher Stowe Gilbert Stuart Sylvanus Thayer Henry David Thoreau Mark Twain Lillian Wald Booker T. Washington George Washington Daniel Webster George Westinghouse James McNeill Whistler Walt Whitman Eli Whitney John Greenleaf Whittier Emma Willard Frances Willard Roger Williams Woodrow Wilson Orville Wright Wilbur Wright Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Netherlands Latvia Korea Poland Israel Artists ULAN People DDB Other IdRef NARA SNAC RISM Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐zjssh
Cached time: 20250817222802
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, vary‐revision, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.258 seconds
Real time usage: 1.637 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 10894/1000000
Revision size: 90474/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 400316/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 16179/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 22/100
Expensive parser function count: 21/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 344434/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.675/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17332425/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1316.026      1 -total
 22.99%  302.577      1 Template:Reflist
 17.97%  236.434      1 Template:Infobox_military_person
 17.59%  231.441      1 Template:Infobox
 10.80%  142.193     20 Template:Cite_web
  7.13%   93.770      4 Template:Sister_project
  7.00%   92.151      4 Template:Side_box
  6.82%   89.734      2 Template:Navbox
  6.77%   89.100      6 Template:Ubl
  6.75%   88.881      1 Template:Virginia_Military_Institute Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:31485:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817222802 and revision id 1303403834. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Stonewall_Jackson&oldid=1303403834 " Categories : Stonewall Jackson 1824 births 1863 deaths 19th-century Presbyterians Accidental deaths in Virginia American amputees American military personnel of the Mexican–American War American people of English descent American people of Scotch-Irish descent American Presbyterians Army of Northern Virginia Burials in Virginia Confederate States Army lieutenant generals Confederate States of America military personnel killed in the American Civil War Deaths by firearm in Virginia Deaths from pneumonia in Virginia Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees People with hypochondriasis Military personnel from West Virginia Military personnel killed by friendly fire Military personnel from Clarksburg, West Virginia Slave owners killed in the American Civil War People of West Virginia in the American Civil War Stonewall Brigade United States Army officers United States Military Academy alumni Virginia Military Institute faculty Stone Mountain Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Use mdy dates from October 2023 Articles needing additional references from April 2017 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 Commons category link is on Wikidata Wikisource templates with missing id This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 20:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Stonewall Jackson 50 languages Add topic

