Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Key concepts Toggle Key concepts subsection 2.1 Ishraq 3 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 3.1 Mulla Sadra 4 See also 5 Notes 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Illuminationism 16 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Deutsch Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kurdî 日本語 پښتو Português Русский Türkçe Türkmençe اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Islamic philosophy introduced by Suhrawardi Not to be confused with Divine illumination or Illuminism .

Illuminationism ( Persian حكمت اشراق hekmat-e eshrāq , Arabic : حكمة الإشراق ḥikmat al-ishrāq , both meaning "Wisdom of the Rising Light"), also known as Ishrāqiyyun or simply Ishrāqi ( Persian اشراق, Arabic : الإشراق, lit. "Rising", as in "Shining of the Rising Sun") is a philosophical and mystical school of thought introduced by Shahab al-Din Suhrawardi ( honorific : Shaikh al-ʿIshraq or Shaikh-i-Ishraq , both meaning "Master of Illumination") in the twelfth century, established with his Kitab Hikmat al-Ishraq (lit: "Book of the Wisdom of Illumination"), a fundamental text finished in 1186. Written with influence from Avicennism , Peripateticism , and Neoplatonism , the philosophy is nevertheless distinct as a novel and holistic addition to the history of Islamic philosophy .

History [ edit ] Ilkhanate - Mongols besieging Baghdad under the command of Hulagu Khan , c. 1430.

While the Ilkhanate - Mongol Siege of Baghdad and the destruction of the House of Wisdom ( Arabic : بيت الحكمة, romanized: Bayt al-Ḥikmah) effectively ended the Islamic Golden Age in 1258, it also paved the way for novel philosophical invention.

[ 1 ] Such an example is the work of philosopher Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī , specifically his Kitāb al-Muʿtabar ("The Book of What Has Been Established by Personal Reflection"); the book's challenges to the Aristotelian norm in Islamic philosophy along with al-Baghdādī's emphasis on "evident self-reflection" and his revival of the Platonic use of light as a metaphor for phenomena like inspiration all influenced the philosophy of Suhrawardi.

[ 2 ] The philosopher and logician Zayn al-Din Omar Savaji further inspired Suhrawardi with his foundational works on mathematics and his creativity in reconstructing the Organon ; Savaji's two-part logic based on "expository propositions" (al-aqwāl al-šāreḥa) and "proof theory" (ḥojaj) served as the precursory model for Suhrawardi's own "Rules of Thought" (al-Żawābeṭ al-fekr).

[ 3 ] Among the three Islamic philosophers mentioned in Suhrawardi's work, al-Baghdādī and Savaji are two of them.

Upon finishing his Kitab Hikmat al-Ishraq (lit: "Book of the Wisdom of Illumination"), the Persian [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 1 ] philosopher Shahab al-Din Suhrawardi founded Illuminationism in 1186. The Persian and Islamic school draws on ancient Iranian philosophical disciplines, [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Avicennism ( Ibn Sina 's early Islamic philosophy ), Neoplatonic thought (modified by Ibn Sina), and the original ideas of Suhrawardi.

Key concepts [ edit ] In his Philosophy of Illumination , Suhrawardi argued that light operates at all levels and hierarchies of reality (PI, 97.7–98.11). Light produces immaterial and substantial lights, including immaterial intellects ( angels ), human and animal souls, and even 'dusky substances', such as bodies.

[ 9 ] Suhrawardi's metaphysics is based on two principles. The first is a form of the principle of sufficient reason . The second principle is Aristotle's principle that an actual infinity is impossible.

[ 10 ] Ishraq [ edit ] The essential meaning of ishrāq ( Persian اشراق, Arabic : الإشراق) is "rising", specifically referring to the sunrise , though "illumination" is the more common translation. It has used both Arabic and Persian philosophical texts as means to signify the relation between the " apprehending subject " (al-mawżuʿ al-modrek) and the " apprehensible object " (al-modrak); beyond philosophical discourse, it is a term used in common discussion. Suhrawardi utilized the ordinariness of the word in order to encompass the all that is mystical along with an array of different kinds of knowledge, including elhām , meaning personal inspiration.

[ 1 ] Legacy [ edit ] None of Suhrawardi's works was translated into Latin, so he remained unknown in the Latin West , although his work continued to be studied in the Islamic East.

[ 11 ] According to Hosein Nasr , Suhrawardi was unknown to the west until he was translated into western languages by contemporary thinkers such as Henry Corbin , and he remains largely unknown even in countries within the Islamic world.

[ 12 ] Suhrawardi tried to present a new perspective on questions like those of existence. He not only caused peripatetic philosophers to confront such new questions, but also gave new life to the body of philosophy after Avicenna.

[ 13 ] According to John Walbridge , Suhrawardi's critiques of Peripatetic philosophy could be counted as an important turning point for his successors. Although Suhravardi was first a pioneer of Peripatetic philosophy, he later became a Platonist following a mystical experience. He is also counted as one who revived the ancient wisdom in Persia by his philosophy of illumination. His followers, such as Shahrzouri and Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi tried to continue the way of their teacher. Suhrewardi makes a distinction between two approaches in the philosophy of illumination: one approach is discursive and another is intuitive.

[ 14 ] Illuminationist thinkers in the School of Isfahan played a significant role in revitalizing academic life in the [ 15 ] Safavid Empire under Shah Abbas I (1588–1629).

[ 16 ] Avicennan thought continued to inform philosophy during the reign of the Safavid Empire.

[ 16 ] Illuminationism was taught in Safavid Madrasas (Place of Study) established by pious shahs.

[ 17 ] Mulla Sadra [ edit ] Mulla Sadra (Ṣadr ad-Dīn Muḥammad Shīrāzī) was a 17th-century Iranian philosopher who was considered a master [ 18 ] of illuminationism. He wrote a book titled al-Asfār al-Arbaʻah meaning 'the four journeys', referring to the soul's journey back to Allah. He developed his book into an entire school of thought; he did not refer to al-Asfār as a philosophy but as "wisdom." Sadra taught how one could be illuminated or given wisdom until becoming a sage.

[ 19 ] Al-Asfar was one piece of illuminationism which is still an active part of Islamic philosophy today. It was representative of Mulla Sadra's entire philosophical worldview.

[ 20 ] Like many important Arabic works it is difficult for the western world to understand because it has not been translated into English. Mulla Sadra eventually became the most significant teacher at the religious school known as Madrasa-yi Khan.

[ 16 ] His philosophies are still taught throughout the Islamic East and South Asia.

[ 16 ] Al-Asfar is Mulla Sadra's book explaining his view of illuminationism. He views problems starting with a Peripatetic sketch .

[ 21 ] This Aristotelian style of teaching is reminiscent of Islamic Golden Age Philosopher Avicenna . Mulla Sadra often refers to the Qur'an when dealing with philosophical problems. He quotes Qur'anic verses while explaining philosophy. He wrote exegeses of the Qur'an such as his explanation of Āyat al-Kursī .

Asfār means journeys. In al-Asfar is a journey to gain wisdom. Mulla Sadra used philosophy as a set of spiritual exercises to become more wise.

[ 22 ] In Mulla Sadra's book The Transcendent Philosophy of the Four Journeys of the Intellect he describes the four journeys of A journey from creation to the Truth or Creator A journey from the Truth to the Truth A journey that stands in relation to the first journey because it is from the Truth to creation with the Truth A journey that stands in relation to the second journey because it is from the Truth to the creation.

[ 20 ] See also [ edit ] Body of light Divine illumination Divine light Divine spark Inward light Luminous mind Perennialism Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c Ziai, Hossein (2004).

"Illuminationism" .

Encyclopaedia Iranica . Retrieved 2020-04-10 .

^ Langermann, Y. Tzvi (1998), "al-Baghdadi, Abu 'l-Barakat (fl. c.1200-50)", Islamic Philosophy , Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy , archived from the original on 28 February 2008 , retrieved 2008-02-03 ^ HOSSEIN ZIAI, "EBN SAHLĀN SĀVAJĪ, Qāżī ZAYN-AL-DĪN ʿOMAR " in Encyclopaedia Iranica [1] ^ John Walbridge, "The leaven of the ancients: Suhrawardī and the heritage of the Greeks", State University of New York Press, 1999.  Excerpt: "Suhrawardi, a 12th-century Persian philosopher, was a key figure in the transition of Islamic thought from the neo-Aristotelianism of Avicenna to the mystically oriented philosophy of later centuries." ^ Seyyed Hossein Nasr, "The need for a sacred science", SUNY Press, 1993.  Pg 158: "Persian philosopher Suhrawardi refers in fact to this land as na-kuja abad,  which in Persian means literally utopia." ^ Matthew Kapstein, University of Chicago Press, 2004, "The presence of light: divine radiance and religious experience", University of Chicago Press, 2004. pg 285:"..the light of lights in the system of the Persian philosopher Suhrawardi" ^ Henry Corbin. The Voyage and the Messenger. Iran and Philosophy. Containing previous unpublished articles and lectures from 1948 to 1976. North Atlantic Books. Berkeley, California. 1998.

ISBN 1-55643-269-0 .

^ Henry Corbin. The Man of Light in Iranian Sufism. Omega Publications, New York. 1994.

ISBN 0-930872-48-7 .

^ Philosophy of Illumination 77.1–78.9 ^ Philosophy of Illumination 87.1–89.8 ^ Marcotte, Roxanne, "Suhrawardi" , The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2019 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.).

^ Naṣr, Ḥusain (1997).

Three Muslim sages: Avicenna - Suhrawardī - Ibn 'Arabī (Third ed.). Delmar, NY: Caravan Books. p. 55.

ISBN 0-88206-500-9 .

^ Nasr, Seyyed Hossein (2006).

Islamic Philosophy from Its Origin to the Present: Philosophy in the Land of Prophecy . State University of New York Press. p. 86.

ISBN 978-0-7914-8155-4 .

^ John Walbridge (2004). "Suhrawardī and Illuminationism". In Adamson, Peter; Taylor, Richard C. (eds.).

The Cambridge Companion to Arabic Philosophy . Cambridge University Press. pp.

201– 223.

ISBN 9780511999864 .

^ "Safavid- Mughal Cultural Interrelations as reflected in Matenadaran's 'Bayaz' Manuscript Illumination | Association for Iranian Studies (AIS) | انجمن ایران‌ پژوهی" .

associationforiranianstudies.org . Retrieved 2020-04-10 .

^ a b c d "Friends of the SEP Society - Preview of Mulla Sadra PDF" .

leibniz.stanford.edu . Retrieved 2020-04-10 .

^ Moazzen, Maryam (2011).

Shi'ite Higher Learning and the Role of the Madrasa-yi Sulṭānī in Late Safavid Iran (Thesis).

hdl : 1807/29816 .

^ Razavi, Mehdi Amin (1997).

Suhrawardi and the School of Illumination . Curzon.

ISBN 978-0700704125 .

^ Rizvi, Sajjad (2019), "Mulla Sadra" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2019 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2020-04-10 ^ a b Kamal, Muhammad (2006).

Mulla Sadra's Transcendent Philosophy . Ashgate World Philosophies Series. Ashgate.

ISBN 0-7546-5271-8 .

^ SIPR.

"Methodology" .

MullaSadra.org .

^ Rizvi, Sajjad (2019), "Mulla Sadra" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2019 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2020-04-09 Further reading [ edit ] Razavi, Mehdi Amin (2015).

Nasr, Seyyed Hossein (ed.).

The Islamic Intellectual Tradition in Persia . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1138883840 .

Tianyi, Zhang (22 December 2022).

A Philosophical Enquiry into the Nature of Suhrawardi's Illuminationism: Light in the Cave .

Brill .

ISBN 978-9004523715 .

v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Sufism terminology Sufis Abdal Ahl al-Khutwa Al-Insān al-Kāmil Bash Hezzab Dervish Fakir Hafiz Hezzab Imam Khatib Majzoob Marabout Mudaqiq [ ar ] Muqaddam Muqarrab Murshid Mutahaqiq [ ar ] Murid Nass al-Houdhour Pir Qalandar Qāriʾ Qutb Rabbani Salik Sheikh Siddiq Sufis ranks Talibe The Seven ranks [ ar ] Wali Wasil Concepts Aayane [ ar ] Aayane Thabita [ ar ] Aql Baqaa Dhawq Fana Ghaflah Hal Hijab Huwa Ihsan Ishq Ismul Azam Lataif-e-Sitta Maqam Nafs Qalb Ran Rūḥ Sadr Yaqeen Awrad Dhikr Djamaa [ ar ] Djoua [ ar ] Dua Ibara [ ar ] Ichara [ ar ] Latifa Lazimi Muhasabah Muraqabah Raising hands in Dua Sabr Sahar [ ar ] Salat al-Fatih Salawat Samt [ ar ] Shuhud [ ar ] Shukr Sufism pillars Tafakur Tahara [ ar ] Tahlia [ ar ] Takhlia [ ar ] Tawajud [ ar ] Tawakkul Tawassul Tazkiah Uzla [ ar ] Wajd Wazifa Zarruqiyya Wird Zuhd Waridates Barakah Basirah Bast [ ar ] Djadba [ ar ] Fath [ ar ] Haqiqa Hidayah Ilham Irfan Ishrak Karamat Kashf Khatir Ma'rifa Nūr Qabdh [ ar ] Rabita [ ar ] Ru'ya Secret Tajalli Thawab Uns [ ar ] Walayah Warid Misconducts Antinomianism Rahbaniya Shath Taqabbur Zandaqa Ceremonies Ashura Bay'ah Hadra Hizb Rateb Idjaza Mawlid Mawsim Salka Sbooa [ fr ] Sebiba Silsila Sufi orders Tariqa Tweeza Wezeea Ziyarat Arts Ashewiq [ ar ] Madih nabawi Nasheed Naʽat Qawwali Sama Sufi cosmology Sufism history Sufi literature Sufi metaphysics Sufi music Sufis persecution Sufi philosophy Sufi poetry Sufi psychology Sufi whirling Places Daara Dargah Datuk Keramat Eidgah Gonbad Gongbei Jama masjid Jama'at Khana Khalwa Khalawi Khanqah Külliye Kuttab Madrasa Maqam Maqbara Mausoleum Mazar Mosque Musalla Qubba Rauza Ribat Surau Takya Turbah Türbe Zawiya Objects Ammama Balgha Burnous Djellaba Gandoura Jellabiya Khirqa Misbaha Miswak Prayer rug Qashabiya Tagelmust Taqiyah Tarboosh Turban Portals : Religion Islam Education Psychology Authority control databases International FAST National United States France BnF data Israel Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Illuminationism&oldid=1294723927 " Categories : Persian philosophy History of logic Theories of deduction Iranian philosophy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 June 2025, at 12:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Illuminationism 16 languages Add topic

