Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Recipients 2 See also 3 References Toggle References subsection 3.1 Sources 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Sakurai Prize 14 languages العربية Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano 日本語 Polski Português Русский Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Award in theoretical particle physics Award J. J. Sakurai Prize for Theoretical Particle Physics Awarded for outstanding achievement in particle theory Country United States Presented by American Physical Society Reward(s) US$10,000 First award 1985 Website www .aps .org /funding-recognition /prize /sakurai-prize The J. J. Sakurai Prize for Theoretical Particle Physics , also commonly referred to as just the Sakurai Prize , is a prize awarded by the American Physical Society . It is presented annually at the Society's April meeting and honors "outstanding achievement in particle theory ".

[ 1 ] The award was established in November 1984 with an endowment fund provided by the family and friends of physicist Jun John Sakurai , [ 2 ] who had died in October 1982 during a visit to CERN .

[ 3 ] Currently, the prize consists of a US$10,000 cash award, an allowance for the recipient to travel to the ceremony, and a certificate citing their contributions.

[ 1 ] From its inaugural edition until 2008, the prize's cash award was $5,000.

[ 4 ] The Sakurai Prize is administered by the Society's Division of Particles and Fields, [ 5 ] and winners are chosen by a selection committee.

[ 1 ] The prize may be shared by multiple people.

[ 1 ] The inaugural recipients, Toshihide Maskawa and Makoto Kobayashi , were awarded the prize in 1985 for their work on the electroweak interaction .

[ 6 ] The first woman to receive the Sakurai Prize was Mary K. Gaillard in 1993.

[ 7 ] Recipients [ edit ] Sakurai Prize recipients and rationale [ 1 ] Year Image Recipients Rationale 1985 Toshihide Maskawa "For their contributions to the theory of electroweak interactions through their general formulation of fermion mass matrix and their prescient inference of the existence of more than four flavors of quarks ." Makoto Kobayashi 1986 David Gross "For their analyses of nonabelian gauge theories at short distances, and the implications of these insights for the understanding of the strong interaction between quarks." – H. David Politzer Frank Wilczek 1987 Luciano Maiani "For their work on the weak interactions of charmed particles , a crucial step in the development of the modern theory of the fundamental interactions ." John Iliopoulos 1988 – Stephen L. Adler For his work in elucidating the consequences of chiral symmetry through sum rules and low energy theorems." 1989 Nicola Cabibbo "For his outstanding contribution in elucidating the structure of the hadronic weak current." 1990 – Toichiro Kinoshita "For his theoretical contributions to precision tests of quantum electrodynamics and the electroweak theory, especially his pioneering work on the computation of the lepton anomalous magnetic moments ." 1991 Vladimir N. Gribov "For his early pioneering work on the high energy behavior of quantum field theories and his elucidating studies of the global structure of non-abelian gauge theories." 1992 – Lincoln Wolfenstein "For his many contributions to the theory of weak interactions, particularly CP violation and the properties of neutrinos ." 1993 Mary K. Gaillard "For contributions to particle physics phenomenology and theory, and in particular for her work with Ben Lee and others applying QCD to K meson mixing and decays and to the bound states of charmed quarks." 1994 Yoichiro Nambu "For his many fundamental contributions to field theory and particle physics, including the understanding of the pion as the signaler of spontaneous breaking of chiral symmetry ." 1995 – Howard Georgi "For his pioneering contributions toward the unification of strong and electroweak interactions, and for his application of quantum chromodynamics to the properties and interactions of hadrons ." 1996 William Allan Bardeen "For fundamental insights into the structure and meaning of the axial anomaly and for contributions to the understanding of perturbative quantum chromodynamics." 1997 Thomas Appelquist "For his pioneering work on charmonium and on the de-coupling of heavy particles." 1998 Leonard Susskind "For his pioneering contributions to hadronic string models, lattice gauge theories , quantum chromodynamics, and dynamical symmetry breaking ." 1999 Mikhail Shifman "For fundamental contributions to the understanding of non-perturbative QCD, non-leptonic weak decays, and the analytic properties of supersymmetric gauge theories ." – Arkady Vainshtein – Valentin Ivanovich Zakharov [ ru ; de ] 2000 Curtis G. Callan "For his classic formulation of the renormalization group , his contributions to instanton physics and to the theory of monopoles and strings ." 2001 Nathan Isgur "For the construction of the heavy quark mass expansion and the discovery of the heavy quark symmetry in quantum chromodynamics, which led to a quantitative theory of the decays of c and b flavored hadrons." – Mikhail Voloshin – Mark Wise 2002 – Alberto Sirlin "For their pioneering work on radiative corrections , which made precision electroweak studies a powerful method of probing the Standard Model and searching for new physics." – William J. Marciano 2003 – Alfred Mueller "For developing concepts and techniques in QCD, such as infrared safety and factorization in hard processes, which permitted precise quantitative predictions and experimental tests, and thereby helped to establish QCD as the theory of the strong interactions." – George Sterman 2004 – Ikaros I. Bigi "For pioneering theoretical insights that pointed the way to the very fruitful experimental study of CP violation in B decays, and for continuing contributions to the fields of CP and heavy flavor physics." Anthony Sanda 2005 – Susumu Okubo "For groundbreaking investigations into the pattern of hadronic masses and decay rates, which provided essential clues into the development of the quark model, and for demonstrating that CP violation permits partial decay rate asymmetries." 2006 – Savas Dimopoulos "For his creative ideas on dynamical symmetry breaking, supersymmetry , and extra spatial dimensions , which have shaped theoretical research on TeV-scale physics, thereby inspiring a wide range of experiments." 2007 – Stanley Brodsky "For applications of perturbative quantum field theory to critical questions of elementary particle physics, in particular, to the analysis of hard exclusive strong interaction processes." 2008 – Alexei Smirnov "For pioneering and influential work on the enhancement of neutrino oscillations in matter, which is essential to a quantitative understanding of the solar neutrino flux." – Stanislav Mikheyev 2009 – Davison E. Soper "For work in perturbative quantum chromodynamics, including applications to problems pivotal to the interpretation of high energy particle collisions." – John C. Collins R. Keith Ellis 2010 Gerald S. Guralnik "For elucidation of the properties of spontaneous symmetry breaking in four-dimensional relativistic gauge theory and of the mechanism for the consistent generation of vector boson masses." Carl R. Hagen – T. W. B. Kibble Robert Brout Francois Englert Peter Higgs 2011 Chris Quigg "For their work, separately and collectively, to chart a course of the exploration of TeV scale physics using multi-TeV hadron colliders ." – Estia Eichten – Ian Hinchliffe Kenneth Lane 2012 Guido Altarelli "For key ideas leading to the detailed confirmation of the Standard Model of particle physics, enabling high energy experiments to extract precise information about Quantum Chromodynamics, electroweak interactions and possible new physics." – Torbjörn Sjöstrand – Bryan Webber 2013 Helen Quinn "For their proposal of the elegant mechanism to resolve the famous problem of strong-CP violation which, in turn, led to the invention of axions , a subject of intense experimental and theoretical investigation for more than three decades." – Roberto Peccei 2014 Zvi Bern "For pathbreaking contributions to the calculation of perturbative scattering amplitudes, which led to a deeper understanding of quantum field theory and to powerful new tools for computing QCD processes." – Lance J. Dixon – David A. Kosower [ de ] 2015 George Zweig "For his independent proposal that hadrons are composed of fractionally charged fundamental constituents, called quarks or aces, and for developing its revolutionary implications for hadron masses and properties." 2016 – G. Peter Lepage "For inventive applications of quantum field theory to particle physics, particularly in establishing the theory of hadronic exclusive processes, developing nonrelativistic effective field theories , and determining standard-model parameters with lattice gauge theory ." 2017 Gordon L. Kane "For instrumental contributions to the theory of the properties, reactions, and signatures of the Higgs boson ." – Howard E. Haber – Jack F. Gunion Sally Dawson 2018 – Ann Nelson "For groundbreaking explorations of physics beyond the Standard Model of particle physics, including their seminal joint work on dynamical super-symmetry breaking, and for their innovative contributions to a broad range of topics, including new models of electroweak symmetry breaking, baryogenesis , and solutions to the strong charge parity problem ." – Michael Dine 2019 Lisa Randall "For creative contributions to physics beyond the Standard Model, in particular the discovery that warped extra dimensions of space can solve the hierarchy puzzle , which has had a tremendous impact on searches at the Large Hadron Collider ." Raman Sundrum 2020 Pierre Sikivie "For seminal work recognizing the potential visibility of the invisible axion, devising novel methods to detect it, and for theoretical investigations of its cosmological implications." 2021 – Vernon Barger "For pioneering work in collider physics contributing to the discovery and characterization of the W boson , top quark , and Higgs boson, and for the development of incisive strategies to test theoretical ideas with experiments." 2022 Nima Arkani-Hamed "For the development of transformative new frameworks for physics beyond the standard model with novel experimental signatures, including work on large extra dimensions, the little Higgs , and more generally for new ideas connected to the origin of the electroweak scale." 2023 – Heinrich Leutwyler "For fundamental contributions to the effective field theory of pions at low energies, and for proposing that the gluon is a color octet ." 2024 Andrzej Buras "For exceptional contributions to quark-flavor physics, in particular, developing and carrying out calculations of higher-order QCD effects to electroweak transitions, as well as for drawing phenomenological connections between kaons, D mesons , and B mesons ." 2025 – Elizabeth E. Jenkins "For outstanding contributions to the physics of baryons , including deriving many physical properties of nucleons and hyperons in the large number of colors limit of quantum chromodynamics and deriving the renormalization group evolution of the standard model effective field theory at one loop." – Aneesh V. Manohar See also [ edit ] List of American Physical Society prizes and awards List of physics awards List of awards named after people References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e "J. J. Sakurai Prize for Theoretical Particle Physics" .

American Physical Society .

Archived from the original on January 12, 2025 . Retrieved February 1, 2025 .

^ Physics Today 1984 .

^ Nambu 1983 .

^ Jaros, John (July 2007).

"Update on DPF Prizes" (PDF) .

DPF Newsletter . The American Physical Society Division of Particles and Fields.

Archived (PDF) from the original on March 16, 2022.

^ "Honors Policies and Procedures" .

American Physical Society .

Archived from the original on September 22, 2024 . Retrieved February 1, 2025 .

^ Physics Today 1985 , p. 95.

^ Physics Today 1993 .

Sources [ edit ] Nambu, Yoichiro (1983).

"Jun John Sakurai" .

Physics Today .

36 (2): 87.

doi : 10.1063/1.2915507 .

"Sakurai Prize for Theoretical Particle Physics established".

Physics Today .

37 (4): 91. 1984.

doi : 10.1063/1.2916205 .

"APS Honors Work in Nuclei, Fluids, Theory" .

Physics Today .

38 (4): 95– 97. 1985.

doi : 10.1063/1.2814538 .

"At April Meeting, APS and AAPT Recognize Outstanding Work" .

Physics Today .

46 (9): 75. 1993.

doi : 10.1063/1.2809048 .

External links [ edit ] 2010 Sakurai Prize playlist on YouTube v t e American Physical Society Membership Fellows (1921–1971) Fellows (1972–1997) Fellows (1998–2010) Fellows (2011–present) Awards Full list of awards Abraham Pais Prize Andrei Sakharov Prize Aneesur Rahman Prize Arthur L. Schawlow Prize Dannie Heinemann Prize David Adler Lectureship Award Davisson–Germer Prize Earle K. Plyler Prize Einstein Prize Fluid Dynamics Prize Francis M. Pipkin Award Frank Isakson Prize George E. Pake Prize Hans A. Bethe Prize Herbert P. Broida Prize Herman Feshbach Prize I. I. Rabi Prize Irving Langmuir Award James C. McGroddy Prize James Clerk Maxwell Prize John H. Dillon Medal Joseph F. Keithley Award Lars Onsager Prize Leo P. Kadanoff Prize Leo Szilard Lectureship Award LeRoy Apker Award Lilienfeld Prize Maria Goeppert-Mayer Award Max Delbruck Prize Norman F. Ramsey Prize Oliver E. Buckley Prize Panofsky Prize Robert R. Wilson Prize Sakurai Prize Tom W. Bonner Prize Publications Physics Today Physics Magazine Journals Physical Review Letters A B C D E X Accelerators and Beams Applied Fluids Materials Physics Education Research Research Reviews of Modern Physics Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sakurai_Prize&oldid=1295726183 " Categories : Awards of the American Physical Society Fellows of the American Physical Society Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Featured lists This page was last edited on 15 June 2025, at 13:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sakurai Prize 14 languages Add topic

