Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Lithium-7 2 Lithium-6 3 Lithium test 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Lithium burning 12 languages العربية Deutsch فارسی 한국어 Македонски Português Русский සිංහල Српски / srpski Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For combustion of lithium, see Lithium § Chemistry .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Lithium burning" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Process by which lithium is spent in a star Lithium burning is a nucleosynthetic process in which lithium is depleted in a star . Lithium is generally present in brown dwarfs and not in older low-mass stars. Stars, which by definition must achieve the high temperature (2.5 million K) necessary for fusing hydrogen , rapidly deplete their lithium.

Lithium-7 [ edit ] Burning of the most abundant isotope of lithium , lithium-7, occurs by a collision of lithium-7 and a proton producing beryllium-8 , which promptly decays into two helium-4 nuclei. The temperature necessary for this reaction is just below the temperature necessary for hydrogen fusion . Convection in low-mass stars ensures that lithium in the whole volume of the star is depleted.

[ 1 ] Therefore, the presence of the lithium line in a candidate brown dwarf's spectrum is a strong indicator that it is indeed substellar.

Lithium-6 [ edit ] From a study of lithium abundances in 53 T Tauri stars , it has been found that lithium depletion varies strongly with size, suggesting that lithium burning by the P-P chain , during the last highly convective and unstable stages during the pre–main sequence later phase of the Hayashi contraction may be one of the main sources of energy for T Tauri stars. Rapid rotation tends to improve mixing and increase the transport of lithium into deeper layers where it is destroyed. T Tauri stars generally increase their rotation rates as they age, through contraction and spin-up, as they conserve angular momentum. This causes an increased rate of lithium loss with age. Lithium burning will also increase with higher temperatures and mass, and will last for at most a little over 100 million years.

The P-P chain for lithium burning is as follows p + 6 3 Li → 7 4 Be (unstable) 7 4 Be + e − → 7 3 Li + ν p + 7 3 Li → 8 4 Be (unstable) 8 4 Be →   2× 4 2 He + energy It will not occur in stars less than sixty times the mass of Jupiter.  In this way, the rate of lithium depletion can be used to calculate the age of the star.

Lithium test [ edit ] The use of lithium to distinguish candidate brown dwarfs from low-mass stars is commonly referred to as the lithium test . Heavier stars like the Sun can retain lithium in their outer atmospheres, which never get hot enough for lithium depletion, but those are distinguishable from brown dwarfs by their size. Brown dwarfs at the high end of their mass range (60–75 M J ) can be hot enough to deplete their lithium when they are young. Dwarfs of mass greater than 65 M J can burn off their lithium by the time they are half a billion years old; thus, this test is not perfect.

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] Cosmological lithium problem Dilithium Halo nucleus Isotopes of lithium Lithium References [ edit ] ^ Bildsten, L.; Brown, E. F.; Matzner, C. D.; Ushomirsky, G. (1997). "Lithium Depletion in Fully Convective Pre-Main-Sequence Stars".

The Astrophysical Journal .

482 (1): 442– 447.

arXiv : astro-ph/9612155 .

Bibcode : 1997ApJ...482..442B .

doi : 10.1086/304151 .

^ Basri, Gibor (1998). Rafael Rebolo; Eduardo L. Martín; María Rosa Zapatero-Osorio (eds.).

"The Lithium Test for Young Brown Dwarfs (invited review)" .

Proceedings of a Workshop Held in Puerto de la Cruz, Tenerife, Spain, 17–21 March 1997, ASP Conference Series #134 .

134 : 394.

Bibcode : 1998ASPC..134..394B .

v t e Nuclear processes Radioactive decay Alpha Beta Double Gamma radiation Cluster decay Electron capture Double Internal conversion Isomeric transition Neutron emission Positron emission Proton emission Spontaneous fission Stellar nucleosynthesis Deuterium fusion Li burning Proton–proton chain CNO cycle α process Triple-α C burning Ne burning O burning Si burning r -process s -process p-process rp-process Other processes Photodisintegration Photofission Capture Neutron capture Proton capture Exchange (n-p) reaction Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lithium_burning&oldid=1295274087 " Categories : Nuclear fusion Lithium Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from August 2017 All articles needing additional references Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 June 2025, at 19:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lithium burning 12 languages Add topic

