Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Legacy 3 See also 4 References 5 Sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Ahi Evran 6 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা فارسی Français Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Ahi Evren ) Turkic scholar and leader of the Ahi Brotherhood You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Turkish .

(October 2021) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Turkish Wikipedia article at [[:tr:Ahî Evran]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|tr|Ahî Evran}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Tomb of Ahi Evren in Kırşehir , Turkey Sheikh Pir Nasiruddin Abul Hakayik Pir Mahmud bin Ahmed Ahi Evran bin Abbas Veli al-Khoyi (1169–1261), commonly known as Ahi Evran or Pir Ahi Evren-ı Veli , was a Turkic Alevi Sufi saint , preacher, philosopher and poet who wrote 20 books. He is mostly remembered as the founder and leader of the Ahi Brotherhood .

[ 1 ] Life [ edit ] Born in Khoy , Iranian Azerbaijan in 1169, [ 2 ] he moved to Kayseri , Turkey and established the Ahi guild there.

[ 3 ] He was skilled in the leatherworking trade and he organized guilds from 32 different professions. He led and organized the Ahis into a force capable of fighting the invading Mongols.

[ 1 ] He was a Bektashi preacher who had gone to Trabzon during the Empire of Trebizond to spread Islam . As a scholar, he was taught by teachers in Baghdad and Khorasan .

[ 1 ] He was killed by Mongols in Kırşehir on 1 April 1261. His grave site is in debate, but thought to be in Boztepe . The site is near Trabzon. It is considered as sacred and has been visited by many people. This grave, however, may instead be that of a clan leader or a Greek metropolitan who had accepted Islam. According to Şakir Şevket, in 1863, Muslim preacher Sheykh Haji Hakki Efendi was inspired to build a place near Ahi Evren's grave. So when Sheykh Haji Hakki Efendi died in 1890, he was buried there. The government then built a tomb and mosque at the site.

Legacy [ edit ] Information about Ahi Evren at his tomb A new insect species discovered in Turkey by assistant professor Mahmut Erbey at Ahi Evran University was named Evrani to honor the university and the saint .

[ 4 ] An annual festival is held in Kırşehir, where its organized by the local chambers of commerce.

[ 1 ] A museum in Kayseri, the Ahi Evran Esnaf ve Sanatkarlar Müzesi , is dedicated to his influence on traders and craftsmen.

See also [ edit ] Tasawwuf References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Darke, Diana (2022).

The Ottomans: A Cultural Legacy . Thames & Hudson. pp. 86, 88.

ISBN 978-0-500-77753-4 .

^ Mikail Bayram, Ahi Evran ve Ahi Teşkilâtının Kuruluşu , Konya 1991, s.135 ^ Salih Özkan , Türk Eğitim Tarihi , Nobel Yayım Dağıtım, 2.basım Mart 2008, s.44 ISBN 978-605-395-089-9 ^ sabah, daily (17 August 2015).

"New insect species registered in Turkey" .

Daily Sabah . Retrieved 30 November 2021 .

Sources [ edit ] Öztürk, Özhan (2005).

Karadeniz : ansiklopedik sözlük (1. basım ed.). İstanbul: Heyamola Yayınları.

ISBN 975-6121-00-9 .

OCLC 63737636 .

"Alevi Önderleri (Horasan Piri Hünkar Hacı Bektaş Veli) |" . 26 April 2017. Archived from the original on 26 April 2017 . Retrieved 30 November 2021 .

"Haci Bektas Veli and Bektashi Order | All About Turkey" .

www.allaboutturkey.com . Retrieved 30 November 2021 .

"Traditional Institutions - Dervish Orders" .

www.ktb.gov.tr . Retrieved 30 November 2021 .

External links [ edit ] Ahilik ve Yaran Authority control databases International VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Israel People Deutsche Biographie Other İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX This Iranian biographical article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ahi_Evran&oldid=1300856443 " Categories : 1169 births 1261 deaths Medieval Islamic philosophers Iranian people stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Biography articles needing translation from Turkish Wikipedia Use dmy dates from March 2021 All stub articles This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 19:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ahi Evran 6 languages Add topic

