Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology and scope Toggle Terminology and scope subsection 1.1 Comparison with surface based diving operations 2 Technical classification and description Toggle Technical classification and description subsection 2.1 Architectural variations 2.2 Pressure modes 2.3 Components 2.4 Excursions 3 History Toggle History subsection 3.1 Historical underwater habitats 3.1.1 Man-in-the-Sea I and II 3.1.2 Conshelf I, II and III 3.1.3 SEALAB I, II and III 3.1.4 Tektite I and II 3.1.5 Hydrolab 3.1.6 Edalhab 3.1.7 BAH I 3.1.8 Helgoland 3.1.9 Bentos-300 3.1.10 Progetto Abissi 3.1.11 MarineLab 4 Existing underwater habitats Toggle Existing underwater habitats subsection 4.1 Aquarius 4.2 La Chalupa research laboratory 4.3 Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station 4.4 Lloyd Godson's Biosub 4.5 Galathée 4.6 Aquabulle 4.7 Hippocampe 4.8 Ithaa undersea restaurant 4.9 Red Sea Star 4.10 Eilat’s Coral World Underwater Observatory 4.11 Alpha Deep SeaPod 5 In popular culture 6 See also 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Sources 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Underwater habitat 8 languages Deutsch Eesti Nederlands 日本語 Português Română Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Underwater living ) Human habitable underwater enclosure filled with breathable gas This article is about underwater habitats for humans. For marine life habitats, see Marine habitats .

German underwater laboratory, "Helgoland", 2010 Underwater habitats are a form of subsea technology . They are underwater structures in which people can live for extended periods and carry out most of the basic human functions of a 24-hour day , such as working, resting, eating, attending to personal hygiene, and sleeping. In this context, ' habitat ' is generally used in a narrow sense to mean the interior and immediate exterior of the structure and its fixtures, but not its surrounding marine environment . Most early underwater habitats lacked regenerative systems for air, water, food, electricity, and other resources. However, some underwater habitats allow for these resources to be delivered using pipes, or generated within the habitat, rather than manually delivered.

[ 1 ] An underwater habitat has to meet the needs of human physiology and provide suitable environmental conditions, and the one which is most critical is breathing gas of suitable quality. Others concern the physical environment ( pressure , temperature , light , humidity ), the chemical environment ( drinking water , food , waste products , toxins ) and the biological environment (hazardous sea creatures, microorganisms , marine fungi ). Much of the science covering underwater habitats and their technology designed to meet human requirements is shared with diving , diving bells , submersible vehicles and submarines , and spacecraft . It incorporates various developments used in other forms of subsea technology .

Numerous underwater habitats have been designed, built and used around the world since as early as the start of the 1960s, either by private individuals or by government agencies.

[ 2 ] They have been used almost exclusively for research and exploration , but, in recent years, at least one underwater habitat has been provided for recreation and tourism . Research has been devoted particularly to the physiological processes and limits of breathing gases under pressure, for aquanaut , as well as astronaut training, and for research on marine ecosystems.

Terminology and scope [ edit ] The term 'underwater habitat' is used for a range of applications, including some structures that are not exclusively underwater while operational, but all include a significant underwater component. There may be some overlap between underwater habitats and submersible vessels, and between structures which are completely submerged and those which have some part extending above the surface when in operation.

In 1970 G. Haux stated: [ 3 ] At this point it must also be said that it is not easy to sharply define the term "underwater laboratory". One may argue whether Link's diving chamber which was used in the "Man-in-Sea I" project, may be called an underwater laboratory. But the Bentos 300, planned by the Soviets, is not so easy to classify as it has a certain ability to maneuver. Therefore, the possibility exists that this diving hull is classified elsewhere as a submersible. Well, a certain generosity can not hurt.

Comparison with surface based diving operations [ edit ] In an underwater habitat, observations can be carried out at any hour to study the behavior of both diurnal and nocturnal organisms.

[ 4 ] Habitats in shallow water can be used to accommodate divers from greater depths for a major portion of the decompression required. This principle was used in the project Conshelf II. Saturation dives provide the opportunity to dive with shorter intervals than possible from the surface, and risks associated with diving and ship operations at night can be minimized. In the habitat La Chalupa , 35% of all dives took place at night. To perform the same amount of useful work diving from the surface instead of from La Chalupa , an estimated eight hours of decompression time would have been necessary every day.

[ 5 ] However, maintaining an underwater habitat is much more expensive and logistically difficult than diving from the surface. It also restricts the diving to a much more limited area.

Technical classification and description [ edit ] Architectural variations [ edit ] Floating The habitat is in the underwater hull of a floating structure. In the Sea Orbiter example this part should reach a depth of 30 metres (98 ft). The advantage of this type is horizontal mobility. Safety logistics are also easier due to immediate access to the atmosphere.

Access shaft to the surface The habitat is accessible via a shaft to above the water surface. The depth of submersion is quite limited. However, normal atmospheric pressure can be maintained inside so that visitors do not have to undergo any decompression. This type is generally used inshore such as the underwater restaurant Ithaa in the Maldives or Red Sea Star (closed in 2012) in Eilat , Israel.

Semi-autonomous Habitats of this type are accessible only by diving, but energy and breathing gas are supplied by an umbilical cable. Most stations are of this type, such as Aquarius , SEALAB I and II and Helgoland Autonomous The station has its own reserves of energy and breathing gas and is able to maneuver itself (at least in the vertical direction). This type is similar to submarines or atmospheric diving suits, but it avoids complete environmental separation. Examples of this type include Conshelf III and Bentos-300 .

[ 6 ] Atmospheric pressure is a critical safety concern at all times.

Pressure modes [ edit ] Underwater habitats are designed to operate in two fundamental modes.

Open to ambient pressure via a moon pool , meaning the air pressure inside the habitat equals underwater pressure at the same level, such as SEALAB . This makes entry and exit easy as there is no physical barrier other than the moon pool water surface. Living in ambient pressure habitats is a form of saturation diving , and return to the surface will require appropriate decompression .

Closed to the sea by hatches, with internal air pressure less than ambient pressure and at or closer to atmospheric pressure ; entry or exit to the sea requires passing through hatches and an airlock . Decompression may be necessary when entering the habitat after a dive. This would be done in the airlock.

A third or composite type has compartments of both types within the same habitat structure and connected via airlocks, such as Aquarius .

Components [ edit ] Habitat The air filled underwater structure in which the occupants live and work Life support buoy (LSB) The floating structure moored to the habitat which provides energy, air, fresh water, telecommunication and telemetry. The connection between Habitat and LSB is made by a multi-core umbilical cable in which all hoses and cables are combined.

Personnel transfer capsule (PTC) Closed diving bell, a submersible decompression chamber which can be lowered to the habitat to transfer aquanauts back to the surface under pressure, where they can be transferred while still under pressure to a decompression chamber on the support vessel for safer decompression.

Deck decompression chamber (DDC) A decompression chamber on the support vessel.

Diving support vessel (DSV) Surface vessel used in support of diving operations Shore base station A shore establishment where operations can be monitored. It may include a diving control base, workshops and accommodation.

Excursions [ edit ] An excursion is a visit to the environment outside the habitat. Diving excursions can be done on scuba or umbilical supply, and are limited upwards by decompression obligations while on the excursion, and downwards by decompression obligations while returning from the excursion.

Open circuit or rebreather scuba have the advantage of mobility, but it is critical to the safety of a saturation diver to be able to get back to the habitat, as surfacing directly from saturation is likely to cause severe and probably fatal decompression sickness. For this reason, in most of the programs, signs and guide lines are installed around the habitat in order to prevent divers from getting lost.

Umbilicals or airline hoses are safer, as the breathing gas supply is unlimited, and the hose is a guideline back to the habitat, but they restrict freedom of movement and can become tangled.

[ 7 ] The horizontal extent of excursions is limited by the scuba air supply or the length of the umbilical. The distance above and below the level of the habitat are also limited and depend on the depth of the habitat and the associated saturation of the divers. The volume of the underwater environment available for excursions thus takes the shape of a vertical axis cylinder centred on the habitat.

As an example, in the Tektite I program, the habitat was located at a depth of 13.1 metres (43 ft). Excursions were limited vertically to a depth of 6.7 metres (22 ft) (6.4 m above the habitat) and 25.9 metres (85 ft) (12.8 m below the habitat level) and were horizontally limited to a distance of 549 metres (1,801 ft) from the Habitat.

[ 5 ] History [ edit ] The history of underwater habitats follows on from the previous development of diving bells and caissons , and as long exposure to a hyperbaric environment results in saturation of the body tissues with the ambient inert gases, it is also closely connected to the history of saturation diving . The original inspiration for the development of underwater habitats was the work of George F. Bond , who investigated the physiological and medical effects of hyperbaric saturation in the Genesis project between 1957 and 1963.

Edwin Albert Link started the Man-in-the-Sea project in 1962, which exposed divers to hyperbaric conditions underwater in a diving chamber, culminating in the first aquanaut , Robert Sténuit , spending over 24 hours at a depth of 200 feet (61 m).

[ 5 ] Also inspired by Genesis, Jacques-Yves Cousteau conducted the first Conshelf project in France in 1962 where two divers spent a week at a depth of 10 metres (33 ft), followed in 1963 by Conshelf II at 11 metres (36 ft) for a month and 25 metres (82 ft) for two weeks.

[ 8 ] In June 1964, Robert Sténuit and Jon Lindberg spent 49 hours at 126m in Link's Man-in-the-Sea II project. The habitat was an inflatable structure called SPID.

This was followed by a series of underwater habitats where people stayed for several weeks at great depths. Sealab II had a usable area of 63 square metres (680 sq ft), and was used at a depth of more than 60 metres (200 ft). Several countries built their own habitats at much the same time and mostly began experimenting in shallow waters. In Conshelf III six aquanauts lived for several weeks at a depth of 100 metres (330 ft). In Germany, the Helgoland UWL was the first habitat to be used in cold water, the Tektite stations were more spacious and technically more advanced. The most ambitious project was Sealab III, a rebuild of Sealab II, which was to be operated at 186 metres (610 ft). When one of the divers died in the preparatory phase due to human error, all similar projects of the United States Navy were terminated. Internationally, except for the La Chalupa Research Laboratory the large-scale projects were carried out, but not extended, so that the subsequent habitats were smaller and designed for shallower depths. The race for greater depths, longer missions and technical advances seemed to have come to an end.

For reasons such as lack of mobility, lack of self-sufficiency, shifting focus to space travel and transition to surface-based saturation systems, the interest in underwater habitats decreased, resulting in a noticeable decrease in major projects after 1970. In the mid eighties, the Aquarius habitat was built in the style of Sealab and Helgoland and is still in operation today.

Historical underwater habitats [ edit ] Man-in-the-Sea I and II [ edit ] Man-in-the-Sea I – a minimal habitat The first aquanaut was Robert Stenuit in the Man-in-the-Sea I project run by Edwin A. Link. On 6 September 1962, he spent 24 hours and 15 minutes at a depth of 61 metres (200 ft) in a steel cylinder, doing several excursions. In June 1964 Stenuit and Jon Lindbergh spent 49 hours at a depth of 126 metres (413 ft) in the Man-in-the-Sea II program. The habitat consisted of a submerged portable inflatable dwelling (SPID).

Conshelf I, II and III [ edit ] Conshelf II – Starfish Conshelf III Conshelf, short for Continental Shelf Station, was a series of undersea living and research stations undertaken by Jacques Cousteau's team in the 1960s. The original design was for five of these stations to be submerged to a maximum depth of 300 metres (1,000 ft) over the decade; in reality only three were completed with a maximum depth of 100 metres (330 ft). Much of the work was funded in part by the French petrochemical industry , who, along with Cousteau, hoped that such colonies could serve as base stations for the future exploitation of the sea. Such colonies did not find a productive future, however, as Cousteau later repudiated his support for such exploitation of the sea and put his efforts toward conservation. It was also found in later years that industrial tasks underwater could be more efficiently performed by undersea robot devices and men operating from the surface or from smaller lowered structures, made possible by a more advanced understanding of diving physiology. Still, these three undersea living experiments did much to advance man's knowledge of undersea technology and physiology, and were valuable as " proof of concept " constructs. They also did much to publicize oceanographic research and, ironically, usher in an age of ocean conservation through building public awareness. Along with Sealab and others, it spawned a generation of smaller, less ambitious yet longer-term undersea habitats primarily for marine research purposes.

[ 9 ] [ 2 ] Conshelf I (Continental Shelf Station), constructed in 1962, was the first inhabited underwater habitat. Developed by Cousteau to record basic observations of life underwater, Conshelf I was submerged in 10 metres (33 ft) of water near Marseille , and the first experiment involved a team of two spending seven days in the habitat. The two oceanauts, Albert Falco and Claude Wesly , were expected to spend at least five hours a day outside the station, and were subject to daily medical exams.

[ citation needed ] Conshelf Two , the first ambitious attempt for men to live and work on the sea floor, was launched in 1963. In it, a half-dozen oceanauts lived 10 metres (33 ft) down in the Red Sea off Sudan in a starfish -shaped house for 30 days. The undersea living experiment also had two other structures, one a submarine hangar that housed a small, two-man submarine named SP-350 Denise , often referred to as the "diving saucer" for its resemblance to a science fiction flying saucer, and a smaller "deep cabin" where two oceanauts lived at a depth of 30 metres (100 ft) for a week. They were among the first to breathe heliox , a mixture of helium and oxygen, avoiding the normal nitrogen /oxygen mixture, which, when breathed under pressure, can cause narcosis . The deep cabin was also an early effort in saturation diving , in which the aquanauts' body tissues were allowed to become totally saturated by the helium in the breathing mixture, a result of breathing the gases under pressure. The necessary decompression from saturation was accelerated by using oxygen enriched breathing gases.

[ citation needed ] They suffered no apparent ill effects.

[ citation needed ] The undersea colony was supported with air, water, food, power, all essentials of life, from a large support team above. Men on the bottom performed a number of experiments intended to determine the practicality of working on the sea floor and were subjected to continual medical examinations. Conshelf II was a defining effort in the study of diving physiology and technology, and captured wide public appeal due to its dramatic " Jules Verne " look and feel. A Cousteau-produced feature film about the effort ( World Without Sun ) was awarded an Academy Award for Best Documentary the following year.

[ 10 ] Conshelf III was initiated in 1965. Six divers lived in the habitat at 102.4 metres (336 ft) in the Mediterranean Sea near the Cap Ferrat lighthouse, between Nice and Monaco, for three weeks. In this effort, Cousteau was determined to make the station more self-sufficient, severing most ties with the surface. A mock oil rig was set up underwater, and divers successfully performed several industrial tasks.

[ citation needed ] SEALAB I, II and III [ edit ] Main article: SEALAB SEALAB I SEALAB II Artist's impression of SEALAB III SEALAB I, II, and III were experimental underwater habitats developed by the United States Navy in the 1960s to prove the viability of saturation diving and humans living in isolation for extended periods of time. The knowledge gained from the SEALAB expeditions helped advance the science of deep sea diving and rescue, and contributed to the understanding of the psychological and physiological strains humans can endure.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] The three SEALABs were part of the United States Navy Genesis Project. Preliminary research work was undertaken by George F. Bond . Bond began investigations in 1957 to develop theories about saturation diving . Bond's team exposed rats , goats , monkeys , and human beings to various gas mixtures at different pressures. By 1963 they had collected enough data to test the first SEALAB habitat.

[ 14 ] Tektite I and II [ edit ] Main article: Tektite habitat Tektite I habitat The Tektite underwater habitat was constructed by General Electric and was funded by NASA , the Office of Naval Research and the United States Department of the Interior .

[ 15 ] On 15 February 1969, four Department of the Interior scientists (Ed Clifton, Conrad Mahnken, Richard Waller and John VanDerwalker) descended to the ocean floor in Great Lameshur Bay in the United States Virgin Islands to begin an ambitious diving project dubbed "Tektite I". By 18 March 1969, the four aquanauts had established a new world's record for saturated diving by a single team. On 15 April 1969, the aquanaut team returned to the surface after performing 58 days of marine scientific studies. More than 19 hours of decompression were needed to safely return the team to the surface.

[ citation needed ] Inspired in part by NASA's budding Skylab program and an interest in better understanding the effectiveness of scientists working under extremely isolated living conditions, Tektite was the first saturation diving project to employ scientists rather than professional divers.

[ citation needed ] The term tektite generally refers to a class of meteorites formed by extremely rapid cooling. These include objects of celestial origins that strike the sea surface and come to rest on the bottom (note project Tektite's conceptual origins within the U.S space program).

[ citation needed ] The Tektite II missions were carried out in 1970. Tektite II comprised ten missions lasting 10 to 20 days with four scientists and an engineer on each mission. One of these missions included the first all-female aquanaut team, led by Dr.

Sylvia Earle . Other scientists participating in the all-female mission included Dr.

Renate True of Tulane University , as well as Ann Hartline and Alina Szmant, graduate students at Scripps Institute of Oceanography. The fifth member of the crew was Margaret Ann Lucas, a Villanova University engineering graduate, who served as Habitat Engineer. The Tektite II missions were the first to undertake in-depth ecological studies.

[ 16 ] Tektite II included 24 hour behavioral and mission observations of each of the missions by a team of observers [ 17 ] from the University of Texas at Austin . Selected episodic events and discussions were videotaped using cameras in the public areas of the habitat. Data about the status, location and activities of each of the 5 members of each mission was collected via key punch data cards every six minutes during each mission. This information was collated and processed by BellComm [ 18 ] and was used for the support of papers written about the research concerning the relative predictability of behavior patterns of mission participants in constrained, dangerous conditions for extended periods of time, such as those that might be encountered in crewed spaceflight.

[ 19 ] The Tektite habitat was designed and built by General Electric Space Division at the Valley Forge Space Technology Center in King of Prussia, Pennsylvania . The Project Engineer who was responsible for the design of the habitat was Brooks Tenney, Jr. Tenney also served as the underwater Habitat Engineer on the International Mission, the last mission on the Tektite II project. The Program Manager for the Tektite projects at General Electric was Dr. Theodore Marton.

[ citation needed ] Hydrolab [ edit ] Exterior of Hydrolab Inside Hydrolab Hydrolab was constructed in 1966 at a cost of $60,000 [ 20 ] ($560,000 in today's currency) and used as a research station from 1970. The project was in part funded by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). Hydrolab could house four people. Approximately 180 Hydrolab missions were conducted—100 missions in The Bahamas during the early to mid-1970s, and 80 missions off Saint Croix, U.S. Virgin Islands , from 1977 to 1985. These scientific missions are chronicled in the Hydrolab Journal .

[ 21 ] Dr.

William Fife spent 28 days in saturation, performing physiology experiments on researchers such as Dr.

Sylvia Earle .

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] The habitat was decommissioned in 1985 and placed on display at the Smithsonian Institution 's National Museum of Natural History in Washington, D.C.

As of 2017 [update] , the habitat is located at the NOAA Auditorium and Science Center at National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) headquarters in Silver Spring, Maryland.

[ citation needed ] Edalhab [ edit ] EDALHAB 01 The Engineering Design and Analysis Laboratory Habitat was a horizontal cylinder 2.6 m high, 3.3 m long and weighing 14 tonnes was built by students of the Engineering Design and Analysis Laboratory in the US at a cost of $20,000 [ 20 ] or $187,000 in today's currency. From 26 April 1968, four students spent 48 hours and 6 minutes in this habitat in Alton Bay, New Hampshire. Two further missions followed to 12.2 m.

[ 24 ] In the 1972 Edalhab II Florida Aquanaut Research Expedition experiments, the University of New Hampshire and NOAA used nitrox as a breathing gas.

[ 25 ] In the three FLARE missions, the habitat was positioned off Miami at a depth of 13.7 m. The conversion to this experiment increased the weight of the habitat to 23 tonnes.

BAH I [ edit ] Underwater laboratory BAH-1 at the Nautineum, Stralsund BAH I (for Biological Institute Helgoland ) had a length of 6 m and a diameter of 2 m. It weighed about 20 tons and was intended for a crew of two people.

[ 26 ] The first mission in September 1968 with Jürgen Dorschel and Gerhard Lauckner at 10 m depth in the Baltic Sea lasted 11 days. In June 1969, a one-week flat-water mission took place in Lake Constance. In attempting to anchor the habitat at 47 m, the structure was flooded with the two divers in it and sank to the seabed. It was decided to lift it with the two divers according to the necessary decompression profile and nobody was harmed.

[ 5 ] BAH I provided valuable experience for the much larger underwater laboratory Helgoland. In 2003 it was taken over as a technical monument by the Technical University of Clausthal-Zellerfeld and in the same year went on display at the Nautineum Stralsund on Kleiner Dänholm island.

[ 27 ] Helgoland [ edit ] Main article: Helgoland Habitat The Helgoland underwater laboratory (UWL) at Nautineum, Stralsund (Germany) The Helgoland underwater laboratory (UWL) is an underwater habitat. It was built in Lübeck , Germany in 1968, and was the first of its kind in the world built for use in colder waters.

[ 28 ] The 14 meter long, 7 meter diameter UWL allowed divers to spend several weeks under water using saturation diving techniques. The scientists and technicians would live and work in the laboratory, returning to it after every diving session. At the end of their stay they decompressed in the UWL, and could resurface without decompression sickness.

The UWL was used in the waters of the North and Baltic Seas and, in 1975, on Jeffreys Ledge , in the Gulf of Maine off the coast of New England in the United States.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] At the end of the 1970s it was decommissioned and in 1998 donated to the German Oceanographic Museum where it can be visited at the Nautineum , a branch of the museum in Stralsund .

Bentos-300 [ edit ] Hulk of soviet experimental submarine "Bentos-300" (project 1603) for underwater biological research Bentos-300 (Bentos minus 300) was a maneuverable Soviet submersible with a diver lockout facility that could be stationed at the seabed. It was able to spend two weeks underwater at a maximum depth of 300m with about 25 people on board. Although announced in 1966, it had its first deployment in 1977.

[ 5 ] [1] There were two vessels in the project. After Bentos-300 sank in the Russian Black Sea port of Novorossiisk in 1992, several attempts to recover it failed. In November 2011 it was cut up and recovered for scrap in the following six months.

[ citation needed ] Progetto Abissi [ edit ] Progetto Abissi habitat The Italian Progetto Abissi habitat, also known as La Casa in Fondo al Mare (Italian for The House at the Bottom of the Sea), was designed by the diving team Explorer Team Pellicano, consisted of three cylindrical chambers and served as a platform for a television game show. It was deployed for the first time in September 2005 for ten days, and six aquanauts lived in the complex for 14 days in 2007.

[ 31 ] MarineLab [ edit ] The MarineLab underwater laboratory was the longest serving seafloor habitat in history, having operated continuously from 1984 to 2018 under the direction of aquanaut Chris Olstad at Key Largo , Florida. The seafloor laboratory has trained hundreds of individuals in that time, featuring an extensive array of educational and scientific investigations from United States military investigations to pharmaceutical development.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Beginning with a project initiated in 1973, MarineLab, then known as Midshipman Engineered & Designed Undersea Systems Apparatus (MEDUSA), was designed and built as part of an ocean engineering student program at the United States Naval Academy under the direction of Dr. Neil T. Monney. In 1983, MEDUSA was donated to the Marine Resources Development Foundation (MRDF), and in 1984 was deployed on the seafloor in John Pennekamp Coral Reef State Park, Key Largo, Florida. The 2.4-by-4.9-metre (8 by 16 ft) shore-supported habitat supports three or four persons and is divided into a laboratory, a wet-room, and a 1.7-metre-diameter (5 ft 7 in) transparent observation sphere. From the beginning, it has been used by students for observation, research, and instruction. In 1985, it was renamed MarineLab and moved to the 9-metre-deep (30 ft) mangrove lagoon at MRDF headquarters in Key Largo at a depth of 8.3 metres (27 ft) with a hatch depth of 6 m (20 ft). The lagoon contains artifacts and wrecks placed there for education and training. From 1993 to 1995, NASA used MarineLab repeatedly to study Controlled Ecological Life Support Systems (CELLS). These education and research programs qualify MarineLab as the world's most extensively used habitat.

[ citation needed ] MarineLab was used as an integral part of the "Scott Carpenter, Man in the Sea" Program.

[ 34 ] In 2018 the habitat was retired and restored to its 1985 condition and is on display to the public at Marine Resources Development Foundation, Inc. Key Largo, Florida.

[ 33 ] Existing underwater habitats [ edit ] Aquarius [ edit ] Main article: Aquarius (laboratory) Aquarius underwater laboratory on Conch Reef, off the Florida Keys.

Aquarius laboratory underwater Aquarius laboratory on shore The Aquarius Reef Base is an underwater habitat located 5.4 miles (9 kilometers) off Key Largo in the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary . It is deployed on the ocean floor 62 feet (19 m) below the surface and next to a deep coral reef named Conch Reef .

Aquarius is one of three undersea laboratories in the world dedicated to science and education. Two additional undersea facilities, also located in Key Largo, Florida , are owned and operated by Marine Resources Development Foundation. Aquarius was owned by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and operated by the University of North Carolina–Wilmington [ 35 ] until 2013 when Florida International University assumed operational control.

[ 36 ] Florida International University (FIU) took ownership of Aquarius in October 2014. As part of the FIU Marine Education and Research Initiative, the Medina Aquarius Program is dedicated to the study and preservation of marine ecosystems worldwide and is enhancing the scope and impact of FIU on research, educational outreach, technology development, and professional training. At the heart of the program is the Aquarius Reef Base.

[ 37 ] La Chalupa research laboratory [ edit ] La Chalupa research laboratory, now known as Jules' Undersea Lodge In the early 1970s, Ian Koblick, president of Marine Resources Development Foundation, developed and operated the La Chalupa [ 38 ] research laboratory, which was the largest and most technologically advanced underwater habitat of its time.

[ citation needed ] Koblick, who has continued his work as a pioneer in developing advanced undersea programs for ocean science and education, is the co-author of the book Living and Working in the Sea and is considered one of the foremost authorities on undersea habitation.

[ citation needed ] La Chalupa was operated off Puerto Rico . During the habitat's launching for its second mission, a steel cable wrapped around Dr. Lance Rennka's left wrist, shattering his arm, which he subsequently lost to gas gangrene .

[ 39 ] In the mid-1980s La Chalupa was transformed into Jules' Undersea Lodge in Key Largo , Florida. Jules' co-developer, Dr. Neil Monney, formerly served as Professor and Director of Ocean Engineering at the U.S. Naval Academy, and has extensive experience as a research scientist, aquanaut and designer of underwater habitats.

[ citation needed ] La Chalupa was used as the primary platform for the Scott Carpenter Man in the Sea Program, [ 40 ] an underwater analog to Space Camp . Unlike Space Camp, which utilizes simulations, participants performed scientific tasks while using actual saturation diving systems . This program, envisioned by Ian Koblick and Scott Carpenter , was directed by Phillip Sharkey with operational help of Chris Olstad . Also used in the program was the MarineLab Underwater Habitat, the submersible Sea Urchin (designed and built by Phil Nuytten ), and an Oceaneering Saturation Diving system consisting of an on-deck decompression chamber and a diving bell . La Chalupa was the site of the first underwater computer chat, [ citation needed ] a session hosted on GEnie 's Scuba RoundTable (the first non-computing related area on GEnie) by then-director Sharkey from inside the habitat. Divers from all over the world were able to direct questions to him and to Commander Carpenter.

[ citation needed ] Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station [ edit ] Main article: Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station The Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station was launched near Key Largo on six-week missions in 1997 and 1998.

[ 41 ] The station was a NASA project illustrating the analogous science and engineering concepts common to both undersea and space missions. During the missions, some 20 aquanauts rotated through the undersea station including NASA scientists, engineers and director James Cameron . The SCSAS was designed by NASA engineer Dennis Chamberland .

[ 41 ] Lloyd Godson's Biosub [ edit ] This section may contain excessive or inappropriate references to self-published sources .

Please help improve it by removing references to unreliable sources where they are used inappropriately.

( May 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Lloyd Godson's Biosub was an underwater habitat, built in 2007 for a competition by Australian Geographic. The Biosub [ 42 ] generated its own electricity (using a bike); its own water, using the Air2Water Dragon Fly M18 system; and its own air, using algae that produce O 2 . The algae were fed using the Cascade High School Advanced Biology Class Biocoil .

[ 43 ] The habitat shelf itself was constructed by Trygons Designs .

Galathée [ edit ] Galathée Underwater Laboratory and Habitat – 1977 The first underwater habitat built by Jacques Rougerie was launched and immersed on 4 August 1977.

[ 44 ] The unique feature of this semi-mobile habitat- laboratory is that it can be moored at any depth between 9 and 60 metres, which gives it the capability of phased integration in the marine environment. This habitat therefore has a limited impact on the marine ecosystem and is easy to position. Galathée was experienced by Jacques Rougerie himself.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] [ clarification needed ] Aquabulle [ edit ] Aquabulle, Underwater Laboratory – 1978 Launched for the first time in March 1978, this underwater shelter suspended in midwater (between 0 and 60 metres) is a mini scientific observatory 2.8 metres high by 2.5 metres in diameter.

[ 47 ] The Aquabulle , created and experienced by Jacques Rougerie, can accommodate three people for a period of several hours and acts as an underwater refuge. A series of Aquabulles were later built and some are still being used by laboratories.

[ 44 ] [ 48 ] Hippocampe [ edit ] Hippocampe, Underwater Habitat – 1981 This underwater habitat, created by a French architect, Jacques Rougerie , was launched in 1981 to act as a scientific base suspended in midwater using the same method as Galathée.

[ 47 ] Hippocampe can accommodate 2 people on saturation dives up to a depth of 12 metres for periods of 7 to 15 days, and was also designed to act as a subsea logistics base for the offshore industry.

[ 44 ] Ithaa undersea restaurant [ edit ] Main article: Ithaa Interior of the Ithaa restaurant Ithaa ( Dhivehi for mother of pearl ) is the world's only fully glazed underwater restaurant and is located in the Conrad Maldives Rangali Island hotel.

[ 49 ] It is accessible via a corridor from above the water and is open to the atmosphere, so there is no need for compression or decompression procedures.

Ithaa was built by M.J. Murphy Ltd, and has an unballasted mass of 175 tonnes.

[ 50 ] Red Sea Star [ edit ] Red Sea Star in Eilat The "Red Sea Star" restaurant in Eilat, Israel, consisted of three modules: an entrance area above the water surface, a restaurant with 62 panorama windows 6 m under water and a ballast area below. The entire construction weighs about 6000 tons. The restaurant had a capacity of 105 people.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] It shut down in 2012.

[ 53 ] Eilat’s Coral World Underwater Observatory [ edit ] Underwater observatory in Eilat, Israel.

The first part of Eilat 's Coral World Underwater Observatory was built in 1975 and it was expanded in 1991 by adding a second underwater observatory connected by a tunnel. The underwater complex is accessible via a footbridge from the shore and a shaft from above the water surface. The observation area is at a depth of approximately 12 m.

[ 54 ] Alpha Deep SeaPod [ edit ] Alpha Deep SeaPod Alpha Deep SeaPod is located off the coast of Puerto Lindo in Portobelo . The Pod was commissioned on the 5th of Feb, 2024. It is currently operational and serves as the residence of its owner. The floating residence provides living quarters with 360-degree panoramic views, while the underwater capsule serves as a 300-square-foot (about 28-square-meter) functional living space.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] In popular culture [ edit ] See also: Category:Underwater civilizations in fiction See also [ edit ] Accommodation platform – A platform designed to provide living quarters for people.

Ichthyander Project – Soviet underwater habitat project of the 1960s Artificial gills (human) – Hypothetical devices to extract oxygen from water Saturation diving – Diving mode and decompression technique Human outpost – Human habitats located in environments inhospitable for humans Research station – Facility for scientific research Observatory – Location used for observing terrestrial or celestial events NASA Extreme Environment Mission Operations ( NEEMO ) – NASA Extreme Environment Mission Operation project Offshore construction – Installation of structures and facilities in a marine environment Offshore platform – Platform for offshore work, typically petroleum production Space station – Habitable artificial satellite References [ edit ] ^ Ceurstemont, Sandrine (23 April 2007).

"Living Underwater" .

FirstScience . Archived from the original on 29 February 2012.

^ a b Adler, Antony (2020). "Deep horizons: Canada's underwater habitat program and vertical dimensions of marine sovereignty".

Centaurus .

62 (4): 763– 782.

doi : 10.1111/1600-0498.12287 .

S2CID 225413688 .

^ Haux, G. (2013).

"Technishe Daten, Erseinsätze und Einsatztiefen von bemannten Unterwasserstationen" .

Tauchtechnik, Volume 2 . Springer-Verlag. p. 277.

ISBN 978-3-642-88352-1 .

Originally published as: Tauchtechnik, 1970.

^ Collette, Bruce B. (1972). Results of the Tektite program: Ecology of coral-reef fishes (Report). Los Angeles: Natural History Museum, Los Angeles County.

^ a b c d e Miller, James W.; Koblick, Ian G. (1984).

Living & Working in the Sea . New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold Company.

ISBN 978-0-442-26084-2 .

^ Sealab I Project Group (14 June 1965). Project Sealab Summary Report: An Experimental Eleven-Day Undersea Saturation Dive at 193 Feet.

ONR Report ACR-108 (Report). Washington, D.C.: Office of Naval Research. Dep. of the Navy.

^ Johns, Keneth D. Scientific Diver Rebreather Fatality: An Incident Review.

AAUS_2013_18 (Report). Wilmington, North Carolina: University of North Carolina Wilmington.

^ "Conshelf I, II & III" .

www.cousteau.org . Cousteau Society. Archived from the original on 9 June 2014 . Retrieved 25 April 2017 .

^ Adler, Antony (2019).

Neptune's Laboratory: Fantasy, Fear, and Science at Sea . Harvard University Press. pp.

106– 111.

ISBN 978-0674972018 .

^ "The 37th Academy Awards | 1965" .

Oscars.org | Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences .

Archived from the original on 2 April 2015 . Retrieved 12 October 2016 .

^ Clarke, T.A.; Flechsig, A.O.; Grigg, R.W. (September 1967). "Ecological studies during Project Sealab II. A sand-bottom community at depth of 61 meters and the fauna attracted to "Sealab II" are investigated".

Science .

157 (3795): 1381– 9.

Bibcode : 1967Sci...157.1381C .

doi : 10.1126/science.157.3795.1381 .

PMID 4382569 .

^ Crowley, R.W.; Summitt, J.K. (1970). Report of Experimental Dives for SEALAB III Surface Support Decompression Schedules.

US Navy Experimental Diving Unit Technical Report (Report). Vol. NEDU-RR-15-70.

^ Kuling, J.W.; Summitt, J.K. (1970). "Saturation Dives, with Excursions, for the Development of a Decompression Schedule for Use during SEALAB III".

Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine Technical Report . NEDU-RR-9-70.

^ Chamberland, Dennis (1986). "Sealab: Unfinished Legacy".

Proceedings .

112 (1).

United States Naval Institute : 72– 82.

^ Starck WA, Miller JW (September 1970).

"Tektite: expectations and costs" .

Science .

169 (3952): 1264– 5.

Bibcode : 1970Sci...169.1264S .

doi : 10.1126/science.169.3952.1264-a .

PMID 5454136 .

S2CID 19479809 . Retrieved 8 July 2008 .

^ Collette, B.B. (1996). Lang, M.A.; Baldwin, C.C. (eds.). Results of the Tektite Program: Ecology of coral-reef fishes.

The Diving for Science...1996, "Methods and Techniques of Underwater Research" Proceedings of the American Academy of Underwater Sciences Sixteenth Annual Scientific Diving Symposium, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.

(Report).

^ TEKTITE II Behavior Observer's Manual Archived 2020-09-25 at the Wayback Machine UT Austin, 1970 ^ Tektite II Data Management/Handling Case 103-7 Archived 2021-01-26 at the Wayback Machine 28 September 1970 by M.J. Reynolds ^ The TEKTITE II Human Behavior Program September 1971, UT Austin, Robert Helmreich ^ a b High, W. L.; Ellis, I. E.; Schroeder, W. W.; Loverich, G. (1973). "Evaluation of the undersea habitats - Tektite II, Hydro-Lab, and Edalhab - for scientific saturation diving programs".

Helgoländer Wissenschaftliche Meeresuntersuchungen .

24 ( 1– 4): 16– 44.

Bibcode : 1973HWM....24...16H .

doi : 10.1007/BF01609497 .

ISSN 0017-9957 .

^ Hydrolab Journal OCLC number 3289185 ^ Fife, William P.; Schroeder, W. (1973). "Effects of the Hydrolab environment on pulmonary function".

Hydrolab J .

2 : 73.

^ Fife, William P; Schroeder, W. (1973). "Measurement of metabolic rate in aquanauts".

Hydrolab J .

2 : 81.

^ "University of New Hampshire: Guide to the Engineering Design and Analysis Laboratory Habitat (EDALHAB) Files, 1967–1978" . Archived from the original on 23 October 2016 . Retrieved 23 October 2016 .

^ "Periscope Film: Science Screen Report on YouTube" .

YouTube . Archived from the original on 23 October 2016 . Retrieved 23 October 2016 .

^ "Unterwasserstation BAH I" (in German) . Retrieved 12 September 2016 .

^ "NAUTINEUM verleiht Unterwasserstation und Haitauchfahrzeug" (in German). 10 August 2016 . Retrieved 12 September 2016 .

^ "Helgoland" (in German). Archived from the original on 2 December 2007.

^ Miller, James W.; Koblick, Ian G.

(1984).

Living and Working in the Sea .

New York, New York : Van Nostrand Reinhold Company . pp.

115– 116.

ISBN 978-0-442-26084-2 .

^ Pratt, Wes.

"Helgoland Mission to the Seafloor" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 January 2017 . Retrieved 30 April 2017 .

^ "Explorer Team Pellicano Homepage" (in Italian) . Retrieved 7 December 2016 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "MarineLab: Marine Science Education in the Florida Keys" .

www.marinelab.org .

^ a b "MarineLab Undersea Laboratory" .

www.mrdf.org . Marine Resources Development Foundation . Retrieved 7 September 2022 .

^ Tracy Kornfeld - WOWIE Web Design.

"Sealab" .

^ Shepard, Andrew N.; Dinsmore, David A.; Miller, Steven L.; Cooper, Craig B.

; Wicklund, Robert I. (1996). Lang, M.A.; Baldwin, C.C. (eds.). Aquarius undersea laboratory: The next generation.

The Diving for Science…1996, "Methods and Techniques of Underwater Research" (Report). Vol. Proceedings of the American Academy of Underwater Sciences.

^ Ho, Leonard (15 January 2013).

"It's Official: Aquarius Reef Base still in business" .

Advanced Aquarist . Pomacanthus Publications.

Archived from the original on 17 July 2017 . Retrieved 17 January 2013 .

^ Communications, Florida International University-Digital.

"About" .

aquarius.fiu.edu .

^ "Chalupa", a feminine noun, means "small boat" in Spanish.

^ Ecott, Tim (2001).

Neutral Buoyancy: Adventures in a Liquid World . New York: Atlantic Monthly Press . p. 275.

ISBN 978-0-87113-794-4 .

LCCN 2001018840 .

^ Sharkey, Phillip (May 1996). "The Scott Carpenter Man in the Sea Program".

Sources, the Journal of Underwater Education . Montclair CA: National Association of Underwater Instructors.

^ a b "Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station" . NASA Quest. Archived from the original on 25 September 2008 . Retrieved 26 December 2008 .

^ Godson, Lloyd.

"BioSUB" .

www.lloydgodson.com/ .

Archived from the original on 2012-08-26 . Retrieved 2012-07-15 .

^ "BioSub specifics" .

www.biosub.com.au .

Archived from the original on 2009-10-14 . Retrieved 2010-02-01 .

^ a b c "SeaOrbiter's Website" .

Archived from the original on 2013-07-22 . Retrieved 2012-11-29 .

^ Jacques Rougerie, un architecte de la mer "immortel" . 25 November 2009.

Archived from the original on 17 November 2021 – via YouTube.

^ De Vingt milles lieues sous les mers à SeaOrbiter, plongez dans l'univers de Jacques Rougerie . 27 November 2012.

Archived from the original on 17 November 2021 – via YouTube.

^ a b EURONEWS - SeaOrbiter - The vessel on and under the oceans - En . 15 June 2012.

Archived from the original on 17 November 2021 – via YouTube.

^ Du Nautilus à SeaOrbiter - Grande Histoire des Océans - Arte . 28 June 2012.

Archived from the original on 17 November 2021 – via YouTube.

^ "Ithaa Undersea Restaurant" .

Restaurants and Lounges . Conrad Maldives Rangali Island . Retrieved 7 May 2017 .

^ "Undersea Restaurants" .

www.mjmurphy.co.nz . M.J. Murphy Ltd. 2007. Archived from the original on 22 November 2019 . Retrieved 7 May 2017 .

^ "The Red Sea Star: Underwater observatory, restaurant and bar" . Archived from the original on 4 April 2016 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 .

^ Cohen, Edie (July 1999). "Under The Sea".

Interior Design Magazine : 142.

^ "Deserted Places: An abandoned underwater strip club in Israel" . 31 July 2013.

^ "History" .

The Underwater Observatory Marine Park Eilat . www.coralworld.co.il.

Archived from the original on 17 August 2017 . Retrieved 6 May 2017 .

^ "I'm living underwater for months to break a record" .

New York Post . 4 December 2024 . Retrieved 2025-01-23 .

^ "Can humans live under the sea? Engineer attempts world record to prove it's a good option" .

MSN . Retrieved 2025-01-23 .

Sources [ edit ] Gregory Stone: "Deep Science".

Archived 2007-10-17 at the Wayback Machine National Geographic Online Extra (Sept 2003). Retrieved 29 July 2007.

BBC.

Living under the sea External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Undersea habitats .

US Naval Undersea Museum SEALAB II Display v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐mz2kh
Cached time: 20250814220145
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.258 seconds
Real time usage: 1.533 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 10777/1000000
Revision size: 60135/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 625868/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 15232/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 18/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 198717/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.666/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 27693130/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1085.438      1 -total
 33.04%  358.580      1 Template:Reflist
 15.01%  162.924     25 Template:Cite_web
 14.62%  158.705      1 Template:Underwater_diving
 14.23%  154.467      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 14.05%  152.550     11 Template:Annotated_link
 10.85%  117.767     16 Template:Citation_needed
  8.97%   97.352     17 Template:Fix
  7.55%   81.929     35 Template:Navbox
  5.54%   60.149      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1480126:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220145 and revision id 1303173751. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Underwater_habitat&oldid=1303173751 " Categories : Underwater habitats Pressure vessels Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Webarchive template wayback links CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Italian-language sources (it) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2011 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2017 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2013 Articles with self-published sources from May 2025 All articles with self-published sources Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2017 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 13:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Underwater habitat 8 languages Add topic

