Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Example 2 Related terms 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Terminus post quem 11 languages Deutsch Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latina Norsk bokmål Polski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Earliest date possible for something The coins of Azes II found inside the Bimaran casket provide a terminus post quem : for the coins to have been placed inside, the casket was necessarily consecrated after the beginning of the reign of Azes II.

A terminus post quem ('limit after which', sometimes abbreviated TPQ ) and terminus ante quem ('limit before which', abbreviated TAQ ) specify the known limits of dating for events or items.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] A terminus post quem is the earliest date the event may have happened or the item was in existence, and a terminus ante quem is the latest.  An event may well have both a terminus post quem and a terminus ante quem , in which case the limits of the possible range of dates are known at both ends, but many events have just one or the other.  Similarly, a terminus ad quem 'limit to which' is the latest possible date of a non-punctual event (period, era, etc.), whereas a terminus a quo 'limit from which' is the earliest. The concepts are similar to those of upper and lower bounds in mathematics.

These terms are often used in archaeological and historical studies, such as dating layers in excavated sites, coins, historical events, authors, inscriptions or texts where the exact dates may not be known or may be in dispute.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Example [ edit ] The Phoenician inscription on the sarcophagus of Ahiram is the earliest known example of the fully developed Phoenician alphabet . For some scholars, it represents the terminus post quem of the transmission of the alphabet to Europe.

For example, consider an archaeological find of a burial that contains coins dating to 1588, 1595, and others less securely dated to 1590–1625.  The terminus post quem for the burial would be the latest date established with certainty: in this case, 1595. A secure dating of an older coin to an earlier date would not shift the terminus post quem .

An archaeological example of a terminus ante quem would be deposits formed before a historically dateable event, such as building foundations that were partly demolished to make way for the construction of a city wall. If it is known that the wall was finished in 650, then the foundations must have been demolished in 650 or earlier; all that can be said from the evidence is that it happened before the known event.

Other examples of things that may establish a terminus are known dates of death or travel by persons involved, a particular form of heraldry that can be dated (see pastiglia for example), references to reigning monarchs or office-holders, or a placing relative to any other events whose date is securely known. In a modern context, dated images, such as those available in Google Earth , may establish termini.

Related terms [ edit ] A terminus ante quem non differs from a terminus post quem by not implying the event necessarily took place.  'Event E happened after time T' implies E occurred, whereas 'event E did not happen before time T' leaves open the possibility that E never occurred at all.

[ dubious – discuss ] In project planning , sometimes the phrases "no earlier than" / "no later than" (NET/NLT) are used.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Interval (time) List of Latin phrases Relative dating References [ edit ] ^ Grant, Jim; Gorin, Sam; Fleming, Neil (2005), The archaeology coursebook: an introduction to study skills, topics and methods (2 ed.), Taylor & Francis, p. 90, ISBN 978-0-415-36077-7 .

^ a b Barker, P. (1993).

Techniques of Archaeological Excavation . Batsford. pp.

224– 226.

ISBN 978-0-7134-7169-4 .

^ a b Comfort, P.W. (2005).

Encountering the Manuscripts: An Introduction to New Testament Paleography & Textual Criticism . Broadman & Holman. pp.

104– 106.

ISBN 978-0-8054-3145-2 .

v t e Chronology Key topics Archaeology Astronomy Geology History Big History Paleontology Time Periods Eras Epochs Calendar eras Human Era Ab urbe condita Anno Domini / Common Era Anno Mundi Bosporan era Bostran era Byzantine era Seleucid era Era of Caesar (Iberia) Before Present Hijri Egyptian Sothic cycle Hindu units of time ( Yuga ) Mesoamerican Long Count Short Count Tzolkʼin Haabʼ Regnal year Anka year Canon of Kings English and British regnal year Lists of kings Limmu Era names Chinese Japanese Korean Vietnamese Calendars Pre-Julian / Julian Pre-Julian Roman Original Julian Proleptic Julian Revised Julian Gregorian Gregorian Proleptic Gregorian Old Style and New Style dates Adoption of the Gregorian calendar Dual dating Astronomical Lunisolar ( Hebrew , Hindu ) Solar Lunar ( Islamic ) Astronomical year numbering Others Chinese sexagenary cycle Geologic Calendar Iranian ISO week date Mesoamerican Maya Aztec Winter count New Earth Time Astronomic time Cosmic Calendar Ephemeris Galactic year Metonic cycle Milankovitch cycles Geologic time Concepts Deep time Geological history of Earth Geological time units Standards Global Standard Stratigraphic Age (GSSA) Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP) Methods Chronostratigraphy Geochronology Isotope geochemistry Law of superposition Luminescence dating Samarium–neodymium dating Chronological dating Absolute dating Amino acid racemisation Archaeomagnetic dating Dendrochronology Ice core Incremental dating Lichenometry Paleomagnetism Radiometric dating Lead–lead Potassium–argon Radiocarbon Uranium–lead Tephrochronology Luminescence dating Thermoluminescence dating Relative dating Fluorine absorption Nitrogen dating Obsidian hydration Seriation Stratigraphy Genetic methods Molecular clock Linguistic methods Glottochronology Related topics Chronicle New Chronology Synchronoptic view Timeline Year zero Floruit Terminus post quem ASPRO chronology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Terminus_post_quem&oldid=1256469116 " Categories : Latin words and phrases Dating methods Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from August 2018 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 This page was last edited on 10 November 2024, at 02:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Terminus post quem 11 languages Add topic

