Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Personal life 2 Education 3 Career 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Wander Johannes de Haas 21 languages تۆرکجه Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Kreyòl ayisyen Magyar მარგალური Nederlands Norsk nynorsk Português Română Русский Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dutch physicist (1878–1960) In this article, Dutch  capitalization is used for tussenvoegsels in Dutch family names . The first letter in De Haas  is capitalized unless it is preceded by a name, initial or title of nobility.

W. J. de Haas De Haas in 1925 Born ( 1878-03-02 ) 2 March 1878 Lisse , Netherlands Died 26 April 1960 (1960-04-26) (aged 82) Bilthoven , Netherlands Alma mater University of Leiden Known for De Haas–Van Alphen effect Shubnikov–de Haas effect Einstein–de Haas effect Spouse Geertruida de Haas-Lorentz Awards Rumford Medal (1934) Scientific career Fields Physicist Institutions University of Leiden TU Delft Doctoral advisor Heike Kamerlingh Onnes Other academic advisors Johannes Petrus Kuenen Doctoral students Cornelis Jacobus Gorter Gerardus J. Sizoo Notes He was the husband of Geertruida Luberta Lorentz and the son-in-law of Hendrik Lorentz .

Wander Johannes de Haas (2 March 1878 – 26 April 1960) was a Dutch physicist and mathematician . He is best known for the Shubnikov–de Haas effect , the De Haas–Van Alphen effect and the Einstein–de Haas effect .

Personal life [ edit ] Wander de Haas was born in Lisse , a small town near Leiden . He was the son of Albertus de Haas, principal of the Teacher's College in Middelburg , and Maria Efting. On 22 December 1910 he married physicist Geertruida Luberta Lorentz , the eldest daughter of Hendrik Lorentz . They had two daughters and two sons. He was an atheist.

[ 1 ] Education [ edit ] After attending high school in Middelburg , De Haas started paralegal studies in 1895. After completion of two of three parts of the examinations and having worked in a lawyer's office for some time, he decided to change career and become a physicist instead. After passing the qualifications exams for admission to University, he started to study physics at the University of Leiden in 1900 under Heike Kamerlingh Onnes and Johannes Petrus Kuenen . He earned his doctorate in 1912, under Kamerlingh Onnes, with a thesis entitled: Measurements on the Compressibility of Hydrogen .

[ 2 ] Career [ edit ] After getting his degree, De Haas worked in Berlin as a researcher at the Physikalische Reichsanstalt . Then he returned to the Netherlands, worked as a schoolteacher in Deventer , a conservator of the Teylers Museum in Haarlem , and then a physics professor in Delft Technical School and University of Groningen . In 1925, he became a professor in Leiden, and one of the two heads of the Laboratory of physics, succeeding Kamerlingh Onnes. In 1948, De Haas retired.

[ 3 ] An example of the equipment (an electromagnet of c.1930) used for his low-temperature research can be seen in the Boerhaave Museum , the history of science museum in Leiden.

In 1922 he became member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences . Twenty years later, in 1942, he was forced to resign. After World War II ended in 1945, he was allowed to rejoin as a member.

[ 3 ] References [ edit ] ^ Dirk van Delft (2005).

"Heike Kamerlingh Onnes. Een biografie" .

dbnl (in Dutch) . Retrieved 2019-08-07 .

^ Wander Johannes de Haas (1912).

"Metingen over de compressibiliteit van waterstof, in het bijzonder van waterstofdamp bij en beneden het kookpunt" (PDF) (in Dutch).

^ a b "Wander Johannes de Haas (1878 - 1960)" . Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences . Retrieved 28 July 2015 .

External links [ edit ] De Haas' math genealogy Albert van Helden, Biography, Wander Johannes de Haas 1878–1960 (Digital Library of Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences [1] ). Originally published in: K. van Berkel, A. van Helden and L. Palm, ed., A History of Science in The Netherlands, Survey, Themes and Reference, pp. 454–456 (Leiden, Brill, 1999).

Wander Johannes de Haas, 1878–1960 @ Instituut-Lorentz for theoretical physics J. van den Handel, Haas, Wander Johannes de (1878–1960) , in Biografisch Woordenboek van Nederland.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Netherlands Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project Scopus zbMATH People Netherlands Deutsche Biographie Other SNAC Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wander_Johannes_de_Haas&oldid=1257767397 " Categories : 1878 births 1960 deaths Dutch atheists 20th-century Dutch physicists Leiden University alumni Academic staff of the Delft University of Technology Academic staff of Leiden University Members of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences People from Lisse Hidden categories: CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 16 November 2024, at 15:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wander Johannes de Haas 21 languages Add topic

