Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Career 3 Bibliography 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Howard Raiffa 2 languages Deutsch Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American academic Howard Raiffa Born ( 1924-01-24 ) January 24, 1924 Died July 8, 2016 (2016-07-08) (aged 92) Nationality American Alma mater University of Michigan Scientific career Institutions Harvard University Doctoral advisor Arthur Herbert Copeland Doctoral students Gordon M. Kaufman Robert B. Wilson Howard Raiffa ( / ˈ r eɪ f ə / RAY -fə ; January 24, 1924 – July 8, 2016) was an American academic who was the Frank P. Ramsey Professor (Emeritus) of Managerial Economics , a joint chair held by the Business School and Harvard Kennedy School at Harvard University .

[ 1 ] He was an influential Bayesian decision theorist and pioneer in the field of decision analysis , with works in statistical decision theory, game theory , behavioral decision theory, risk analysis, and negotiation analysis .

[ 2 ] He helped found and was the first director of the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Early life [ edit ] After service in the Army Air Forces during World War II, Raiffa received a bachelor's degree in mathematics in 1946, a master's degree in statistics in 1947 and a PhD in mathematics in 1951, all from the University of Michigan .

Career [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Howard Raiffa" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) His book Applied Statistical Decision Theory with Robert Schlaifer introduced the idea of conjugate prior distributions.

A lecture of his in the 1960s concerning the use of Bayesian methods for betting on horses gave John Craven USN , a US Navy scientist the idea of using Bayesian methods to search for a missing US Air Force hydrogen bomb lost near Palomares , Spain in the 1966 Palomares B-52 crash .

[ 5 ] Craven used the same methods again in the search for the lost submarine USS Scorpion in 1968. Raiffa has analysed situations involving the use of subjective probability and argues that subjective probabilities should follow the same rules (the Kolmogorov axioms ) as objective, frequency-based probabilities.

Consider a situation in which you are required to gamble and are given two possible gambles.

Gamble A, in which you bet on the outcome of a fight between the world's greatest boxer and the world's greatest wrestler in a ring fight. (Assume you are fairly ignorant about martial arts and would have great difficulty making a choice of whom to bet on.) If your chosen champion wins you win $500 otherwise you get nothing. You place your choice in a sealed envelope, which is opened after the game.

Gamble B. Draw a ball from an opaque urn known to contain 50 orange and 50 blue balls. You will receive $500 if you draw an orange ball and nothing for a blue ball. The balls have been thoroughly mixed and you should assume that all balls are equally likely to be drawn. The draw takes place after the ring match is over.

Many people would feel more unsure about taking Gamble A in which the probabilities are unknown, rather than Gamble B, in which the probabilities are easily seen to be one half for each outcome.

Raiffa argues that a decision-maker should in fact assign a subjective probability of one-half to each outcome of Gamble A, provided that no information was available that makes one outcome more likely than the other.

Raiffa argues as follows. Suppose someone has the following preferences. If forced to take Gamble A they would bet on the boxer, but if given a free choice between the gambles they would prefer Gamble B. Presumably, such a person when allowed to choose Gamble A would prefer to simply bet on the boxer rather than toss a coin to decide the matter of whether they should bet on the boxer or the wrestler. But this randomised approach is equivalent to Gamble B. So, by the axioms of substitutability and transitivity for utilities , they should also prefer to bet on the boxer than on Gamble B. A similar argument can be used to show that when the player has no preference between the boxer and the wrestler he should also have no preference between Gamble A and Gamble B.

(The axiom of substitutability says that if someone is indifferent between outcomes A and B and indifferent between outcomes A and C, they should be indifferent between B and C. The axiom of transitivity says that if someone prefers outcome A to B and also prefers B to C, then they should prefer A to C.) Others, such as Daniel Ellsberg disagree with Raiffa's reasoning and have devised alternative interpretations of decision theory. One of the most radical departures is Dempster-Shafer theory , which rejects the use of probability theory completely, in favour of a theory of belief functions , which do not satisfy the axioms of probability .

Bibliography [ edit ] Motzkin, T. S.

; Raiffa, H.; Thompson, G. L.

; Thrall, R. M. (1953). "The double description method".

Contributions to the theory of games . Annals of Mathematics Studies. Vol. 2. Princeton, N. J.: Princeton University Press. pp.

51– 73.

MR 0060202 .

Raiffa, Howard; Coombs, Clyde H.

; Thrall, Robert M., eds. (1954).

Decision processes . New York: Wiley.

OCLC 639321 .

Luce, R. Duncan ; Raiffa, Howard (1957).

Games and decisions: introduction and critical survey . New York: Wiley.

MR 0087572 .

[ 6 ] Paperback reprint, Dover, New York Raiffa, H. and Schlaifer, R. (1961). Applied Statistical Decision Theory. Division of Research, Harvard Business School, Boston. 1968 paperback edition, MIT Press, Press, Cambridge, MA. Wiley Classics Library edition (2000) Raiffa, H. (1968). Decision Analysis: Introductory Lectures on Choices Under Uncertainty. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.

Keeney, R. L. and Raiffa, H. (1976). Decisions with Multiple Objectives: Preferences and Value Tradeoffs. Wiley, New York. Reprinted, Cambridge Univ. Press, New York (1993). MR0449476 Raiffa, H. (1982). The Art and Science of Negotiation. Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge, MA.

Pratt, J. W., Raiffa, H. and Schlaifer, R. (1995). Introduction to Statistical Decision Theory. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. MR1326829 Hammond, J. S., Keeney, R. L. and Raiffa, H. (1998).  Smart Choices. Harvard Business School Press, Boston.

Raiffa, H. (2002). Negotiation Analysis. Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge, MA.

Raiffa, H., Richardson, J. and Metcalfe, D. (2003). Negotiation Analysis: The Science and Art of Collaborative Decision. Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge, MA.

Raiffa, H. (2011). Memoir: Analytical Roots of a Decision Scientist. CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform ISBN 978-1461146926 References [ edit ] ^ Arjang A. Assad; Saul I. Gass (June 30, 2011).

Profiles in Operations Research: Pioneers and Innovators . Springer.

ISBN 978-1441962812 .

^ Fienberg, Stephen E. (2008). "The Early Statistical Years: 1947–1967. A Conversation with Howard Raiffa".

Statistical Science .

23 (1): 136– 149.

arXiv : 0808.0781 .

doi : 10.1214/088342307000000104 .

S2CID 62668400 .

I think of myself as a decision analyst who believes in using subjective probabilities. I would prefer being called a "subjectivist" than a "Bayesian." ^ Raiffa, Howard (September 23, 1992).

"History of IIASA" . International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis . Retrieved 4 December 2010 .

I got an idea: call it applied systems analysis, because nobody will know what it means. We had a clean slate.

^ "Harvard remembers Howard Raiffa" .

harvard.edu . 11 July 2016 . Retrieved 12 July 2016 .

^ John P. Craven (2001).

The Silent War . Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 0684872137 .

^ Gale, David (1958).

"Review: Games and Decisions: Introduction and Critical Survey by R. Duncan Luce and Howard Raiffa" (PDF) .

Bull. Amer. Math. Soc .

64 (3, Part 1): 108– 111.

doi : 10.1090/s0002-9904-1958-10180-9 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Howard Raiffa .

Howard Raiffa page at Harvard Howard Raiffa at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Biography of Howard Raiffa from the Institute of Operations Research and the Management Sciences v t e Decision theory Core concepts Ambiguity aversion Bounded rationality Choice architecture Expected utility Expected value Hyperbolic discounting Leximin Loss aversion Multi-attribute utility Path dependence Principle of indifference Prospect theory Rational choice theory Risk aversion Risk-seeking Satisficing Strategic dominance Subjective expected utility Sure-thing Utility theorem Decision models Anscombe-Aumann framework Causal decision Decision field theory Emotional choice Evidential decision Fuzzy-trace theory Intertemporal choice Naturalistic decision Normative model Quantum cognition Recognition-primed decision Rubicon model Savage's subjective expected utility model Decision analysis tools Analytic hierarchy process Analytic network process Cost–benefit analysis Cost-effectiveness analysis Cost–utility analysis Decision conferencing Decision curve analysis Decision rule Decision support system Decision table Decision tree Decision matrix Decisional balance sheet Gittins index Influence diagram Minimax MCDA Scoring rule Value of information perfect sample uncertainty Paradoxes and biases Allais paradox Certainty effect Cognitive bias Decoy effect Disposition effect Ellsberg paradox Endowment effect Framing effect Heuristics Newcomb's paradox Pseudocertainty effect Reference dependence Regret St. Petersburg paradox Status quo bias Sunk cost Uncertainty and risk Deep uncertainty Exploration–exploitation Info-gap Pignistic probability Robust decision-making Related fields Behavioral economics Game theory Operations research Social choice theory Utility theory Key people David Blackwell Bruno de Finetti Morris H. DeGroot Peter C. Fishburn Gerd Gigerenzer Itzhak Gilboa Daniel Kahneman R. Duncan Luce Oskar Morgenstern Howard Raiffa Leonard J. Savage David Schmeidler Herbert Simon Amos Tversky John von Neumann Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Howard_Raiffa&oldid=1294025276 " Categories : 1924 births 2016 deaths Harvard Business School faculty Harvard Kennedy School faculty American statisticians Bayesian statisticians Fellows of the American Statistical Association Bayesian econometricians Members of the United States National Academy of Engineering American game theorists Negotiation scholars University of Michigan College of Literature, Science, and the Arts alumni Fellows of the Econometric Society Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles needing additional references from November 2017 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 5 June 2025, at 03:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Howard Raiffa 2 languages Add topic

