Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Human rights instruments 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Freedom of assembly 42 languages العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia עברית ქართული Қазақша Latina Latviešu Magyar Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Right to form social or political groups and hold meetings "Sammankomsten" ("The Meeting"), oil painting by Ester Almqvist , original at the Swedish National Museum . The painting was chosen by the UN as a motif for a stamp commemorating the establishment of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , paragraph 20: the Right of Assembly.

Janitorial workers striking in front of the MTV building in Santa Monica , California . Although striking in a trade union is a way of exercising freedom of assembly and freedom of association, other aspects of the conduct of the workers depicted here, such as pedestrian blocking of vehicle traffic in whichever direction has the right of way at this signal-controlled intersection, may violate local or state laws such as California Vehicle Code § 21950(b).

[ 1 ] Posted excerpt from the US Constitution , at an Occupy Oakland event, 2011 Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Constitutional law of the United States Overview Articles Amendments History Judicial review Principles Separation of powers Individual rights Rule of law Federalism Republicanism Equal footing Tiers of scrutiny Government structure Legislative branch Executive branch Judicial branch State government Local government Individual rights Freedom of religion Freedom of speech Freedom of the press Freedom of assembly Right to petition Freedom of association Right to keep and bear arms Right to trial by jury Criminal procedural rights Right to privacy Freedom from slavery Due process Equal protection Citizenship Voting rights Right to candidacy Comprehensible rules Theory Living Constitution Originalism Substantive due process Political process theory Judicial restraint Purposivism Textualism Strict constructionism Common good constitutionalism Unitary executive theory v t e Freedom of assembly , sometimes used interchangeably with the freedom of association , is the individual right or ability of individuals to peaceably assemble and collectively express, promote, pursue, and defend their ideas.

[ 2 ] The right to freedom of assembly is recognized as a human right , a political right and a civil liberty .

The terms freedom of assembly and freedom of association may be used to distinguish between the freedom to assemble in public places and the freedom to join an association. Freedom of assembly is often used in the context of the right to protest , while freedom of association is used in the context of labor rights. The Constitution of the United States is interpreted to mean both the freedom to assemble and the freedom to join an association.

[ 3 ] Human rights instruments [ edit ] Freedom of assembly is included in, among others, the following human rights instruments: Universal Declaration of Human Rights – Article 20 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights – Article 21 European Convention on Human Rights – Article 11 American Convention on Human Rights – Article 15 National and regional constitutions that recognize freedom of assembly include: Bangladesh – Articles 37 and 38 of the Constitution of Bangladesh guarantee the freedom of association and assembly.

[ 4 ] Brazil – Article 5 of the Constitution of Brazil Canada – S. 2 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms which forms part of the Constitution Act, 1982 France – Article 431-1 of the Nouveau Code Pénal Germany – Article 8 GG ( Grundgesetz , Basic Law) Hungary – Article VIII (1) of the Fundamental Law India – Article 19 of the Constitution of India Indonesia – Article 28E(3) of the Constitution of Indonesia Ireland – Article 40.6.1° of the Constitution , as enumerated under the heading "Fundamental Rights" [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Italy – Article 17 of the Constitution [ 7 ] Japan – Article 21 of the Constitution of Japan Macau Basic Law - Article 27 Malaysia – Article 10 of the Constitution of Malaysia Mexico – Article 9 of the Constitution of Mexico Netherlands - Articles 8 and 9 of the Constitution of the Kingdom of the Netherlands New Zealand – Section 16 New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990 Norway – Section 101 of the Constitution of Norway Pakistan - Article 16 of the Constitution of Pakistan, 1973 Philippines – Article III, Section 4 of the Constitution of the Philippines Poland – Article 57 of the Constitution of Poland Russia – Articles 30 and 31 of the Constitution of Russia guarantee the freedom of association and peaceful assembly.

[ 8 ] South Africa Bill of Rights – Article 17 Spain – Article 21 of the Spanish Constitution of 1978 Sweden – Chapter 2 of The Instrument of Government [ 9 ] Taiwan ( Republic of China ) – Article 14 guarantees freedom of assembly and association.

Turkey – Articles 33 and 34 of the Constitution of Turkey guarantee the freedom of association and assembly.

UAE – Article 33 of the Constitution of the UAE United States – First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States Venezuela – Article 68 of the Constitution of Venezuela [ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Politics portal Free speech zone Right to protest Strategy-31 Unlawful assembly United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Rights to Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and of Association References [ edit ] ^ California Vehicle Code § 21950(b) : "No pedestrian may unnecessarily stop or delay traffic while in a marked or unmarked crosswalk." ^ Jeremy McBride, Freedom of Association, in The Essentials of... Human Rights, Hodder Arnold, London, 2005, pp. 18–20 ^ See: NAACP v. Claiborne Hardware Co., 458 U.S. 898 (1982); Healey v. James, 408 U.S. 169 (1972); Brotherhood of Railroad Trainmen v. Virginia, 377 U.S. 1 (1964); United Mine Workers v. Illinois State Bar Assn., 389 U.S. 217 (1967).

^ "Constitution of Bangladesh: Chapter III" . Prime Minister's Office. Archived from the original on 24 May 2013 . Retrieved 2 October 2011 .

^ "Fundamental Rights under the Irish Constitution" .

Citizensinformation.ie . Retrieved 2018-03-03 .

^ "Constitution of Ireland" .

Irish Statute Book . Retrieved 2018-03-03 .

^ "The Italian Constitution" (PDF) . The official website of the Presidency of the Italian Republic. Archived from the original on 2016-11-27.

^ "Constitution of Russia: Article 30" . Adopted at National Voting on December 12, 1993.

^ "Kungörelse (1974:152) om beslutad ny regeringsform Svensk författningssamling 1974:1974:152 t.o.m. SFS 2018:1903" .

Riksdagsförvaltningen (in Swedish) . Retrieved 2020-04-13 .

^ Situación de la criminalización y represión en Venezuela- 2018 (PDF) (in Spanish). Caracas, Venezuela: Observatorio Venezolano de Conflictividad Social (published February 2019). 17 December 2023.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 October 2020.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Freedom of assembly .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Freedom of assembly .

Guidelines on Freedom of Peaceful Assembly OSCE/ODIHR, 2007 Guidelines on Freedom of Peaceful Assembly (2nd edition) Venice Commission and OSCE/ODIHR, 2010 v t e Liberty Concepts Artistic freedom Cognitive liberty Free will Freedom of conscience Freedom of expression Freedom of Expression (book) Algeria Canada India South Africa Freethought Moral responsibility Personification of Liberty Libertas Negative liberty Positive liberty Rights Self-ownership Topfreedom By type Academic Civil Economic Financial Intellectual Internet Morphological Political By right Abortion Assembly Association Asylum Cannabis Choice Civil and political Clothing Death Digital Education Fair trial Family Freedom from discrimination Food Gun Health Housing Internet access Information Life Morphological Movement Personality Press Privacy Property Protest Religion Repair Resist Self-defense Sexual and reproductive health Sexuality Silence Speech Thought To be forgotten Truth Water and sanitation Workers' right to access the toilet See also All men are created equal Anarchism Autonomy Beard and haircut laws by country Civil libertarianism Clothing laws by country Dancing ban Decriminalization of sex work Drug liberalization Human rights Left-libertarianism Legality of recording by civilians LGBTQ rights Libertarianism Liberty, equality, brotherhood Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness Photography and the law Photography Is Not a Crime Pornography laws by region Prostitution law Psilocybin decriminalization in the United States Right-libertarianism Self-determination Stanley v. Georgia Universal Declaration of Human Rights v t e Substantive human rights What is considered a human right is in some cases controversial; not all the topics listed are universally accepted as human rights Civil and political Equality before the law Freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention Freedom of assembly Freedom of association Cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment Freedom from discrimination Freedom of information Freedom of movement Freedom of religion Freedom from slavery Freedom of speech Freedom of thought Freedom from torture LGBT rights Liberty Nationality Personhood Presumption of innocence Access to justice Right of asylum Right to die Right to a fair trial Right to counsel Right to family life Right to keep and bear arms Right to life Right to petition Right to privacy Right to protest Right to refuse medical treatment Right to resist Right of return Right of self-defense Right to truth Security of person Speedy trial Suffrage right to be a candidate Right to homeland Economic, social and cultural Digital rights Equal pay for equal work Fair remuneration Labor rights Right to an adequate standard of living Right to clothing Right to development Right to education Right to food Right to health Right to a healthy environment Right to housing Right to Internet access Right to property Right to public participation Right of reply Right to rest and leisure Right of return Right to science and culture Right to social security Right to water Right to work Sexual and reproductive Abortion Family planning Family rights Freedom from involuntary female genital mutilation Freedom from forced circumcision Intersex human rights LGBT rights Sexual and reproductive health Right to sexuality v t e U.S. Supreme Court Assemble and Petition Clause case law First Amendment to the United States Constitution Freedom of assembly Incorporation United States v. Cruikshank (1876) Presser v. Illinois (1886) Protection from prosecution and state restrictions De Jonge v. Oregon (1937) Coates v. City of Cincinnati (1971) Americans for Prosperity Foundation v. Bonta (2021) Freedom of association Organizations Joint Anti-Fascist Refugee Committee v. McGrath (1951) Watkins v. United States (1957) NAACP v. Alabama (1958) Bates v. City of Little Rock (1960) NAACP v. Button (1963) Americans for Prosperity Foundation v. Bonta (2021) Future Conduct Baggett v. Bullitt (1964) Solicitation In re Primus (1978) Membership restriction Baird v. State Bar of Arizona (1971) Roberts v. United States Jaycees (1984) Dallas v. Stanglin (1989) Hurley v. Irish-American Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Group of Boston (1995) Boy Scouts of America v. Dale (2000) Christian Legal Society v. Martinez (2010) Primaries and elections Anderson v. Celebrezze (1983) California Democratic Party v. Jones (2000) New York State Board of Elections v. Lopez Torres (2008) Washington State Grange v. Washington State Republican Party (2008) Freedom to petition United States v. Cruikshank (1876) Eastern Railroad Presidents Conference v. Noerr Motor Freight, Inc.

(1961) NAACP v. Button (1963) Edwards v. South Carolina (1963) United Mine Workers v. Pennington (1965) Cox v. Louisiana (1965) California Motor Transport Co. v. Trucking Unlimited (1972) McDonald v. Smith (1985) Meyer v. Grant (1988) Buckley v. American Constitutional Law Foundation, Inc.

(1999) Doe v. Reed (2010) Borough of Duryea v. Guarnieri (2011) Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Freedom_of_assembly&oldid=1298219147 " Categories : Freedom of assembly Human rights by issue First Amendment to the United States Constitution Hidden categories: CS1 Swedish-language sources (sv) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Use American English from March 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with excerpts Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 July 2025, at 05:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Freedom of assembly 42 languages Add topic

