Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Pre-metric era Toggle Pre-metric era subsection 1.1 Length 1.2 Mass 1.3 Capacity 1.3.1 Dry 1.3.2 Liquids 2 Household units 3 Land measurement 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Ethiopian units of measurement Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Units of measurement used in Ethiopia A common unit of weight in Ethiopia was the load - a simple measure of the amount carried by a beast of burden such as a camel [ 1 ] A number of different units of measurement have been used in Ethiopia . The values of most of these units are not well defined.

[ 2 ] In 1963, Ethiopia adopted the metric system .

[ 3 ] Pre-metric era [ edit ] These units have also been referred to as Abyssinian units of measurements.

Length [ edit ] Different units were used to measure length.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] 1 pic = 0.686 metres 1 farsang = 5070 m 1 berri = 1 ⁄ 3 farsang (approx. 3 pics) Mass [ edit ] A number of units were used to measure mass.  One rotto is approximately equal to 0.311 kilograms . Some other units are provided below.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] 1 drachm = 1 ⁄ 120 rotto 1 derime = 1 ⁄ 120 rotto 1 wakea (ounce) = 1 ⁄ 12 rotto 1 mocha = 1 ⁄ 10 rotto Capacity [ edit ] Two types of measuring system were used, one for dry measures and one for liquid measures.

Dry [ edit ] Different units were used to measure dry capacities.  One madega is approximately equal to 0.44 litres .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] 1 ardeb = 10 or 24 madega (these may sometimes be referred to as either the long ardeb , equal to 24 madega , or the short ardeb , equal to 10 madega ) [ 3 ] Liquids [ edit ] The kuba(kubaya)pronounced in Ethiopia is approximately equal to 1.016 litres.

[ 2 ] Household units [ edit ] More than 70 different units are used in an ordinary household.  Some of the more important units used are kilograms, kunna, medeb, esir, bobo, pieces, litres, tassa, kubaya , birchiko , sini, bottles, guchiye, sahen and weket.

[ 4 ] Details for some of the common units of measurements are given below: [ 5 ] Medeb: meaning "heap", can be large or small, and is mainly used for vegetables.

Tassa: A large serving can (often for cereals, pulses and liquids).

Sini: A small ceramic cup often used for coffee, pulses (e.g.

oilseeds ) and spices.

Birchiko: A glass often for pulses and liquids Kubaya: A mug, often for cereals, pulses and liquids.

Esir: A "bundle" often used for cabbage and chat (a mild stimulant) Tikil: A wrap often for sugar and coffee.

(Note: Most of the above are actual household items, such as tassa translating to can, and sini mainly being used for serving coffee, not measuring coffee or any other substances.) Land measurement [ edit ] The size of the gasha measured by rope (sometimes called "qalad") varied with the type of land, according to Mahtama Sellase, in the following manner: Location or situation Size of gasha Rich land in the dega, or high plateau 15 × 15 qalads Poor land in the plateau 20 × 9 qalads Wayna dega, or lower plateau 12 × 8 qalads Pasture land too steep or too exposed to wind or heat to allow cultivation 15 × 9 qalads [ 6 ] References [ edit ] ^ Pankhurst 1970 , p. 45.

^ a b c d e Washburn, E.W. (1926).

International Critical Tables of Numerical Data, Physics, Chemistry and Technology . New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc. p. 2.

^ a b c d e Cardarelli, F. (2003).

Encyclopaedia of Scientific Units, Weights and Measures. Their SI Equivalences and Origins . London: Springer. pp.

7 .

ISBN 978-1-4471-1122-1 .

^ Capeau, B.; Dercon, S. (1998), Prices, local measurement units and subsistence consumption in rural surveys: an econometric approach with an application to Ethiopia , Oxford: Institute of Economics and Statistics ^ Disney, R.; Mamo, A.; McKay, A. (8 November 2001), Local measure, quality effects and estimation of demand elasticities in urban Ethiopia , Nottingham: University of Nottingham ^ Pankhurst, Richard, Economic History of Ethiopia (1800-1935), 1968, pp. 152-153, under the heading Land Measurement in Shoa Further reading [ edit ] Pankhurst, Richard (1969), "A preliminary history of Ethiopian measures, weights and values (part 1)", Journal of Ethiopian Studies , 7 (1): 31– 54 Pankhurst, Richard (1969), "A preliminary history of Ethiopian measures, weights and values (part 2)", Journal of Ethiopian Studies , 7 (2): 99– 164 Pankhurst, Richard (1970), "A preliminary history of Ethiopian measures, weights and values (part 3)", Journal of Ethiopian Studies , 8 (1): 45– 86 v t e Systems of measurement Current General International System of Units (SI) UK imperial system US customary units (USCS/USC) Chinese Hong Kong Specific Apothecaries' Avoirdupois Troy Astronomical Electrical English Engineering Units (US) Natural Atomic Geometrised Heaviside–Lorentz Planck Quantum chromodynamical Stoney Background Metric Overview Outline History Metrication UK/US Overview Comparison Foot–pound–second (FPS) Historic Metric metre–kilogram–second (MKS) metre–tonne–second (MTS) centimetre–gram–second (CGS) gravitational Europe Cornish Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch English Winchester Exchequer Estonian Finnish French Traditional Mesures usuelles German Greek Byzantine Hungarian Icelandic Irish Italian Latvian Luxembourgian Maltese Norwegian Ottoman Polish Portuguese Romanian Russian Scottish Serbian Slovak Spanish Swedish Swiss Welsh Asia Afghan Cambodian Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Mongolian Myanmar Nepalese Omani Pakistani Philippine Pegu Singaporean Sri Lankan Syrian Taiwanese Tatar Thai Vietnamese Africa Algerian Ethiopian Egyptian Eritrean Guinean Libyan Malagasy Mauritian Moroccan Seychellois Somali South African Tunisian Tanzanian North and Central America Costa Rican Cuban Haitian Honduran Mexican Nicaraguan Puerto Rican South America Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Paraguayan Peruvian Uruguayan Venezuelan Ancient Arabic Biblical and Talmudic Egyptian Greek Hindu Indian Mesopotamian Persian Roman List articles Humorous Obsolete Unusual Other Absolute scale N-body Modulor Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ethiopian_units_of_measurement&oldid=1296349567 " Categories : Culture of Ethiopia Units of measurement by country Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 12:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ethiopian units of measurement Add languages Add topic

