Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early life 1.2 French Revolution 1.3 Teaching career 1.4 Work in electromagnetism 2 Honours Toggle Honours subsection 2.1 Legacy 3 Writings 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents André-Marie Ampère 104 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی ភាសាខ្មែរ Piemontèis Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Batak Mandailing Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Andre-Marie Ampere ) French physicist and mathematician (1775–1836) For the microarchitecture, see Ampere (microarchitecture) .

André-Marie Ampère ForMemRS Engraving of Ampère by Ambroise Tardieu , 1825 Born ( 1775-01-20 ) 20 January 1775 Lyon , Kingdom of France Died 10 June 1836 (1836-06-10) (aged 61) Marseille , Kingdom of France Known for Discovering fluorine Ampère's circuital law Ampère's force law Ampère's right hand grip rule Ampèrian loop model Monge–Ampère equation Avogadro–Ampère hypothesis Needle telegraph Solenoid Awards ForMemRS (1827) Scientific career Fields Physics Mathematics Institutions École polytechnique Collège de France Signature Electromagnetism Electricity Magnetism Optics History Computational Textbooks Phenomena Electrostatics Charge density Conductor Coulomb law Electret Electric charge Electric dipole Electric field Electric flux Electric potential Electrostatic discharge Electrostatic induction Gauss's law Insulator Permittivity Polarization Potential energy Static electricity Triboelectricity Magnetostatics Ampère's law Biot–Savart law Gauss's law for magnetism Magnetic dipole Magnetic field Magnetic flux Magnetic scalar potential Magnetic vector potential Magnetization Permeability Right-hand rule Electrodynamics Bremsstrahlung Cyclotron radiation Displacement current Eddy current Electromagnetic field Electromagnetic induction Electromagnetic pulse Electromagnetic radiation Faraday's law Jefimenko equations Larmor formula Lenz's law Liénard–Wiechert potential London equations Lorentz force Maxwell's equations Maxwell tensor Poynting vector Synchrotron radiation Electrical network Alternating current Capacitance Current density Direct current Electric current Electric power Electrolysis Electromotive force Impedance Inductance Joule heating Kirchhoff's laws Network analysis Ohm's law Parallel circuit Resistance Resonant cavities Series circuit Voltage Watt Waveguides Magnetic circuit AC motor DC motor Electric machine Electric motor Gyrator–capacitor Induction motor Linear motor Magnetomotive force Permeance Reluctance (complex) Reluctance (real) Rotor Stator Transformer Covariant formulation Electromagnetic tensor Electromagnetism and special relativity Four-current Four-potential Mathematical descriptions Maxwell equations in curved spacetime Relativistic electromagnetism Stress–energy tensor Scientists Ampère Biot Coulomb Davy Einstein Faraday Fizeau Gauss Heaviside Helmholtz Henry Hertz Hopkinson Jefimenko Joule Kelvin Kirchhoff Larmor Lenz Liénard Lorentz Maxwell Neumann Ohm Ørsted Poisson Poynting Ritchie Savart Singer Steinmetz Tesla Thomson Volta Weber Wiechert v t e André-Marie Ampère ( UK : / ˈ æ m p ɛər / , US : / ˈ æ m p ɪər / ; [ 1 ] French: [ɑ̃dʁe maʁi ɑ̃pɛʁ] ; 20 January 1775 – 10 June 1836) [ 2 ] was a French physicist and mathematician who was one of the founders of the science of classical electromagnetism , which he referred to as electrodynamics . He is also the inventor of numerous applications, such as the solenoid (a term coined by him) and the electrical telegraph . As an autodidact , Ampère was a member of the French Academy of Sciences and professor at the École polytechnique and the Collège de France .

The SI unit of electric current , the ampere (A), is named after him. His name is also one of the 72 names inscribed on the Eiffel Tower . The term kinematic is the English version of his cinématique , [ 3 ] which he constructed from the Greek κίνημα kinema ("movement, motion"), itself derived from κινεῖν kinein ("to move").

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Biography [ edit ] Early life [ edit ] André-Marie Ampère was born on 20 January 1775 in Lyon to Jean-Jacques Ampère, a prosperous businessman, and Jeanne Antoinette Desutières-Sarcey Ampère, during the height of the French Enlightenment . He spent his childhood and adolescence at the family property at Poleymieux-au-Mont-d'Or near Lyon.

[ 6 ] Jean-Jacques Ampère, a successful merchant, was an admirer of the philosophy of Jean-Jacques Rousseau , whose theories of education (as outlined in his treatise Émile ) were the basis of Ampère's education. Rousseau believed that young boys should avoid formal schooling and pursue instead a "direct education from nature." Ampère's father actualized this ideal by allowing his son to educate himself within the walls of his well-stocked library. French Enlightenment masterpieces such as Georges-Louis Leclerc, comte de Buffon 's Histoire naturelle, générale et particulière (begun in 1749) and Denis Diderot and Jean le Rond d'Alembert 's Encyclopédie (volumes added between 1751 and 1772) thus became Ampère's schoolmasters.

[ citation needed ] The young Ampère, however, soon resumed his Latin lessons, which enabled him to master the works of Leonhard Euler and Daniel Bernoulli .

[ 7 ] French Revolution [ edit ] In addition, Ampère used his access to the latest books to begin teaching himself advanced mathematics at age 12. In later life Ampère claimed that he knew as much about mathematics and science when he was eighteen as ever he knew, but as a polymath , his reading embraced history, travels, poetry, philosophy, and the natural sciences.

[ 7 ] His mother was a devout Catholic, so Ampère was also initiated into the Catholic faith along with Enlightenment science. The French Revolution (1789–99) that began during his youth was also influential: Ampère's father was called into public service by the new revolutionary government, [ 8 ] becoming a local judge ( juge de paix ) in a small town near Lyon. When the Jacobin faction seized control of the Revolutionary government in 1792, his father Jean-Jacques Ampère resisted the new political tides, and he was guillotined on 24 November 1793, as part of the Jacobin purges of the period.

In 1796, Ampère met Julie Carron and, in 1799, they were married. Ampère took his first regular job in 1799 as a mathematics teacher, which gave him the financial security to marry Carron and father his first child, Jean-Jacques (named after his father), the next year. (Jean-Jacques Ampère eventually achieved his own fame as a scholar of languages.) Ampère's maturation corresponded with the transition to the Napoleonic regime in France, and the young father and teacher found new opportunities for success within the technocratic structures favoured by the new French First Consul . In 1802, Ampère was appointed a professor of physics and chemistry at the École Centrale in Bourg-en-Bresse , leaving his ailing wife and infant son in Lyon. He used his time in Bourg to research mathematics, producing Considérations sur la théorie mathématique du jeu (1802; "Considerations on the Mathematical Theory of Games"), a treatise on mathematical probability that he sent to the Paris Academy of Sciences in 1803.

Teaching career [ edit ] Essai sur la philosophie des sciences After the death of his wife in July 1803, [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Ampère moved to Paris, where he began a tutoring post at the new École Polytechnique in 1804. Despite his lack of formal qualifications, Ampère was appointed a professor of mathematics at the school in 1809. As well as holding positions at this school until 1828, in 1819 and 1820 Ampère offered courses in philosophy and astronomy , respectively, at the University of Paris , and in 1824 he was elected to the prestigious chair in experimental physics at the Collège de France . In 1814, Ampère was invited to join the class of mathematicians in the new Institut Impérial , the umbrella under which the reformed state Academy of Sciences would sit.

Ampère engaged in a diverse array of scientific inquiries during the years leading up to his election to the academy—writing papers and engaging in topics from mathematics and philosophy to chemistry and astronomy, which was customary among the leading scientific intellectuals of the day. Ampère claimed that "at eighteen years he found three culminating points in his life, his First Communion , the reading of Antoine Leonard Thomas's "Eulogy of Descartes", and the Taking of the Bastille . On the day of his wife's death he wrote two verses from the Psalms , and the prayer, 'O Lord, God of Mercy, unite me in Heaven with those whom you have permitted me to love on earth.' In times of duress he would take refuge in the reading of the Bible and the Fathers of the Church ." [ 11 ] A lay Catholic , he took for a time into his family the young student Frédéric Ozanam (1813–1853), one of the founders of the Conference of Charity , later known as the Society of Saint Vincent de Paul .

[ 12 ] Ozanam would much later be beatified by Pope John Paul II in 1998. Through Ampère, Ozanam had contact with leaders of the neo-Catholic movement, such as François-René de Chateaubriand , Jean-Baptiste Henri Lacordaire , and Charles Forbes René de Montalembert .

[ 12 ] Work in electromagnetism [ edit ] In September 1820, Ampère's friend and eventual eulogist François Arago showed the members of the French Academy of Sciences the surprising discovery by Danish physicist Hans Christian Ørsted that a magnetic needle is deflected by an adjacent electric current . Ampère began developing a mathematical and physical theory to understand the relationship between electricity and magnetism . Furthering Ørsted's experimental work, Ampère showed that two parallel wires carrying electric currents attract or repel each other, depending on whether the currents flow in the same or opposite directions, respectively - this laid the foundation of electrodynamics. He also applied mathematics in generalizing physical laws from these experimental results. The most important of these was the principle that came to be called Ampère's law , which states that the mutual action of two lengths of current-carrying wire is proportional to their lengths and to the intensities of their currents. Ampère also applied this same principle to magnetism, showing the harmony between his law and French physicist Charles Augustin de Coulomb 's law of electric action. Ampère's devotion to, and skill with, experimental techniques anchored his science within the emerging fields of experimental physics.

Ampère also provided a physical understanding of the electromagnetic relationship, theorizing the existence of an "electrodynamic molecule" (the forerunner of the idea of the electron ) that served as the component element of both electricity and magnetism. Using this physical explanation of electromagnetic motion, Ampère developed a physical account of electromagnetic phenomena that was both empirically demonstrable and mathematically predictive. Almost 100 years later, in 1915, Albert Einstein together with Wander Johannes de Haas made the proof of the correctness of Ampère's hypothesis through the Einstein–de Haas effect . In 1827, Ampère published his magnum opus, Mémoire sur la théorie mathématique des phénomènes électrodynamiques uniquement déduite de l'experience (Memoir on the Mathematical Theory of Electrodynamic Phenomena, Uniquely Deduced from Experience), the work that coined the name of his new science, electrodynamics , and became known ever after as its founding treatise.

In 1827, Ampère was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society and in 1828, a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Science .

[ 13 ] Probably the highest recognition came from James Clerk Maxwell , who in his Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism named Ampère "the Newton of electricity".

[ citation needed ] Honours [ edit ] 8.10.1825 : Member of the Royal Academy of Science, Letters and Fine Arts of Belgium .

[ 14 ] Legacy [ edit ] An international convention, signed at the 1881 International Exposition of Electricity , established the ampere as one of the standard units of electrical measurement, in recognition of his contribution to the creation of modern electrical science and along with the coulomb , volt , ohm , watt and farad , which are named, respectively, after Ampère's contemporaries Charles-Augustin de Coulomb of France, Alessandro Volta of Italy , Georg Ohm of Germany , James Watt of Scotland and Michael Faraday of England. Ampère's name is one of the 72 names inscribed on the Eiffel Tower .

Many streets and squares are named after Ampère, as are schools , a Lyon metro station , a graphics processing unit microarchitecture , a mountain on the moon and an electric ferry in Norway.

[ 15 ] Writings [ edit ] Considérations sur la théorie mathématique du jeu , Perisse , Lyon Paris 1802, online lesen im Internet-Archiv André-Marie Ampère (1822), Recueil d'observations électro-dynamiques: contenant divers mémoires, notices, extraits de lettres ou d'ouvrages périodiques sur les sciences, relatifs a l'action mutuelle de deux courans électriques, à celle qui existe entre un courant électrique et un aimant ou le globe terrestre, et à celle de deux aimans l'un sur l'autre (in French), Chez Crochard , retrieved 26 September 2010 André-Marie Ampère; Babinet (Jacques, M.) (1822), Exposé des nouvelles découvertes sur l'électricité et le magnétisme (in German), Chez Méquignon-Marvis , retrieved 26 September 2010 André-Marie Ampère (1824), Description d'un appareil électro-dynamique (in French), Chez Crochard … et Bachelie , retrieved 26 September 2010 André-Marie Ampère (1826), Théorie des phénomènes électro-dynamiques, uniquement déduite de l'expérience (in French), Méquignon-Marvis , retrieved 26 September 2010 André-Marie Ampère (1883), Théorie mathématique des phénomènes électro-dynamiques: uniquement déduite de l'expérience (in French) (2nd ed.), A. Hermann , retrieved 26 September 2010 André-Marie Ampère (1834), Essai sur la philosophie des sciences, ou, Exposition analytique d'une classification naturelle de toutes les connaissances humaines (in German), Chez Bachelier , retrieved 26 September 2010 André-Marie Ampère (1834), Essai sur la philosophie des sciences (in German), vol. Bd. 1, Chez Bachelier , retrieved 26 September 2010 André-Marie Ampère (1843), Essai sur la philosophie des sciences (in German), vol. Bd. 2, Bachelier , retrieved 26 September 2010 Partial translations: Magie, W.M. (1963).

A Source Book in Physics.

Harvard: Cambridge MA. pp. 446–460.

Lisa M. Dolling; Arthur F. Gianelli; Glenn N. Statile, eds. (2003).

The Tests of Time: Readings in the Development of Physical Theory . Princeton: Princeton University Press. pp.

157– 162.

ISBN 978-0691090856 .

.

Complete translations: Ampère, André-Marie (2015). André Koch Torres Assis (ed.).

Ampère's electrodynamics: analysis of the meaning and evolution of Ampère's force between current elements, together with a complete translation of his masterpiece: Theory of electrodynamic phenomena, uniquely deduced from experience (PDF) . Translated by J. P. M. C Chaib. Montreal: Apeiron.

ISBN 978-1-987980-03-5 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

Ampère, André-Marie (2015).

Mathematical Theory of Electrodynamic Phenomena, Uniquely Derived from Experiments . Michael D. Godfrey, Stanford University, (trans.).

References [ edit ] ^ "Ampère" .

Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary .

^ Dictionary of Scientific Biography . United States of America: Charles Scribner's Sons. 1970.

ISBN 9780684101149 .

^ Ampère, André-Marie (1834).

Essai sur la Philosophie des Sciences . Chez Bachelier.

^ Merz, John (1903).

A History of European Thought in the Nineteenth Century . Blackwood, London. pp.

5 .

^ O. Bottema & B. Roth (1990).

Theoretical Kinematics . Dover Publications. preface, p. 5.

ISBN 0-486-66346-9 .

^ "Andre-Marie Ampere" .

IEEE Global History Network . IEEE . Retrieved 21 July 2011 .

^ a b One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Ampère, André Marie ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 1 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

878– 879.

^ "Biography of Andre Marie Ampere" . Retrieved 3 September 2019 .

^ Ampère married again after his much loved first wife died, but his second marriage was very unhappy and ended in divorce.

^ Laidler, Keith J. (1993).

To Light such a Candle . Oxford University Press. p. 128.

^ "Catholic Encyclopedia" . Retrieved 29 December 2007 .

^ a b Gregory, David L. (2005). "Antoine Frederic Ozanam: Building the Good Society".

St. Thomas Law Journal .

3 (1): 21– 48.

^ "Library and Archive Catalogue" . Royal Society . Retrieved 13 March 2012 .

^ Index biographique des membres et associés de l'Académie royale de Belgique (1769–2005) p. 15 ^ "Batterifergen har måttet stå over avganger. Nå er løsningen klar" .

Teknisk Ukeblad . November 2016 . Retrieved 19 November 2016 .

Further reading [ edit ] Williams, L. Pearce (1970). "Ampère, André-Marie".

Dictionary of Scientific Biography . Vol. 1. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. pp.

139– 147.

ISBN 978-0-684-10114-9 .

Hofmann, James R. (1995).

André-Marie Ampère . Oxford: Blackwell.

ISBN 978-0631178491 .

Duhem, Pierre Maurice Marie (9 September 2018).

Ampère's Force Law: A Modern Introduction . Alan Aversa (trans.).

doi : 10.13140/RG.2.2.31100.03206/1 . Retrieved 3 July 2019 .

( EPUB ) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to André-Marie Ampère .

Wikiquote has quotations related to André-Marie Ampère .

English Wikisource has original works by or about: André-Marie Ampère Ampère and the history of electricity – a French-language, edited by CNRS, site with Ampère's correspondence (full text and critical edition with links to manuscripts pictures, more than 1000 letters), an Ampère bibliography, experiments, and 3D simulations Ampère Museum – a French-language site from the museum in Poleymieux-au-Mont-d'or, near Lyon , France Ampere's Electrodynamics Includes complete English translation of Theory of Electrodynamic Phenomena "Société des Amis d'André-Marie Ampère" , a French society dedicated to maintain the memory of André-Marie Ampère and in charge of the Ampère Museum .

O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "André-Marie Ampère" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Catholic Encyclopedia on André Marie Ampère v t e Scientists whose names are used as units SI base units André-Marie Ampère ( ampere ) Lord Kelvin ( kelvin ) SI derived units Henri Becquerel ( becquerel ) Anders Celsius (degree Celsius ) Charles-Augustin de Coulomb ( coulomb ) Michael Faraday ( farad ) Louis Harold Gray ( gray ) Joseph Henry ( henry ) Heinrich Hertz ( hertz ) James Prescott Joule ( joule ) Isaac Newton ( newton ) Georg Ohm ( ohm ) Blaise Pascal ( pascal ) Werner von Siemens ( siemens ) Rolf Maximilian Sievert ( sievert ) Nikola Tesla ( tesla ) Alessandro Volta ( volt ) James Watt ( watt ) Wilhelm Eduard Weber ( weber ) Non-SI metric ( cgs ) units Anders Jonas Ångström ( angstrom ) Peter Debye ( debye ) Loránd Eötvös ( eotvos ) Galileo Galilei ( gal ) Carl Friedrich Gauss ( gauss ) William Gilbert ( gilbert ) Heinrich Kayser ( kayser ) Johann Heinrich Lambert ( lambert ) Samuel Langley ( langley ) James Clerk Maxwell ( maxwell ) Hans Christian Ørsted ( oersted ) Jean Léonard Marie Poiseuille ( poise ) Sir George Stokes, 1st Baronet ( stokes ) John William Strutt, 3rd Baron Rayleigh ( rayl ) Imperial and US customary units Daniel Gabriel Fahrenheit (degree Fahrenheit ) Johann Heinrich Lambert ( foot-lambert ) William John Macquorn Rankine ( degree Rankine ) Non-systematic units Alexander Graham Bell ( bel/decibel ) Marie Curie & Pierre Curie ( curie ) John Dalton ( dalton ) Michael Faraday ( faraday ) Heinrich Mache ( mache ) John Napier ( neper ) René Antoine Ferchault de Réaumur ( degree Réaumur ) Wilhelm Röntgen ( roentgen ) J. J. Thomson ( thomson ) Evangelista Torricelli ( torr ) List of scientists whose names are used as units · Scientists whose names are used in physical constants · People whose names are used in chemical element names Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Chile Greece Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii zbMATH MathSciNet Artists ULAN RKD Artists People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=André-Marie_Ampère&oldid=1297103427 " Categories : 1775 births 1836 deaths Scientists from Lyon Electrostatics 19th-century French physicists People associated with electricity Independent scientists French Roman Catholics Academic staff of the Collège de France Foreign members of the Royal Society Fellows of the Royal Society of Edinburgh Members of the French Academy of Sciences Members of the Royal Academy of Belgium Members of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences Honorary members of the Saint Petersburg Academy of Sciences Burials at Montmartre Cemetery Magneticians Academic staff of École Polytechnique Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2020 Biography with signature Articles with hCards Pages with French IPA Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2022 CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1: long volume value Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 June 2025, at 04:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents André-Marie Ampère 104 languages Add topic

