Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Institution and composition of Heliaia 2 Appointment of the jurymen 3 Jurisdiction 4 Procedure 5 Sentences Toggle Sentences subsection 5.1 Socrates' trial 5.2 Pericles' trial 6 Location 7 See also 8 Notes 9 Citations 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Heliaia 27 languages Alemannisch Български Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano עברית ქართული Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi தமிழ் Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Highest court of ancient Athens Heliaia or Heliaea ( Ancient Greek : Ἡλιαία ; Doric : Ἁλία Halia ) was the supreme court of ancient Athens . The view generally held among scholars is that the court drew its name from the ancient Greek verb ἡλιάζεσθαι ( héliázesthai ), which means congregate .

[α] Another version is that the court took its name from the fact that the hearings were taking place outdoors, under the sun.

[β] Initially, this was the name of the place where the hearings were convoked, but later this appellation included the court as well.

[ 1 ] The judges were called heliasts ( ἡλιασταί ) or dikastes ( δικασταί , ὀμωμοκότες = those who have sworn, namely the jurors ). The operation of judging was called iliázesthai ( ἡλιάζεσθαι ), or dikázein ( δικάζειν ).

Institution and composition of Heliaia [ edit ] It is not clear whether Heliaia was instituted by Cleisthenes or Solon , but it seems that the latter initiated a function of the Assembly to sit as an appeals court.

[ 2 ] [γ] The court had 6,001 members, chosen annually by lot [ 3 ] among all the male citizens over 30 years old, unless they were disfranchised .

[ 4 ] Those suffering from intellectual or corporeal flaws were also excepted, if their shortages prevented them from fully perceiving the proceedings. If any unqualified person participated in a jury, then information was laid against him and he was brought before the Heliaia. If convicted the court could assess against him whatever punishment or fine he was thought to deserve. If the punishment was a money fine, then the infringer had to go to prison until he had paid both the former debt, for which the information was laid, and whatever additional sum had been imposed on him as a fine by the court.

[ 4 ] Appointment of the jurymen [ edit ] The public office of the heliast was not obligatory, but the citizens who wished to exert these duties had to submit a petition. Jurors were paid a salary; [ 5 ] originally one obol per day and later, at the instigation of Kleon probably in 425 BC three obols, i.e. half a drachma .  According to Aristotle , [ 6 ] "Pericles first made service in the jury-courts a paid office, as a popular counter-measure against Cimon's wealth".

The 6,000 were drawn from the 10 tribes (each tribe offering 600 members) and they were then divided into chambers of 600 jurymen, 500 or 501 of whom were regular members, with the rest constituting alternate jurors. In exceptional cases the court could go into plenary sessions.

[ 7 ] Sometimes, the chambers had 201 to 401 members or 1001 to 1501 members.

[δ] After the selection by lot , the heliasts had to take the Heliastic Oath once every year.

[ 1 ] After the swearing-in, the jurors received one box-wood ticket, with their own names and that of their father and deme written on it, and one letter of the alphabet as far as kappa [ 8 ] and the jurors of each tribe were divided into ten sections, approximately an equal number under each letter.

[ 4 ] Moreover, each juror was given a color-coded staff that represented their court designation, which reinforced their status as a unique group responsible for voting on cases and making decisions.

[ 9 ] Jurisdiction [ edit ] Initially, the Heliaia's jurisdiction was limited to judging the archons and, probably, some other similar accusations against public office-holders.

[ 10 ] It was when Ephialtes and  Pericles prompted a binding resolution through the ecclesia , [ 11 ] stripping the Areios Pagos of most of the cases it judged, [ 12 ] that the Heliaia started judging almost all the civil and penal cases. The Areios Pagos kept its competence only for the crimes of murder and arson , [ 13 ] while the archons could impose some minor fines. The Heliaia's jurisdiction also included litigation which involved Athenians and citizens of other cities or Athens and another city as subjects of international law. Namely, the Heliaia functioned as a court for litigation of public, criminal and private international law.

[ε] Taking the jurisdiction over the so-called graphe paranomon , [ 14 ] the Heliaia replaced the Areios Pagos in the execution of the legal control of the decisions of the ecclesia . Until Ephialtes' reforms the Areios Pagos had the duty of guarding the laws and to keep watch over the greatest and the most important of the affairs of state.

[ 15 ] Procedure [ edit ] The Heliaia was in session every normal day, except for the three last days of each month and for the days during which the ecclesia was in session. The sessions took place in the open within a marked-off area, since there was no specific building where they could be lodged. The location of the hearing was confined within a special hedge, outside of which the audience could stand.

[ 16 ] The details of the legal procedure were as follows: The hegemon ( ἡγεμών [στ] ) of the court was responsible for the registration of the suits and complaints. After holding a preliminary investigation, he also had to subpoena the litigant parties and the witnesses before the jury. In the morning of the day of hearings, the hegemon had to determine by lot the jury that would judge the case as well as the place where it would convene. After the formation of the jury, the hegemon had to submit the conclusions of his preliminary investigation, announcing and defining the litigation on which the court should decide. Then it was the time for the plaintiff, the defendant and the witnesses to be heard. The arguments were exposed by the litigants themselves, without the legal support of a lawyer, [ζ] in the form of an exchange of single speeches timed by water clock. In a public suit each litigant had three hours to speak, whereas they had much less in private suits (though here it was in proportion to the amount of money at stake). In this way the judicial cases became a vehement fight of impressions, since the jurors did not constitute a little group of mature citizens, such as the Court of Areios Pagos, which was interested only in the correct application of the law. Additionally, before the Chambers of Heliaia each citizen had to become an effective orator and to act solely in his capacity as citizen, in order to protect his interests and to enforce his views.

[ 17 ] Decisions were made by voting without any time set aside for deliberation. Nothing, however, stopped jurors from talking informally among themselves during the voting procedure and juries could be unruly, shouting out their disapproval or disbelief of things said by the litigants. This may have had some role in building a consensus. The voting procedure was public and transparent. Each heliast had received two votes, one "not guilty" and one "guilty". Then the herald (κήρυξ) would, first, ask the heliasts if they wanted to submit any objections against the witnesses and, then, he would call them to cast their votes in two different amphoras , one of copper for the "non-guilty" votes and one of wood for the "guilty" votes. The voting was secret, [ 18 ] since each juror had to cover the vote with his fingers, so that nobody could see in which amphora he threw it. In the civil cases the voting procedure was different, because the amphoras were as many as the litigant parties and the jurors had to vindicate one of them by casting their vote.

After the votes were counted, the herald announced the final result. In cases of a tie, the defendant was acquitted, because he was thought to have got "the vote of Athena ".

Sentences [ edit ] The Heliaia is considered the highest court in ancient Athens. Heliasts could impose either fines (for civil and penal cases) or "corporeal sentences" (only for penal cases). The fines of Heliaia were higher than the fines of the archons. The lato sensu "corporeal sentences" included death, imprisonment (for the non-Athenian citizens), atimia (sometimes along with confiscation) and perpetual exile ( ἀειφυγία ). Heliaia was the primary court in ancient Athens, composed of large juries selected from the citizens to ensure democratic participation in judicial processes. It was a democratic court with 6,000 citizens who served as jurors.

Famous trials before the Heliaia Socrates' trial [ edit ] Main article: Trial of Socrates Socrates was accused of asebeia (impiety) by Meletus , Anytus and Lycon . His trial took place in 399 BC and the jury found him guilty with 280 votes to 220.

[ 19 ] His death sentence was decided in a second round of voting, which was even worse for the philosopher. Nonetheless, Socrates did not lose his calm demeanor and, although during the trial he could propose to the jury his self-exile, he did not do it when his friends offered to help him flee afterward, since life away from his beloved city was pointless for him.

Pericles' trial [ edit ] According to Plutarch , [ 20 ] Pericles faced, twice, serious accusations. The first one was just before the eruption of the Peloponnesian War and the second one was during the first year of the war, when he was punished with a fine, the amount of which was either fifteen or fifty talents . Before the war a bill was passed, on the motion of Dracontides, according to which Pericles should deposit his accounts of public moneys with the prytanes and the jurors should decide upon his case with ballots which had lain upon the altar of the goddess on the acropolis. This clause of the bill was however amended with the motion that the case be tried before fifteen hundred jurors in the ordinary way, whether one wanted to call it a prosecution for embezzlement and bribery, or malversation.

Location [ edit ] The name "Heliaia" has often been attached to a large unroofed rectangular enclosure at the southwestern corner of the Classical Agora of Athens. The identification was tentatively suggested by the excavator when the structure was discovered in the 1950s, but in the absence of any positive evidence to support it, he admitted that it was "nothing more than a likely hypothesis." [ 21 ] For lack of a better suggestion the name became widely used and appeared on plans of the site, but the uncertainty remained, and in a comprehensive final publication of the lawcourts in the Athenian Agora, published in 1995, the structure was referred to simply as the "Rectangular Peribolos," a neutral descriptive label that assumed no specific identification.

[ 22 ] A few years later, a thorough review of the question, prompted by new epigraphical evidence, led to the suggestion that the enclosure was in fact the Aiakeion, a shrine dedicated to the hero Aiakos of Aegina, [ 23 ] and this identification has since been widely accepted.

[ 24 ] The location of the Heliaia itself remains unknown.

See also [ edit ] Areopagus Athenian democracy Atimia (loss of citizen rights) Attic calendar Boule Ecclesia (ancient Athens) Graphe paranomon History of Athens Law court (ancient Athens) Notes [ edit ] α.

^ In Argos the place where its court was seated was also called ἁλιαία .

β.

^ Sun = ἥλιος ( hélios ) and the  verb ἡλιοῦσθαι ( hélióusthai ) (passive voice) = enjoy the sun.

γ.

^ According to Mogens Herman Hansen , The Athenian Ecclesia: A Collection of Articles 1983-1989, page 260 , "apart from Plutarch, who quotes the Ath. Pol.

, there is no other evidence that the heliaia was a court of appeal, and the scanty contemporary sources indicate that it was a court of first instance." δ.

^ When certain chambers were merged. This was the case of Pericles ' trial.

[ 25 ] ε.

^ The cases of private international law were initially judged by the session of the Athenian alliance in Delos .

[ 1 ] στ.

^ This was not a judge or a juror, but a kind of archon, chosen by lot or by ordination for about a month.

[ 26 ] ζ.

^ That is why the profession of the logographer , or professional speechwriter, such as Lysias , flourished in ancient Athens .

[ 27 ] Citations [ edit ] ^ a b c The Helios Dictionary ^ Aristotle , Constitution of Athens, 9.1 and Archaic Times to the End of the Peloponnesian War, Cambridge University Press, page 209 ^ Aristotle , Constitution of Athens, 63.1 and Archaic Times to the End of the Peloponnesian War, Cambridge University Press, page 209 ^ a b c Aristotle , Constitution of Athens, 63.3 ^ Aristophanes , Wasps, 662 ^ Aristotle , Constitution of Athens, 27.2.4-5 ^ Andocides , Speeches, 1.17 and Mogens Herman Hansen , The Athenian Ecclesia: A Collection of Articles 1983-1989, page 260 ^ Demosthenes , On the Crown, 210 ^ Adamidis, Vasileios (2024).

"Mind the Audience: Forensic Rhetoric, Persuasion, and Identification by Reference to the Social Identity of Athenian dikastai" .

Rhetorica .

42 (1): 1– 30.

doi : 10.1353/rht.2024.a925230 .

ISSN 1533-8541 .

^ Jones, Lesley Ann (1987).

"The Role of Ephialtes in the Rise of Athenian Democracy" .

Classical Antiquity .

6 (1): 53– 76.

doi : 10.2307/25010858 .

ISSN 0278-6656 .

JSTOR 25010858 .

^ Plutarch , Pericles, IX ^ Aristotle , Politics, 1274a ^ Demosthenes , On the Crown, 133 ^ Sealey, Raphael (1982).

"On the Athenian Concept of Law" .

The Classical Journal .

77 (4): 289– 302.

ISSN 0009-8353 .

JSTOR 3297006 .

^ Aristotle , Constitution of Athens, 8.1 ^ Demosthenes , On the Crown, 196 ^ Stephen Usher, The Orations in Ancient Attica in The Orations in the Modern Educational Systems , page 184 ^ R.K Sinclair, Democracy and Participation in Athens, page 20 ^ Comments on Socrates' Apology , page 17 (in Greek) ^ Plutarch , Pericles, 32.1 and 35.1 ^ Thompson, Homer A.

“Excavations in the Athenian Agora: 1953.” Hesperia 23 (1954): 38. Twenty years later, Thompson repeated that no dikastic equipment or other diagnostic material was found in the enclosure, and that the identification was essentially the product of "a process of elimination":  Thompson, Homer A., and R. E. Wycherley.

The Agora of Athens: The History, Shape, and Uses of an Ancient City Center ( The Athenian Agora , vol. 14), Princeton, 1972: 62-63.

^ Boegehold, Alan L., II John McK. Camp, Margaret Crosby, Mabel Lang, David R. Jordan, and Rhys F. Townsend.

The Lawcourts at Athens: Sites, Buildings, Equipment, Procedure, and Testimonia ( The Athenian Agora , vol. 28), Princeton, 1995: 99-103. This same agnostic label also appeared on some official plans of the site: e.g., Agora Image 2008.19.009 (Agora Excavations) ^ Stroud, Ronald S.

The Athenian Grain-Tax Law of 374/3 B. C.

( Hesperia Supplement 29 ), Princeton 1998: 85-108.

^ It is reflected in the official publications of the Agora Excavations (e.g., Camp, John McKesson, II, The Athenian Agora: Site Guide (5th ed.), Princeton, 2010: 170-171) and on the excavation web site .

^ See The Helios ^ The Helios , article Hegemony of the court ^ Stephen Usher, The Orations in Ancient Attica in The Orations in the Modern Educational Systems , page 183 References [ edit ] Primary sources Andocides , Speeches . See original text in Perseus Project .

Aristophanes , The Wasps . See original text in Perseus Project .

Aristotle , Constitution of Athens . See original text in Perseus Project .

Aristotle , Politics . See original text in Perseus Project .

Demosthenes , On the Crown . See original text in Perseus Project .

Plutarch , Pericles . See original text in Perseus Project .

Secondary sources Cambridge University Press, Archaic Times to the End of the Peloponnesian War , 1983.

Encyclopaedic Dictionary The Helios , article Heliaia (in Greek).

Mogens Herman Hansen, The Athenian Ecclesia: A Collection of Articles 1983-1989 , 1989.

Konstantinos Paparrigopoulos , History of the Hellenic Nation , Volume Ab (in Greek).

R.K Sinclair, Democracy and Participation in Athens , 1991.

Georg Friedrich Schömann, A Dissertation on the Assemblies of the Athenians , Cambridge, 1838.

Stephen Usher, The Orations in Ancient Attica in The Orations in the Modern Educational Systems , Editions: Grigoris, 1984 (translated in Greek).

Burrus, Virginia, and Marco Conti.

The Life of Saint Helia: Critical Edition, Translation, Introduction, and Commentary . Oxford University Press, 2015.

Jones, A.H.M.

Athenian Democracy . Oxford University Press, 1957.

Ober, Josiah.

Mass and Elite in Democratic Athens: Rhetoric, Ideology, and the Power of the People . Princeton University Press, 1989.

MacDowell, D.M.

The Law in Classical Athens . Cornell University Press, 1978.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Heliaia .

Athenian Democracy in Action: The Pnyx, the Bouleuterion, the Prytaneion, and the Heliaia Criminal Procedure in Ancient Greece and the Trial of Socrates Historical Overview Panagiotis Chaloulos, Legislative provisions (in Greek) Yannis Panagiwtopoulos, The Athenian Democracy Archived 2006-04-27 at the Wayback Machine (in Greek) Michael Sakelariou, The Athenian Democracy Archived 2006-04-18 at the Wayback Machine E.M. Soulis, Thucydides and his political and intellectual environment (in Greek) v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Heliaia&oldid=1292479326 " Categories : Ancient Greek law Athenian democracy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Greek-language sources (el) Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 27 May 2025, at 04:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Heliaia 27 languages Add topic

