Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Origins 1.2 Creation 1.3 Development 1.4 21st century 1.5 Changes in States' memberships 1.5.1 Israel, Palestine, and the United States 1.5.2 Russia 1.6 Cultural policies and sustainable development 2 Activities Toggle Activities subsection 2.1 New proposed lists 3 Media 4 Official UNESCO NGOs 5 Institutes and centres 6 Prizes Toggle Prizes subsection 6.1 Education 6.2 Natural Sciences 6.3 Social and Human Sciences 6.4 Culture 6.5 Communication and Information 6.6 Peace 6.7 Inactive prizes 7 International Days observed at UNESCO 8 Member states 9 Governing bodies Toggle Governing bodies subsection 9.1 Director-General 9.2 General Conference 9.3 Executive Board 10 Offices and headquarters Toggle Offices and headquarters subsection 10.1 Field offices by region 10.1.1 Africa 10.1.2 Arab States 10.1.3 Asia and Pacific 10.1.4 Europe and North America 10.1.5 Latin America and the Caribbean 10.2 Partner organizations 11 Controversies Toggle Controversies subsection 11.1 New World Information and Communication Order 11.2 China 11.3 Israel 11.3.1 Occupied Palestine Resolution 11.4 Palestine 11.4.1 Palestinian youth magazine controversy 11.4.2 Islamic University of Gaza controversy 11.5 Listing Nanjing Massacre documents 11.6 United States and UNESCO 11.7 Kurdish–Turkish conflict 11.8 Campaigns against illicit art trading 12 Products and services Toggle Products and services subsection 12.1 Information processing tools 13 See also 14 Notes 15 References 16 Further reading 17 External links Toggle the table of contents UNESCO 186 languages Адыгэбзэ Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Аԥсшәа العربية Aragonés Արեւմտահայերէն Arpetan অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা Banjar 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dagbanli Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Fulfulde Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ / inuktitut IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча Ladin Ladino ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingála Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala Lombard Magyar मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Mirandés Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Napulitano Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی ပအိုဝ်ႏဘာႏသာႏ Papiamentu پښتو ភាសាខ្មែរ Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Qırımtatarca Română Rumantsch Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла संस्कृतम् ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Sardu Scots Seeltersk Setswana Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taclḥit Taqbaylit Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Tyap Удмурт Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt West-Vlams Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Batak Mandailing Ghanaian Pidgin ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Specialized agency of the United Nations United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization Flag of UNESCO Abbreviation UNESCO Formation 16 November 1945 ; 79 years ago ( 1945-11-16 ) Type United Nations specialized agency Legal status Active Headquarters Paris , France Director-General Audrey Azoulay Deputy Director-General Xing Qu Parent organization United Nations Economic and Social Council Staff 2,384 (2024 [ 1 ] ) Website unesco.org Politics portal The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization ( UNESCO / j uː ˈ n ɛ s k oʊ / ) [ 2 ] [ a ] is a specialized agency of the United Nations (UN) with the aim of promoting world peace and security through international cooperation in education, arts, sciences and culture.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] It has 194 member states and 12 associate members, [ 5 ] as well as partners in the non-governmental , intergovernmental and private sector .

[ 6 ] Headquartered in Paris , France, UNESCO has 53 regional field offices [ 7 ] and 199 national commissions .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] UNESCO was founded in 1945 as the successor to the League of Nations ' International Committee on Intellectual Cooperation .

[ 10 ] UNESCO's founding mission, which was shaped by the events of World War II , is to advance peace , sustainable development and human rights by facilitating collaboration and dialogue among nations.

[ 11 ] It pursues this objective through five major programme areas: education, natural sciences , social / human sciences , culture and communication/information. UNESCO sponsors projects that improve literacy , provide technical training and education, advance science, protect independent media and press freedom , preserve regional and cultural history , and promote cultural diversity .

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] The organization prominently helps establish and secure World Heritage Sites of cultural and natural importance.

[ 15 ] UNESCO is governed by the General Conference composed of member states and associate members, which meets biannually to set the agency's programs and budget. It also elects members of the executive board, which manages UNESCO's work, and appoints every four years a Director-General, who serves as UNESCO's chief administrator.

History [ edit ] Origins [ edit ] UNESCO and its mandate for international cooperation can be traced  to a League of Nations resolution on 21 September 1921, to elect a commission to study the feasibility of having nations freely share cultural, educational and scientific achievements.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] This new body, the International Committee on Intellectual Cooperation (ICIC), was created in 1922 [ 10 ] and counted such figures as Henri Bergson , Albert Einstein , Marie Curie , Robert A. Millikan , and Gonzague de Reynold among its members (being thus a small commission of the League of Nations essentially centred on Western Europe [ 18 ] ). The International Institute for Intellectual Cooperation (IIIC) was then created in Paris in September 1924, to act as the executing agency for the ICIC.

[ 19 ] However, the onset of World War II largely interrupted the work of these predecessor organizations.

[ 20 ] As for private initiatives, the International Bureau of Education (IBE) began to work as a non-governmental organization in the service of international educational development since December 1925 [ 21 ] and joined UNESCO in 1969, after having established a joint commission in 1952.

[ 22 ] Creation [ edit ] After the signing of the Atlantic Charter and the Declaration of the United Nations , the Conference of Allied Ministers of Education (CAME) began meetings in London which continued from 16 November 1942 to 5 December 1945. On 30 October 1943, the necessity for an international organization was expressed in the Moscow Declaration, agreed upon by China , the United Kingdom, the United States and the USSR. This was followed by the Dumbarton Oaks Conference proposals of 9 October 1944. Upon the proposal of CAME and in accordance with the recommendations of the United Nations Conference on International Organization (UNCIO), held in San Francisco from April to June 1945, a United Nations Conference for the establishment of an educational and cultural organization (ECO/CONF) was convened in London from 1 to 16 November 1945 with forty-four governments represented. The idea of UNESCO was largely developed by Rab Butler , the Minister of Education for the United Kingdom, who had a great deal of influence in its development.

[ 23 ] At the ECO/CONF, the Constitution of UNESCO was introduced and signed by 37 countries, and a Preparatory Commission was established.

[ 24 ] The Preparatory Commission operated between 16 November 1945, and 4 November 1946 — the date when UNESCO's Constitution came into force with the deposit of the twentieth ratification by a member state.

[ 25 ] The first General Conference took place from 19 November to 10 December 1946, and elected Julian Huxley to Director-General.

[ 26 ] United States Army colonel, university president and civil rights advocate Blake R. Van Leer joined as a member as well.

[ 27 ] The Constitution was amended in November 1954 when the General Conference resolved that members of the executive board would be representatives of the governments of the States of which they are nationals and would not, as before, act in their personal capacity.

[ 28 ] This change in governance distinguished UNESCO from its predecessor, the ICIC, in how member states would work together in the organization's fields of competence. As member states worked together over time to realize UNESCO's mandate, political and historical factors have shaped the organization's operations in particular during the Cold War , the decolonization process, and the dissolution of the Soviet Union .

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Development [ edit ] Among the major achievements of the organization is its work against racism, for example through influential statements on race starting with a declaration of anthropologists (among them was Claude Lévi-Strauss ) and other scientists in 1950 and concluding with the 1978 Declaration on Race and Racial Prejudice .

[ 31 ] In 1955, the Republic of South Africa withdrew from UNESCO saying that some of the organization's publications amounted to "interference" in the country's "racial problems".

[ 32 ] It rejoined the organization in 1994 under the leadership of Nelson Mandela .

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] One of the early work of UNESCO in the education field was a pilot project on fundamental education in the Marbial Valley, [ 35 ] Haiti, which was launched in 1947. Following this project one of expert missions to other countries, included a 1949 mission to Afghanistan.

[ 36 ] UNESCO recommended in 1948 that Member countries should make free primary education compulsory and universal.

[ 36 ] The World Conference on Education for All , in Jomtien , Thailand, started a global movement in 1990 to provide basic education for all children, youths and adults.

[ 36 ] In 2000, World Education Forum in Dakar , Senegal, led member governments to commit for achieving basic education for all in 2015.

[ 36 ] The World Declaration on Higher Education was adopted by UNESCO's World Conference on Higher Education on 9 October 1998, [ 37 ] with the aim of setting global standards on the ideals and accessibility of higher education .

UNESCO's early activities in culture included the International Campaign to Save the Monuments of Nubia , launched in 1960.

[ 38 ] The purpose of the campaign was to move the Great Temple of Abu Simbel to keep it from being swamped by the Nile after the construction of the Aswan Dam . During the 20-year campaign, 22 monuments and architectural complexes were relocated. This was the first and largest in a series of campaigns including Mohenjo-daro (Pakistan), Fes (Morocco), Kathmandu (Nepal), Borobudur (Indonesia) and the Acropolis of Athens (Greece).

[ 39 ] The organization's work on heritage led to the adoption, in 1972, of the Convention concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage.

[ 40 ] In 1976, the World Heritage Committee was established and the first sites were included on the World Heritage List in 1978.

[ 41 ] Since then important legal instruments on cultural heritage and diversity have been adopted by UNESCO member states in 2003 (Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage ) [ 42 ] and 2005 ( Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions ).

[ 43 ] An intergovernmental meeting of UNESCO in Paris in December 1951 led to the creation of the European Council for Nuclear Research , which was responsible for establishing the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) [ 44 ] later on, in 1954.

[ 45 ] Arid Zone programming, 1948–1966, is another example of an early major UNESCO project in the field of natural sciences.

[ 46 ] In 1968, UNESCO organized the first intergovernmental conference aimed at reconciling the environment and development, a problem that continues to be addressed in the field of sustainable development . The main outcome of the 1968 conference was the creation of UNESCO's Man and the Biosphere Programme .

[ 47 ] UNESCO has been credited with the diffusion of national science bureaucracies.

[ 48 ] In the field of communication, the "free flow of ideas by word and image" has been in UNESCO's constitution since it was established, following the experience of the Second World War when control of information was a factor in indoctrinating populations for aggression.

[ 49 ] In the years immediately following World War II, efforts were concentrated on reconstruction and on the identification of needs for means of mass communication around the world. UNESCO started organizing training and education for journalists in the 1950s.

[ 49 ] In response to calls for a " New World Information and Communication Order " in the late 1970s, UNESCO established the International Commission for the Study of Communication Problems, [ 50 ] which produced the 1980 MacBride report (named after the chair of the commission, the Nobel Peace Prize laureate Seán MacBride ).

[ 50 ] The same year, UNESCO created the International Programme for the Development of Communication (IPDC), a multilateral forum designed to promote media development in developing countries.

[ 51 ] In 1993, UNESCO's General Conference endorsed the Windhoek Declaration on media independence and pluralism, which led the UN General Assembly to declare the date of its adoption, 3 May, as World Press Freedom Day .

[ 52 ] Since 1997, UNESCO has awarded the UNESCO / Guillermo Cano World Press Freedom Prize every 3 May.

[ 53 ] 21st century [ edit ] Changes in States' memberships [ edit ] Israel, Palestine, and the United States [ edit ] In 2011, UNESCO admitted Palestine as a member.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] [ 56 ] Laws had passed in the United States after Palestine applied for UNESCO and WHO membership in April 1989 [ 57 ] [ 58 ] mean that the United States cannot contribute financially to any UN organization that accepts Palestine as a full member.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] As a result, the United States withdrew its funding, which had accounted for about 22% of UNESCO's budget.

[ 61 ] Israel also reacted to Palestine's admittance to UNESCO by freezing Israeli payments to UNESCO and imposing sanctions on the Palestinian Authority , [ 62 ] stating that Palestine's admittance would be detrimental "to potential peace talks".

[ 63 ] In 2013, two years after stopping payment of its dues to UNESCO, the United States and Israel lost UNESCO voting rights, but without losing the right to be elected; thus, the United States was elected as a member of the executive board for the period from 2016 to 2019.

[ 64 ] In 2019, Israel left UNESCO after 69 years of membership, with Israel's ambassador to the UN Danny Danon writing: "UNESCO is the body that continually rewrites history, including by erasing the Jewish connection to Jerusalem... it is corrupted and manipulated by Israel's enemies... we are not going to be a member of an organization that deliberately acts against us." [ 65 ] Also in 2023, the United States stated its intent to rejoin UNESCO, five years after leaving, and to pay its US$600 million of back dues.

[ 66 ] The United States was readmitted by the UNESCO General Conference that July.

[ 67 ] Three years later, in 2025, however, the United States stated its intent to withdraw again, to be effective as of December 2026.

[ 68 ] Russia [ edit ] In 2023, Russia was not renewed as member of the executive committee for the first time, after failing to get sufficient votes.

[ 69 ] Cultural policies and sustainable development [ edit ] In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic and United Nations-wide efforts to achieve the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda , the UNESCO reactivated in 2022 the cycle of MONDIACULT Conferences (World Conference on Cultural Policies and Sustainable Development) whose first edition had been held in Mexico City in 1982. The 2022 MONDIACULT conference was held again in Mexico , and a 2025 edition is planned in Barcelona , Spain .

Activities [ edit ] UNESCO offices in Brasília .

UNESCO implements its activities through five programme areas: education, natural sciences, social and human sciences, culture, and communication and information.

[ 70 ] UNESCO supports research in comparative education , provides expertise and fosters partnerships to strengthen national educational leadership and the capacity of countries to offer quality education for all. This includes the UNESCO Chairs , an international network of 644 UNESCO chairs, involving more than 770 institutions in 126 countries Environmental Conservation Organization Convention against Discrimination in Education adopted in 1960 Organization of the International Conference on Adult Education (CONFINTEA) in an interval of 12 years Publication of the Education for All Global Monitoring Report Publication of the Four Pillars of Learning seminal document UNESCO ASPNet , an international network of more than 12,000 schools in 182 countries UNESCO does not accredit institutions of higher learning.

[ 71 ] UNESCO also issues public statements to educate the public: Seville Statement on Violence : A statement adopted by UNESCO in 1989 to refute the notion that humans are biologically predisposed to organized violence.

Designating projects and places of cultural and scientific significance, such as: Global Geoparks Network Biosphere reserves , through the Programme on Man and the Biosphere (MAB), since 1971 City of Literature ; in 2007, the first city to be given this title was Edinburgh , the site of Scotland's first circulating library .

[ 72 ] In 2008, Iowa City, Iowa, became the City of Literature.

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] Endangered languages and linguistic diversity projects ( UNESCO Atlas of the World's Languages in Danger ) Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity Memory of the World International Register, since 1997, plus a number of national and regional registers Water resources management , through the International Hydrological Programme (IHP), since 1965 World Heritage Sites World Digital Library Encouraging the "free flow of ideas by images and words" by: Promoting freedom of expression , including freedom of the press and freedom of information legislation , through the Division of Freedom of Expression and Media Development, [ 75 ] including the International Programme for the Development of Communication [ 76 ] Promoting the safety of journalists and combatting impunity for those who attack them, [ 77 ] through coordination of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity [ 78 ] Promoting universal access to and preservation of information and open solutions for sustainable development through the Knowledge Societies Division, [ 79 ] including the Memory of the World Programme [ 80 ] and Information for All Programme [ 81 ] Promoting pluralism , gender equality and cultural diversity in the media Promoting Internet Universality and its principles, that the Internet should be (I) human Rights -based, (ii) Open, (iii) Accessible to all, and (iv) nurtured by Multi-stakeholder participation (summarized as the acronym R.O.A.M.) [ 82 ] Generating knowledge through publications such as World Trends in Freedom of Expression and Media Development , [ 83 ] the UNESCO Series on Internet Freedom, [ 84 ] and the Media Development Indicators, [ 85 ] as well as other indicator-based studies.

Promoting events, such as: International Decade for the Promotion of a Culture of Peace and Non-Violence for the Children of the World : 2001–2010, proclaimed by the UN in 1998 [ 86 ] World Press Freedom Day , 3 May each year, to promote freedom of expression and freedom of the press as a basic human right and as crucial components of any healthy, democratic and free society.

[ 87 ] Criança Esperança in Brazil, in partnership with Rede Globo , to raise funds for community-based projects that foster social integration and violence prevention.

[ 88 ] International Literacy Day , 8 September each year International Year for the Culture of Peace , 2000 Health Education for Behavior Change programme in partnership with the Ministry of Education of Kenya which was financially supported by the Government of Azerbaijan to promote health education among 10-19-year-old young people who live in informal camp in Kibera , Nairobi. The project was carried out between September 2014 – December 2016.

[ 89 ] World Day for Cultural Diversity for Dialogue and Development 21 May each year Founding and funding projects, such as: Migration Museums Initiative: Promoting the establishment of museums for cultural dialogue with migrant populations.

[ 90 ] UNESCO-CEPES , the European Centre for Higher Education: established in 1972 in Bucharest, Romania, as a decentralized office to promote international co-operation in higher education in Europe as well as Canada, USA and Israel.

Higher Education in Europe is its official journal.

Free Software Directory : since 1998 UNESCO and the Free Software Foundation have jointly funded this project cataloguing free software .

FRESH , Focusing Resources on Effective School Health [ 91 ] OANA , Organization of Asia-Pacific News Agencies International Council of Science UNESCO Goodwill Ambassadors ASOMPS , Asian Symposium on Medicinal Plants and Spices, a series of scientific conferences held in Asia Botany 2000 , a programme supporting taxonomy, and biological and cultural diversity of medicinal and ornamental plants, and their protection against environmental pollution The UNESCO Collection of Representative Works , translating works of world literature both to and from multiple languages, from 1948 to 2005 GoUNESCO , an umbrella of initiatives to make heritage fun supported by UNESCO, New Delhi Office [ 92 ] UNESCO-CHIC BIRUP , UNESCO-CHIC Group (China) Biosphere Rural and Urbanization Programme [ 93 ] The UNESCO transparency portal has been designed to enable public access to information regarding the Organization's activities, such as its aggregate budget for a biennium, as well as links to relevant programmatic and financial documents. These two distinct sets of information are published on the IATI registry, respectively based on the IATI Activity Standard and the IATI Organization Standard.

[ 94 ] New proposed lists [ edit ] Two new UNESCO lists have been proposed.

[ 95 ] The first proposed list would focus on movable cultural heritage such as artifacts, paintings, and biofacts. The list could include cultural objects, such as the Jōmon Venus of Japan, the Mona Lisa of France, the Gebel el-Arak Knife of Egypt , The Ninth Wave of Russia, the Seated Woman of Çatalhöyük of Turkey, the David (Michelangelo) of Italy, the Mathura Herakles of India, the Manunggul Jar of the Philippines, the Crown of Baekje of South Korea, The Hay Wain of the United Kingdom, and the Benin Bronzes of Nigeria.

[ 95 ] The second proposed list would focus on the world's living species.

[ 95 ] [ 96 ] Media [ edit ] UNESCO and its specialized institutions issue a number of magazines.

Created in 1945, The UNESCO Courier magazine states its mission to "promote UNESCO's ideals, maintain a platform for the dialogue between cultures and provide a forum for international debate". Since March 2006 it has been available free online, with limited printed issues. Its articles express the opinions of the authors which are not necessarily the opinions of UNESCO. There was a hiatus in publishing between 2012 and 2017.

[ 97 ] In 1950, UNESCO initiated the quarterly review Impact of Science on Society (also known as Impact ) to discuss the influence of science on society. The journal ceased publication in 1992.

[ 98 ] Official UNESCO NGOs [ edit ] UNESCO has official relations with 322 international non-governmental organizations (NGOs).

[ 99 ] Most of these are what UNESCO calls "operational"; a select few are "formal".

[ 100 ] The highest form of affiliation to UNESCO is "formal associate", and the 22 NGOs [ 101 ] with formal associate (ASC) relations occupying offices at UNESCO are: Abbr Organization IB International Baccalaureate CCIVS Co-ordinating Committee for International Voluntary Service CIPSH International Council for Philosophy and Humanistic Studies ( Conseil International de Philosophie et des Sciences Humaines ; publishes Diogenes ) CIOFF International Council of Organizations of Folklore Festivals and Folk Arts ( Conseil International des Organisations de Festivals de Folklore et d'Arts Traditionnels ) EI Education International IAU International Association of Universities IFTC International Council for Film, Television and Audiovisual Communication ICOM International Council of Museums ICSSPE International Council of Sport Science and Physical Education ICA International Council on Archives ICOMOS International Council on Monuments and Sites IFJ International Federation of Journalists IFLA International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions IFPA International Federation of Poetry Associations IMC International Music Council IPA International Police Association INSULA International Scientific Council for Island Development ISC International Science Council (formerly ICSU and ISSC ) ITI International Theatre Institute IUCN International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources IUTAO International Union of Technical Associations and Organizations UIA Union of International Associations WAN World Association of Newspapers WFEO World Federation of Engineering Organizations WFUCA World Federation of UNESCO Clubs, Centres and Associations UNESCO Institute for Water Education in Delft Institutes and centres [ edit ] The institutes are specialized departments of the organization that support UNESCO's programme, providing specialized support for cluster and national offices.

Abbr Name Location IBE International Bureau of Education Geneva [ 102 ] UIL UNESCO Institute for Lifelong Learning Hamburg [ 103 ] IIEP UNESCO International Institute for Educational Planning Paris (headquarters) and Buenos Aires and Dakar (regional offices) [ 104 ] IITE UNESCO Institute for Information Technologies in Education Moscow [ 105 ] IICBA UNESCO International Institute for Capacity Building in Africa Addis Ababa [ 106 ] IESALC UNESCO International Institute for Higher Education in Latin America and the Caribbean Caracas [ 107 ] MGIEP Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Education for Peace and Sustainable Development New Delhi [ 108 ] UNESCO-UNEVOC UNESCO-UNEVOC International Centre for Technical and Vocational Education and Training Bonn [ 109 ] ICWRGC International Centre for Water Resources and Global Change Koblenz [ 110 ] IHE IHE-Delft Institute for Water Education Delft [ 111 ] ICTP International Centre for Theoretical Physics Trieste [ 112 ] UIS UNESCO Institute for Statistics Montreal [ 113 ] Prizes [ edit ] UNESCO awards 26 prizes [ 114 ] in education, natural sciences, social and human sciences, culture, communication and information as well as peace: Education [ edit ] UNESCO/King Sejong Literacy Prize UNESCO/Confucius Prize for Literacy UNESCO-Japan Prize on Education for Sustainable Development UNESCO Prize for Girls' and Women's Education UNESCO/Hamdan Bin Rashid Al-Maktoum Prize for Outstanding Practice and Performance in Enhancing the Effectiveness of Teachers UNESCO King Hamad Bin Isa Al-Khalifa Prize for the Use of Information and Communication Technologies in Education Natural Sciences [ edit ] L'Oréal-UNESCO Awards for Women in Science [ 115 ] [ 116 ] UNESCO/Kalinga Prize for the Popularization of Science UNESCO-Equatorial Guinea International Prize for Research in the Life Sciences Carlos J. Finlay Prize for Microbiology UNESCO/Sultan Qaboos Prize for Environmental Preservation UNESCO-Russia Mendeleev International Prize in the Basic Sciences UNESCO-Al Fozan International Prize for the Promotion of Young Scientists in STEM Michel Batisse Award for Biosphere Reserve Management Social and Human Sciences [ edit ] UNESCO Avicenna Prize for Ethics in Science UNESCO/Juan Bosch Prize for the Promotion of Social Science Research in Latin America and the Caribbean UNESCO-Madanjeet Singh Prize for the Promotion of Tolerance and Non-Violence UNESCO-Sharjah Prize for Arab Culture UNESCO/International José Martí Prize UNESCO-UNAM / Jaime Torres Bodet Prize in social sciences, humanities and arts Culture [ edit ] Melina Mercouri International Prize for the Safeguarding and Management of Cultural Landscapes (UNESCO-Greece) Communication and Information [ edit ] UNESCO/Guillermo Cano World Press Freedom Prize UNESCO/Emir Jaber al-Ahmad al-Jaber al-Sabah Prize to promote Quality Education for Persons with Intellectual Disabilities UNESCO/Jikji Memory of the World Prize Peace [ edit ] Félix Houphouët-Boigny Peace Prize Inactive prizes [ edit ] International Simón Bolívar Prize (inactive since 2004) UNESCO Prize for Human Rights Education UNESCO/Obiang Nguema Mbasogo International Prize for Research in the Life Sciences (inactive since 2010) UNESCO Prize for the Promotion of the Arts International Days observed at UNESCO [ edit ] International Days observed at UNESCO are provided in the table below: [ 117 ] Date Name 14 January World Logic Day 24 January World Day for African and Afrodescendant Culture [ 118 ] 24 January International Day of Education 25 January International Day of Women in Multilateralism [ 119 ] 27 January International Day of Commemoration in Memory of the Victims of the Holocaust 11 February International Day of Women and Girls in Science 13 February World Radio Day 21 February International Mother Language Day 4 March UNESCO World Engineering Day for Sustainable Development 8 March International Women's Day 14 March International Day of Mathematics 20 March International Francophonie Day 21 March International Day of Nowruz 21 March World Poetry Day 21 March International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination 22 March World Water Day 5 April International Day of Conscience 6 April International Day of Sport for Development and Peace 15 April World Art Day 23 April World Book and Copyright Day 30 April International Jazz Day 3 May World Press Freedom Day 5 May African World Heritage Day 5 May World Portuguese Language Day 16 May International Day of Light 21 May World Day for Cultural Diversity for Dialogue and Development 22 May International Day for Biological Diversity 5 June World Environment Day 8 June World Oceans Day 17 June World Day to Combat Desertification and Drought 7 July Kiswahili Language Day 18 July Nelson Mandela International Day 26 July International Day for the Conservation of the Mangrove Ecosystem 9 August International Day of the World's Indigenous People 12 August International Youth Day 23 August International Day for the Remembrance of the Slave Trade and its Abolition 8 September International Literacy Day 9 September International Day to Protect Education from Attack 15 September International Day of Democracy 20 September International Day for University Sport 21 September International Day of Peace 28 September International Day for the Universal Access to Information 5 October World Teachers' Day 6 October International Geodiversity Day [ 120 ] 11 October International Day of the Girl Child 13 October International Day for Disaster Reduction 17 October International Day for the Eradication of Poverty 24 October United Nations Day 27 October World Day for Audiovisual Heritage 2 November International Day to End Impunity for Crimes Against Journalists [ 121 ] 3 November International Day for Biosphere Reserves [ 122 ] First Thursday of November International day against violence and bullying at school including cyberbullying [ 123 ] 5 November World Day of Romani Language 5 November World Tsunami Awareness Day 10 November World Science Day for Peace and Development 14 November International Day against Illicit Trafficking in Cultural Property [ 124 ] Third Thursday of November World Philosophy Day 16 November International Day for Tolerance 18 November International International Day of Islamic Art [ 125 ] 25 November International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women 26 November World Olive Tree Day [ 126 ] 29 November International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People 1 December World AIDS Day 2 December World Futures Day [ 127 ] 3 December International Day of Persons with Disabilities 10 December Human Rights Day 18 December International Migrants Day 18 December World Arabic Language Day Member states [ edit ] Main article: Member states of UNESCO UNESCO member states UNESCO member state dependent territory with separate NOC UNESCO associates UNESCO observers As of July 2023 [update] , UNESCO has 194 member states and 12 associate members.

[ 128 ] Some members are not independent states and some members have additional National Organizing Committees from some of their dependent territories .

[ 129 ] UNESCO state parties are the United Nations member states (except Israel [ 130 ] and Liechtenstein ), as well as Cook Islands , Niue and Palestine .

[ 131 ] [ 132 ] Israel left UNESCO on 31 December 2018.

[ 133 ] [ 134 ] On May 4, 2025, Nicaragua announced its decision to withdraw from UNESCO, effective December 31, 2026.

[ 135 ] [ 136 ] The United States left UNESCO in 1984, rejoined in 2003, left again in 2018, and rejoined in 2023.

[ 66 ] [ 137 ] [ 67 ] On July 22, 2025, the United States informed the Director-General of its decision to withdraw again, effective December 31, 2026.

[ 138 ] [ 137 ] [ 139 ] Governing bodies [ edit ] Director-General [ edit ] As of June 2023 [update] , there have been 11 Directors-General of UNESCO since its inception – nine men and two women. The 11 Directors-General of UNESCO have come from six regions within the organization: West Europe (5), Central America (1), North America (2), West Africa (1), East Asia (1), and East Europe (1).

To date, there has been no elected Director-General from the remaining ten regions within UNESCO: Southeast Asia, South Asia, Central and North Asia, Middle East, North Africa, East Africa, Central Africa, South Africa, Australia-Oceania, and South America.

The list of the Directors-General of UNESCO since its establishment in 1946 is as follows: [ 140 ] Directors-General of UNESCO Order Image Name Country Term 1st Julian Huxley United Kingdom 1946–1948 2nd Jaime Torres Bodet Mexico 1948–1952 – John Wilkinson Taylor United States acting 1952–1953 3rd Luther Evans United States 1953–1958 4th Vittorino Veronese Italy 1958–1961 5th René Maheu France acting 1961; 1961–1974 6th Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow Senegal 1974–1987 7th Federico Mayor Zaragoza Spain 1987–1999 8th Koïchiro Matsuura Japan 1999–2009 9th Irina Bokova Bulgaria 2009–2017 10th Audrey Azoulay France 2017– Incumbent General Conference [ edit ] This is the list of the sessions of the UNESCO General Conference held since 1946: [ 141 ] Session Location Year Chaired by from 1st Paris 1946 Léon Blum France 2nd Mexico City 1947 Manuel Gual Vidal Mexico 3rd Beirut 1948 Hamid Bey Frangie Lebanon 1st extraordinary Paris 1948 4th Paris 1949 Edward Ronald Walker Australia 5th Florence 1950 Stefano Jacini Italy 6th Paris 1951 Howland H. Sargeant United States 7th Paris 1952 Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan India 2nd extraordinary Paris 1953 8th Montevideo 1954 Justino Zavala Muniz Uruguay 9th New Delhi 1956 Abul Kalam Azad India 10th Paris 1958 Jean Berthoin France 11th Paris 1960 Akale-Work Abte-Wold Ethiopia 12th Paris 1962 Paulo de Berrêdo Carneiro Brazil 13th Paris 1964 Norair Sisakian Soviet Union 14th Paris 1966 Bedrettin Tuncel Turkey 15th Paris 1968 William Eteki Mboumoua Cameroon 16th Paris 1970 Atilio Dell'Oro Maini Argentina 17th Paris 1972 Toru Haguiwara Japan 3rd extraordinary Paris 1973 18th Paris 1974 Magda Jóború Hungary 19th Nairobi 1976 Taaita Toweett Kenya 20th Paris 1978 Napoléon LeBlanc Canada 21st Belgrade 1980 Ivo Margan Yugoslavia 4th extraordinary Paris 1982 22nd Paris 1983 Saïd Tell Jordan 23rd Sofia 1985 Nikolai Todorov Bulgaria 24th Paris 1987 Guillermo Putzeys Alvarez Guatemala 25th Paris 1989 Anwar Ibrahim Malaysia 26th Paris 1991 Bethwell Allan Ogot Kenya 27th Paris 1993 Ahmed Saleh Sayyad Yemen 28th Paris 1995 Torben Krogh Denmark 29th Paris 1997 Eduardo Portella Brazil 30th Paris 1999 Jaroslava Moserová Czech Republic 31st Paris 2001 Ahmad Jalali Iran 32nd Paris 2003 Michael Omolewa Nigeria 33rd Paris 2005 Musa Bin Jaafar Bin Hassan Oman 34th Paris 2007 Georgios Anastassopoulos Greece 35th Paris 2009 Davidson Hepburn Bahamas 36th Paris 2011 Katalin Bogyay Hungary 37th [ 142 ] Paris 2013 Hao Ping China 38th Paris 2015 Stanley Mutumba Simataa [ 143 ] Namibia 39th Paris 2017 Zohour Alaoui [ 144 ] Morocco 40th Paris 2019 Ahmet Altay Cengizer [ 145 ] Turkey 41st [ 146 ] Paris 2021 Santiago Irazabal Mourão Brazil 42nd [ 147 ] Paris 2023 Simona Miculescu Romania Executive Board [ edit ] Biennial elections are held, with 58 elected representatives holding office for four years.

Term Group I (9 seats) Group II (7 seats) Group III (10 seats) Group IV (12 seats) Group V(a) (13 seats) Group V(b) (7 seats) 2017– 2021 Finland Portugal Turkey Albania Belarus Bulgaria Cuba Grenada Jamaica Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Venezuela Bangladesh China India Indonesia Japan Philippines Burundi Equatorial Guinea Ethiopia Madagascar Zambia Zimbabwe Egypt Jordan Morocco 2019–2023 [ 148 ] France Germany Italy Netherlands Spain Switzerland Hungary Poland Russia Serbia Argentina Brazil Dominican Republic Uruguay Afghanistan Kyrgyzstan Philippines Pakistan South Korea Thailand Benin Congo Guinea Ghana Kenya Namibia Senegal Togo Saudi Arabia UAE Tunisia 2021–2025 [ 149 ] Austria Iceland Turkey Armenia Azerbaijan Lithuania Chile Grenada Haiti Mexico Paraguay Saint Lucia China Cook Islands India Japan Philippines Vietnam Angola Botswana Congo Djibouti South Africa Tanzania Egypt Jordan Kuwait 2023–2027 [ 150 ] France Germany Italy Spain United Kingdom United States Albania Czech Republic Serbia Slovakia Argentina Brazil Cuba Dominican Republic Australia Bangladesh Indonesia Pakistan South Korea Sri Lanka Burkina Faso Côte d'Ivoire Gabon Liberia Mauritius Mozambique Nigeria Iraq Oman Qatar Saudi Arabia Offices and headquarters [ edit ] Main article: World Heritage Centre The UNESCO headquarters is located at Place de Fontenoy in Paris, France. Several architects collaborated on the construction of the headquarters, including Bernard Zehrfuss , Marcel Breuer and Luigi Nervi.

[ 151 ] It includes a Garden of Peace which was donated by the Government of Japan .

[ 152 ] This garden was designed by American-Japanese sculptor artist Isamu Noguchi in 1958 and installed by Japanese gardener Toemon Sano. In 1994–1995, in memory of the 50th anniversary of UNESCO, a meditation room was built by Tadao Ando .

[ 153 ] UNESCO's field offices across the globe are categorized into four primary office types based upon their function and geographic coverage: cluster offices, national offices, regional bureaus and liaison offices.

Field offices by region [ edit ] The following list of all UNESCO Field Offices is organized geographically by UNESCO Region and identifies the members states and associate members of UNESCO which are served by each office.

[ 154 ] Africa [ edit ] Abidjan – National Office to Côte d'Ivoire Abuja – National Office to Nigeria Accra – Cluster Office for Benin , Côte d'Ivoire , Ghana , Liberia , Nigeria , Sierra Leone and Togo Addis Ababa – Liaison Office with the African Union and with the Economic Commission for Africa Bamako – Cluster Office for Burkina Faso , Guinea , Mali and Niger Brazzaville – National Office to the Republic of the Congo Bujumbura – National Office to Burundi Dakar – Regional Bureau for Education in Africa and Cluster Office for Cape Verde , Gambia , Guinea-Bissau , and Senegal Dar es Salaam – Cluster Office for Comoros , Madagascar , Mauritius , Seychelles and Tanzania Harare – Cluster Office for Botswana , Malawi , Mozambique , Zambia and Zimbabwe Juba – National Office to South Sudan Kinshasa – National Office to the Democratic Republic of the Congo Libreville – Cluster Office for the Republic of the Congo , Democratic Republic of the Congo , Equatorial Guinea , Gabon and São Tomé and Príncipe Maputo – National Office to Mozambique Nairobi – Regional Bureau for Sciences in Africa and Cluster Office for Burundi , Djibouti , Eritrea , Kenya , Rwanda , Somalia , South Sudan and Uganda Windhoek – National Office to Namibia Yaoundé – Cluster Office to Cameroon , Central African Republic and Chad Arab States [ edit ] Amman – National Office to Jordan Beirut – Regional Bureau for Education in the Arab States and Cluster Office to Lebanon , Syria , Jordan , Iraq and Palestine Cairo – Regional Bureau for Sciences in the Arab States and Cluster Office for Egypt and Sudan Doha – Cluster Office to Bahrain , Kuwait , Oman , Qatar , Saudi Arabia , United Arab Emirates and Yemen Iraq – National Office for Iraq (currently located in Amman , Jordan) Khartoum – National Office to Sudan Manama – Arab Regional Centre for World Heritage Rabat – Cluster Office to Algeria , Libya , Mauritania , Morocco and Tunisia Ramallah – National Office to the Palestinian Territories Asia and Pacific [ edit ] See also: UNESCO Asia Pacific Heritage Awards Almaty – Cluster Office to Kazakhstan , Kyrgyzstan , Tajikistan and Uzbekistan Apia – Cluster Office to Australia, Cook Islands , Fiji , Kiribati , Marshall Islands , Federated States of Micronesia , Nauru , New Zealand, Niue , Palau , Papua New Guinea , Samoa , Solomon Islands , Tonga , Tuvalu , Vanuatu and Tokelau (Associate Member) Bangkok – Regional Bureau for Education in Asia and the Pacific and Cluster Office to Thailand , Burma , Laos , Singapore and Vietnam Beijing – Cluster Office to North Korea , Japan, Mongolia , the People's Republic of China and South Korea Dhaka – National Office to Bangladesh Hanoi – National Office to Vietnam Islamabad – National Office to Pakistan Jakarta – Regional Bureau for Sciences in Asia and the Pacific and Cluster Office to the Philippines , Brunei , Indonesia , Malaysia , and East Timor Manila – National Office to the Philippines Kabul – National Office to Afghanistan Kathmandu – National Office to Nepal New Delhi – Cluster Office to Bangladesh , Bhutan , India, Maldives and Sri Lanka Phnom Penh – National Office to Cambodia Tashkent – National Office to Uzbekistan Tehran – Cluster Office to Afghanistan , Iran , Pakistan and Turkmenistan Europe and North America [ edit ] Brussels – Liaison Office to the European Union and its subsidiary bodies in Brussels Geneva – Liaison Office to the United Nations in Geneva New York City – Liaison Office to the United Nations in New York Venice – Regional Bureau for Sciences and Culture in Europe Latin America and the Caribbean [ edit ] Carondelet Palace , Presidential Palace – with changing of the guards. The Historic Center of Quito , Ecuador, is one of the largest, least-altered and best-preserved historic centres in the Americas .

[ 155 ] This centre was, together with the historic centre of Kraków in Poland, the first to be declared World Heritage Site by UNESCO on 18 September 1978.

Brasília – National Office to Brazil [ 156 ] Guatemala City – National Office to Guatemala Havana – Regional Bureau for Culture in Latin America and the Caribbean and Cluster Office to Cuba , Dominican Republic , Haiti and Aruba Kingston – Cluster Office to Antigua and Barbuda , Bahamas , Barbados , Belize , Dominica , Grenada , Guyana , Jamaica , Saint Kitts and Nevis , Saint Lucia , Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago as well as the associate member states of British Virgin Islands , Cayman Islands , Curaçao and Sint Maarten Lima – National Office to Peru Mexico City – National Office to Mexico Montevideo – Regional Bureau for Sciences in Latin America and the Caribbean and Cluster Office to Argentina , Brazil, Chile, Paraguay and Uruguay Port-au-Prince – National Office to Haiti Quito – Cluster Office to Bolivia , Colombia , Ecuador and Venezuela [ 157 ] San José – Cluster Office to Costa Rica , El Salvador , Guatemala , Honduras , Mexico, Nicaragua and Panama Santiago de Chile – Regional Bureau for Education in Latin America and the Caribbean and National Office to Chile Partner organizations [ edit ] International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) Blue Shield International (BSI) International Council of Museums (ICOM) International Council on Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS) International Institute of Humanitarian Law (IIHL) Controversies [ edit ] New World Information and Communication Order [ edit ] UNESCO has been the centre of controversy in the past, particularly in its relationships with the United States, the United Kingdom, Singapore and the former Soviet Union . During the 1970s and 1980s, UNESCO's support for a " New World Information and Communication Order " and its MacBride report calling for democratization of the media and more egalitarian access to information was condemned in these countries as attempts to curb freedom of the press . UNESCO was perceived as a platform for communists and Third World dictators to attack the West, in contrast to accusations made by the USSR in the late 1940s and early 1950s.

[ 158 ] In 1984, the United States withheld its contributions and withdrew from the organization in protest, followed by the United Kingdom in 1985.

[ 159 ] Singapore withdrew also at the end of 1985, citing rising membership fees.

[ 160 ] Following a change of government in 1997, the UK rejoined. The United States rejoined in 2003, followed by Singapore on 8 October 2007.

[ 161 ] China [ edit ] UNESCO has been criticized as being used by the People's Republic of China to present a Chinese Communist Party version of history and to dilute the contributions of ethnic minorities in China such as Uyghurs and Tibetans .

[ 162 ] [ 163 ] [ 164 ] Israel [ edit ] Israel was admitted to UNESCO in 1949, one year after its creation. Israel has maintained its membership since then. In 2010, Israel designated the Cave of the Patriarchs in Hebron and Rachel's Tomb in Bethlehem – both in the West Bank – as National Heritage Sites and announced restoration work, prompting criticism from the Obama administration and protests from Palestinians.

[ 165 ] In October 2010, UNESCO's executive board voted to declare the sites as "al-Haram al-Ibrahimi/Tomb of the Patriarchs" and "Bilal bin Rabah Mosque/Rachel's Tomb" and stated that they were "an integral part of the occupied Palestinian Territories " and any unilateral Israeli action was a violation of international law .

[ 166 ] UNESCO described the sites as significant to "people of the Muslim, Christian and Jewish traditions", and accused Israel of highlighting only the Jewish character of the sites.

[ 167 ] Israel in turn accused UNESCO of "detach[ing] the Nation of Israel from its heritage", and accused it of being politically motivated.

[ 168 ] The Rabbi of the Western Wall said that Rachel's tomb had not previously been declared a holy Muslim site.

[ 169 ] Israel partially suspended ties with UNESCO. Israeli Deputy Foreign Minister Danny Ayalon declared that the resolution was a "part of Palestinian escalation".

Zevulun Orlev , chairman of the Knesset Education and Culture Committee, referred to the resolutions as an attempt to undermine the mission of UNESCO as a scientific and cultural organization that promotes cooperation throughout the world.

[ 170 ] [ 171 ] On 28 June 2011, UNESCO's World Heritage Committee, at Jordan 's insistence, censured [ clarification needed ] Israel's decision to demolish and rebuild the Mughrabi Gate Bridge in Jerusalem for safety reasons. Israel stated that Jordan had signed an agreement with Israel stipulating that the existing bridge must be dismantled for safety reasons; Jordan disputed the agreement, saying that it was only signed under U.S. pressure. Israel was also unable to address the UNESCO committee over objections from Egypt .

[ 172 ] In January 2014, days before it was scheduled to open, UNESCO Director-General, Irina Bokova , "indefinitely postponed" and effectively cancelled an exhibit created by the Simon Wiesenthal Centre entitled "The People, The Book, The Land: The 3,500-year relationship between the Jewish people and the Land of Israel ". The event was scheduled to run from 21 January through 30 January in Paris. Bokova cancelled the event after representatives of Arab states at UNESCO argued that its display would "harm the peace process ".

[ 173 ] The author of the exhibition, professor Robert Wistrich of the Hebrew University 's Vidal Sassoon International Centre for the Study of Anti-Semitism , called the cancellation an "appalling act", and characterized Bokova's decision as "an arbitrary act of total cynicism and, really, contempt for the Jewish people and its history". UNESCO amended the decision to cancel the exhibit within the year, and it quickly achieved popularity and was viewed as a great success.

[ 174 ] On 1 January 2019, Israel formally left UNESCO in pursuance of the US withdrawal over perceived continuous anti-Israel bias.

[ 175 ] Occupied Palestine Resolution [ edit ] Main article: Occupied Palestine Resolution On 13 October 2016, UNESCO passed a resolution on East Jerusalem that condemned Israel for "aggressions" by Israeli police and soldiers and "illegal measures" against the freedom of worship and Muslims' access to their holy sites, while also recognizing Israel as the occupying power. Palestinian leaders welcomed the decision.

[ 176 ] While the text acknowledged the "importance of the Old City of Jerusalem and its walls for the three monotheistic religions", it referred to the sacred hilltop compound in Jerusalem's Old City only by its Muslim name "Al-Haram al-Sharif", Arabic for Noble Sanctuary. In response, Israel denounced the UNESCO resolution for its omission of the words "Temple Mount" or "Har HaBayit", stating that it denies Jewish ties to the key holy site .

[ 176 ] [ 177 ] After receiving criticism from numerous Israeli politicians and diplomats, including Benjamin Netanyahu and Ayelet Shaked , Israel froze all ties with the organization.

[ 178 ] [ 179 ] The resolution was condemned by Ban Ki-moon and the Director-General of UNESCO, Irina Bokova, who said that Judaism, Islam and Christianity have clear historical connections to Jerusalem and "to deny, conceal or erase any of the Jewish, Christian or Muslim traditions undermines the integrity of the site.

[ 180 ] [ 181 ] "Al-Aqsa Mosque [or] Al-Haram al-Sharif" is also Temple Mount, whose Western Wall is the holiest place in Judaism." [ 182 ] It was also rejected by the Czech Parliament which said the resolution reflects a "hateful anti-Israel sentiment", [ 183 ] and hundreds of Italian Jews demonstrated in Rome over Italy's abstention.

[ 183 ] On 26 October, UNESCO approved a reviewed version of the resolution, which also criticized Israel for its continuous "refusal to let the body's experts access Jerusalem's holy sites to determine their conservation status".

[ 184 ] Despite containing some softening of language following Israeli protests over a previous version, Israel continued to denounce the text.

[ 185 ] The resolution refers to the site Jews and Christians refer to as the Temple Mount, or Har HaBayit in Hebrew, only by its Arab name – a significant semantic decision also adopted by UNESCO's executive board, triggering condemnation from Israel and its allies. U.S. Ambassador Crystal Nix Hines stated: "This item should have been defeated. These politicized and one-sided resolutions are damaging the credibility of UNESCO." [ 186 ] In October 2017, the United States and Israel announced they would withdraw from the organization, citing in-part anti-Israel bias.

[ 187 ] [ 188 ] Palestine [ edit ] Palestinian youth magazine controversy [ edit ] In February 2011, an article was published in a Palestinian youth magazine in which a teenage girl described one of her four role models as Adolf Hitler . In December 2011, UNESCO, which partly funded the magazine, condemned the material and subsequently withdrew support.

[ 189 ] Islamic University of Gaza controversy [ edit ] In 2012, UNESCO decided to establish a chair at the Islamic University of Gaza in the field of astronomy , astrophysics , and space sciences , [ 190 ] fueling controversy and criticism. Israel bombed the school in 2008 stating that they develop and store weapons there, which Israel restated in criticizing UNESCO's move.

[ 191 ] [ 192 ] The head, Kamalain Shaath , defended UNESCO, stating that "the Islamic University is a purely academic university that is interested only in education and its development".

[ 193 ] [ 194 ] [ 195 ] Israeli ambassador to UNESCO Nimrod Barkan planned to submit a letter of protest with information about the university's ties to Hamas, especially angry that this was the first Palestinian university that UNESCO chose to cooperate with. He never provided any evidence to support his claim of ties to Hamas.

[ 196 ] The Jewish organization B'nai B'rith criticized the move as well.

[ 197 ] Listing Nanjing Massacre documents [ edit ] In 2015, Japan threatened to halt funding of UNESCO because of the organization's decision to include documents related to the 1937 Nanjing massacre in the latest listing for its "Memory of the World" program.

[ 198 ] In October 2016, Japanese Foreign Minister Fumio Kishida confirmed that Japan's 2016 annual funding of ¥4.4 billion had been suspended, although he denied any direct link with the Nanjing document controversy.

[ 199 ] United States and UNESCO [ edit ] The United States withdrew from UNESCO in 1984, citing the "highly politicized" nature of the organization, its ostensible "hostility toward the basic institutions of a free society , especially a free market and a free press ", as well as its "unrestrained budgetary expansion", and poor management under then Director-General Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow of Senegal.

[ 200 ] On 19 September 1989, US Congressman Jim Leach stated before a congressional subcommittee: [ 201 ] The reasons for the withdrawal of the United States from UNESCO in 1984 are well-known; my view is that we overreacted to the calls of some who wanted to radicalize UNESCO, and the calls of others who wanted the United States to lead in emasculating the UN system. The fact is UNESCO is one of the least dangerous international institutions ever created. While some member countries within UNESCO attempted to push journalistic views antithetical to the values of the west, and engage in Israel bashing, UNESCO itself never adopted such radical postures. The United States opted for empty-chair diplomacy, after winning, not losing, the battles we engaged in... It was nuts to get out, and would be nuttier not to rejoin.

Leach concluded that the record showed Israel bashing, a call for a new world information order, money management, and arms control policy to be the impetuses behind the withdrawal; he asserted that before departing from UNESCO, a withdrawal from the IAEA had been pushed on him.

[ 201 ] On 1 October 2003, the United States rejoined UNESCO.

[ 200 ] On 12 October 2017, the United States notified UNESCO it would again withdraw from the organization, on 31 December 2018; Israel followed suit.

[ 202 ] The Department of State cited "mounting arrears at UNESCO, the need for fundamental reform in the organization, and continuing anti-Israel bias at UNESCO".

[ 187 ] The United States has not paid over $600 million in dues [ 203 ] since it stopped paying its $80 million annual UNESCO dues when Palestine became a full member in 2011. Israel and the United States were among the 14 votes against the membership out of 194 member countries.

[ 204 ] When the United States announced it was rejoining the body in 2023, it also pledged to pay all past-due payments.

[ 66 ] On 4 February 2025, the White House said to conduct a review of US membership in UNESCO.

[ 205 ] On 22 July, Donald Trump decided that US will again withdraw from UNESCO, effective at the end of 2026.

[ 206 ] Kurdish–Turkish conflict [ edit ] On 25 May 2016, Turkish poet and human rights activist Zülfü Livaneli resigned as Turkey 's only UNESCO goodwill ambassador. He highlighted the human rights situation in Turkey and the destruction of the historical Sur district of Diyarbakir , the largest city in Kurdish-majority southeast Turkey, during fighting between the Turkish army and Kurdish militants as the main reasons for his resignation. Livaneli said: "To pontificate on peace while remaining silent against such violations is a contradiction of the fundamental ideals of UNESCO." [ 207 ] Campaigns against illicit art trading [ edit ] In 2020 UNESCO stated that the size of the illicit trade in cultural property amounted to 10 billion dollars a year. A report that same year by the Rand Organization suggested the actual market is "not likely to be larger than a few hundred million dollars each year". An expert cited by UNESCO as attributing the 10 billion figure denied it, saying he had "no idea" where the figure came from. Art dealers were particularly critical of the UNESCO figure because it amounted to 15% of the total world art market.

[ 208 ] In November 2020, part of a UNESCO advertising campaign intended to highlight international trafficking in looted artefacts had to be withdrawn after it falsely presented a series of museum-held artworks with known provenances as recently looted objects held in private collections. The adverts claimed that a head of Buddha in the Metropolitan Museum's collection since 1930 had been looted from a Kabul Museum in 2001 and then smuggled into the US art market, that a funerary monument from Palmyra that the Met had acquired in 1901 had been recently looted from the Palmyra Museum by Islamic State militants and then smuggled into the European antiquities market, and that an Ivory Coast mask with a provenance that indicates it was in the United States by 1954 was looted during armed clashes in 2010–2011. After complaints by the Met, the adverts were withdrawn.

[ 209 ] Products and services [ edit ] UNESDOC Database [ 210 ] – Contains more than 146,000 UNESCO documents in full text published since 1945 as well as metadata from the collections of the UNESCO Library and documentation centres in field offices and institutes.

Information processing tools [ edit ] UNESCO develops, maintains, and disseminates, free of charge, two interrelated software packages for database management (CDS/ISIS [not to be confused with UK police software package ISIS]) and data mining/statistical analysis (IDAMS).

[ 211 ] CDS/ISIS – a generalized information storage and retrieval system. The Windows version may run on a single computer or in a local area network. The JavaISIS client/server components allow remote database management over the Internet and are available for Windows, Linux, and Macintosh. Furthermore, GenISIS allows users to produce HTML Web forms for CDS/ISIS database searching. The ISIS_DLL provides an API for developing CDS/ISIS based applications.

OpenIDAMS – a software package for processing and analysing numerical data developed, maintained and disseminated by UNESCO. The original package was proprietary, but UNESCO has initiated a project to provide it as open source.

[ 212 ] IDIS – a tool for direct data exchange between CDS/ISIS and IDAMS See also [ edit ] Schools portal Science portal Society portal Politics portal World portal Academic mobility network League of Nations archives UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists UNESCO Reclining Figure 1957–58 , sculpture by Henry Moore UniRef International Charter of Physical Education, Physical Activity and Sport World Conference on Cultural Policies and Sustainable Development Notes [ edit ] ^ French: Organisation des Nations unites pour l'éducation, la science et la culture References [ edit ] ^ "PERSONNEL BY ORGANIZATION" .

CEB . Retrieved 13 August 2025 .

^ "UNESCO" .

UNESCO .

Archived from the original on 25 September 2013 . Retrieved 22 July 2025 .

^ "Introducing UNESCO" . UNESCO.

Archived from the original on 18 August 2011 . Retrieved 22 July 2025 .

^ "UNESCO history" . UNESCO.

Archived from the original on 9 April 2010 . Retrieved 23 April 2011 .

^ "List of UNESCO members and associates" . UNESCO.

Archived from the original on 15 August 2022 . Retrieved 23 August 2022 .

^ "Partnerships" .

UNESCO . 25 June 2013.

Archived from the original on 23 August 2020 . Retrieved 19 August 2020 .

^ "Field offices" .

UNESCO .

Archived from the original on 17 August 2020 . Retrieved 19 August 2020 .

^ "National Commissions" .

UNESCO . 28 September 2012.

Archived from the original on 22 August 2020 . Retrieved 19 August 2020 .

^ "About UNESCO Office for the Pacific States" .

UNESCO . 1 August 2019 . Retrieved 24 July 2023 .

^ a b Grandjean, Martin (2018).

Les réseaux de la coopération intellectuelle. La Société des Nations comme actrice des échanges scientifiques et culturels dans l'entre-deux-guerres [ The Networks of Intellectual Cooperation. The League of Nations as an Actor of the Scientific and Cultural Exchanges in the Inter-War Period ]. Lausanne: Université de Lausanne.

Archived from the original on 12 September 2018 . Retrieved 5 April 2019 .

( English summary Archived 22 March 2019 at the Wayback Machine ).

^ "UNESCO. General Conference, 39th, 2017 [892]" .

UNESCO Digital Library .

Archived from the original on 9 April 2020 . Retrieved 19 August 2020 .

^ "MOFA: Project list of The UNESCO Japanese Funds-in-Trust for the Capacity-building of Human Resources" .

mofa.go.jp . Retrieved 30 June 2022 .

^ "Sponsors" .

climats-bourgogne.com . Retrieved 30 June 2022 .

^ "Sponsors and Contributors" .

wcrp-climate.org . Retrieved 30 June 2022 .

^ "UNESCO • General Conference; 34th; Medium-term Strategy, 2008–2013; 2007" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 July 2011 . Retrieved 8 August 2011 .

^ Plenary Meetings , Records of the Second Assembly, Geneva: League of Nations, 5 September – 5 October 1921 ^ A Chronology of UNESCO: 1945–1987 (PDF) , UNESDOC database, Paris, December 1987, LAD.85/WS/4 Rev, archived (PDF) from the original on 2 February 2011 , retrieved 13 December 2010 , The International Committee on Intellectual Cooperation (ICIC) was created on 4 January 1922, as a consultative organ composed of individuals elected based on their personal qualifications.

{{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) .

^ Grandjean, Martin (2020).

"A Representative Organization? Ibero-American Networks in the Committee on Intellectual Cooperation of the League of Nations (1922–1939)" .

Cultural Organizations, Networks and Mediators in Contemporary Ibero-America : 65– 89.

doi : 10.4324/9780429299407-4 .

S2CID 243387712 .

Archived from the original on 17 January 2021 . Retrieved 13 August 2020 .

^ International Institute of Intellectual Cooperation , United Nations library resources, 1930, archived from the original on 19 August 2021 , retrieved 27 March 2021 ^ Hamen, Susan E; Wilson, Theodore A (2014).

The Great Depression and World War II : 1929–1945 . ABDO Publishing Company.

ISBN 978-1-62403-178-6 .

OCLC 870724668 .

^ UNESCO 1987 .

^ "IBE — Digital Collections — IBE History, 1925-1969" .

IBE — Digital Collections . Retrieved 26 July 2024 .

^ The work of U.N.E.S.C.O. (Hansard, 26 January 1949) Archived 19 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine . Millbank systems. Retrieved 12 July 2013.

^ "United Nations Conference for the Establishment of an Educational and Cultural Organisation. Conference for the Establishment of an Educational and Cultural Organisation" (PDF) . UNESDOC database. The Institute of Civil Engineers, London. 1–16 November 1945. ECO/Conf./29.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 March 2012 . Retrieved 8 June 2012 .

^ Unesco 1945 .

^ General Conference, First Session (PDF) . UNESDOC database. UNESCO House, Paris: UNESCO. 1947. Item 14, p. 73.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 September 2012 . Retrieved 1 July 2012 .

^ Summary Minutes of Meetings 1956 . United States National Commission for the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. 1956.

Archived from the original on 9 February 2022 . Retrieved 27 December 2021 .

^ "Records of the General Conference, Eighth Session" (PDF) .

UNESCO Digital Library .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 February 2011 . Retrieved 13 December 2010 .

^ "Peacekeeping in the Cold War/Post-Cold War" , United Nations Peacekeeping in the Post-Cold War Era , Abingdon, UK: Taylor & Francis, pp.

23– 45, 2005, doi : 10.4324/9780203307434_chapter_2 , ISBN 978-0-203-30743-4 , archived from the original on 12 March 2021 , retrieved 17 September 2020 ^ Schmidt, Christopher. (2010).

Into the heart of darkness : cosmopolitanism vs. realism and the Democratic Republic of Congo .

OCLC 650842164 .

^ Stoczkowski, Wiktor (2008).

"Claude Lévi-Strauss and UNESCO" .

The UNESCO Courier . No. 5. Paris, France: UNESCO.

ISSN 1993-8616 . Retrieved 26 July 2024 .

^ "Apartheid: its effects on education, science, culture and information" . UNESCO. 1967 . Retrieved 26 July 2024 .

^ Thompson, Leonard Monteath (January 2001).

A history of South Africa (Third ed.). New Haven: Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-12806-2 .

OCLC 560542020 .

^ Nygren, Thomas (2016), "UNESCO Teaches History: Implementing International Understanding in Sweden" , A History of UNESCO , London: Palgrave Macmillan UK, pp.

201– 230, doi : 10.1007/978-1-137-58120-4_11 , ISBN 978-1-349-84528-6 , archived from the original on 9 February 2022 , retrieved 17 September 2020 ^ unesdoc.unesco.org https://unesdoc.unesco.org/48223/pf0000000372 . Retrieved 17 June 2025 .

{{ cite web }} : Missing or empty |title= ( help ) ^ a b c d "UNESCO at 74: An overview of its laudable progress" .

The Financial Express . Retrieved 26 July 2024 .

^ "World Declaration On Higher Education For The Twenty-First Century: Vision And Action" . UNESCO. 9 October 1998 . Retrieved 12 November 2012 .

^ "Monuments of Nubia-International Campaign to Save the Monuments of Nubia" . UNESCO . Retrieved 26 July 2024 .

^ Nagaoka, Masanori (2016).

Cultural landscape management at Borobudur, Indonesia . Springer.

ISBN 978-3-319-42046-2 .

OCLC 957437019 .

^ "The World Heritage Convention" . UNESCO . Retrieved 26 July 2024 .

^ "41st Session of the World Heritage Committee" . The City of Krakow. 18 August 2017 . Retrieved 26 July 2024 .

^ "Text of the Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage" . UNESCO . Retrieved 26 July 2024 .

^ "Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions" . UNESCO . Retrieved 9 August 2024 .

^ "About CERN" .

CERN . Retrieved 26 July 2024 .

^ "UNESCO must reform to stay relevant – and reconnect people through science" .

Nature .

587 (7835): 521– 522. 25 November 2020.

Bibcode : 2020Natur.587..521.

.

doi : 10.1038/d41586-020-03311-3 .

PMID 33239811 .

S2CID 227176079 .

^ "UNESCO in the Making" . Paris, France: UNESCO. 2019. Archived from the original on 27 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 August 2024 .

^ "Use and conservation of the biosphere: Proceedings of the intergovernmental conference of experts on the scientific basis for rational use and conservation of the resources of the biosphere, Paris, 4–13 September 1968" (PDF) .

Natural Resources Research .

X . 1970.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 April 2012 . Retrieved 8 June 2012 .

^ Finnemore, Martha (1996).

National Interests in International Society . Cornell University Press. p. 4.

ISBN 978-0-8014-8323-3 .

JSTOR 10.7591/j.ctt1rv61rh .

Archived from the original on 1 June 2021 . Retrieved 11 May 2021 .

^ a b "United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization: Seeds of Peace, Weeds of War" .

IRPJ = Intergovernmental Research and Policy Journal . Retrieved 26 July 2024 .

^ a b Wouters, Jan; Vidal, Maarten (29 June 1905). "UNESCO and the promotion of cultural exchange and cultural diversity".

Normative Action in Education, Science and Culture – Essays in Commemoration of the Sixtieth Anniversary of UNESCO . Standard-Setting in UNESCO. Vol. 1. UNESCO Publishing. pp.

147– 169.

ISBN 978-92-3-104067-2 . Retrieved 26 July 2024 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ "International Programme for the Development of Communication – About" . UNESCO . Retrieved 9 August 2024 .

^ "World Press Freedom Day" . United Nations . Retrieved 26 July 2024 .

^ "What is UNESCO/Guillermo Cano World Press Freedom Prize?" .

www.manoramayearbook.in . Retrieved 26 July 2024 .

^ "General Conference admits Palestine as UNESCO Member" . 31 October 2011.

Archived from the original on 14 December 2011 . Retrieved 11 December 2011 .

^ Blomfield, Adrian (31 October 2011).

"US withdraws Unesco funding after it accepts Palestinian membership" .

The Telegraph .

Archived from the original on 1 November 2011 . Retrieved 31 October 2011 .

^ Palestine Admitted to UNESCO . 2 November 2011 . Retrieved 17 June 2025 – via www.unesco.org.

^ Shadi Sakran (26 November 2019).

The Legal Consequences of Limited Statehood: Palestine in Multilateral Frameworks . Taylor & Francis. pp. 64–.

ISBN 978-1-00-076357-7 .

Archived from the original on 24 December 2021 . Retrieved 27 February 2020 .

^ Request for the admission of the State of Palestine to UNESCO as a Member State Archived 13 April 2020 at the Wayback Machine , UNESCO Executive Board, 131st, 1989 ^ The laws originated in H.R. 2145 and S. 875 ; for further details, see committee discussions at: United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Subcommittee on Human Rights and International Organizations (1989).

The PLO's Efforts to Obtain Statehood Status at the World Health Organization and Other International Organizations: Hearing and Markup Before the Subcommittee on Human Rights and International Organizations of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundred First Congress, First Session, on H.R. 2145, May 4, 1989 . U.S. Government Printing Office.

Archived from the original on 19 August 2020 . Retrieved 27 February 2020 .

. The texts of the House and Senate resolutions were subsequently put into the following laws: H.R. 3743 (which produced Pub. L.

101–246 ), H.R. 5368 , H.R. 2295 and finally H.R. 2333 (which produced Pub. L.

103–236 ). See also: Beattie, Kirk (3 May 2016).

Congress and the Shaping of the Middle East . Seven Stories Press. p. 287 online.

ISBN 978-1-60980-562-3 .

Archived from the original on 19 August 2020 . Retrieved 27 February 2020 .

...1989 Senate and House efforts like... Senate Resolution 875 and House Resolution 2145, both of which contained language similar to that found in the public laws of 1990 and 1994. Sen.

Robert Kasten, Jr.

(R-WI) was the primary sponsor of S 875, and Rep.

Tom Lantos sponsored HR 2145. In a nutshell, recognition by any UN body of the Palestinians' right to statehood or its achievement of statehood status would trigger a suspension of US funding to the "offending" UN body under these laws.

^ "U.S. stops UNESCO funding over Palestinian vote" .

Reuters . 31 October 2011.

Archived from the original on 26 February 2020 . Retrieved 26 February 2020 .

^ Erlanger, Steven; Sayare, Scott (31 October 2011).

"Unesco Approves Full Membership for Palestinians" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 31 October 2011 . Retrieved 31 October 2011 .

^ "After UNESCO vote, Israeli sanctions on Palestinian Authority anger U.S." Haaretz . 4 November 2011.

Archived from the original on 7 December 2011 . Retrieved 11 December 2011 .

^ "Israel freezes UNESCO funds" . CNN. 3 December 2011. Archived from the original on 6 November 2011 . Retrieved 11 December 2011 .

^ "U.S., Israel lose voting rights at UNESCO over Palestine row" .

Reuters . 8 November 2013.

Archived from the original on 9 July 2014 . Retrieved 29 June 2014 .

^ " "69 years after joining, Israel formally leaves UNESCO; so, too, does the US" – The Times of Israel" .

The Times of Israel .

Archived from the original on 30 December 2019 . Retrieved 2 February 2021 .

^ a b c Charlton, Angela (12 June 2023).

"US decides to rejoin UNESCO and pay back dues, to counter Chinese influence" .

Associated Press . Retrieved 26 September 2024 .

^ a b Lee, Matthew (26 September 2024).

"U.S. formally rejoins UNESCO 5 years after withdraw" .

PBS .

Associated Press . Retrieved 11 July 2023 .

^ Chrisafis, Angelique (22 July 2025).

"Trump pulls US out of Unesco in blow for UN culture and education agency" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 22 July 2025 .

^ "Russia not elected to UNESCO Executive Board for the first time" . 15 November 2023.

^ "Expertise" . UNESCO . Retrieved 9 August 2024 .

^ Because diploma mills have falsely claimed UNESCO accreditation, UNESCO itself has published warnings against education organizations that claim UNESCO recognition or affiliation. See Luca Lantero, Degree Mills: non-accredited and irregular higher education institutions Archived 13 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine , Information Centre on Academic Mobility and Equivalence (CIMEA) , Italy. and UNESCO "Alert: Misuse of UNESCO Name by Bogus Institutions" ^ Varga, Susan (2006).

Edinburgh Old Town (Images of Scotland) . The History Press Ltd.

ISBN 978-0-7524-4083-5 .

^ Schmidt, Mitchell (12 October 2017).

"Iowa City, nation's only 'UNESCO City of Literature' disappointed over withdrawal" .

The Gazette .

Archived from the original on 9 February 2022 . Retrieved 23 September 2021 .

^ Phipps, Kinsey (9 December 2018).

"Iowa City grows after 10 years as City of Literature" .

The Daily Iowan .

Archived from the original on 11 December 2018 . Retrieved 23 September 2021 .

^ "Communication & Information" .

UNESCO . Archived from the original on 10 December 2019 . Retrieved 19 December 2016 .

^ "International Programme for the Development of Communication (IPDC)" .

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization . Archived from the original on 18 June 2017 . Retrieved 19 December 2016 .

^ "Safety of Journalists" .

UNESCO .

Archived from the original on 20 January 2020 . Retrieved 19 December 2016 .

^ "UN Plan of Action" .

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization .

Archived from the original on 11 August 2017 . Retrieved 19 December 2016 .

^ "Building Knowledge Societies" .

UNESCO . 18 June 2013.

Archived from the original on 16 January 2020 . Retrieved 19 December 2016 .

^ "Memory of the World" .

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization . Retrieved 22 April 2025 .

^ "Information for All Programme (IFAP)" .

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2017 . Retrieved 19 December 2016 .

^ "Internet Universality" .

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization .

Archived from the original on 28 July 2017 . Retrieved 19 December 2016 .

^ "World Trends in Freedom of Expression and Media Development" .

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization .

Archived from the original on 26 August 2017 . Retrieved 19 December 2016 .

^ "UNESCO Series on Internet Freedom" .

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization .

Archived from the original on 21 August 2017 . Retrieved 19 December 2016 .

^ "Media Development Indicators (MDIs)" .

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization .

Archived from the original on 12 June 2017 . Retrieved 19 December 2016 .

^ "International Decade for a Culture of Peace and Non-Violence for the Children of the World" .

^ Nations, United.

"World Press Freedom Day - EN" .

United Nations . Retrieved 13 April 2025 .

^ "Criança Esperança Programme" .

^ "Promouvoir l'éducation à la santé chez les jeunes du campement informel de Kibera à Nairobi | Organisation des Nations Unies pour l'éducation, la science et la culture" .

unesco.org (in French).

Archived from the original on 20 August 2017 . Retrieved 18 August 2017 .

^ "Migration Institutions – Home" . Migrationmuseums.org. Archived from the original on 5 March 2007 . Retrieved 23 April 2010 .

^ "Education | EDUCATION –" . UNESCO. Archived from the original on 6 October 2009 . Retrieved 23 April 2010 .

^ "Official support for GoUNESCO from UNESCO New Delhi" .

GoUNESCO – Make Heritage Fun!

. 24 March 2014.

Archived from the original on 15 August 2019 . Retrieved 15 August 2019 .

^ [1] , UNESCO-CHIC Biosphere Integrated Rural Urbanization Project (BIRUP).

^ "UNESCO Transparency Portal" .

opendata.unesco.org .

Archived from the original on 10 May 2021 . Retrieved 1 March 2021 .

^ a b c "Tangible Cultural Heritage – United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization" .

unesco.org .

Archived from the original on 19 March 2018 . Retrieved 18 March 2018 .

^ Centre, UNESCO World Heritage.

"UNESCO World Heritage Centre – Document – Discovered artifacts under preservation, Archaeological Site, 18 Hoang Dieu street" .

whc.unesco.org .

Archived from the original on 3 November 2019 . Retrieved 26 December 2019 .

^ "Archives" .

The UNESCO Courier . United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. 20 April 2017.

Archived from the original on 14 November 2018 . Retrieved 14 November 2018 .

^ "Science and Technology Education" (PDF) . UNESCO. 1998.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 August 2016 . Retrieved 23 June 2016 .

^ "Quoted on UNESCO official site" . Ngo-db.unesco.org. Archived from the original on 25 June 2012 . Retrieved 1 July 2012 .

^ "Full list of NGOs that have official relations with UNESCO" . UNESCO.

Archived from the original on 23 June 2012 . Retrieved 1 July 2012 .

^ "UNESCO Headquarters Committee 107th session 13 Feb 2009" . Ngo-db.unesco.org. Archived from the original on 25 June 2012 . Retrieved 1 July 2012 .

^ "International Bureau of Education" . UNESCO.

Archived from the original on 14 November 2018 . Retrieved 14 November 2018 .

^ "About the Institute" .

UIL – UNESCO Institute for Lifelong Learning . 29 October 2015.

Archived from the original on 14 November 2018 . Retrieved 14 November 2018 .

^ "IIEP UNESCO" .

Archived from the original on 19 November 2014 . Retrieved 14 November 2018 .

^ "Contact Us" .

UNESCO IITE .

Archived from the original on 14 November 2018 . Retrieved 14 November 2018 .

^ "Contact Us" .

IICBA . UNESCO.

Archived from the original on 14 November 2018 . Retrieved 14 November 2018 .

^ "Contact Us" .

IESALC (in Spanish). UNESCO.

Archived from the original on 14 November 2018 . Retrieved 14 November 2018 .

^ "Building Social and Emotional Learning for Education 2030" .

UNESCO MGIEP . UNESCO. Archived from the original on 23 March 2018 . Retrieved 3 February 2020 .

^ "UNESCO-UNEVOC International Centre" .

Archived from the original on 14 November 2018 . Retrieved 14 November 2018 .

^ "The International Centre for Water Resources and Global Change (ICWRGC)" .

ICWRGC – International Centre for Water Resources and Global Change .

Archived from the original on 20 January 2022 . Retrieved 4 July 2022 .

^ "Home" .

IHE Delft Institute for Water Education . UNESCO.

Archived from the original on 24 October 2018 . Retrieved 14 November 2018 .

^ "Mission & History" .

ICTP – International Centre for Theoretical Physics . UNESCO.

Archived from the original on 14 November 2018 . Retrieved 14 November 2018 .

^ "Contact Us" .

UNESCO Institute for Statistics . 21 November 2016.

Archived from the original on 14 November 2018 . Retrieved 14 November 2018 .

^ UNESCO Executive Board Document 185 EX/38 Archived 2 February 2011 at the Wayback Machine , Paris, 10 September 2010 ^ Peccia, Tiziano, Rasha Kelej, Ahmed Hamdy, and Ahmed Fahmi. "A reflection on Public-Private Partnerships’ contribution to the attainment of Sustainable Development Goals.", Scienza e Pace - Università di Pisa, 8.1 (2017): Research Papers.

^ Hamdy, Ahmed, Mohammed Kyari, Marie Johnson, Ahmed Fahmi, and Tiziano Peccia. "Towards Women participation in Scientific Research in Africa." Published by African Union Scientific, Technical and Research Commission (AU-STRC).

^ International Days | United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization Archived 10 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine . UNESCO. Retrieved 12 July 2013.

^ "World Day for African and Afrodescendant Culture" . United Nations . Retrieved 16 March 2023 .

^ "International Day of Women in Multilateralism" .

UNESCO .

^ "Home" .

Geodiversity Day . Retrieved 30 March 2023 .

^ "International Day to End Impunity for Crimes against Journalists" .

UNESCO .

Archived from the original on 30 October 2017 . Retrieved 19 December 2016 .

^ "International Day for Biosphere Reserves" .

UNESCO . Retrieved 20 March 2023 .

^ "International day against violence and bullying at school including cyberbullying" .

UNESCO . Retrieved 30 March 2023 .

^ "International Day against Illicit Trafficking in Cultural Property" .

UNESCO . Retrieved 30 March 2023 .

^ "International Day of Islamic Art" .

UNESCO . Retrieved 30 March 2023 .

^ "World Day of the Olive Tree" .

International Olive Council . Archived from the original on 30 March 2023 . Retrieved 30 March 2023 .

^ "World Futures Day" .

UNESCO . Retrieved 30 March 2023 .

^ "List of UNESCO members and associates" . UNESCO.

Archived from the original on 2 November 2011 . Retrieved 3 November 2011 .

^ "Summary update on Government progress to become a State Party to the UNESCO International Convention against Doping in Sport" (PDF) . WADA. p. 2. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 January 2013 . Retrieved 28 July 2009 .

^ UNESCO (29 December 2017), Declaration by UNESCO Director-General Audrey Azoulay on the withdrawal of Israel from the Organization (Press release.), archived from the original on 21 February 2019 , retrieved 21 February 2019 ^ "State Parties" . UNESCO.

Archived from the original on 31 October 2011 . Retrieved 31 October 2011 .

^ "Member States of the United Nations" . United Nations.

Archived from the original on 30 December 2013 . Retrieved 31 October 2011 .

^ Lazaroff, Tovah (31 December 2018).

"Israel, U.S. slated to leave UNESCO today to protest anti-Israel bias" .

The Jerusalem Post .

Archived from the original on 9 February 2022 . Retrieved 31 December 2018 .

^ UNESCO (12 October 2017), Statement by Irina Bokova, Director-General of UNESCO, on the occasion of the Withdrawal by the United States of America from UNESCO (Press release.), archived from the original on 21 February 2019 , retrieved 21 February 2019 ^ "UNESCO Statement following Nicaragua's decision to withdraw from the Organization" . Archived from the original on 27 June 2025 . Retrieved 24 July 2025 .

^ "Nicaragua leaves UNESCO after exiled newspaper wins award – DW – 05/04/2025" .

dw.com . Retrieved 24 July 2025 .

^ a b "US says it's leaving UNESCO again, only 2 years after rejoining" .

AP News . 22 July 2025 . Retrieved 22 July 2025 .

^ "The United States Withdraws from the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)" .

United States Department of State . Retrieved 22 July 2025 .

^ "Withdrawal of the United States of America from UNESCO: statement by Audrey Azoulay, Director-General" . Retrieved 24 July 2025 .

^ UNESCO official site: Directors-General Archived 18 July 2018 at the Wayback Machine ^ UNESCO official site: Previous Sessions of the General Conference Archived 25 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ "General Conference 37th" .

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization .

Archived from the original on 3 October 2015 . Retrieved 25 September 2015 .

^ "President of the 38th session of the General Conference" . UNESCO.

Archived from the original on 16 November 2015 . Retrieved 11 November 2015 .

^ "President of the 39th session of the General Conference" . UNESCO. 5 October 2017.

Archived from the original on 13 November 2017 . Retrieved 12 November 2017 .

^ "UNESCO: President of the 40th session of the General Conference" . 14 October 201.

Archived from the original on 18 October 2020 . Retrieved 20 August 2020 .

^ "41st Session of the General Conference – 9–24 November 2021" .

UNESCO . 1 June 2021.

Archived from the original on 6 October 2021 . Retrieved 6 October 2021 .

^ "Address by Ms Simona Mirela Miculescu" . 13 November 2023.

^ "40th Session of the General Conference – 12–27 November 2019" .

UNESCO . 16 October 2019.

Archived from the original on 2 January 2020 . Retrieved 20 November 2019 .

^ "Elections" . 17 November 2021.

^ "Elections" . 15 November 2023.

^ "UNESCO House – visit us | UNESCO" .

unesco.org . Retrieved 29 March 2023 .

^ "UNESCO garden" .

Architectuul . Retrieved 31 May 2022 .

^ Furuyama, Masao.

"Ando (Basic Art Series)" .

taschen.com . pp.

71– 72.

Archived from the original on 24 March 2021 . Retrieved 30 January 2021 .

^ "List of All UNESCO Field Offices by Region with Descriptions of Member State Coverage" . UNESCO.

Archived from the original on 8 September 2019.

^ "City of Quito – UNESCO World Heritage" . UNESCO.

Archived from the original on 7 May 2009 . Retrieved 30 April 2010 .

^ "UNESCO Office in Brasilia | United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization" .

unesco.org .

Archived from the original on 25 September 2015 . Retrieved 24 September 2015 .

^ "Oficina de la UNESCO en Quito | Organización de las Naciones Unidas para la Educación, la Ciencia y la Cultura" .

unesco.org .

Archived from the original on 25 September 2015 . Retrieved 24 September 2015 .

^ Grahm, S. E. (April 2006). "The (Real)politiks of Culture: U.S. Cultural Diplomacy in UNESCO, 1946–1954".

Diplomatic History .

30 (2): 231– 51.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-7709.2006.00548.x .

hdl : 1885/20736 .

^ "UNESCO asks states considering withdrawal to 'reconsider their position' " , UN Chronicle , January 1986, archived from the original on 9 February 2022 , retrieved 2 April 2018 ^ "Singapore to withdraw from UNESCO" , The Telegraph , 28 December 1984, archived from the original on 7 September 2015 , retrieved 20 June 2015 ^ "UNESCO" , Encyclopædia Britannica , 14 February 2018, archived from the original on 2 April 2018 , retrieved 2 April 2018 ^ "How China uses UNESCO to rewrite history" .

The Economist . 23 September 2023.

ISSN 0013-0613 . Retrieved 22 September 2023 .

To bolster the idea of a Han-centric identity, the party seeks to dilute the contributions of minority groups in UNESCO claims. For example, documents filed with the organisation state that Tibet's Potala Palace, the winter home of Dalai Lamas from 1649 to 1959, exhibits the skills of many ethnic groups, not just Tibetans. The government uses "radical selectivity" in choosing which places, people and practices to emphasise, says Rachel Harris of the School of Oriental and African Studies, part of the University of London.

^ Kashgarian, Asim (16 February 2023).

"UNESCO Accused of Complicity in China's Treatment of Uyghur Heritage" .

Voice of America . Retrieved 22 September 2023 .

^ Kachmar, Oleh (24 September 2020).

"Uyghur Heritage and the Charge of Cultural Genocide in Xinjiang" .

New Lines Institute .

Fairfax University of America . Retrieved 22 September 2023 .

^ "Hebron clashes over Israel's West Bank heritage list" . BBC News. 26 February 2010.

Archived from the original on 3 August 2012 . Retrieved 1 November 2011 .

^ "Executive Board adopts five decisions concerning UNESCO's work in the occupied Palestinian and Arab Territories" . UNESCO. 21 October 2010.

Archived from the original on 11 November 2010 . Retrieved 3 November 2010 .

^ "The Two Palestinian sites of Al-Haram Al-Ibrahimi/Tomb of the Patriarchs in Al-Khalil/Hebron and the Bilal Bin Rabah Mosque/Rachel's Tomb in Bethlehem" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 January 2012 . Retrieved 1 November 2011 .

^ Hillel Fendel (1 November 2010).

"UNESCO Erases Israeli Protests from Rachel's Tomb Protocol" . Arutz Sheva.

Archived from the original on 4 November 2010 . Retrieved 3 November 2010 .

^ Maayana Miskin (29 October 2010).

"UN Org.: Rachel's Tomb is a Mosque" . Arutz Sheva.

Archived from the original on 6 November 2010 . Retrieved 3 November 2010 .

^ "Ayalon: Israel will no longer cooperate with UNESCO" .

The Jerusalem Post . 3 November 2010.

Archived from the original on 3 November 2010 . Retrieved 3 November 2010 .

^ Shalom, Rabbi (5 November 2010).

"Cooperation with UNESCO only partially suspended" .

The Jerusalem Post .

Archived from the original on 5 January 2012 . Retrieved 8 August 2011 .

^ Eichner, Itamar (20 June 1995).

"UNESCO censures Israel over Mughrabi Bridge – Israel News, Ynetnews" .

Ynetnews .

Archived from the original on 7 August 2011 . Retrieved 8 August 2011 .

^ Berman, Lazar (17 January 2014).

"UNESCO cancels event on Jewish ties to Land of Israel" .

The Times of Israel .

Archived from the original on 20 January 2014 . Retrieved 21 January 2014 .

^ Ahren, Raphael (21 January 2014).

"Author of UNESCO's nixed Israel exhibit decries 'appalling betrayal' " .

The Times of Israel .

Archived from the original on 22 January 2014 . Retrieved 21 January 2014 .

^ Ahren, Raphael (1 January 2019).

"69 years after joining, Israel formally leaves UNESCO; so, too, does the US" .

The Times of Israel .

^ a b "UNESCO adopts anti-Israel resolution on al-Aqsa Mosque" . Al Jazeera.

Archived from the original on 21 October 2016 . Retrieved 21 October 2016 .

^ "Commission report" (PDF) .

UNESCO Digital Library .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 October 2016 . Retrieved 19 October 2016 .

^ Eichner, Itamar (13 October 2016).

"UNESCO fails to acknowledge Jewish ties to Temple Mount" .

Ynetnews .

Archived from the original on 18 October 2016 . Retrieved 19 October 2016 .

^ "Netanyahu leads angry denunciations of 'absurd' UNESCO decision" .

The Times of Israel .

Archived from the original on 18 October 2016 . Retrieved 19 October 2016 .

^ "UNESCO chief 'received death threats' for opposing Jerusalem motion" .

The Times of Israel . 17 October 2016.

Archived from the original on 21 October 2016 . Retrieved 27 October 2016 .

^ "Statement by the Director-General of UNESCO on the Old City of Jerusalem and its Walls on the occasion of the 40th session of the World Heritage Committee of UNESCO in Istanbul – United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization" .

Archived from the original on 19 October 2016 . Retrieved 19 October 2016 .

^ "UNESCO Director Criticizes Resolution: Temple Mount Sacred to Both Jews, Muslims" .

Haaretz . 14 October 2016.

Archived from the original on 14 October 2016 . Retrieved 14 October 2016 .

^ a b "Czech MPs slam 'hateful' UNESCO Jerusalem resolution" .

The Times of Israel .

Archived from the original on 20 October 2016 . Retrieved 19 October 2016 .

^ "UNESCO approves new Jerusalem resolution" . Al Jazeera.

Archived from the original on 27 October 2016 . Retrieved 27 October 2016 .

^ Beaumont, Peter (26 October 2016).

"Unesco adopts controversial resolution on Jerusalem holy sites" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 27 October 2016 . Retrieved 27 October 2016 .

^ "UNESCO resolution on Jerusalem holy sites draws criticism from U.S., Israel" .

CBC/Radio-Canada . 26 October 2016.

Archived from the original on 4 November 2016 . Retrieved 27 October 2016 .

^ a b "The United States Withdraws From UNESCO" .

U.S. Department of State . Archived from the original on 8 April 2019 . Retrieved 12 October 2017 .

^ Harris, Gardiner; Erlangeroct, Steven (12 October 2017).

"U.S. Will Withdraw From Unesco, Citing Its 'Anti-Israel Bias' " .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 21 October 2017 . Retrieved 8 April 2018 .

^ "Unesco cuts funding for Palestinian youth magazine over Hitler praise" .

The Daily Telegraph . London. 23 December 2011.

Archived from the original on 9 January 2012 . Retrieved 12 January 2012 .

^ "UNESCO Chair in Astronomy, Astrophysics and Space Sciences (964), established in 2012 at The Islamic University of Gaza (Palestine)" . UNESCO.

Archived from the original on 27 November 2012 . Retrieved 15 July 2012 .

^ The Goldstone Report: The Legacy of the Landmark Investigation of the Gaza Conflict Archived 13 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine By Adam Horowitz, Lizzy Ratner and Philip Weiss (2011). Google Books.

^ "Israel shocked by UNESCO Chair at Gaza Islamic University" (Press release). Israel ministry of foreign affairs. 12 July 2012.

Archived from the original on 15 July 2012 . Retrieved 15 July 2012 .

^ Higgins, Michael (12 July 2012).

"UNESCO establishes chair at Gaza university accused of housing Hamas bomb labs" .

National Post .

Archived from the original on 30 January 2013 . Retrieved 15 July 2012 .

^ Shaked, Ronny (6 February 2007).

"Fatah: Shalit was held at Gaza Islamic University" .

Ynetnews . Yedioth Ahronot.

Archived from the original on 1 December 2012 . Retrieved 15 July 2012 .

^ Cambanis, Thanassis (28 February 2010).

"Hamas University" .

The Boston Globe .

Archived from the original on 26 February 2012 . Retrieved 15 July 2012 .

^ Ravid, Barak (12 July 2012).

"Israel furious at UNESCO decision to back science chair at Islamic University of Gaza" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 15 July 2012 . Retrieved 15 July 2012 .

^ Yaakov, Yifa (14 July 2012).

"B'nai Brith slams UNESCO affiliation with Gaza University" .

The Times of Israel .

Archived from the original on 17 July 2012 . Retrieved 15 July 2012 .

^ (www.dw.com), Deutsche Welle.

"Japan furious at UNESCO listing Nanjing Massacre documents – Asia – DW.COM – 19.10.2015" .

Deutsche Welle .

Archived from the original on 22 December 2015 . Retrieved 29 December 2015 .

^ "Japan halts Unesco funding following Nanjing massacre row" .

The Guardian . Agence France-Presse. 14 October 2016.

Archived from the original on 30 October 2016 . Retrieved 30 October 2016 .

^ a b "UNESCO Membership: Issues for Congress" .

Congressional Research Service reports . 20 November 2003.

Archived from the original on 28 March 2019 . Retrieved 28 March 2019 .

^ a b "United States & UNESCO, Part 1" .

Starting from 05:08 .

C-SPAN .

Archived from the original on 28 March 2019 . Retrieved 3 February 2020 .

^ "U.S. and Israel officially withdraw from UNESCO" .

PBS . 1 January 2019 . Retrieved 28 August 2022 .

^ Rosenberg, Eli; Morello, Carol (12 October 2017).

"U.S. withdraws from UNESCO, the UN's cultural organization, citing anti-Israel bias" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 9 February 2022 . Retrieved 28 March 2019 .

^ Irish, John (13 October 2017).

"U.S., Israel quit UNESCO over alleged bias" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on 28 March 2019 . Retrieved 28 March 2019 .

^ "Withdrawing the United States from and ending funding to certain United Nations Organizations and reviewing United States support to all international organizations" .

the White House . 4 February 2025.

^ "US says it's leaving UN cultural agency UNESCO again, only 2 years after rejoining" .

AP . 22 July 2025.

^ " Turkish writer quits UNESCO to protest damage to heritage, rights abuse Archived 9 May 2018 at the Wayback Machine ". Reuters. 26 May 2016.

^ Vincent Noice, "Unesco, stop citing 'bogus' $10bn figure, art trade pleads", The Art Newspaper, 12 November 2020 [2] Archived 15 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Nancy Kenney, "Unesco under fire for using Met objects in anti-trafficking campaign", The Art Newspaper, 13 November 2020 [3] Archived 17 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine ^ "UNESDOC Database – United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization" .

unesco.org .

Archived from the original on 14 December 2015 . Retrieved 8 December 2015 .

^ "Information Processing Tools" . Unesco. Archived from the original on 8 January 2015.

^ "OpenIDAMS" . Unesco. Archived from the original on 13 January 2015.

Further reading [ edit ] Finnemore, Martha. 1993. " International Organizations as Teachers of Norms: The United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cutural [ sic ] Organization and Science Policy.

" International Organization Vol. 47, No. 4 (Autumn, 1993), pp. 565–597 External links [ edit ] UNESCO at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Data from Wikidata Discussions from Meta-Wiki Official website v t e United Nations Secretary-General : António Guterres Deputy Secretary-General : Amina J. Mohammed General Assembly President : Philemon Yang UN System Charter Preamble Principal organs Secretariat Secretary-General selections Deputy Secretary-General Under-Secretary-General General Assembly President International Court of Justice Statute Security Council Elections Members President Reform Veto power Economic and Social Council President Trusteeship Council Funds, programmes, and other bodies Culture of Peace IAEA IPCC ITC MINURSO OHCHR SCSL UNAIDS UNCDF UNCITRAL UNCTAD UNDGC UNDP UNDPO peacekeeping UNEP OzonAction UNEP/GRID-Arendal UNEP-WCMC UNFPA UN-HABITAT UNHCR UNHRC UNICEF UNICRI UNIDIR UNITAR UN-Oceans UNODC UNOPS UNOSAT UNRISD UNRWA UNSDG UNSSC UNU UNU-CRIS UNU-OP UNV UN Women WFP Specialized agencies FAO ICAO IFAD ILO IMF IMO IOM ITU UN Tourism UNESCO UNIDO UPU WFEO WHO WIPO WMO World Bank Group IBRD IDA IFC Secretariat offices and departments Headquarters Conference Building General Assembly Building Secretariat Building Department of Economic and Social Affairs Department of Peace Operations Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs Dag Hammarskjöld Library Department for Safety and Security Division for Palestinian Rights Office at Geneva Palace of Nations Office at Nairobi Office at Vienna Office for Disarmament Affairs Office for Outer Space Affairs Office for Partnerships Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Office of Internal Oversight Services Office of Legal Affairs Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States Office of Counter-Terrorism Office of the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict Office of the Spokesperson for the Secretary-General Office on Sport for Development and Peace UN organizations by location Members and observers Founding members Full members Security Council Permanent members Permanent representatives to the UN list General Assembly Observers European Union History Preceding years International Telegraph Union Universal Postal Union Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907 Permanent Court of Arbitration International Office of Public Hygiene League of Nations archives covenant organization member states Preparatory years Declaration of St James's Palace (1941) Atlantic Charter (1941) Declaration by United Nations (1942) Moscow Conference (1943) Tehran Conference (1943) Bretton Woods Conference (1944) Dumbarton Oaks Conference (1944) Yalta Conference (1945) Conference on International Organization (1945) Genocide Convention (1948) Activities Enlargement Peacekeeping missions timeline governed territories UNPOL Universal Declaration of Human Rights drafting Human Rights Day World Heritage Convention Convention on the Rights of the Child committee Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues Indigenous Caucus Sustainable Development Goals Declaration on the Rights of Peasants Resolutions Security Council vetoes General Assembly 66th 67th Security Council Cyprus Iran Iraq Israel Lebanon Nagorno-Karabakh North Korea Palestine Syria Western Sahara Yemen Elections Secretary-General 2021 2016 International Court of Justice 2023 2022 2021 2020 2017 2014 2011 General Assembly President (2016) Security Council (2016) Related Outline Advisory Committee of Local Authorities Art Collection Security Council mural Block By Block Bretton Woods system Celestial Sphere Woodrow Wilson Memorial CCISUA Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Criticism Delivering as One Drug control treaties Expulsion from the United Nations Ex Tempore Federal Credit Union FICSA Flag Honour Flag Four Nations Initiative Global Compact International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons International Day of Peace International Decade for a Culture of Peace and Non-Violence for the Children of the World International Narcotics Control Board International School Hanoi Interpretation Service Laissez-passer Memorial Cemetery Korea Military Staff Committee Millennium Declaration Millennium Summit Model United Nations Official languages Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons Postal Administration Ralph Bunche Park Reform SDG Publishers Compact Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners Treaty Series Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons UN Mandate UN Sacco UN Special UNICEF club United Nations Day United Nations in popular culture United Nations Medal United Nations Prize in the Field of Human Rights United Nations Radio United Nations television film series University for Peace Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action WIPO Treaty on Intellectual Property, Genetic Resources and Associated Traditional Knowledge Withdrawal from the United Nations Women in peacekeeping World Federation of United Nations Associations World portal v t e United Nations Economic and Social Council Membership List of members of the United Nations Economic and Social Council Functional commissions United Nations Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice (CCPCJ) United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs (CND) United Nations Commission on Population and Development (CPD) United Nations Commission on Science and Technology for Development (CSTD) United Nations Commission for Social Development (CSocD) United Nations Statistical Commission (StatCom) United Nations Commission on the Status of Women (CSW) United Nations Forum on Forests (UNFF) Regional commissions Europe (ECE) Africa (ECA) Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) Western Asia (ESCWA) Specialised agencies Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) International Labour Organization (ILO) International Monetary Fund (IMF) International Maritime Organization (IMO) International Telecommunication Union (ITU) United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) UN Tourism Universal Postal Union (UPU) World Health Organization (WHO) World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) World Meteorological Organization (WMO) World Bank Group (WBG) Funds and Programmes United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) World Food Programme (WFP) World Bank Group International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) International Development Association (IDA) International Finance Corporation (IFC) Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) Expert bodies Committee for Development Policy (CDP) Committee of Experts on Public Administration (CEPA) Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR) Committee of Experts on Global Geospatial Information Management (GGIM) Intergovernmental Working Group of Experts on International Standards of Accounting and Reporting (ISAR) Group of Experts on Geographical Names (UNGEGN) United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues (UNPFII) Committee of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters Committee of Experts on the Transport of Dangerous Goods and on the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations Research and training United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute (UNICRI) United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research (UNIDIR) United Nations Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR) United Nations Research Institute for Social Development (UNRISD) United Nations System Staff College (UNSSC) United Nations University (UNU) Other entities High-level Political Forum on Sustainable Development (HLPF) International Trade Centre (ITC) Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) United Nations Sustainable Development Group (UNSDG) United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund (UNICEF) United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) Disbanded entities Functional Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD - Replaced in 2013 by UNHLPF ) Functional  Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR - Replaced in 2006 by UNHRC ) International Refugee Organization (IRO - Replaced in 1952 by UNHCR ) Category Politics portal v t e United Nations Charter Text Preamble Chapter I II III IV V VI VII VIII IX X XI XII XIII XIV XV XVI XVII XVIII XIX Amendments Organs created Security Council General Assembly Economic and Social Council Trusteeship Council International Court of Justice ( statute ) Secretariat Military Staff Committee History Background Paris Peace Conference Treaty of Versailles Covenant of the League of Nations Preparation London Declaration (1941) Atlantic Charter (1941) Declaration by United Nations (1942) Moscow Conference (1943) Tehran Conference (1943) Dumbarton Oaks Conference (1944) Yalta Conference (1945) Conference on International Organization (1945) Signatories Original members Complete text Politics portal Law portal v t e Global governance and identity Proposals United Nations Parliamentary Assembly World constitution World government World federalism World taxation system Flag Theories Cosmopolitanism Democratic globalization Democratic mundialization Global apartheid Global citizenship Global governance Globalism Internationalism Transnational governance World currency Organisations Global citizens movement World Federalist Movement/Institute for Global Policy World Service Authority Campaign for World Government World Constitution and Parliament Association Provisional government Provisional World Government World portal v t e Humanitarian partners of the European Commission Humanitarian partners DG ECHO NGOs International Action Against Hunger (France, Spain) ADRA (Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany) CARE International (Austria, Denmark, France, Germany, Netherlands, Norway) Caritas Europa ( Austria , Belgium , Czech Republic , Denmark , France , Germany , Ireland , Luxembourg , Netherlands , Spain ) ICRC ( Austria , Belgium , Denmark , Finland , France , Germany , Luxembourg , Italy , Netherlands , Norway , Spain , Sweden ) Islamic Relief (Germany, Sweden) Oxfam (Belgium, Italy, Netherlands, Spain) Plan International (Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Netherlands, Spain, Sweden) Save the Children (Denmark, Finland, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden) Solidarités international (France, Spain) SOS Children's Villages (Austria, Netherlands) Terre des hommes (Italy, Netherlands) World Vision (Austria, Finland, Netherlands) National MDM · VSF PIN DACAAR · DanChurchAid · DPA · DRC Estonian Refugee Council · MTÜ Mondo Fida International · FinnChurchAid · FRC · Mannerheim League for Child Welfare ACTED · ALIMA · AVSF · Institut Bioforce · CDE · Federation Handicap · GRET · iMMAP · MDM · Œuvre d'Orient · PUI · Relief International · Secours Islamique · SPF · Triangle · TSF arche noVa · ASB · Diakonie Deutschland · Die Johanniter · GAC · HELP · International Rescue Committee · Malteser Hilfsdienst · Medair · MI · Sign of Hope · VSF Concern Worldwide · GOAL · SHA · Trócaire ActionAid · AISPO · AVSI · Cesvi · CISP · COOPI · CUAMM · Emergency · FADV · INTERSOS · JRS · LVIA · Un Ponte Per · VIS · WeWorld Cordaid · DAI · HNTPO · INSO · Mercy Corps · REK · Stichting Vluchteling · Tearfund Netherlands · War Child Netherlands · ZOA NCA · NPA · NRC PAH AKF PRT ACPP · Ayuda en Acción · EDUCO · Entreculturas · Farmacéuticos Mundi · MDM · Medicus Mundi · MPDL · Mundubat · SIA COS · Diakonia · Läkarmissionen · PMU Interlife · SWEDO International organisations ICRC IFRC FAO ILO IOM OCHA OHCHR PAHO UNDP UNDP MPTFO UNDRR UNESCAP UNESCO UNICEF UNFPA UN-HABITAT UNHCR UNMAS UNODC UNOPS UNRWA UNSECOORD UN Women WFP WHO World Bank Agencies AECID DGPCE DEMA DGSCGC Protezione Civile Enabel Expertise France GIZ GSCP Hungary Helps ITF MSB THW European Union portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Artists ULAN Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐42nb8
Cached time: 20250818020737
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.999 seconds
Real time usage: 3.429 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 32955/1000000
Revision size: 150111/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 670106/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 34827/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 17/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 766785/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.668/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19846186/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2772.263      1 -total
 48.84% 1353.946      2 Template:Reflist
 28.03%  777.111    132 Template:Cite_web
 12.22%  338.863    114 Template:Flagcountry
  6.62%  183.569     35 Template:Cite_news
  5.02%  139.107      9 Template:Navbox
  4.99%  138.345      1 Template:Infobox_organization
  4.76%  131.833      1 Template:Infobox
  4.53%  125.531      2 Template:Sfn
  4.40%  122.088      1 Template:Efn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:21786641:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818020737 and revision id 1306370084. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=UNESCO&oldid=1306370084 " Categories : UNESCO Organizations established in 1945 Conservation and restoration organizations Heritage organizations International cultural organizations International educational organizations International scientific organizations International organisations based in Paris United Nations Development Group United Nations specialized agencies France and the United Nations 1945 establishments in France Peace organizations Hidden categories: Articles containing French-language text Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 errors: missing title CS1 errors: bare URL CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1: unfit URL CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use Oxford spelling from December 2018 Use dmy dates from December 2023 Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles containing potentially dated statements from July 2023 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing potentially dated statements from June 2023 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2016 Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 10:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents UNESCO 186 languages Add topic

