Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Deconfliction 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Military training route Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Aerial corridors across the United States This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( May 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Military training routes are aerial corridors across the United States in which military aircraft can operate below 10,000 feet faster than the maximum safe speed of 250 knots that all other aircraft are restricted to while operating below 10,000 feet. The routes are the result of a joint venture between the Federal Aviation Administration and the Department of Defense to provide for high-speed, low-altitude military activities.

[ 1 ] Description [ edit ] Military Training Routes are divided into Instrument Routes (IR), and Visual Routes (VR). Each route is identified by either of these two letters, followed by either four digits for routes below 1,500 feet above ground level, or three digits for routes extending for at least one leg above 1,500ft AGL. (i.e., VR-1056). The difference between the IR and VR routes is that IR routes are flown under Air Traffic Control, while VR routes are not.

Airspace above the United States from the surface to 10,000 feet above sea level is limited to 250 knots (indicated airspeed) per the FAA 's Federal Aviation Regulations .

[ 2 ] This speed limit hinders most modern-day tactical aircraft training operations, since low-level strikes are conducted almost exclusively at speeds exceeding 300 knots. Military Training Routes are usually limited to 420 knots, and in no case are aircraft allowed to exceed Mach 1 within United States sovereign airspace, except in designated Military Operation Areas. While on the route military aircraft squawk a Mode C Transponder code of '4000', which informs controllers that they are 'speeding' on a route. This squawk however is only legal by military aircraft, while inside a properly scheduled route corridor. MTRs do not constitute an official airspace, and are all open to VFR or IFR civilian traffic; however only military aircraft are allowed to squawk 4000 and exceed 250 knots.

Each route is defined by a number of geographical coordinates and their respective navaid fixes. From this line the corridor is extended a specific number of miles, in the vast majority of cases this is five miles, making the corridor 10 miles wide. The Routes are individually operated through one of the local military air bases, which schedule and 'own' the route. The FAA requires these bases to ' NOTAM ' out the routes at least two hours prior to use to allow for civilian traffic to de-conflict if needed.

Additionally, Military Training Routes are one-way-routes due to the need for established entry and exit points. If aircraft are to fly the route in both directions, a separate designator must be assigned.

[ 3 ] Deconfliction [ edit ] It is important to note, that there is no official means of navigation for IR or VR routes. A VR route may be flown visually, and an IR route may be flown completely heads down (although this is rarely the case). Although ATC provides deconfliction for IR Routes, VR routes are flown completely independent of external separation. Since VFR traffic does not legally have to be squawking, this provides for a serious hazard to navigation. The FAA claims the military maximizes use of IR routes for this purpose, however the vast majority of military training flights on MTRs are on VR routes.

See also [ edit ] Military Operations Area References [ edit ] The Department of Defense publication AP-1/B lists all military training routes in North America.   Military training routes are depicted on FAA VFR sectional aeronautical charts as narrow gray lines with IR or VR designator prefixes.

^ "Chapter 3. Airspace. Section 4. Special Use Airspace" .

Aeronautical Information Manual .

Federal Aviation Administration . Retrieved 14 January 2024 .

^ 14CFR 91.117a ^ Federal Aviation Administration (2024).

"FAA Order JO 7610.14W - Non-Sensitive Procedures and Requirements for Special Operations" . Retrieved 2024-12-29 .

Section 2. MTR Route Designation Criteria 6-2-2g External links [ edit ] FAA Aeronautical Chart User's Guide DoD FLIP Military Training Routes AP/1B https://www.daip.jcs.mil/pdf/ap1b.pdf Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Military_training_route&oldid=1266128712 " Categories : American military aviation Air traffic control in the United States Military air traffic control Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from May 2017 All articles lacking in-text citations This page was last edited on 30 December 2024, at 06:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Military training route Add languages Add topic

