Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Career 2 Philosophical work Toggle Philosophical work subsection 2.1 Meta-ontology 2.2 Priority monism 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Jonathan Schaffer 2 languages Deutsch Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American philosopher For the computer scientist, see Jonathan Schaeffer . For the musician, see Jon Schaffer .

Jonathan Schaffer Born Jonathan Moshe Schaffer Academic background Education Kenyon College (BA) Rutgers University (PhD) Thesis Causation and the Probabilities of Processes (1999) Doctoral advisor Brian P. McLaughlin Other advisors Barry Loewer , Tim Maudlin , David Lewis Academic work Era Contemporary philosophy Region Western philosophy School or tradition Analytic Main interests Meta-ontology Notable ideas Priority monism Website jonathanschaffer .org Jonathan Moshe Schaffer is an American philosopher specializing in metaphysics and also working in epistemology , mind , and language . He is best known for his work on grounding and his development of monism , and is also a notable proponent of contrastivism .

Career [ edit ] Since earning his PhD from Rutgers University in 1999, Schaffer has published 73 papers.

[ 1 ] He wrote his PhD thesis Causation and the Probabilities of Processes under Brian McLaughlin. In 2000, he accepted a position as assistant professor at the University of Massachusetts Amherst in Amherst, Massachusetts , earning tenure by 2004. In that period he was awarded the Philosophy of Science Recent PhD Essay Contest in 2001, and the Young Epistemologist Prize in 2002.

[ 1 ] In 2007, Schaffer accepted a permanent research position at the Australian National University , and was described as "one of philosophy's most creative and interesting younger figures".

[ 2 ] He subsequently won awards for two papers published that year, the American Philosophical Association 's 2008 Article Prize, for "Knowing the Answer" in Philosophy and Phenomenological Research , and the Australasian Journal of Philosophy ' s 2008 Best Paper Award, for "From Nihilism to Monism".

[ 3 ] In 2010, Schaffer accepted a permanent position at Rutgers University .

[ 4 ] In 2014 he was awarded the Lebowitz Prize for excellence in philosophical thought by Phi Beta Kappa in conjunction with the American Philosophical Association .

[ 5 ] In 2015 he was promoted to Distinguished Professor, and from 2016-19 he had a Humboldt Prize .

[ 1 ] Philosophical work [ edit ] Meta-ontology [ edit ] Schaffer advocates a neo-Aristotelian [ 6 ] approach to meta-ontology in which composite objects , abstract objects , fictional characters, and many other philosophically contentious entities exist. Rather than debating such objects' existence, the primary role of metaphysics is to organize all existent entities into a hierarchical dependence structure. Within this structure, all existing things are classified as fundamental entities, derivative entities, or grounding relations.

[ 7 ] Fundamental entities (also called substances ) have nothing ontologically prior to them upon which their existence depends. They are the most basic units of existence. derivative entities, on the other hand, depend upon other entities for their existence. Schaffer uses the holes in a block of Swiss Cheese as an example of a derivative entity, since the holes are ontologically dependent upon the cheese. A derivative entity may be grounded in either another derivative entity or in a substance. A grounding relation is a primitive relation of dependence that holds between a derivative entity and that entity's "grounds". Grounding relations are irreflexive, asymmetric, and transitive.

[ 7 ] This allows for chains of grounding. Schaffer asserts that all chains of grounding must terminate in a fundamental entity in his "well-foundedness" assumption.

[ 8 ] Priority monism [ edit ] Schaffer is perhaps most well-known for his arguments in favor of priority monism. Priority monism is a form of monism that claims that while very many entities exist, only one is fundamental. For Schaffer, this entity is the cosmos. Schaffer's position is motivated by his belief that the whole universe may be an entangled system and thus have properties that are not reducible to the universe's parts. "Monism: The Priority of the Whole" [ 8 ] also contains his Argument from Gunk , according to which mereological atoms cannot be fundamental due to the possibility of infinitely divisible matter.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c Schaffer's CV ^ "Leiter Reports: A Philosophy Blog: Jonathan Schaffer to ANU" . Leiterreports.typepad.com. 2007-03-26 . Retrieved 2012-02-19 .

^ Schaffer's Awards Archived October 21, 2008, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Leiter Reports: A Philosophy Blog: Rutgers Raids the ANU: Schaffer, Schellenberg to New Brunswick in 2011" . Leiterreports.typepad.com. 2009-11-20 . Retrieved 2012-02-19 .

^ News - Rutgers University ^ Jonathan Schaffer (2009).

"On What Grounds What Metametaphysics" (PDF) . In Chalmers; Manley; Wasserman (eds.).

Metametaphysics . Oxford University Press. pp.

347– 83.

ISBN 978-0199546046 .

^ a b "On What Grounds What" .

^ a b "Monism: The Priority of the Whole" External links [ edit ] Jonathan Schaffer publications indexed by Google Scholar Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Poland Israel Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project PhilPeople MathSciNet Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jonathan_Schaffer&oldid=1299319774 " Categories : 20th-century American philosophers 21st-century American philosophers Rutgers University alumni Analytic philosophers 1970 births American metaphysicians Living people American philosophy academics Humboldt Research Award recipients Rutgers University faculty Kenyon College alumni American epistemologists American philosophers of mind American philosophers of language Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using infobox academic with unknown parameters Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 7 July 2025, at 18:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jonathan Schaffer 2 languages Add topic

