Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Companies and market Toggle Companies and market subsection 2.1 United States 2.2 European Union 2.3 China 2.4 India 3 Function Toggle Function subsection 3.1 Satellite 3.2 Gateways 3.3 Antenna dish and modem 3.3.1 Outdoor unit (ODU) 3.3.2 Indoor unit (IDU) 4 Challenges and limitations Toggle Challenges and limitations subsection 4.1 Signal latency 4.1.1 Geostationary orbits 4.1.2 Medium and low Earth orbits 4.1.3 Ultralight atmospheric aircraft as satellites 4.2 Interference 4.3 Line of sight 4.4 Fresnel zone 5 Two-way satellite-only communication Toggle Two-way satellite-only communication subsection 5.1 Bandwidth 5.2 Portable satellite Internet 5.2.1 Portable satellite modem 5.2.2 Internet via satellite phone 6 One-way receive Toggle One-way receive subsection 6.1 System components 7 One-way broadcast Toggle One-way broadcast subsection 7.1 System hardware components 7.2 System software components 7.3 Services 8 Efficiency increases Toggle Efficiency increases subsection 8.1 2013 FCC report cites big jump in satellite performance 8.2 Reducing satellite latency 9 Satellites launched Toggle Satellites launched subsection 9.1 Geostationary orbit 9.2 Medium Earth orbit 9.3 Low Earth orbit 10 In oceanography and seismology 11 See also 12 Notes 13 References 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Satellite Internet access 28 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Bosanski Català Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski IsiZulu Italiano മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Suomi Türkçe Українська 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Satellite-provided Internet This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Satellite Internet access" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A WildBlue satellite dish on the side of a house for receiving Internet Satellite Internet access is Internet access provided through communication satellites ; if it can sustain high speeds , it is termed satellite broadband . Modern consumer grade satellite Internet service is typically provided to individual users through geostationary satellites that can offer relatively high data speeds, [ 1 ] with newer satellites using the K u band to achieve downstream data speeds up to 506 Mbit/s .

[ 2 ] In addition, new satellite internet constellations are being developed in low-earth orbit to enable low-latency internet access from space.

History [ edit ] Following the launch of the first satellite, Sputnik 1 , by the Soviet Union in October 1957, the US successfully launched the Explorer 1 satellite in 1958. The first commercial communications satellite was Telstar 1 , built by Bell Labs and launched in July 1962.

The idea of a geosynchronous satellite —one that could orbit the Earth above the equator and remain fixed by following the Earth's rotation—was first proposed by Herman Potočnik in 1928 and popularised by the science fiction author Arthur C. Clarke in a paper in Wireless World in 1945.

[ 3 ] The first satellite to successfully reach geostationary orbit was Syncom3 , built by Hughes Aircraft for NASA and launched on August 19, 1963. Succeeding generations of communications satellites featuring larger capacities and improved performance characteristics were adopted for use in television delivery, military applications and telecommunications purposes. Following the invention of the Internet and the World Wide Web, geostationary satellites attracted interest as a potential means of providing Internet access.

A significant enabler of satellite-delivered Internet has been the opening up of the K a band for satellites. In December 1993, Hughes Aircraft Co. filed with the Federal Communications Commission for a license to launch the first K a -band satellite, Spaceway . In 1995, the FCC issued a call for more K a -band satellite applications, attracting applications from 15 companies. Among those were EchoStar , Lockheed Martin , GE-Americom , Motorola and KaStar Satellite, which later became WildBlue , which then became Viasat.

[ 4 ] Among prominent aspirants in the early-stage satellite Internet sector was Teledesic , an ambitious and ultimately failed project funded in part by Microsoft that ended up costing more than $9 billion. Teledesic's idea was to create a satellite Internet constellation of hundreds of low-orbiting satellites in the K a -band frequency, providing inexpensive Internet access with download speeds of up to 720 Mbit/s. However, the project was abandoned in 2003. Teledesic's failure, coupled with the bankruptcy filings of the satellite communications providers Iridium Communications Inc.

and Globalstar , dampened marketplace enthusiasm for satellite Internet development. The first Internet-ready satellite for consumers was launched in September 2003.

[ 5 ] In 2004, with the launch of Anik F2 , the first high-throughput satellite , a class of next-generation satellites providing improved capacity and bandwidth became operational. More recently, high throughput satellites such as ViaSat's ViaSat-1 satellite in 2011 and HughesNet's Jupiter in 2012 have achieved further improvements, elevating downstream data rates from 1 to 3 Mbit/s up to 12 to 15 Mbit/s and beyond. Internet access services tied to these satellites are targeted largely to rural residents as an alternative to Internet service via dial-up, ADSL or classic FSSes .

[ 6 ] In 2013, the first four satellites of the O3b constellation were launched into medium Earth orbit (MEO) to provide internet access to the "other three billion" people without stable internet access at that time. Over the next six years, 16 further satellites joined the constellation, now owned and operated by SES .

[ 7 ] Since 2014, a rising number of companies announced working on internet access using satellite constellations in low Earth orbit .

SpaceX , OneWeb and Amazon all planned to launch more than 1000 satellites each. OneWeb alone raised $1.7 billion by February 2017 for the project, [ 8 ] and SpaceX raised over one billion in the first half of 2019 for their service called Starlink .

[ 9 ] They expected more than $30 billion in revenue by 2025 from its satellite constellation.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Starlink, as of February 2024, has 5,402 operational satellites in orbit.

[ 12 ] Many planned constellations employ laser communication for inter-satellite links to effectively create a space-based internet backbone .

[ citation needed ] As of 2017, airlines such as Delta and American have been introducing satellite internet as a means of combating limited bandwidth on airplanes and offering passengers usable internet speeds.

[ 13 ] In September 2017, SES announced the next generation of O3b satellites and service, named O3b mPOWER , a constellation of seven MEO satellites to deliver 10 terabits of capacity globally through 30,000 spot beams for broadband internet services.

[ 14 ] The number of O3b mPOWER satellites ordered was subsequently increased to 11 and then 13, and on 16 December 2022, the first two O3b mPOWER satellites were successfully launched, with four more in 2023, and the service began operations alongside the existing O3b constellation in April 2024.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] Two further satellites have since joined the constellation, launched in 2024 [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Companies and market [ edit ] This section needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( April 2024 ) United States [ edit ] As of 2024, [update] companies providing home internet service in the United States via satellite included ViaSat , through its Exede brand, EchoStar , through subsidiary HughesNet , Starlink , and Project Kuiper .

[ 20 ] European Union [ edit ] The EU plans to commence the IRIS² project in the 2020s.

[ 21 ] China [ edit ] As of 2023, [update] China is in the process of developing its own, state-owned, satellite internet constellation , run by Chinasat .

[ 22 ] India [ edit ] India’s main offerings in the space is Oneweb and JioSpaceFiber .

[ 23 ] And is as of 2023, entertaining licenses for Starlink and Project Kuiper.

[ 24 ] Function [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Satellite Internet access" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) How satellite internet works Satellite Internet generally relies on three primary components: a satellite –  historically in geostationary orbit (or GEO) but now increasingly in Low Earth orbit (LEO) or Medium Earth orbit MEO) [ 25 ] –  a number of ground stations known as gateways that relay Internet data to and from the satellite via radio waves ( microwave ), and further ground stations to serve each subscriber, with a small antenna and transceiver . Other components of a satellite Internet system include a modem at the user end which links the user's network with the transceiver, and a centralized network operations centre (NOC) for monitoring the entire system. Working in concert with a broadband gateway, the satellite operates a Star network topology where all network communication passes through the network's hub processor, which is at the centre of the star. With this configuration, the number of ground stations that can be connected to the hub is virtually limitless.

Satellite [ edit ] Marketed as the centre of the new broadband satellite networks are a new generation of high-powered GEO satellites positioned 35,786 kilometres (22,236 mi) above the equator, operating in K a -band (18.3–30 GHz) mode.

[ 26 ] These new purpose-built satellites are designed and optimized for broadband applications, employing many narrow spot beams, [ 27 ] which target a much smaller area than the broad beams used by earlier communication satellites. This spot beam technology allows satellites to reuse assigned bandwidth multiple times which can enable them to achieve much higher overall capacity than conventional broad beam satellites. The spot beams can also increase performance and consequential capacity by focusing more power and increased receiver sensitivity into defined concentrated areas. Spot beams are designated as one of two types: subscriber spot beams, which transmit to and from the subscriber-side terminal, and gateway spot beams, which transmit to/from a service provider ground station. Note that moving off the tight footprint of a spotbeam can degrade performance significantly. Also, spotbeams can make the use of other significant new technologies impossible, including 'Carrier in Carrier ' modulation.

In conjunction with the satellite's spot-beam technology, a bent-pipe architecture has traditionally been employed in the network in which the satellite functions as a bridge in space, connecting two communication points on the ground. The term "bent-pipe" is used to describe the shape of the data path between sending and receiving antennas, with the satellite positioned at the point of the bend.
Simply put, the satellite's role in this network arrangement is to relay signals from the end user's terminal to the ISP's gateways, and back again without processing the signal at the satellite. The satellite receives, amplifies, and redirects a carrier on a specific radio frequency through a signal path called a transponder.

[ 28 ] Some satellite constellations in LEO such as Starlink and the proposed Telesat constellation will employ laser communication equipment for high-throughput optical inter-satellite links. The interconnected satellites allow for direct routing of user data from satellite to satellite and effectively create a space-based optical mesh network that will enable seamless network management and continuity of service.

[ 29 ] The satellite has its own set of antennas to receive communication signals from Earth and to transmit signals to their target location. These antennas and transponders are part of the satellite's "payload", which is designed to receive and transmit signals to and from various places on Earth. What enables this transmission and reception in the payload transponders is a repeater subsystem (RF (radio frequency) equipment) used to change frequencies, filter, separate, amplify and group signals before routing them to their destination address on Earth. The satellite's high-gain receiving antenna passes the transmitted data to the transponder which filters, translates and amplifies them, then redirects them to the transmitting antenna on board. The signal is then routed to a specific ground location through a channel known as a carrier. Beside the payload, the other main component of a communications satellite is called the bus, which comprises all equipment required to move the satellite into position, supply power, regulate equipment temperatures, provide health and tracking information, and perform numerous other operational tasks.

[ 28 ] Gateways [ edit ] Along with dramatic advances in satellite technology over the past decade, ground equipment has similarly evolved, benefiting from higher levels of integration and increasing processing power, expanding both capacity and performance boundaries.
The gateway —or gateway Earth station—is also referred to as a ground station, teleport or hub. The term is sometimes used to describe just the antenna dish portion, or it can refer to the complete system with all associated components.
In short, the gateway receives radio wave signals from the satellite on the last leg of the return or upstream payload, carrying the request originating from the end-user's site. The satellite modem at the gateway location demodulates the incoming signal from the outdoor antenna into IP packets and sends the packets to the local network. Access server/gateways manage traffic transported to/from the Internet. Once the initial request has been processed by the gateway's servers, sent to and returned from the Internet, the requested information is sent back as a forward or downstream payload to the end-user via the satellite, which directs the signal to the subscriber terminal. Each Gateway provides the connection to the Internet backbone for the gateway beam(s) it serves.

The system of gateways comprising the satellite ground system provides all network services for satellite and corresponding terrestrial connectivity. Each gateway provides a multiservice access network for subscriber terminal connections to the Internet.

As the continental United States is north of the equator, all gateway and subscriber dish antenna must have an unobstructed view of the southern sky. Because of the satellite's geostationary orbit, the gateway antenna can stay pointed at a fixed position.

Antenna dish and modem [ edit ] For the customer-provided equipment (i.e. PC and router) to access the broadband satellite network, the customer must have additional physical components installed: Outdoor unit (ODU) [ edit ] At the far end of the outdoor unit is typically a small (2–3-foot, 60 to 90 cm diameter), reflective dish-type radio antenna. The VSAT antenna must also have an unobstructed view of the sky to allow for proper line-of-sight (L-O-S) to the satellite. 
There are four physical characteristic settings used to ensure that the antenna is configured correctly at the satellite, which are: azimuth , elevation, polarization , and skew . The combination of these settings gives the outdoor unit a L-O-S to the chosen satellite and makes data transmission possible. These parameters are generally set at the time the equipment is installed, along with a beam assignment (K a -band only); these steps must all be taken prior to the actual activation of service.
Transmit and receive components are typically mounted at the focal point of the antenna which receives/sends data from/to the satellite. The main parts are: Feed – This assembly is part of the VSAT receive and transmit chain, which consists of several components with different functions, including the feed horn at the front of the unit, which resembles a funnel and has the task of focusing the satellite microwave signals across the surface of the dish reflector. The feed horn both receives signals reflected off the dish's surface and transmits outbound signals back to the satellite.

Block upconverter (BUC) – This unit sits behind the feed horn and may be part of the same unit, but a larger (higher wattage) BUC could be a separate piece attached to the base of the antenna. Its job is to convert the signal from the modem to a higher frequency and amplify it before it is reflected off the dish and towards the satellite.

Low-noise block downconverter (LNB) – This is the receiving element of the terminal. The LNB's job is to amplify the received satellite radio signal bouncing off the dish and filter out the noise, which is any signal not carrying valid information. The LNB passes the amplified, filtered signal to the satellite modem at the user's location.

Indoor unit (IDU) [ edit ] The satellite modem serves as an interface between the outdoor unit and customer-provided equipment (i.e. PC, router) and controls satellite transmission and reception. From the sending device (computer, router, etc.) it receives an input bitstream and converts or modulates it into radio waves, reversing that order for incoming transmissions, which is called demodulation . It provides two types of connectivity: Coaxial cable (COAX) connectivity to the satellite antenna. The cable carrying electromagnetic satellite signals between the modem and the antenna generally is limited to be no more than 150 feet in length.

Ethernet connectivity to the computer, carrying the customer's data packets to and from the Internet content servers.

Consumer grade satellite modems typically employ either the DOCSIS or WiMAX telecommunication standard to communicate with the assigned gateway.

Challenges and limitations [ edit ] Signal latency [ edit ] Latency (commonly referred to as "ping time") is the delay between requesting data and the receipt of a response, or in the case of one-way communication, between the actual moment of a signal's broadcast and the time it is received at its destination.

A radio signal takes about 120 milliseconds to reach a geostationary satellite and then 120 milliseconds to reach the ground station, so nearly 1/4 of a second overall. Typically, during perfect conditions, the physics involved in satellite communications account for approximately 550 milliseconds of latency round-trip time.

The longer latency is the primary difference between a standard terrestrial-based network and a geostationary satellite-based network. The round-trip latency of a geostationary satellite communications network can be more than 12 times that of a terrestrial based network.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] Satellite latency can be detrimental to especially time-sensitive applications such as on-line gaming (although it only seriously affects the likes of first-person shooters or racing simulators while many MMOGs can operate well over satellite Internet [ 32 ] ), but IPTV is typically a simplex operation (one-way transmission) and latency is not a critical factor for video transmission.

The effects of this delay may be mitigated using data compression, TCP-acceleration, and HTTP pre-fetching.

[ 33 ] Geostationary orbits [ edit ] A geostationary orbit (or geostationary Earth orbit/GEO) is a geosynchronous orbit directly above the Earth's equator (0° latitude), with a period equal to the Earth's rotational period and an orbital eccentricity of approximately zero (i.e. a "circular orbit"). An object in a geostationary orbit appears motionless, at a fixed position in the sky, to ground observers. Launchers often place communications satellites and weather satellites in geostationary orbits, so that the satellite antennas that communicate with them do not have to move to track them, but can point permanently at the position in the sky where the satellites stay. Due to the constant 0° latitude and circularity of geostationary orbits, satellites in GEO differ in location by longitude only.

Compared to ground-based communication, all geostationary satellite communications experience higher latency due to the signal having to travel 35,786 km (22,236 mi) to a satellite in geostationary orbit and back to Earth again. Even at the speed of light (about 300,000 km/s or 186,000 miles per second), this delay can appear significant. If all other signaling delays could be eliminated, it still takes a radio signal about 250 milliseconds (ms), or about a quarter of a second, to travel to the satellite and back to the ground.

[ 34 ] The absolute minimum total amount of delay varies, due to the satellite staying in one place in the sky, while ground-based users can be directly below (with a roundtrip latency of 239.6 ms), or far to the side of the planet near the horizon (with a roundtrip latency of 279.0 ms).

[ 35 ] For an Internet packet, that delay is doubled before a reply is received. That is the theoretical minimum. Factoring in other normal delays from network sources gives a typical one-way connection latency of 500 to 700 ms from the user to the ISP, or about 1,000 to 1,400 ms latency for the total round-trip time (RTT) back to the user. This is more than most dial-up users experience at typically 150–200 ms total latency, and much higher than the typical 15 to 40 ms latency experienced by users of other high-speed Internet services, such as cable or VDSL .

[ 36 ] For geostationary satellites, there is no way to eliminate latency, but the problem can be somewhat mitigated in Internet communications with TCP acceleration features that shorten the apparent round trip time (RTT) per packet by splitting ("spoofing") the feedback loop between the sender and the receiver. Certain acceleration features are often present in recent technology developments embedded in satellite Internet equipment.

Latency also impacts the initiation of secure Internet connections such as SSL which require the exchange of numerous pieces of data between web server and web client. Although these pieces of data are small, the multiple round trips involved in the handshake produce long delays compared to other forms of Internet connectivity, as documented by Stephen T. Cobb in a 2011 report published by the Rural Mobile and Broadband Alliance.

[ 37 ] This annoyance extends to entering and editing data using some Software as a Service or SaaS applications as well as in other forms of online work.

Functions, like live interactive access to a distant computer—such as virtual private networks , can be affected by the high latency. Many TCP protocols were not designed to work in high-latency environments.

Medium and low Earth orbits [ edit ] Medium Earth orbit (MEO) and low Earth orbit (LEO) satellite constellations do not have such long delays, as the satellites are closer to the ground. For example: The current LEO constellations of Globalstar and Iridium satellites have delays of less than 40 ms round trip, but their throughput is less than broadband at 64 kbit/s per channel. The Globalstar constellation orbits 1,420 km above the Earth and Iridium orbits at 670 km altitude.

The O3b constellation orbits at 8,062 km, with RTT latency of approximately 125 ms.

[ 38 ] The network is also designed for much higher throughput with links well in excess of 1 Gbit/s . The next generation O3b mPOWER constellation shares the same orbit and delivers from 50 Mbit/s to multiple gigabits per second to a single user.

[ 39 ] A study in 2021 showed that the Starlink satellites orbit at 550 km altitude, with an average RTT latency of 45 ms.

[ 40 ] Another study in 2022 showed that the latency of the Starlink network is 1.8 ms to 22.8 ms more than the latency of terrestrial networks according to a measurement study conducted in the Metro Vancouver area.

[ 41 ] Note that the exact measurement results can differ as the deployment of Starlink infrastructure varies across time and locations.

Unlike geostationary satellites, LEO and MEO satellites do not stay in a fixed position in the sky and from a lower altitude they can "see" a smaller area of the Earth , and so continuous widespread access requires a constellation of many satellites (low-Earth orbits needing more satellites than medium-Earth orbits) with complex constellation management to switch data transfer between satellites and keep the connection to a customer, and tracking by the ground stations.

[ 25 ] [ 42 ] MEO satellites require higher power transmissions than LEO to achieve the same signal strength at the ground station but their higher altitude also provides less orbital overcrowding, and their slower orbit speed reduces both Doppler shift and the size and complexity of the constellation required.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] Tracking of the moving satellites is usually undertaken in one of three ways, using: more diffuse or completely omnidirectional ground antennas capable of communicating with one or more satellites visible in the sky at the same time, but at significantly higher transmit power than fixed geostationary dish antennas (due to the lower gain), and with much poorer signal-to-noise ratios for receiving the signal motorized antenna mounts with high-gain, narrow beam antennas tracking individual satellites phased array antennas that can steer the beam electronically, together with software that can predict the path of each satellite in the constellation.

In May 2022, Kazakhstani mobile network operator, Kcell , and satellite owner and operator, SES used SES's O3b MEO satellite constellation to demonstrate that MEO satellites could be used to provide high-speed mobile internet to remote regions of Kazakhstan for reliable video calling, conferencing and streaming, and web browsing, with a latency five times lower than on the existing platform based on geostationary orbit satellites.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] Ultralight atmospheric aircraft as satellites [ edit ] A proposed alternative to relay satellites is a special-purpose high altitude platform stations aircraft, which would fly along a circular path above a fixed ground location, operating under autonomous computer control at a height of approximately 20,000 meters.

For example, the United States Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency Vulture project envisaged an ultralight aircraft capable of station-keeping over a fixed area for a period of up to five years, and able to provide both continuous surveillance to ground assets as well as to service extremely low-latency communications networks.

[ 47 ] This project was cancelled in 2012 before it became operational.

[ citation needed ] Onboard batteries would charge during daylight hours through solar panels covering the wings and would provide power to the plane during night. Ground-based satellite internet dishes would relay signals to and from the aircraft, resulting in a greatly reduced round-trip signal latency of only 0.25 milliseconds. The planes could potentially run for long periods without refueling. Several such schemes involving various types of aircraft have been proposed in the past.

Interference [ edit ] A foldable Bigpond satellite Internet dish Satellite communications are affected by moisture and various forms of precipitation (such as rain or snow) in the signal path between end users or ground stations and the satellite being utilized. This interference with the signal is known as rain fade . The effects are less pronounced on the lower frequency 'L' and 'C' bands but can become quite severe on the higher frequency 'Ku' and 'Ka' band. For satellite Internet services in tropical areas with heavy rain, use of the C band (4/6 GHz) with a circular polarisation satellite is popular.

[ 48 ] Satellite communications on the K a band (19/29 GHz) can use special techniques such as large rain margins , adaptive uplink power control and reduced bit rates during precipitation.

Rain margins are the extra communication link requirements needed to account for signal degradations due to moisture and precipitation, and are of acute importance on all systems operating at frequencies over 10 GHz.

[ 49 ] The amount of time during which service is lost can be reduced by increasing the size of the satellite communication dish so as to gather more of the satellite signal on the downlink and also to provide a stronger signal on the uplink. In other words, increasing antenna gain through the use of a larger parabolic reflector is one way of increasing the overall channel gain and, consequently, the signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio, which allows for greater signal loss due to rain fade without the S/N ratio dropping below its minimum threshold for successful communication.

Modern consumer-grade dish antennas tend to be fairly small, which reduces the rain margin or increases the required satellite downlink power and cost. However, it is often more economical to build a more expensive satellite and smaller, less expensive consumer antennas than to increase the consumer antenna size to reduce the satellite cost.

Large commercial dishes of 3.7 m to 13 m diameter can be used to achieve increased rain margins and also to reduce the cost per bit by allowing for more efficient modulation codes. Alternately, larger aperture antennae can require less power from the satellite to achieve acceptable performance. Satellites typically use photovoltaic solar power, so there is no expense for the energy itself, but a more powerful satellite will require larger, more powerful solar panels and electronics, often including a larger transmitting antenna. The larger satellite components not only increase materials costs but also increase the weight of the satellite, and in general, the cost to launch a satellite into an orbit is directly proportional to its weight. (In addition, since satellite launch vehicles [i.e. rockets] have specific payload size limits, making parts of the satellite larger may require either more complex folding mechanisms for parts of the satellite like solar panels and high-gain antennas, or upgrading to a more expensive launch vehicle that can handle a larger payload.) Modulated carriers can be dynamically altered in response to rain problems or other link impairments using a process called adaptive coding and modulation, or "ACM". ACM allows the bit rates to be increased substantially during normal clear sky conditions, increasing the number of bits per Hz transmitted, and thus reducing overall cost per bit. Adaptive coding requires some sort of a return or feedback channel which can be via any available means, satellite or terrestrial.

Line of sight [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "Satellite Internet access" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Fresnel zone. D is the distance between the transmitter and the receiver, r is the radius of the Fresnel zone.

Two objects are said to be within line of sight if a straight line between the objects can be connected without any interference, such as a mountain. An object beyond the horizon is below the line of sight and, therefore, can be difficult to communicate with.

Typically a completely clear line of sight between the dish and the satellite is required for the system to work optimally. In addition to the signal being susceptible to absorption and scattering by moisture, the signal is similarly impacted by the presence of trees and other vegetation in the path of the signal. As the radio frequency decreases, to below 900 MHz, penetration through vegetation increases, but most satellite communications operate above 2 GHz making them sensitive to even minor obstructions such as tree foliage. A dish installation in the winter must factor in plant foliage growth that will appear in the spring and summer.

Fresnel zone [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "Satellite Internet access" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Even if there is a direct line of sight between the transmitting and receiving antenna, reflections from objects near the path of the signal can decrease apparent signal power through phase cancellations. Whether and how much signal is lost from a reflection is determined by the location of the object in the Fresnel zone of the antennas.

Two-way satellite-only communication [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "Satellite Internet access" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The back panel of a satellite modem , with coaxial connections for both incoming and outgoing signals, and an Ethernet port for connection Home or consumer grade two-way satellite Internet service involves both sending and receiving data from a remote very-small-aperture terminal (VSAT) via satellite to a hub telecommunications port (teleport), which then relays data via the terrestrial Internet. The satellite dish at each location must be precisely pointed to avoid interference with other satellites. At each VSAT site the uplink frequency, bit rate and power must be accurately set, under control of the service provider hub.

There are several types of two-way satellite Internet services, including time-division multiple access (TDMA) and single channel per carrier (SCPC). Two-way systems can be simple VSAT terminals with a 60–100 cm dish and output power of only a few watts intended for consumers and small business or larger systems that provide more bandwidth. Such systems are frequently marketed as "satellite broadband" and can cost two to three times as much per month as land-based systems such as ADSL . The modems required for this service are often proprietary, but some are compatible with several different providers. They are also expensive, costing in the range of US$600 to $2000.

The two-way "iLNB" used on the SES Broadband .

The two-way "iLNB" used on the SES Broadband terminal dish has a transmitter and single-polarity receive LNB, both operating in the K u band . Pricing for SES Broadband modems range from €299 to €350. These types of system are generally unsuitable for use on moving vehicles, although some dishes may be fitted to an automatic pan and tilt mechanism to continuously re-align the dish—but these are more expensive. The technology for SES Broadband was delivered by a Belgian company called Newtec.

Bandwidth [ edit ] Consumer satellite Internet customers range from individual home users with one PC to large remote business sites with several hundred PCs.

Home users tend to use shared satellite capacity to reduce the cost, while still allowing high peak bit rates when congestion is absent. There are usually restrictive time-based bandwidth allowances so that each user gets their fair share, according to their payment. When a user exceeds their allowance, the company may slow down their access, deprioritise their traffic or charge for the excess bandwidth used. For consumer satellite Internet, the allowance can typically range from 200 MB per day to 25 GB per month.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] A shared download carrier may have a bit rate of 1 to 40 Mbit/s and be shared by up to 100 to 4,000 end users.

The uplink direction for shared user customers is normally time-division multiple access (TDMA), which involves transmitting occasional short packet bursts in between other users (similar to how a cellular phone shares a cell tower).

Each remote location may also be equipped with a telephone modem; the connections for this are as with a conventional dial-up ISP. Two-way satellite systems may sometimes use the modem channel in both directions for data where latency is more important than bandwidth, reserving the satellite channel for download data where bandwidth is more important than latency, such as for file transfers .

In 2006, the European Commission sponsored the UNIC Project which aimed to develop an end-to-end scientific test bed for the distribution of new broadband interactive TV-centric services delivered over low-cost two-way satellite to actual end-users in the home.

[ 53 ] The UNIC architecture employs DVB-S2 standard for downlink and DVB-RCS standard for uplink.

Normal VSAT dishes (1.2 to 2.4 m diameter) are widely used for VoIP phone services. A voice call is sent by means of packets via the satellite and Internet. Using coding and compression techniques the bit rate needed per call is only 10.8 kbit/s each way.

Portable satellite Internet [ edit ] Portable satellite modem [ edit ] This section needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( April 2024 ) Portable Satellite Internet Modem and Antenna deployed with the Red Cross in South Sudan in 2014.

These usually come in the shape of a self-contained flat rectangular box that needs to be pointed in the general direction of the satellite—unlike VSAT the alignment need not be very precise and the modems have built in signal strength meters to help the user align the device properly. The modems have commonly used connectors such as Ethernet or Universal Serial Bus (USB). Some also have an integrated Bluetooth transceiver and double as a satellite phone. The modems also tend to have their own batteries so they can be connected to a laptop without draining its battery. The most common such system is INMARSAT 's BGAN —these terminals are about the size of a briefcase and have near-symmetric connection speeds of around 350 to 500 kbit/s. Smaller modems exist like those offered by Thuraya but only connect at 444 kbit/s in a limited coverage area.

At $5 to $7 per megabyte on average, portable satellite internet is typically more expensive than other modes of Internet access, with modems usually costing between $1,000 and $5,000.

[ 54 ] Due to this, it is most often used on vehicles without access to other modes of Internet access, such as seafaring vessels.

[ citation needed ] Internet via satellite phone [ edit ] This section has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This section contains promotional content .

Please help improve it by removing promotional language and inappropriate external links , and by adding encyclopedic text written from a neutral point of view .

( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "Satellite Internet access" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) For many years [ when?

] satellite phones have been able to connect to the Internet. Bandwidth varies from about 2400 bit/s for Iridium network satellites and ACeS based phones to 15 kbit/s upstream and 60 kbit/s downstream for Thuraya handsets. Globalstar also provides Internet access at 9.6 kbit/s; like Iridium and ACeS a dial-up connection is required and is billed per minute, however both Globalstar and Iridium are planning to launch new satellites offering always-on data services at higher rates. With Thuraya phones the 9.6 kbit/s dial-up connection is also possible, the 60 kbit/s service is always-on and the user is billed for data transferred (about $5 per megabyte ). The phones can be connected to a laptop or other computer using a USB or RS-232 interface. Due to the low bandwidths involved it is extremely slow to browse the web with such a connection, but useful for sending email, Secure Shell data and using other low-bandwidth protocols. Since satellite phones tend to have omnidirectional antennas no alignment is required as long as there is a line of sight between the phone and the satellite.

One-way receive [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Satellite Internet access" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) One-way terrestrial return satellite Internet systems are used with conventional dial-up Internet access , with outbound ( upstream ) data traveling through a telephone modem , but downstream data sent via satellite at a higher rate. In the U.S., an FCC license is required for the uplink station only; no license is required for the users.

Another type of one-way satellite Internet system uses General Packet Radio Service (GPRS) for the back-channel.

[ 55 ] Using standard GPRS or Enhanced Data Rates for GSM Evolution (EDGE), costs are reduced for higher effective rates if the upload volume is very low, and also because this service is not per-time charged, but charged by volume uploaded. GPRS as return improves mobility when the service is provided by a satellite that transmits in the field of 100 to 200 kW.

[ citation needed ] Using a 33 cm wide satellite dish, a notebook and a normal GPRS equipped GSM phone , users can get mobile satellite broadband.

System components [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "Satellite Internet access" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The transmitting station has two components, consisting of a high-speed Internet connection to serve many customers at once, and the satellite uplink to broadcast requested data to the customers. The ISP's routers connect to proxy servers which can enforce quality of service (QoS) bandwidth limits and guarantees for each customer's traffic.

Often, nonstandard IP stacks are used to address the latency and asymmetry problems of the satellite connection. As with one-way receive systems, data sent over the satellite link is generally also encrypted, as otherwise it would be accessible to anyone with a satellite receiver.

Many IP-over-satellite implementations use paired proxy servers at both endpoints so that certain communications between clients and servers [ 56 ] need not to accept the latency inherent in a satellite connection. For similar reasons, there exist special Virtual private network (VPN) implementations designed for use over satellite links because standard VPN software cannot handle the long packet travel times.

Upload speeds are limited by the user's dial-up modem, while download speeds can be very fast compared to dial-up, using the modem only as the control channel for packet acknowledgement.

Latency is still high, although lower than full two-way geostationary satellite Internet, since only half of the data path is via satellite, the other half being via the terrestrial channel.

One-way broadcast [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "Satellite Internet access" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) One-way broadcast satellite Internet systems are used for Internet Protocol (IP) broadcast -based data, audio and video distribution. In the United States, a Federal Communications Commission (FCC) license is required only for the uplink station, not for its users. Note that most Internet protocols will not work correctly over one-way access, since they require a return channel. However, Internet content such as web pages can still be distributed over a one-way system by "pushing" them out to local storage at end user sites, though full interactivity is not possible. This is much like TV or radio content which offers little user interface.

The broadcast mechanism may include compression and error correction to help ensure the one-way broadcast is properly received. The data may also be rebroadcast periodically, so that receivers that did not previously succeed will have additional chances to try downloading again.

The data may also be encrypted so that while anyone can receive the data, only certain destinations are able to actually decode and use the broadcast data. Authorized users only need to have possession of either a short decryption key or an automatic rolling code device that uses its own highly accurate independent timing mechanism to decrypt the data.

System hardware components [ edit ] Similar to one-way terrestrial return, satellite Internet access may include interfaces to the public switched telephone network for squawk box applications. An Internet connection is not required, but many applications include a File Transfer Protocol (FTP) server to queue data for broadcast.

System software components [ edit ] Most one-way broadcast applications require custom programming at the remote sites. The software at the remote site must filter, store, present a selection interface to and display the data. The software at the transmitting station must provide access control, priority queuing, sending, and encapsulating of the data.

Services [ edit ] Emerging commercial services in this area include: Outernet – Satellite constellation technology Efficiency increases [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "Satellite Internet access" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) 2013 FCC report cites big jump in satellite performance [ edit ] In its report released in February, 2013, the Federal Communications Commission noted significant advances in satellite Internet performance. The FCC's Measuring Broadband America report also ranked the major ISPs by how close they came to delivering on advertised speeds. In this category, satellite Internet topped the list, with 90% of subscribers seeing speeds at 140% or better than what was advertised.

[ 57 ] Reducing satellite latency [ edit ] Much of the slowdown associated with satellite Internet is that for each request, many roundtrips must be completed before any useful data can be received by the requester.

[ a ] Special IP stacks and proxies can also reduce latency through lessening the number of roundtrips, or simplifying and reducing the length of protocol headers. Optimization technologies include TCP acceleration , HTTP pre-fetching and DNS caching among many others. See the Space Communications Protocol Specifications standard (SCPS), developed by NASA and adopted widely by commercial and military equipment and software providers in the market space.

Satellites launched [ edit ] Geostationary orbit [ edit ] The WINDS satellite was launched on February 23, 2008. The WINDS satellite is used to provide broadband Internet services to Japan and locations across the Asia-Pacific region. The satellite to provides a maximum speed of 155 Mbit/s down and 6 Mbit/s up to residences with a 45 cm aperture antenna and a 1.2 Gbit/s connection to businesses with a 5-meter antenna.

[ 58 ] It has reached the end of its design life expectancy.

SkyTerra-1 was launched in mid-November 2010, providing North America, while Hylas-1 was launched in November 2010, targeting Europe.

[ 59 ] On December 26, 2010, Eutelsat's KA-SAT was launched. It covers the European continent with 80 spot beams—focused signals that cover an area a few hundred kilometers across Europe and the Mediterranean. Spot beams allow for frequencies to be effectively reused in multiple regions without interference. The result is increased capacity. Each of the spot beams has an overall capacity of 900 Mbit/s and the entire satellite will has a capacity of 70 Gbit/s.

[ 59 ] ViaSat-1 was launched Oct. 19, 2011 from Baikonur, Kazakhstan, offering 140 Gbit/s of total throughput capacity, through the Exede Internet service. Passengers aboard JetBlue Airways can use this service since 2015.

[ 60 ] The service has also been expanded to United Airlines , American Airlines , Scandinavian Airlines , Virgin America and Qantas .

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] [ 63 ] The EchoStar XVII satellite was launched July 5, 2012 by Arianespace and was placed in its permanent geosynchronous orbital slot of 107.1° West longitude, servicing HughesNet . This K a -band satellite has over 100 Gbit/s of throughput capacity.

[ 64 ] In 2015 and 2016, the Australian Government launched two Sky Muster geostationary satellites to provide internet to regional Australians and residents of External Territories, such as Norfolk Island and Christmas Island .

[ 65 ] In 2006 [ 66 ] and 2015, [ 67 ] the Argentinian company ARSAT launched the ARSAT-1 and ARSAT-2 satellites, respectively. Providing internet and TV access to remote locations in its country of origin.

Medium Earth orbit [ edit ] Since 2013, the O3b satellite constellation (in Medium Earth Orbit at an altitude of 8,063 km) claims an end-to-end round-trip latency of 140 ms for data services. Since 2024, the next generation O3b mPOWER constellation has been operating alongside in MEO, offering tens of Mbps to multiple Gbps  per service with a latency of about 150 ms [ 68 ] Low Earth orbit [ edit ] See also: Satellite internet constellation As of September 2024 [update] , 6,426 Starlink satellites are orbiting Earth. As of September 2024, Starlink has over 4 million subscribers.

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] [ 71 ] There are 648 Oneweb has satellites in low Earth orbit.

[ 72 ] In oceanography and seismology [ edit ] Satellite communications are used for data transmission, remote instrument diagnostics , for physical satellite and oceanographic measurements from the sea surface (e.g.

sea surface temperature and sea surface height [ 73 ] ) to the ocean floor , and for seismological analyses.

[ 74 ] See also [ edit ] Back-channel and return channel DishNET (satellite Internet access in the United States) HughesNet (formerly DIRECWAY) IP over DVB Lamit Company – Satellite operator providing fixed and mobile communications including internet.

NetHope#NetReliefKit SES Broadband (satellite Internet access in Europe) StarBand Teledesic Tooway – Satellite broadband Internet provider TS 2 – Internet provider for U.S. Army soldiers in Afghanistan Very small aperture terminal – Satellite communication system with small dish antenna Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Viasat Inc.

(Excede Internet) Wireless Internet Service Provider Notes [ edit ] ^ TCP is bound by the low latency of a three-way handshake. See Transmission Control Protocol .

References [ edit ] ^ "Satellite Internet: 15 Mbps, no matter where you live in the U.S." Ars Technica. 7 January 2013 . Retrieved 5 September 2013 .

^ End-to-End Efficiency for Trunking Networks , Newtec IP Trunking , 2013 ^ "Extra-Terrestrial Relays—Can Rocket Stations Give Worldwide Radio Coverage?" (PDF) . Arthur C. Clark. October 1945. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2006-07-15 . Retrieved 2009-03-04 .

^ "Wildblue Internet Service | 855-267-2270 | My Wildblue" .

www.viasatsavings.com . Retrieved 2025-06-20 .

^ "First Internet Ready Satellite Launched" . Space Daily. 2003-09-29 . Retrieved 2013-08-29 .

^ Fitchard, Kevin (2012-10-01).

"With new satellite tech, rural dwellers get access to true broadband" . Gigaom. Archived from the original on 2020-10-27 . Retrieved 2013-08-29 .

^ O3b MEO SES. Accessed 25 April 2021 ^ "OneWeb weighing 2,000 more satellites - SpaceNews.com" .

SpaceNews.com . 24 February 2017 . Retrieved 15 April 2018 .

^ "Elon Musk's SpaceX raises over $1 billion this year as internet satellite production ramps up" .

CNBC . May 24, 2019.

^ Winkler, Rolfe; Pasztor, Andy (2017-01-13).

"Exclusive Peek at SpaceX Data Shows Loss in 2015, Heavy Expectations for Nascent Internet Service" .

Wall Street Journal .

ISSN 0099-9660 . Retrieved 2018-02-09 .

^ Etherington, Darrell.

"SpaceX hopes satellite Internet business will pad thin rocket launch margins" .

TechCrunch . Retrieved 2018-02-09 .

^ Howell, Elizabeth (14 April 2022).

"Starlink satellites: Everything you need to know about the controversial internet megaconstellation" .

Space.com .

^ A.W. (17 October 2017).

"More airlines are offering free Wi-Fi for messaging services" .

The Economist .

^ SES building a 10-terabit O3b "mPOWER" constellation Space News 11 September 2017. Accessed 25 April 2021 ^ SpaceX launches first pair of O3b mPower satellites SpaceNews. 16 December 2022. Accessed 31 December 2022 ^ SpaceX launches final pair of O3b mPower satellites needed for commercial services SpaceNews 12 November 2023. Accessed 18 December 2024 ^ SES’ O3b mPOWER MEO System is Now Operational, Service Rollout to Follow Via Satellite. 24 April 2024. Accessed 18 December 2024 ^ Boeing ships first two redesigned O3b mPower satellites SpaceNews 13 November 2024. Accessed 27 February 2025 ^ SpaceX launches redesigned O3b mPower satellites SpaceNews 18 December 2024. Accessed 20 January 2025 ^ "Satellite broadband takes off, attracts users beyond rural areas – Denver Business Journal" .

Denver Business Journal . Retrieved 2016-01-18 .

^ "OBSERVER: Copernicus gets sibling— IRIS², the new EU Secure Communication Constellation | Copernicus" .

www.copernicus.eu . Retrieved 2023-11-03 .

^ "G60 Starlink: China plans second megaconstellation to rival SpaceX" . 30 September 2023.

^ "Reliance Jio demonstrates its satellite-based gigabit internet in India" .

The Indian Express . 27 October 2023 . Retrieved 14 March 2024 .

^ "Amazon Steps up Challenge to Elon Musk's Starlink in India? Eyes Licence for Project Kuiper" .

^ a b Large LEO satellite constellations: Will it be different this time?

McKinsey & Company, 4 May 2020, Accessed 25 April 2021 ^ "Ka-band Permitted Space Station List" . Federal Communications Commission. 2009-01-25. Archived from the original on 2012-04-21 . Retrieved 2013-08-29 .

^ "Satellite technology primer" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-07-14.

^ a b "How broadband satellite Internet works" . VSAT Systems . Retrieved 2013-08-29 .

^ "Elon Musk is about to launch the first of 11,925 proposed SpaceX internet satellites — more than all spacecraft that orbit Earth today" .

Business Insider . Retrieved 15 April 2018 .

^ Golding, Joshua (August 9, 2011).

"Q: What is the difference between terrestrial (land based) Internet and satellite Internet" .

Network Innovation Associates . Archived from the original on 2013-06-30 . Retrieved August 6, 2021 .

^ "Latency- why is it a big deal for Satellite Internet?" .

VSAT Systems . Archived from the original on 2014-10-21 . Retrieved August 6, 2021 .

^ Tom’s Hardware "How much latency is too much for Online Gaming?" . Accessed 23 January 2009. Internet Forum Archived 19 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ Newtec Productions NV "TP210 Sat3Play Broadband Terminal" (Version R2/06.2010). Satellite Internet Modem factsheet Archived 17 November 2010 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Data Communications Protocol Performance on Geo-stationary Satellite Links (Hans Kruse, Ohio University, 1996)" (PDF) .

ohiou.edu . Retrieved 28 March 2018 .

^ Roundtrip latency numbers are from RFC 2488, Section 2: Satellite Characteristics ^ "AT&T Internet Plans & Packages | AT&T Internet Service Deals, Prices" .

www.thetripleplay.net .

^ Stephen Cobb.

"RuMBA White Paper: Satellite Internet Connection for Rural Broadband" .

RuMBA – Rural Mobile & Broadband Alliance . Archived from the original on 2012-07-29 . Retrieved 22 March 2019 .

^ Wood, Lloyd; Lou, Yuxuan; Olusola, Opeoluwa (2014). "Revisiting elliptical satellite orbits to enhance the O3b constellation".

Journal of the British Interplanetary Society .

67 : 110.

arXiv : 1407.2521 .

Bibcode : 2014JBIS...67..110W .

^ "Boeing to Build Four Additional 702X Satellites for SES's O3b mPOWER Fleet" (Press release). Boeing. 7 August 2020 . Retrieved 25 April 2021 .

^ "Starlink is better than its satellite competition but not as fast as landline internet" . 5 August 2021 . Retrieved 26 March 2022 .

^ Ma, Sami; Chou, Yi Ching; Zhao, Haoyuan; Chen, Long; Ma, Xiaoqiang; Liu, Jiangchuan (2022-12-27). "Network Characteristics of LEO Satellite Constellations: A Starlink-Based Measurement from End Users".

arXiv : 2212.13697 [ cs.NI ].

^ LEO and MEO broadband constellations mega source of consternation SpaceNews, 13 March 2018, Accessed 25 April 2021 ^ The Gravity of Space Debris Via Satellite. March 2019, Accessed 25 April 2021 ^ "Satellites: LEO, MEO & GEO" .

Atlanta RF . October 29, 2013. Archived from the original on 2014-10-03 . Retrieved August 6, 2021 .

^ Kcell, SES demo O3b satellite-enabled remote mobile services Comms Update. 26 May 2022. Accessed 30 May 2022 ^ "Kcell and SES Successfully Demonstrate Cellular Network connectivity in Kazakhstan" (Press release). SES. 25 May 2022 . Retrieved 30 May 2022 .

^ "DARPA's Vulture Program Enters Phase II" (Press release). September 15, 2010. Archived from the original on 2012-10-17 . Retrieved 2021-08-06 .

^ "C Band Ku Band Comparison" . Technical.

Link Communications Systems . 2004-07-30 . Retrieved 2018-02-10 .

^ Takashi Iida Satellite Communications: System and Its Design Technology , IOS Press, 2000, ISBN 4-274-90379-6 , ISBN 978-4-274-90379-3 ^ "High Speed Internet Connection at Home – HughesNet" . July 28, 2009. Archived from the original on 28 July 2009.

^ "WildBlue: High Speed Satellite Internet Provider" .

Official web site . Archived from the original on August 18, 2009 . Retrieved July 17, 2011 .

^ "Exede: High Speed Satellite Internet Provider" .

Official web site . Retrieved December 11, 2012 .

^ "Universal satellite home connection | UNIC Project" .

CORDIS | European Commission . EU Publications Office. April 9, 2008 . Retrieved June 20, 2020 .

^ "Inmarsat BGAN" . GMPCS . Retrieved 2013-08-29 .

^ [1] Archived April 9, 2008, at the Wayback Machine ^ "FTP link" .

ftp.rfc-editor.org . Archived from the original on 2017-07-06.

^ "Measuring Broadband America – February 2013" . Federal Communications Commission. 5 February 2013 . Retrieved 2013-08-29 .

^ "JAXA - Wideband InterNetworking engineering test and Demonstration Satellite "KIZUNA"(WINDS)" .

jaxa.jp . Retrieved 28 March 2018 .

^ a b Martyn Williams (December 27, 2010).

"European broadband-Internet satellite launched" .

Network World . Archived from the original on March 8, 2012 . Retrieved July 17, 2011 .

^ "JetBlue adds free Wi-Fi, says it can handle streaming video" .

pcworld.com . Retrieved 28 March 2018 .

^ Galbraith, Craig (August 15, 2016).

"ViaSat's Exede Business Talks Up Sky-High Broadband Contracts" . Channel Partners. Archived from the original on June 3, 2017 . Retrieved October 3, 2016 .

^ de Selding, Peter B. (Feb 12, 2014).

"ViaSat Gears Up for Loral Trial, Reports Slower Exede Growth" .

SpaceNews . Archived from the original on May 4, 2014 . Retrieved 4 May 2014 .

^ Freeman, Mike (September 9, 2016).

"ViaSat Lands Another Airline For Inflight Wi-Fi" .

The San Diego Union-Tribune . Retrieved September 1, 2017 .

^ "Home" . 17 January 2011. Archived from the original on 17 January 2011 . Retrieved 28 March 2018 .

^ "SSL Delivers High Performance Broadband Satellite To Launch Base, Demonstrates Leadership in Satellites For Fast Internet With Satellite For Australia's Broadband Network" . sslmda.com.

^ "El Arsat-1, Argentina" . argentina.gob.ar. 29 October 2020.

^ "Lanzaron el satélite argentino Arsat-2" . infobae.com. 30 November 2017.

^ Factsheet SES 2021. Accessed 20 January 2025 ^ Ricker, Thomas (2024-09-27).

"Starlink passes 4M users" .

The Verge . Retrieved 2024-09-28 .

^ Alamalhodaei, Aria (2024-09-26).

"Starlink hits 4 million subscribers" .

TechCrunch . Retrieved 2024-09-28 .

^ Speed, Richard (2024-09-27).

"Musk's Starlink rockets to 4 million subscribers" .

^ "Eutelsat OneWeb Satellites – SATMARIN" . Retrieved 2024-09-28 .

^ Hardman-Mountford, Nicholas J.; Moore, Gerald; Bakker, Dorothee C. E.; Watson, Andrew J.; Schuster, Ute; Barciela, Rosa; Hines, Adrian; Moncoiffé, Gwenaelle; Brown, Juan; Dye, Stephen; Blackford, Jerry; Somerfield, Paul J.; Holt, Jason; Hydes, David J.; Aiken, James (November 1, 2008). "Towards an operational ocean-carbon observation capability".

An operational monitoring system to provide indicators of CO2-related variables in the ocean . Vol. 65. Oxford University Press. pp.

1498– 1503.

doi : 10.1093/icesjms/fsn110 .

ISSN 1054-3139 .

OCLC 703246903 . Retrieved July 15, 2021 .

{{ cite book }} : |journal= ignored ( help ) ^ Hammond, James O. S.; England, Richard; Rawlinson, Nick; Curtis, Andrew; Sigloch, Karin; Harmon, Nick; Baptie, Brian (April 2, 2019). "What next for broadband passive seismology?".

The future of passive seismic acquisition . Vol. 60. pp.

2.37 – 2.42 .

doi : 10.1093/astrogeo/atz102 .

ISSN 1366-8781 .

OCLC 1101953759 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on March 6, 2020 . Retrieved July 15, 2021 .

{{ cite book }} : |journal= ignored ( help ) External links [ edit ] ViaSat/TIA Satellite Equipment Systems Standardization Efforts Satellite Internet vs DSL v t e Telecommunications History Beacon Broadcasting Cable protection system Cable TV Communications satellite Computer network Data compression audio DCT image video Digital media Internet video online video platform social media streaming Drums Edholm's law Electrical telegraph Fax Heliographs Hydraulic telegraph Information Age Information revolution Internet Mass media Mobile phone Smartphone Optical telecommunication Optical telegraphy Pager Photophone Prepaid mobile phone Radio Radiotelephone Satellite communications Semaphore Phryctoria Semiconductor device MOSFET transistor Smoke signals Telecommunications history Telautograph Telegraphy Teleprinter (teletype) Telephone The Telephone Cases Television digital streaming Undersea telegraph line Videotelephony Whistled language Wireless revolution Pioneers Nasir Ahmed Edwin Howard Armstrong Mohamed M. Atalla John Logie Baird Paul Baran John Bardeen Alexander Graham Bell Emile Berliner Tim Berners-Lee Francis Blake Jagadish Chandra Bose Charles Bourseul Walter Houser Brattain Vint Cerf Claude Chappe Yogen Dalal Donald Davies Daniel Davis Jr.

Amos Dolbear Thomas Edison Philo Farnsworth Reginald Fessenden Lee de Forest Elisha Gray Oliver Heaviside Robert Hooke Erna Schneider Hoover Harold Hopkins Gardiner Greene Hubbard Bob Kahn Dawon Kahng Charles K. Kao Narinder Singh Kapany Hedy Lamarr Roberto Landell Innocenzo Manzetti Guglielmo Marconi Robert Metcalfe Antonio Meucci Samuel Morse Jun-ichi Nishizawa Charles Grafton Page Radia Perlman Alexander Stepanovich Popov Tivadar Puskás Johann Philipp Reis Claude Shannon Almon Brown Strowger Henry Sutton Charles Sumner Tainter Nikola Tesla Camille Tissot Alfred Vail Thomas A. Watson Charles Wheatstone Vladimir K. Zworykin Internet pioneers Transmission media Coaxial cable Fiber-optic communication optical fiber Free-space optical communication Molecular communication Radio waves wireless Transmission line telecommunication circuit Network topology and switching Bandwidth Links Network switching circuit packet Nodes terminal Telephone exchange Multiplexing Space-division Frequency-division Time-division Polarization-division Orbital angular-momentum Code-division Concepts Communication protocol Computer network Data transmission Store and forward Telecommunications equipment Types of network Cellular network Ethernet ISDN LAN Mobile NGN Public Switched Telephone Radio Television Telex UUCP WAN Wireless network Notable networks ARPANET BITNET CYCLADES FidoNet Internet Internet2 JANET NPL network TANet Toasternet Usenet Locations Africa Americas North South Antarctica Asia Europe Oceania Global telecommunications regulation bodies Telecommunication portal Category Outline Commons v t e Internet access Wired Cable Dial-up DOCSIS DSL Ethernet FTTx G.hn Nessum HomePlug HomePNA IEEE 1901 ISDN MoCA PON Power-line Broadband Wireless PAN Bluetooth Li-Fi Wireless USB NearLink Wireless LAN Wi-Fi WAPI Long range wireless 5G NR DECT EVDO GPRS HSPA iBurst LTE MMDS Muni Wi-Fi Satellite UMTS-TDD WiMAX WiBro v t e Satellite communications Main articles Satellite television Satellite radio Satellite Internet access Amateur satellite Ground station High-throughput satellite Relay satellite Transponder Carriage dispute Hardware SAT>IP Monoblock LNB DiSEqC USALS Automatic Tracking Satellite Dish Motor-driven Satellite dish Multi-satellite Satellite dish ( Parabolic antennas ) Satellite phone Satellite modem Satellite data unit Spacebus Very-small-aperture terminal Satellite radio / TV DVB-SH S-DMB DVB-RCS DVB-S2 DVB-S2X ISDB-S3 Digital audio radio service Broadcast companies Astra Digital Radio DirecTV Dish Network Sirius XM Holdings Sky UK Allente 1worldspace Relay satellite companies AST SpaceMobile EchoStar Eutelsat Globalstar Hispasat Hughes Inmarsat Intelsat Intersputnik Iridium SED Systems SES Shanghai Spacecom Satellite Technology Star One Starlink Telesat Tooway Turksat Viasat Satellite manufacturers Airbus Boeing INVAP Lockheed Martin Northrop Grumman SpaceX SSL Thales Alenia Space Trade organizations Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems ETSI Satellite Digital Radio Lists List of communications satellite firsts List of communication satellite companies Category v t e Wireless video and data distribution methods Radio Digital radio Internet radio Radio broadcasting Satellite radio Video Amateur television Internet television Mobile television Terrestrial television Digital Satellite television Visual sensor network Data Mobile broadband Satellite Internet access Wireless broadband Wireless local loop Standards 3GPP family Long Term Evolution (LTE) 5G New Radio (5G NR) Multimedia Broadcast Multicast Service (MBMS) Digital Video Broadcasting Terrestrial (DVB-T) Handheld (DVB-H) Satellite (DVB-S2) IEEE 802 family Mobile WiMAX Mobile broadband wireless access IEEE 802.15.3 ( UWB ) Wi-Fi WiMAX WRAN Advanced Wireless Services (AWS) Educational Broadband Service (EBS) HomeRF Multichannel Video and Data Distribution Service (MVDDS) Multipoint Video Distribution System (MVDS) Wireless USB Technologies Local multipoint distribution service (LMDS) Multichannel multipoint distribution service (MMDS) Related Broadcasting K u band Microwave NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐x8qdk
Cached time: 20250814215430
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.013 seconds
Real time usage: 1.220 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7614/1000000
Revision size: 71577/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 334902/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 24440/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 274196/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.589/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24682434/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  972.705      1 -total
 41.79%  406.451      2 Template:Reflist
 26.89%  261.522     43 Template:Cite_web
 14.52%  141.194      6 Template:Annotated_link
  9.91%   96.371      4 Template:Navbox
  9.07%   88.241      1 Template:Telecommunications
  8.20%   79.797      2 Template:Multiple_issues
  7.74%   75.296     14 Template:Ambox
  6.45%   62.709      1 Template:Short_description
  5.30%   51.582      3 Template:Refimprove Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:769088:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215430 and revision id 1297756231. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Satellite_Internet_access&oldid=1297756231 " Categories : Satellite Internet access Broadband Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1: unfit URL CS1 errors: periodical ignored Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2024 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles in need of updating from April 2024 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2024 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2024 Articles with a promotional tone from April 2024 All articles with a promotional tone All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from July 2011 Articles containing potentially dated statements from September 2024 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 28 June 2025, at 08:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Satellite Internet access 28 languages Add topic

