Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Welfare state in Europe Toggle Welfare state in Europe subsection 1.1 Nordic model 1.2 Continental model 1.3 Anglo-Saxon model 1.4 Mediterranean model 2 Evaluating the different social models Toggle Evaluating the different social models subsection 2.1 Reduction in poverty 2.2 Protection against labour market risks 2.3 Rewards for labour participation 2.4 Conclusion 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents European social model 5 languages العربية Български Čeština Հայերեն Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political-economic model common across Europe This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "European social model" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( April 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The European social model is a concept that emerged in the discussion of economic globalisation and typically contrasts the degree of employment regulation and social protection in European countries to conditions in the United States.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] It is commonly cited in policy debates in the European Union , including by representatives of both labour unions [ 3 ] and employers, [ 4 ] to connote broadly "the conviction that economic progress and social progress are inseparable" and that "[c]ompetitiveness and solidarity have both been taken into account in building a successful Europe for the future".

[ 5 ] While European states do not all use a single social model , welfare states in Europe share several broad characteristics. These generally include an acceptance of political responsibility for levels and conditions of employment, social protections for all citizens, social inclusion , and democracy. Examples common among European countries include universal health care , free higher education, strong labor protections and regulations, and generous welfare programs in areas such as unemployment insurance, retirement pensions, and public housing. The Treaty of the European Community set out several social objectives: "promotion of employment, improved living and working conditions ... proper social protection, dialogue between management and labour, the development of human resources with a view to lasting high employment and the combating of exclusion." [ 6 ] Because different European states focus on different aspects of the model, it has been argued that there are four distinct social models in Europe: the Nordic, British, Mediterranean and the Continental.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] The general outlines of a European social model emerged during the post-war boom .

Tony Judt lists a number of causes: the abandonment of protectionism , the baby boom , cheap energy, and a desire to catch up with living standards enjoyed in the United States. The European social model also enjoyed a low degree of external competition as the Soviet bloc, China and India were still isolated from the rest of the global economy.

[ 9 ] In recent years, some have questioned whether the European social model is sustainable in the face of low birthrates, globalisation , Europeanisation and an ageing population .

[ 10 ] Welfare state in Europe [ edit ] Some of the European welfare states have been described as the most well developed and extensive.

[ 11 ] A unique "European social model" is described in contrast with the social model existing in the US. Although each European country has its own singularities, four traditional welfare or social models are identified in Europe, [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] as well as possible fifth one to cover formerly communist Central and Eastern Europe: [ 15 ] The Nordic ( Social democratic ) model in Denmark , Finland , Iceland , Norway and Sweden The Continental ( Christian democratic ) [ 14 ] model in Andorra , Austria , Belgium , France , Germany , Liechtenstein , Luxembourg , Monaco , Netherlands [ 14 ] and Switzerland The Anglo-Saxon ( Liberal ) model in Ireland and the United Kingdom The Mediterranean model in Cyprus , Greece , Italy , Malta , Portugal , Spain and Turkey The Eastern European model in Albania , Bulgaria , Croatia , Czech Republic , Estonia , Hungary , Latvia , Lithuania , Montenegro , Poland , Romania , Slovakia and Slovenia [ 15 ] Nordic model [ edit ] See also: Nordic model As can be seen in the graph to the right, the Nordic model holds the highest level of social insurance . Its main characteristic is its universal provision nature which is based on the principle of "citizenship". Therefore, there exists a more generalised access, with lower conditionability, to the social provisions.

[ clarification needed ] The Nordic welfare model is distinctive in its strong reliance on government support, aiming to reduce family obligations while promoting individual autonomy. It has significantly de-commodified welfare, ensuring that citizens’ well-being is less dependent on market forces. However, this reduction in market influence is complemented by policies that enhance employability and productivity, reinforcing labor market participation.

[ 16 ] The Nordic welfare states are known for their focus on universal income guarantees, activation policies, and comprehensive services for children, the elderly, and those with disabilities. Their generous income safety nets effectively reduce poverty and promote labor market flexibility by encouraging risk-taking. Activation policies help reduce long-term unemployment, and family care services support women in balancing careers and childcare, which also boosts employment levels. Despite high costs, the system is not more expensive than other models when considering private spending. The model depends on full employment and growth, with heavy taxation being a potential vulnerability. However, the Nordic countries are well-positioned to adapt to post-industrial changes, promoting inclusivity and reducing poverty among both the elderly and children.

[ 17 ] As regards labour market, these countries are characterised by important expenditures in active labour market policies whose aim is a rapid reinsertion of the unemployed into the labour market. These countries are also characterised by a high share of public employment . Trade unions have a high membership and an important decision-making power which induces a low wage dispersion or more equitable income distribution.

Continental model [ edit ] See also: Social market economy The Continental model has some similarities with the Nordic model. Nevertheless, it has a higher share of its expenditures devoted to pensions. The model is based on the principle of "security" and a system of subsidies which are not conditioned to employability (for example in the case of France or Belgium, there exist subsidies whose only requirement is being older than 25).

As regards the labour market, active policies are less important than in the Nordic model and in spite of a low membership rate, trade-unions have important decision-making powers in collective agreements .

Another important aspect of the Continental model is the disability pensions .

Anglo-Saxon model [ edit ] Main article: Anglo-Saxon model The Anglo-Saxon model features a lower level of expenditures than the previous ones. Its main particularity is its social assistance of last resort. Subsidies are directed to a higher extent to the working-age population and to a lower extent to pensions. Access to subsidies is (more) conditioned to employability (for instance, they are conditioned on having worked previously).

Active labour market policies are important. Instead, trade unions have smaller decision-making powers than in the previous models, this is one of the reasons explaining their higher income dispersion and their higher number of low-wage employments.

Mediterranean model [ edit ] The Mediterranean model corresponds to southern European countries who developed their welfare state later than the previous ones (during the 1970s and 1980s). It is the model with the lowest share of expenditures and is strongly based on pensions and a low level of social assistance. There exists in these countries a higher segmentation of rights and status of persons receiving subsidies which has as one of its consequences a strongly conditioned access to social provisions.

[ citation needed ] The main characteristic of labour market policies is a rigid employment protection legislation and a frequent resort to early retirement policies as a means to improve employment conditions.

[ citation needed ] Trade unions tend to have a substantial membership which again is one of the explanations behind a lower income dispersion than in the Anglo-Saxon model.

[ citation needed ] Cyprus , Italy , Spain , Portugal , Greece and Turkey are the countries that constitute the Mediterranean welfare regime. Mediterranean welfare regime or Southern European welfare model is marked by a fragmented and corporatist income maintenance system, offering generous benefits in areas like pensions but leaving gaps, such as the lack of national minimum income schemes. While healthcare systems have shifted towards National Health Services based on universalistic principles, implementation remains uneven, with challenges in financing and private sector involvement. This model also has low state involvement, with close ties between public and private sectors, particularly in healthcare. The family continues to play an important role in providing social support. Additionally, Southern European countries face significant challenges like aging populations, high unemployment, and the impacts of globalization. The clientelistic use of welfare benefits for electoral gains remains a key feature of this welfare system.

[ 18 ] Evaluating the different social models [ edit ] Reduction in poverty by the different European social models. Reduction in Gini index after transfers and taxes (in percentage change).

Efficiency of social expenditures in the four European social models To evaluate the different social models, we follow the criteria used in Boeri (2002) and Sapir (2005) which consider that a social model should satisfy the following: Reduction in poverty.

Protection against labour market risks.

Rewards for labour participation.

Reduction in poverty [ edit ] Further information: poverty reduction The graph on the right shows the reduction in inequality (as measured by the Gini index ) after taking account of taxes and transfers, that is, to which extent does each social model reduce poverty without taking into account the reduction in poverty provoked by taxes and transfers. The level of social expenditures is an indicator of the capacity of each model to reduce poverty: a bigger share of expenditures is in general associated to a higher reduction in poverty. Nevertheless, another aspect that should be taken into account is the efficiency in this poverty reduction. By this is meant that with a lower share of expenditures a higher reduction in poverty may be obtained.

[ 19 ] In this case, the graph on the right shows that the Anglosaxon and Nordic models are more efficient than the Continental or Mediterranean ones. The Continental model appears to be the least efficient. Given its high level of social expenditures, one would expect a higher poverty reduction than that attained by this model. Remark how the Anglosaxon model is found above the average line drawn whereas the Continental is found below that line.

Protection against labour market risks [ edit ] As can be seen, there exists a negative relationship between employment protection legislation and the share of workers receiving unemployment benefits .

Protection against labour market risks is generally assured by two means: Regulation of the labour market by means of employment protection legislation which basically increases firing costs and severance payments for the employers. This is generally referred to as providing "employment" protection.

Unemployment benefits which are commonly financed with taxes or mandatory public insurances to the employees and employers. This is generally referred to as providing protection to the "worker" as opposed to "employment".

As can be seen in the graph, there is a clear trade-off between these two types of labour market instruments (remark the clear negative slope between both). Once again different European countries have chosen a different position in their use of these two mechanisms of labour market protection. These differences can be summarised as follows: The Mediterranean countries have chosen a higher "employment" protection while a very low share of their unemployed workers receives unemployment benefits.

The Nordic countries have chosen to protect to a lesser extent "employment" and instead, an important share of their unemployed workers receives benefits.

The continental countries have a higher level of both mechanisms than the European average, although by a small margin.

The Anglo-Saxon countries base their protection on unemployment benefits and a low level of employment protection.

Evaluating the different choices is a hard task. In general there exists consensus among economists on the fact that employment protection generates inefficiencies inside firms. Instead, there is no such consensus as regards the question of whether employment protection generates a higher level of unemployment.

Rewards for labour participation [ edit ] Employment and unemployment rates for each social model Sapir (2005) and Boeri (2002) propose looking at the employment-to-population ratio as the best way to analyse the incentives and rewards for employment in each social model. The Lisbon Strategy initiated in 2001 established that the members of the EU should attain a 70% employment rate by 2010.

In this case, the graph shows that the countries in the Nordic and Anglosaxon model are the ones with the highest employment rate whereas the Continental and Mediterranean countries have not attained the Lisbon Strategy target.

Conclusion [ edit ] Classifying the different social models according to their efficiency and equity . Elevada means high whereas Baja means low.

Sapir (2005) proposes as a general mean to evaluate the different social models, the following two criteria: Efficiency , that is, whether the model provides the incentives so as to achieve the largest number possible of employed persons, that is, the highest employment rate .

Equity, that is, whether the social model achieves a relatively low poverty risk.

As can be seen in the graph, according to these two criteria, the best performance is achieved by the Nordic model. The Continental model should improve its efficiency whereas the Anglosaxon model its equity. The Mediterranean model under-performs in both criteria.

Some economists consider that between the Continental model and the Anglo-Saxon, the latter should be preferred given its better results in employment, which make it more sustainable in the long term, whereas the equity level depends on the preferences of each country (Sapir, 2005). Other economists argue that the Continental model cannot be considered worse than the Anglosaxon given that it is also the result of the preferences of those countries that support it (Fitoussi et al., 2000; Blanchard, 2004). This last argument can be used to justify any policy.

See also [ edit ] Disability pension Social insurance Social protection Social security Social welfare provision Welfare state Location-specific: Tax rates of Europe US welfare state References [ edit ] ^ Alber, Jens; Gilbert, Neil (2010).

United in Diversity?: Comparing Social Models in Europe and America . Oxford: Oxford Scholarship Onlin.

ISBN 9780195376630 . Retrieved 11 September 2020 .

^ McDowell, Manfred (1995).

"NAFTA and the EC Social Dimension" .

Labor Studies Journal .

20 (1) . Retrieved 11 September 2020 .

^ ETUC.

"The European Social Model" .

etuc.org . European Trade Union Congress . Retrieved 11 September 2020 .

^ European Social and Economic Committee, Employers Group.

"The European Social Model: Can we still afford it in this globalised world?" (PDF) . Europa (web portal)/.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 December 2018 . Retrieved 11 September 2020 .

^ European Observatory of Working Life, EurWORK.

"European social model" . Europa (web portal) . Retrieved 11 September 2020 .

^ "The European Social Model" . European Trade Union Confederation. 21 March 2007. Archived from the original on 9 November 2013 . Retrieved 4 January 2010 .

^ Sapir, André. 2005. Globalisation and the Reform of European Social Models. Bruegel.

http://www.bruegel.org/1425 [ permanent dead link ] .

^ Barr, N. (2004), Economics of the welfare state . New York: Oxford University Press (USA).

^ Charlemagne (11 December 2008).

"The Economist" .

The left's resignation note . Retrieved 2 January 2010 .

^ "Remarks by Governor Liikanen: "A European Social Model: an Asset or a Liability?" " . Budapest: The World Political Forum. 27 November 2007 . Retrieved 3 January 2010 .

^ See article Archived 24 April 2006 at the Wayback Machine ^ Sapir, A. (2005): Globalisation and the Reform of European Social Models , Bruegel, Bruselas. Accessible por internet en [1] ^ Boeri, T. (2002): Let Social Policy Models Compete and Europe Will Win , conference in the John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, 11–12 April 2002.

^ a b c Christian Aspalter, Kim Jinsoo, Park Sojeung.

Analysing the Welfare State in Poland, the Czech Republic, Hungary and Slovenia: An Ideal-Typical Perspective . Published on 10 March 2009.

DOI : 10.1111/j.1467-9515.2009.00654.x ^ a b Laužadytė, Agnė; Baležentis, Tomas; Goculenko, Eglė (2018).

"Welfare state in Central and Eastern Europe" .

Economics and Sociology : 100– 122.

doi : 10.14254/2071-789X.2018/11-1/7 .

ISSN 2071-789X .

^ Esping-Andersen, Gøsta (2002).

Why we need a new welfare state . New York: Oxford University Press. p. 14.

ISBN 978-0-19-925642-6 .

^ Esping-Andersen, Gøsta, ed. (2009).

Why we need a new welfare state (Reprinted ed.). Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press. p. 14.

ISBN 978-0-19-925643-3 .

^ Ferrera, Maurizio (1996). "The 'Southern Model' of Welfare in Social Europe".

Journal of European Social Policy .

6 (17): 17– 37.

^ Prokurat, Sergiusz (2010), European Social Model and East Asian Economic Model – different approach to productivity and competition in economy (PDF) , Wrocław: Asia – Europe. Partnership or Rivalry?", pp.

35– 47, archived from the original (PDF) on 22 September 2016 , retrieved 4 August 2016 Bibliography [ edit ] Blanchard, O. (2004): The Economic Future of Europe. NBER Economic Papers.

Boeri, T. (2002): Let Social Policy Models Compete and Europe Will Win, conference in the John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, 11–12 April 2002.

Sapir, A. (2005): Globalisation and the Reform of European Social Models, Bruegel, Brussels. Downloadable here .

Fitoussi J.P. and O. Passet (2000): Reformes structurelles et politiques macroéconomiques: les enseignements des «modèles» de pays, en Reduction du chômage : les réussites en Europe. Rapport du Conseil d'Analyse Economique, n.23, Paris, La documentation Française, pp. 11–96.

Busch, Klaus: The Corridor Model – Relaunched , edited by Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung, International Policy Analysis, Berlin 2011.

v t e Social models in Europe Anglo-Saxon Mediterranean Nordic Rhine NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐5cf8f5fb49‐5f6wt
Cached time: 20250812022029
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.431 seconds
Real time usage: 0.539 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2393/1000000
Revision size: 23129/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 56454/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4016/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 64544/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.269/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7212955/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  469.759      1 -total
 37.73%  177.258      1 Template:Reflist
 17.10%   80.326      3 Template:Cite_book
 15.53%   72.936      1 Template:Social_models_in_Europe
 15.18%   71.320      1 Template:Navbox
 13.41%   62.987      1 Template:Short_description
 11.89%   55.832      2 Template:Ambox
 11.34%   53.277      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  8.16%   38.354      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.02%   28.266      5 Template:Cite_web Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:20311344:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812022029 and revision id 1295818448. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=European_social_model&oldid=1295818448 " Categories : Economy of Europe Society of Europe Eurozone crisis Political-economic models Social systems Welfare in Europe Welfare state Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from May 2013 Use dmy dates from May 2023 Articles needing additional references from April 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles lacking in-text citations from April 2023 All articles lacking in-text citations Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 This page was last edited on 16 June 2025, at 01:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents European social model 5 languages Add topic

