Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Tunisian Collaborative Painting in America 2 Tunisian Collaborative Painting in United Kingdom 3 Notes 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Tunisian collaborative painting 1 language Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Tunisian Collaborative Painting is an art form developed in Tunisia in the mid-1980s. It is unique in its method of allowing a group of artists to work simultaneously on a canvas without discussion or planning beforehand. The result is a painting created by a group of individuals that looks like the work of a single artist.

Tunisian artist Hechmi Ghachem created Tunisian Collaborative Painting in 1988 when Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali became president and dictator of Tunisia. “Freely expressing yourself in Ben Ali’s Tunisia was dangerous,” said Hechmi. He set out to reclaim freedom of expression for Tunisian artists. He formed groups called Brigades d'Intervention Plastique. “The brigades enabled artists to leave their professional loneliness and work in the same space, and on the same canvas” said Hechmi.  “They created ties built on pleasure, excitement, struggle, jealousy, life, and love and death, as in every creative act. Together they produced paintings which mixed the best parts of themselves with the best parts of each of the other artists. One painting represented the individuality of all.” [ 1 ] Hechmi Ghachem took his Brigades all over Tunisia. When a painting was finished it was given to the host who supplied the space where it was painted. Over a period of several years, hundreds of paintings were created. Many artists participated, some of them well-known and others who were new. The paintings they created together preserved the freedom of artists during the dictatorship of Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali.

[ 1 ] Tunisian Collaborative Painting in America [ edit ] In November 2008, U.S. Ambassador to Tunisia, Robert Godec invited artist  David Black to a reception for his paintings which were hanging in the Ambassador’s residence under the Art in Embassies Program of the U.S. Department of State. Ambassador Godec also introduced David Black to Hechmi Ghachem and the Tunisian artists who were practicing Tunisian Collaborative Painting and they invited him to participate.

Mr. Black invited the Tunisian artists to teach Tunisian Collaborative Painting in America but the Tunisian government would not let them leave the country.

[ 1 ] Hechmi Ghachem suggested that David Black introduce the new art form in America.

On February 20, 2010, David Black conducted the first session of Tunisian Collaborative Painting in America at Lyme Academy College of Fine Arts in Old Lyme, Connecticut.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The students were excited by the experience and the paintings were successfully auctioned off to benefit the Academy.

Ira Goldberg, the Executive Director of The Art Students League of New York , was a spectator at Mr. Black’s workshops at Lyme Academy and he wrote a featured article entitled "All in One" in the League's Linea Journal: “Tunisian Collaborative Painting, purely by virtue of its simple set of rules, requires the elimination of desire in the creative act. Seeing what emerges without any pre-determination gives the artist incredible insight into what is possible in art. As a teaching tool, with its potential for visual expression, Tunisian Collaborative Painting has the potential to be a school unto itself.” [ 4 ] On November 8, 2010, at the invitation of Ira Goldberg, David Black conducted five days of workshops in Tunisian Collaborative Painting at The Art Students League of New York. One hundred and twenty-five artists from 30 countries created 26 paintings and each one of them looked like the work of a single artist. The word most used by the artists to describe their experience was “liberating.”  In keeping with Tunisian tradition, the completed art works were donated to be auctioned off for the benefit of the school.

On December 17, 2010, a month after the workshops at The Art Students League, a 26-year-old Tunisian, Mohamed Bouazizi was selling fruit to feed his family. Ben Ali’s police took his fruit away and beat him. Mr. Bouazizi poured paint thinner on himself and lit a match. Word of his fiery death spread quickly and some of the Tunisian artists David Black had painted with risked their lives demonstrating in the streets. The Jasmine Revolution ended a month later on January 14, 2011 when Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali, the ruler of Tunisia for 23 years, fled the country.

In November 2011, the new government of Tunisia gave permission for the Tunisian artists to travel to America as guests of David Black.  The participation of the Tunisian artists in the Tunisian Collaborative Painting workshops at The Art Students League in New York generated worldwide interest. It was covered by The Wall Street Journal, [ 5 ] the BBC, [ 6 ] and National Public Radio.

[ 7 ] In addition, Secretary of State, Hillary Rodham Clinton issued a statement in which she said, “David Black is an honorary diplomat. By introducing this unique art form to the United States at a time when the Tunisian artists who pioneered it could not travel, he built a bridge that artists from both countries are now able to cross.” [ 1 ] Tunisian Collaborative Painting in United Kingdom [ edit ] The painting event brought together artists from across the South of England and included Andy Council , Xenz, Paris , Richard Twose, Rob Lawes, Gina Love, Samantha Fellows, Ian Thomson and Frances Mansfield. 20 artists in total created 5 new Tunisian Collaborative Paintings. Brought together with support from The Arts Council by Luke Palmer and Karen van Hoey Smith, [ 8 ] During February 2019, the Royal West of England Academy hosted the UK's first Tunisian Collaborative Painting exhibition, curated by Luke Palmer.

[ 9 ] 10 new collaborative artworks were made by 36 street artists, RWA network artists and fine artists during August 2018.

Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d Personal Correspondence with David Black ^ Lyme Academy College of Fine Arts: "First U.S. Demonstration of Tunisian Collaborative Art" ^ "Team Effort" The Day Newspaper Feb 21 2010 ^ "All for One"  LINEA Fall 2010 Art Students League of New York ^ "One Canvas, Many Masters"  Wall Street Journal Nov. 17, 2011 ^ "Collaborative Painting in North Africa"  BBC Nov. 21, 2011 ^ "Tunisian Collaborative Painting"  WNYC Dec. 9, 2011 ^ Tunisian Collaborative Painting UK .

YouTube .

Archived from the original on 2021-12-08.

^ "Collaborative Painting" .

External links [ edit ] Tunisian Collaborative Painting Examples Video of TCP workshop at the Art Student League, Nov 13, 2010 featuring David Black Video of painters at TCP Workshop at the Art Student League, Nov 13, 2010 Facebook Page Tunisian Collaborative Painting in America "Crowdsourcing: The art of a crowd" Christian Science Monitor, Jan 14, 2011 Art Students League of New York Workshop Description Kickin' it Tunisian Style Arts Council of Greater New Haven, Feb 21 2010 Artist Paula Billups' experience with Tunisian Collaborative Painting "From Tunisia to Manhattan" New York Press, Nov 9 2011 "Sharing the Artful Impulse, Tunisian Style" U.S. Dept. of State, March 3, 2012 Art in Embassies Program U.S. Dept of State Aufbau Magazine - Winter Issue 2009 Le Temps - Tunisian newspaper, March 23, 2010 and March 28, 2010. Author: Mourad Zerai David Black Artists Page David Black Paintings v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tunisian_collaborative_painting&oldid=1306251868 " Categories : Contemporary art movements Modern art Culture of Tunisia This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 19:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tunisian collaborative painting 1 language Add topic

