Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Synoptic conditions Toggle Synoptic conditions subsection 1.1 Summer shamal 1.2 Winter shamal 2 Effects 3 Examples 4 Miscellany 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Shamal (wind) 24 languages العربية भोजपुरी Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Hrvatski Italiano עברית Македонски 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Shqip Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Northwesterly wind blowing over Iraq and the Persian Gulf state You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Chinese .

(January 2025) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the Chinese article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Consider adding a topic to this template: there are already 370 articles in the main category , and specifying |topic= will aid in categorization.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Chinese Wikipedia article at [[:zh:夏马风]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|zh|夏马风}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

A shamal overspreading Iraq A shamal ( Arabic : شمال , 'north') is a northwesterly wind blowing over Iraq and the Persian Gulf states (including Saudi Arabia and Kuwait ), often strong during the day, but decreasing at night.

[ 1 ] This weather effect occurs from once to several times a year, mostly in summer, but sometimes in winter.

[ 1 ] The resulting wind typically creates large sandstorms that impact Iraq, most sand having been picked up from Jordan and Syria .

Synoptic conditions [ edit ] Summer shamal [ edit ] When a passing storm with a strong cold front passes over the mountains of Iran , the leading edge of a mass of relatively cooler air kicks up dust and sand , sending it aloft. Maximum temperatures nevertheless average more than 105 °F (41 °C)) during the period.

[ 2 ] Winter shamal [ edit ] In Iraq, where winter storms can bring heavy snow to the terrain, a layer of dust can settle onto the snowpack.

[ 3 ] A winter shamal is associated with the strengthening of a high-pressure area over the peninsula after the passage of a cold front while a deep trough of low pressure maintains itself over areas east of the Persian Gulf.

[ 1 ] This leads to strong northerly wind over the Persian Gulf for periods up to five days. They are associated with cold temperatures.

The places around the Middle East most likely to see the winter variety lie near Lavan Island , Halul Island , and Ras Rakan . They persist from 24–36 hours during the winter and occur as frequently as two to three times per month in December–February. A persistent three-to five-day event occurs only once or twice a winter, and is accompanied by very high winds and seas.

[ 4 ] Effects [ edit ] Shamals normally last three to five days. The dust and sandstorm is several thousand feet deep. Wind speeds can reach up to 70 km/h (43 mph). Such events can impact health and transport, as visibility becomes limited, and some flights get cancelled. Sand dunes build up on roads and require considerable effort to remove. Some infrastructure, such as street signs, become damaged by the shamals.

Examples [ edit ] A study by Hokkaido University on fossil corals in Oman provides an evidence that prolonged winter shamal seasons around 2200 BCE led to the salinization of the irrigated fields; hence, a dramatic decrease in crop production triggered a widespread famine and eventually the collapse of the ancient Akkadian Empire .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Some investigations have also reported that dust storms generated over west Asian regions during summer can alter regional circulation features, even affecting the Indian summer monsoon rainfall.

[ 7 ] A notable storm caused by a shamal covered Baghdad with sand on 8 August 2005, resulting in a closing of nearly all shops and public activity. The storm also overwhelmed Baghdad's Yarmuk Hospital, which treated more than a thousand people with respiratory distress.

[ 8 ] From 1–4 February 2008, a massive dust storm was associated with a shamal wind advected over the Arabian Sea . The leading edge of the dust storm moved at an estimated 20 km/h, and at one point extended from Muqdisho , Somalia, to Mumbai , India.

[ 9 ] Dust from this storm received press from the sports media as it swept across the Dubai Desert Classic golf tournament, where Tiger Woods was playing.

[ 10 ] In May 2022, one person died and 5,000 people were admitted to hospitals with breathing problems in Baghdad , Al Anbar and Najaf Governorates, due to shamal blowing which turned the skies orange in those regions.

[ 11 ] Miscellany [ edit ] A question about this wind was part of the 2003 National Geographic Bee .

[ 12 ] Shamal , an Arabic word meaning "north", is a male name in Afghanistan and Kurdistan, and means both "wind" and "north".

A sandstorm caused by shamal winds tore apart a U.S. Marine encampment on HBO's Generation Kill TV series about the 2003 invasion of Iraq.

See also [ edit ] Asian dust Dust storm N'aschi References [ edit ] ^ a b c El-Baz, Farouk; R.M. Makharita (1994). Gordon and Breach Publishers (ed.).

The Gulf War and the Environment . Taylor & Francis. pp.

31– 54, 178.

ISBN 978-2-88449-100-6 . Retrieved 2009-06-03 .

^ "Desert wind pattern in Iraq to shift in next two months" . Weather Corner.

ggweather.com . Retrieved 9 December 2006 .

^ "Shamal winds drive Middle East dust storm" . Natural Hazards >> Dust & Smoke.

NASA Earth Observatory . Archived from the original on 28 October 2008 . Retrieved 9 December 2006 .

^ "Appendix C: Wind climatology of the Winter Shamal" (PDF) .

NRL – Monterey . United States Navy. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 June 2011 . Retrieved 9 December 2006 .

^ Watanabe, Takaaki K.; Watanabe, Tsuyoshi; Yamazaki, Atsuko; Pfeiffer, Miriam (2019). "Oman corals suggest that a stronger winter shamal season caused the Akkadian Empire (Mesopotamia) collapse".

Geology .

47 (12). GeoScienceWorld: 1141– 1145.

Bibcode : 2019Geo....47.1141W .

doi : 10.1130/G46604.1 .

S2CID 204781389 .

^ "Strong winter dust storms may have caused the collapse of the Akkadian Empire" .

Hokkaido University . 24 October 2019.

^ Vinoj, V.; Rasch, Philip J.; Wang, Hailong; Yoon, Jin-Ho; Ma, Po-Lun; Landu, Kiranmayi; Singh, Balwinder (2014). "Short-term modulation of Indian summer monsoon rainfall by West Asian dust". Vol. 7. Nature Geoscience. pp.

308– 313.

^ "New Images: Iraq Dust Storm" .

NASA Earth Observatory . Archived from the original on 10 October 2006 . Retrieved 9 December 2006 .

^ "Arabian Sea dust storm AVHRR images" .

Amato Evan website .

^ "Tiger Woods battles sand storm to lead at Dubai Desert Classic" .

bloomberg.com .

^ "Iraq dust storm leaves 5,000 people needing treatment" .

BBC . 5 May 2022.

^ "Interview with National Geographic bee champion" . American Morning. CNN. 22 May 2003 . Retrieved 9 December 2006 .

External links [ edit ] Names of Winds v t e Asia pollution topics Air pollution Notable incidents Dust storm 2010 China dust storms Forest fires and haze 1997 SEA haze 1997 Indonesian forest fires 2005 Malaysian haze 2006 SEA haze 2009 SEA haze 2010 SEA haze 2013 SEA haze 2015 SEA haze 2016 Malaysian haze 2016 SEA haze 2017 SEA haze 2019 SEA haze 2019 Vietnam forest fires 2024 Indo-Pakistani smog Air radioactive contamination 1982 Bukit Merah radioactive pollution By countries China Hong Kong India Macau Malaysia Taiwan Recurrent issues Asian brown cloud Asian Dust Shamal Southeast Asian haze Counter-measures ASEAN Agreement on Transboundary Haze Pollution Operation Haze Pollutant Standards Index Great Green Wall (China) Water pollution Notable incidents Water radioactive contamination 2011 Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster Marine pollution 2016 Vietnam marine life disaster 2019 Kim Kim River toxic pollution Pollution of the Pasig River By countries China Water crisis India Japan Philippines Vietnam Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Shamal_(wind)&oldid=1286137142 " Categories : Winds Natural history of Iraq Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing translation from Chinese Wikipedia Articles containing Arabic-language text This page was last edited on 17 April 2025, at 23:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Shamal (wind) 24 languages Add topic

