Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Requirements of the code 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 The Carbon Advisory Group 2.2 Pilot Phase: 2010-2011 2.3 Launch 2.4 Group Scheme Pilot: 2012-2013 3 Carbon registry 4 References Toggle the table of contents Woodland Carbon Code 2 languages Hausa Igbo Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The Woodland Carbon Code is the UK standard for afforestation projects for climate change mitigation .

[ 1 ] It provides independent validation and verification and assurance about the levels of carbon sequestration from woodland creation projects and their contribution to climate change mitigation.

The Code, which sets out project design and management requirements, was established in 2011 to promote best practice procedures for organisations wanting to create woodland to mitigate their carbon emissions. Compliance with the code means that woodland carbon projects are responsibly and sustainably managed to national standards; will have reliable estimates for the amount of carbon that will be sequestered or locked up as a result of the tree planting; be publicly registered and independently verified; and meet transparent criteria and standards to ensure that real carbon benefits are delivered.

Every Woodland Carbon Code project appears on the UK Register of Woodland Carbon Projects; registry services are provided by Markit . All project developers and carbon buyers will have an account on the registry, which also contains project information and documentation, as well as the facility to list, track ownership and retire carbon units. Projects and their documentation are validated at the outset by a third party accredited by the UK Accreditation Service (UKAS) .

[ 2 ] An ongoing monitoring programme for the woodland will have also been agreed at the time of validation and projects will be verified by an accredited third party at regular intervals.

Woodland Carbon Code projects generate Woodland Carbon Units, which once verified can be used by UK businesses to help compensate for their gross emissions.

Requirements of the code [ edit ] register your project on the UK Land Carbon Registry, stating the location and providing a map and carbon calculation.

meet national forestry standards to ensure the woodland is sustainably and responsibly managed have a long-term management plan use standard methods for estimating the carbon that will be sequestered demonstrate that the project delivers additional carbon benefits than would otherwise have been the case History [ edit ] The Carbon Advisory Group [ edit ] The Forestry Commission set up a Carbon Advisory Group of UK forest industry and carbon market experts in 2008 to advise on woodland carbon management and develop industry guidelines and standards. These have since evolved to become the Woodland Carbon Code.

[ citation needed ] Pilot Phase: 2010-2011 [ edit ] Between August 2010 and July 2011 the Woodland Carbon Code was piloted at a number of sites across the UK. Several projects, comprising a variety of woodland types, were designed and validated under the draft criteria of the code. Following feedback from the pilot phase, final amends were made to the Code before being launched in 2011.

[ citation needed ] Launch [ edit ] In July 2011, approval was given for CO 2 abatement from Woodland Carbon Code projects to be reported, under UK government guidance on how to measure and report greenhouse gas emissions . This enabled UK investors and businesses to accurately communicate details of their woodland creation projects in greenhouse gas reports for the first time.

[ 3 ] Group Scheme Pilot: 2012-2013 [ edit ] In 2012 and early 2013 group validation was piloted. This is an alternative approach to certification under the Woodland Carbon Code which allows owners of small woodlands, which may not have been viable to validate on their own, to become certified under a single statement, enabling financial costs to be shared. In May 2013 the group validation scheme was officially launched.

[ 4 ] Carbon registry [ edit ] The Woodland Carbon Code was launched on the Markit Environmental Registry in summer 2013.

[ 5 ] The UK Land Carbon Registry now houses credits from both the Woodland Carbon Code and the Peatland Code.

[ citation needed ] Verified Woodland Carbon Units can be used by companies with UK-based emissions to come to a net figure, as set out in the UK's Environmental Reporting Guidelines.  All projects also help the UK meet its greenhouse gas emissions reduction commitments - There are no Corresponding Adjustments made for verified Woodland Carbon Code units.

[ 6 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Woodland Carbon Code" . Scottish Forestry . Retrieved 16 Nov 2022 .

^ "First accreditations for carbon-capturing woodland creation projects announced" .

UKAS . Retrieved 31 May 2013 .

^ "UK launches Woodland Carbon Code" .

BBC . 28 July 2011 . Retrieved 31 May 2013 .

^ "Woodland Carbon Code group validation scheme opens to all" .

Forestry Commission . Retrieved 9 December 2013 .

^ "Woodland carbon code launched on Markit" .

The Environmentalist . Archived from the original on December 9, 2013 . Retrieved 9 December 2013 .

^ "UK Environmental Reporting Guidance" . 29 March 2019.

v t e Forestry Index Forest areas Ministries Research institutes Colleges Journals Arbor Day Types Agroforestry dehesa Analog forestry Bamboo forestry Close to nature forestry Community forestry Ecoforestry Energy forestry Mycoforestry Permaforestry Plantation forestry Social forestry Sustainable forestry Urban forest Urban forestry Ecology and management Arboriculture Controlled burn Debris coarse driftwood large log jam slash Dendrology Ecological thinning Even-aged management Fire ecology Forest dynamics informatics IPM inventory governance law Global Forest Information Service old-growth pathology protection restoration secondary stand transition Trillion Tree Campaign Forest certification ATFS CFS FSC PEFC SFI SmartWood Woodland Carbon Code Forestation afforestation reforestation Formally designated Glade Growth and yield modelling Horticulture GM trees i-Tree urban Multipurpose tree Silviculture Sustainable management Tree allometry breeding Tree measurement crown girth height volume Environmental topics Acid rain Carbon sequestration Clearcutting Deforestation Ecosystem services Forest degradation Forest dieback Forest fragmentation Ghost forest Great Green Wall (Africa) Great Green Wall (China) High grading Illegal logging timber mafia Invasive species wilding Million Tree Initiative REDD Shifting cultivation chitemene slash-and-burn slash-and-char svedjebruk Timber recycling Tree hugging Urban forest inequity Wildfire Industries Coppicing Forest farming Forest gardening Logging Manufacturing lumber plywood pulp and paper sawmilling Products biochar biomass charcoal non-timber palm oil rayon rubber tanbark Rail transport Tree farm Christmas trees Wood engineered fuel mahogany spruce-pine-fir teak Woodworking green woodworking Occupations Forester Arborist Bucker Choker setter Ecologist Feller Firefighter handcrew hotshot lookout smokejumper River driver Truck driver Log scaler Lumberjack Ranger Resin tapper Rubber tapper Shingle weaver Timber cruiser Tree planter Wood process engineer WikiProject Climate change portal Earth sciences portal Ecology portal Environment portal Plants portal Trees portal Category Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Woodland_Carbon_Code&oldid=1275781103 " Categories : Sustainable forest management Forest certification Forestry and the environment Forests and woodlands of the United Kingdom Forestry in the United Kingdom Biosequestration Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 This page was last edited on 15 February 2025, at 01:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Woodland Carbon Code 2 languages Add topic

