Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Creation Toggle Creation subsection 2.1 Types of cut 2.1.1 Lock cut 3 Notable cuts Toggle Notable cuts subsection 3.1 Canal 3.2 Rail 3.2.1 Asia 3.2.2 Americas 3.2.3 Australia 3.2.4 Europe 3.3 Road 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Cut (earthworks) 9 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Français 日本語 Română Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Location where earth is removed to make way for a road, railway, or canal Road cutting In civil engineering , a cut or cutting is where soil or rock from a relative rise is removed.

Cuts are typically used in road , rail , and canal construction to reduce a route's length and grade .

Cut and fill construction uses the spoils from cuts to fill in defiles to create straight routes at steady grades cost-effectively.

Cuts are used as alternatives to indirect routes, embankments , or viaducts . They also have the advantage of comparatively lower noise pollution than elevated or at-grade solutions.

In river and smaller watercourse management , both terms are used likewise, the short-cutting of one or more meanders , to speed its flow.  Greater and recent examples are often formally suffixed Navigation (more flow-controlled) or a new name of river, whether or not a navigation, such as the Jubilee River which is a navigation only in part and only for canoes and kayaks.  Finally, in the context of lowlands, a proper noun Drain, fresh water Sewer, dyke or otherwise called cutoff (especially in the Mississippi River Delta ) often equally acts as land drainage for a very low gradient, tidal estuary or for a flood-prone formerly extensive marshland.

History [ edit ] Talerddig cutting through the granite Cambrian Mountains , Wales in 2001. Created as part of the Newtown and Machynlleth Railway , with a depth of 120 feet (37 m), it was the deepest cutting in the world at the time of its opening in the early 1860s.  The original nearly-vertical sides have since been trimmed back.

The term cutting appears in the 19th century literature to designate rock cuts developed to moderate grades of railway lines.

[ 1 ] Railway Age's Comprehensive Railroad Dictionary defines a cut as "a passage cut for the roadway through an obstacle of rock or dirt." [ 2 ] Creation [ edit ] Open-cut station of the New York City Subway Cuts can be created by multiple passes of a shovel , grader , scraper or excavator , or by blasting .

[ 3 ] One unusual means of creating a cut is to remove the roof of a tunnel through daylighting . Material removed from cuts is ideally balanced by material needed for fills along the same route, but this is not always the case when cut material is unsuitable for use as fill.

The word is also used in the same sense in mining, in particular open-pit mining . The use of cuttings often provides byproducts as a form of mineral extraction , commonly sand, clay or gravel; the cost of building drains, reinforcing banks against landslide and a high water table are factors which commonly limit its use in certain areas.

Types of cut [ edit ] There are at least two types of cut, sidehill cut and through cut . The former permits passage of a transportation route alongside of, or around a hill, where the slope is transverse to the roadway or the railway. A sidehill cut can be formed by means of sidecasting, i.e.,  cutting on the high side balanced by moving the material to build up the low side to achieve a flat surface for the route. In contrast, through cuts, where the adjacent grade is higher on both sides of the route, require removal of material from the area since it cannot be dumped alongside the route.

[ 4 ] A ledge is a cut in the side of a cliff well above the bottom of a gorge .

Lock cut [ edit ] A lock cut on the River Thames at Bray Lock , Berkshire . The tall wooden poles are designed for boats to tie on to while awaiting entry into the lock.

A lock cut is a section of a river or other inland waterway immediately upstream and downstream of a lock which has been modified to provide locations for boats to moor while waiting for the lock gates to open or to allow people to board or alight vessels.

Notable cuts [ edit ] Canal [ edit ] Culebra Cut (Gaillard Cut) on the Panama Canal Dawesville Cut Corinth Canal Rail [ edit ] Asia [ edit ] Hellfire Pass , Thailand Americas [ edit ] Bergen Hill Cut and Bergen Arches , New Jersey Duffy's Cut , Pennsylvania Australia [ edit ] Big Hill Cutting, New South Wales Windmill Hill Cutting , Western Australia Europe [ edit ] Archaeological site of Atapuerca , Spain Excavation of Olive Mount cutting , Liverpool. Watercolour by T. T.Bury (1833) The cutting was 20 ft (6.1 m) wide and 70 ft (21.3 m) deep. Construction required the removal of 480,000 cubic yards (370,000 m 3 ) of sandstone.

Olive Mount cutting , Liverpool, England Talerddig cutting , Wales Road [ edit ] New Jersey Route 495 through Union City, New Jersey Pikeville Cut-Through on U.S. Route 23 in Kentucky Sideling Hill Cut on I-68 See also [ edit ] Cut-and-cover Dashrath Manjhi Kamakura's Seven Entrances Embankment (transportation) Flying arch , use of a dummy arch bridge to stabilise cutting walls against landslip (landslide) Trench References [ edit ] ^ Alexander Smith (1875) A new history of Aberdeenshire ^ Robert G. Lewis et al., eds., Railway Age's Comprehensive Railroad Dictionary (Omaha, Neb.: Simmons-Boardman Books, 1984), p. 48. That reference does not include a definition for the corresponding term "fill." ^ Herbert L. Nichols, Jr., and David A. Day, P.E., Moving the Earth: The Workbook of Excavation, 5th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005), pp. 8.16 et seq.

^ Nichols and Day, Moving the Earth, p. 8.16.

v t e Geotechnical engineering Offshore geotechnical engineering Investigation and instrumentation Field ( in situ ) Core drill Cone penetration test Geo-electrical sounding Permeability test Load test Static Dynamic Statnamic Pore pressure measurement Piezometer Well Ram sounding Rock control drilling Rotary-pressure sounding Rotary weight sounding Sample series Screw plate test Deformation monitoring Inclinometer Settlement recordings Shear vane test Simple sounding Standard penetration test Total sounding Trial pit Visible bedrock Nuclear densometer test Exploration geophysics Crosshole sonic logging Pile integrity test Wave equation analysis Laboratory testing Soil classification Atterberg limits California bearing ratio Direct shear test Hydrometer Proctor compaction test R-value Sieve analysis Triaxial shear test Oedometer test Hydraulic conductivity tests Water content tests Soil Types Clay Silt Sand Gravel Peat Loam Loess Properties Hydraulic conductivity Water content Void ratio Bulk density Thixotropy Reynolds' dilatancy Angle of repose Friction angle Cohesion Porosity Permeability Specific storage Shear strength Sensitivity Structures ( Interaction ) Natural features Topography Vegetation Terrain Topsoil Water table Bedrock Subgrade Subsoil Earthworks Shoring structures Retaining walls Gabion Ground freezing Mechanically stabilized earth Pressure grouting Slurry wall Soil nailing Tieback Land development Landfill Excavation Trench Embankment Cut Causeway Terracing Cut-and-cover Cut and fill Fill dirt Grading Land reclamation Track bed Erosion control Earth structure Expanded clay aggregate Crushed stone Geosynthetics Geotextile Geomembrane Geosynthetic clay liner Cellular confinement Infiltration Foundations Shallow Deep Mechanics Forces Effective stress Pore water pressure Lateral earth pressure Overburden pressure Preconsolidation pressure Phenomena/ problems Permafrost Frost heaving Consolidation Compaction Earthquake Response spectrum Seismic hazard Shear wave Landslide analysis Stability analysis Mitigation Classification Sliding criterion Slab stabilisation Bearing capacity * Stress distribution in soil Numerical analysis software SEEP2D STABL SVFlux SVSlope UTEXAS Plaxis Related fields Geology Geochemistry Petrology Earthquake engineering Geomorphology Soil science Hydrology Hydrogeology Biogeography Earth materials Archaeology Agricultural science Agrology Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cuttings (transport infrastructure) .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cut_(earthworks)&oldid=1306213918 " Categories : Cuts (earthmoving) Construction Rail infrastructure Road cuttings Building engineering Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 15:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cut (earthworks) 9 languages Add topic

