Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Research and development Toggle Research and development subsection 1.1 Education 1.2 Sub-disciplines 1.2.1 Audio signal processing 1.2.2 Architectural acoustics 1.2.3 Electroacoustics 1.2.4 Musical acoustics 1.2.5 Psychoacoustics 1.2.6 Speech 2 Practitioner Toggle Practitioner subsection 2.1 Education and training 2.2 Role of women 2.3 Sub-disciplines 3 Equipment 4 Notable audio engineers Toggle Notable audio engineers subsection 4.1 Recording 4.2 Mastering 4.3 Live sound 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Audio engineer 41 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Кыргызча Magyar Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska తెలుగు Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Sound engineer ) Engineer involved in the recording, reproduction, or reinforcement of sound An audio engineer with audio console at a recording session at the Danish Broadcasting Corporation An audio engineer (also known as a sound engineer or recording engineer ) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] helps to produce a recording or a live performance , balancing and adjusting sound sources using equalization , dynamics processing and audio effects , mixing , reproduction, and reinforcement of sound. Audio engineers work on the "technical aspect of recording—the placing of microphones , pre-amp knobs, the setting of levels. The physical recording of any project is done by an engineer…" [ 3 ] Sound engineering is increasingly viewed as a creative profession and art form, where musical instruments and technology are used to produce sound for film, radio, television, music and video games.

[ 4 ] Audio engineers also set up, sound check, and do live sound mixing using a mixing console and a sound reinforcement system for music concerts, theatre, sports games, and corporate events.

Alternatively, audio engineer can refer to a scientist or professional engineer who holds an engineering degree and designs, develops, and builds audio or musical technology working under terms such as electronic/electrical engineering or (musical) signal processing .

[ 5 ] Research and development [ edit ] Research and development audio engineers invent new technologies, audio software, equipment, and techniques to enhance the process and art of audio engineering.

[ 6 ] They might design acoustical simulations of rooms, shape algorithms for audio signal processing , specify the requirements for public address systems, carry out research on audible sound for video game console manufacturers, and other advanced fields of audio engineering. They might also be referred to as acoustic engineers.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Education [ edit ] See also: Category:Audio engineering schools Audio engineers working in research and development may come from backgrounds such as acoustics , computer science , broadcast engineering , physics , acoustical engineering , electrical engineering , and electronics . Audio engineering courses at university or college fall into two rough categories: (i) training in the creative use of audio as a sound engineer, and (ii) training in science or engineering topics, which then allows students to apply these concepts while pursuing a career developing audio technologies. Audio training courses provide knowledge of technologies and their application to recording studios and sound reinforcement systems , but do not have sufficient mathematical and scientific content to allow someone to obtain employment in research and development in the audio and acoustic industry.

[ 9 ] Notable audio engineer Roger Nichols using a vintage Neve recording console Audio engineers in research and development usually possess a bachelor's degree , master's degree or higher qualification in acoustics, physics, computer science or another engineering discipline. They might work in acoustic consultancy, specializing in architectural acoustics .

[ 10 ] Alternatively they might work in audio companies (e.g.

headphone manufacturer), or other industries that need audio expertise (e.g., automobile manufacturer), or carry out research in a university. Some positions, such as faculty (academic staff) require a Doctor of Philosophy . In Germany a Toningenieur is an audio engineer who designs, builds and repairs audio systems.

[ citation needed ] Sub-disciplines [ edit ] The listed subdisciplines are based on PACS ( Physics and Astronomy Classification Scheme ) coding used by the Acoustical Society of America with some revision.

[ 11 ] Audio signal processing [ edit ] Audio engineers develop audio signal processing algorithms to allow the electronic manipulation of audio signals. These can be processed at the heart of much audio production such as reverberation , Auto-Tune or perceptual coding (e.g.

MP3 or Opus ). Alternatively, the algorithms might perform echo cancellation , or identify and categorize audio content through music information retrieval or acoustic fingerprint .

[ 12 ] Architectural acoustics [ edit ] Acoustic diffusing mushrooms hanging from the roof of the Royal Albert Hall Architectural acoustics is the science and engineering of achieving a good sound within a room.

[ 13 ] For audio engineers, architectural acoustics can be about achieving good speech intelligibility in a stadium or enhancing the quality of music in a theatre.

[ 14 ] Architectural Acoustic design is usually done by acoustic consultants.

[ 10 ] Electroacoustics [ edit ] See also: Sound reinforcement system The Pyramid Stage Electroacoustics is concerned with the design of headphones, microphones, loudspeakers, sound reproduction systems and recording technologies.

[ 8 ] Examples of electroacoustic design include portable electronic devices (e.g.

mobile phones , portable media players , and tablet computers ), sound systems in architectural acoustics, surround sound and wave field synthesis in movie theater and vehicle audio .

Musical acoustics [ edit ] Musical acoustics is concerned with researching and describing the science of music. In audio engineering, this includes the design of electronic instruments such as synthesizers ; the human voice (the physics and neurophysiology of singing ); physical modeling of musical instruments; room acoustics of concert venues; music information retrieval ; music therapy , and the perception and cognition of music .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Psychoacoustics [ edit ] Psychoacoustics is the scientific study of how humans respond to what they hear. At the heart of audio engineering are listeners who are the final arbitrator as to whether an audio design is successful, such as whether a binaural recording sounds immersive.

[ 12 ] Speech [ edit ] The production, computer processing and perception of speech is an important part of audio engineering. Ensuring speech is transmitted intelligibly, efficiently and with high quality; in rooms, through public address systems and through mobile telephone systems are important areas of study.

[ 17 ] Practitioner [ edit ] Live sound mixing At the front of house position, mixing sound for a band A variety of terms are used to describe audio engineers who install or operate sound recording , sound reinforcement , or sound broadcasting equipment, including large and small format consoles . Terms such as audio technician , sound technician , audio engineer , audio technologist , recording engineer , sound mixer , mixing engineer and sound engineer can be ambiguous; depending on the context they may be synonymous, or they may refer to different roles in audio production. Such terms can refer to a person working in sound and music production; for instance, a sound engineer or recording engineer is commonly listed in the credits of commercial music recordings (as well as in other productions that include sound, such as movies). These titles can also refer to technicians who maintain professional audio equipment. Certain jurisdictions specifically prohibit the use of the title engineer to any individual not a registered member of a professional engineering licensing body .

In the recording studio environment, a sound engineer records, edits, manipulates, mixes, or masters sound by technical means to realize the creative vision of the artist and record producer .  While usually associated with music production, an audio engineer deals with sound for a wide range of applications, including post-production for video and film , live sound reinforcement, advertising , multimedia , and broadcasting. In larger productions, an audio engineer is responsible for the technical aspects of a sound recording or other audio production, and works together with a record producer or director, although the engineer's role may also be integrated with that of the producer. In smaller productions and studios the sound engineer and producer are often the same person.

In typical sound reinforcement applications, audio engineers often assume the role of producer, making artistic and technical decisions, and sometimes even scheduling and budget decisions.

[ 18 ] Education and training [ edit ] See also: Category:Audio engineering schools Audio engineers come from backgrounds or postsecondary training in fields such as audio, fine arts , broadcasting, music, or electrical engineering. Training in audio engineering and sound recording is offered by colleges and universities. Some audio engineers are autodidacts with no formal training, but who have attained professional skills in audio through extensive on-the-job experience.

Audio engineers must have extensive knowledge of audio engineering principles and techniques. For instance, they must understand how audio signals travel, which equipment to use and when, how to mic different instruments and amplifiers, which microphones to use and how to position them to get the best quality recordings. In addition to technical knowledge, an audio engineer must have the ability to problem-solve quickly. The best audio engineers also have a high degree of creativity that allows them to stand out amongst their peers. In the music realm, an audio engineer must also understand the types of sounds and tones that are expected in musical ensembles across different genres— rock and pop music , for example. This knowledge of musical style is typically learned from years of experience listening to and mixing music in recording or live sound contexts. For education and training, there are audio engineering schools all over the world.

Role of women [ edit ] According to Women's Audio Mission (WAM), a nonprofit organization based in San Francisco dedicated to the advancement of women in music production and the recording arts, less than 5% of the people working in the field of sound and media are women.

[ 19 ] "Only three women have ever been nominated for best producer at the Brits or the Grammys " and none won either award.

[ 20 ] According to Susan Rogers , audio engineer and professor at Berklee College of Music , women interested in becoming an audio engineer face "a boys' club, or a guild mentality".

[ 20 ] The UK "Music Producers' Guild says less than 4% of its members are women" and at the Liverpool Institute of Performing Arts, "only 6% of the students enrolled on its sound technology course are female." [ 20 ] Women's Audio Mission was started in 2003 to address the lack of women in professional audio by training over 6,000 women and girls in the recording arts and is the only professional recording studio built and run by women.

[ 21 ] Notable recording projects include the Grammy Award-winning Kronos Quartet , Angelique Kidjo (2014 Grammy winner), author Salman Rushdie , the Academy Award-nominated soundtrack to "Dirty Wars", [ 22 ] Van-Ahn Vo (NPR's top 50 albums of 2013), Grammy-nominated St. Lawrence Quartet , and world music artists Tanya Tagaq and Wu Man .

[ citation needed ] There certainly are efforts to chronicle women's role and history in audio. Leslie Gaston-Bird wrote Women in Audio, [ 23 ] which includes 100 profiles of women in audio through history. Sound Girls is an organization focused on the next generation of women in audio, but also has been building up resources and directories of women in audio.

[ 24 ] Women in Sound is another organization that has been working to highlight women and nonbinary people in all areas of live and recorded sound through an online zine and podcast featuring interviews of current audio engineers and producers.

One of the first women to produce, engineer, arrange and promote music on her own rock and roll music label was Cordell Jackson (1923–2004).

Trina Shoemaker is a mixer, record producer and sound engineer who became the first woman to win the Grammy Award for Best Engineered Album in 1998 for her work on The Globe Sessions .

[ 25 ] Gail Davies was the first female producer in country music , delivering a string of Top 10 hits in the 1970s and 1980s including " Someone Is Looking for Someone Like You ", " Blue Heartache " and " I'll Be There (If You Ever Want Me) ".

[ 26 ] When she moved to Nashville in 1976, men "didn't want to work for a woman" and she was told women in the city were "still barefoot, pregnant and [singing] in the vocal booth." [ 26 ] When Jonell Polansky arrived in Nashville in 1994, with a degree in electrical engineering and recording experience in the Bay Area, she was told "You're a woman, and we already had one"—a reference to Wendy Waldman .

[ 26 ] KK Proffitt, a studio "owner and chief engineer", states that men in Nashville do not want to have women in the recording booth. At a meeting of the Audio Engineering Society , Proffitt was told to "shut up" by a male producer when she raised the issue of updating studio recording technologies.

[ 26 ] Proffitt said she "finds sexism rampant in the industry".

[ 26 ] Other notable women include: Sylvia Robinson , early hip hop music producer Susan Rogers , engineer for Purple Rain Genya Ravan , producer The Dead Boys ' Young, Loud and Snotty ; Delia Derbyshire , British electronics pioneer Lari White , a co-producer on Toby Keith 's White Trash With Money Leslie Ann Jones , recording engineer Sylvia Massy , engineer and producer for Tool, System of a Down, and Johnny Cash Ethel Gabriel , producer and record executive RCA Victor Sub-disciplines [ edit ] There are four distinct steps to the commercial production of a recording: recording, editing, mixing, and mastering. Typically, each is performed by a sound engineer who specializes only in that part of the production.

Studio engineer – an engineer working within a studio facility, either with a producer or independently.

Recording engineer – the engineer who records sound.

Assistant engineer – often employed in larger studios, allowing them to train to become full-time engineers.  They often assist full-time engineers with microphone setups, session breakdowns and in some cases, rough mixes.

[ 18 ] Mixing engineer –  a person who creates mixes of multi-track recordings. It is common to record a commercial record at one studio and have it mixed by different engineers in other studios.

Mastering engineer – the person who masters the final mixed stereo tracks (or sometimes a series of audio stems, which consists in a mix of the main sections) that the mix engineer produces. The mastering engineer makes any final adjustments to the overall sound of the record in the final step before commercial duplication. Mastering engineers use principles of equalization, compression and limiting to fine-tune the sound timbre and dynamics and to achieve a louder recording.

Sound designer – broadly an artist who produces soundtracks or sound effects content for media.

Live sound engineer Front of House (FOH) engineer, or A1.

[ 27 ] – a person dealing with live sound reinforcement . This usually includes planning and installation of loudspeakers, cabling and equipment and mixing sound during the show. This may or may not include running the foldback sound .  A live/sound reinforcement engineer hears source material and tries to correlate that sonic experience with system performance.

[ 28 ] Wireless microphone engineer, or A2. This position is responsible for wireless microphones during a theatre production, a sports event or a corporate event.

Foldback or Monitor engineer – a person running foldback sound during a live event. The term foldback comes from the old practice of folding back audio signals from the front of house (FOH) mixing console to the stage so musicians can hear themselves while performing. Monitor engineers usually have a separate audio system from the FOH engineer and manipulate audio signals independently from what the audience hears so they can satisfy the requirements of each performer on stage. In-ear systems, digital and analog mixing consoles, and a variety of speaker enclosures are typically used by monitor engineers. In addition, most monitor engineers must be familiar with wireless or RF (radio-frequency) equipment and often must communicate personally with the artist(s) during each performance.

Systems engineer – responsible for the design setup of modern PA systems, which are often very complex. A systems engineer is usually also referred to as a crew chief on tour and is responsible for the performance and day-to-day job requirements of the audio crew as a whole along with the FOH audio system. This is a sound-only position concerned with implementation, not to be confused with the interdisciplinary field of system engineering , which typically requires a college degree.

Re-recording mixer – a person in post-production who mixes audio tracks for feature films or television programs .

Equipment [ edit ] Correcting a room's frequency response An audio engineer is proficient with different types of recording media, such as analog tape, digital multi-track recorders and workstations, plug-ins and computer knowledge. With the advent of the digital age, it is increasingly important for the audio engineer to understand software and hardware integration, from synchronization to analog to digital transfers. In their daily work, audio engineers use many tools, including: Tape machines Analog-to-digital converters Digital-to-analog converters Digital audio workstations (DAWs) Audio plug-ins Dynamic range compressors Audio data compressors Equalization (audio) Music sequencers Signal processors Headphones Microphones Preamplifiers Mixing consoles Amplifiers Loudspeakers Notable audio engineers [ edit ] Recording [ edit ] List Steve Albini Larry Alexander Jim Anderson Dave Aron Sylvia Massy Michael J. Bishop Tony Bongiovi Bill Bottrell David Bottrill Helmut Burk Iain Burgess Chuck Britz Patrick Brown Terry Brown John Burns Ian Caple Dru Castro Fred Catero Roy Cicala Bob Clearmountain John Congleton Mike Crossey Terry Date Nick Davis Charles De Schutter Neil Dorfsman Jack Douglas Tom Dowd Mark "Flood" Ellis Geoff Emerick Jack Endino Shawn Everett Bob Ezrin James Farber David R. Ferguson Steve Fisk Dave Fridmann Humberto Gatica Rudy Van Gelder Nigel Godrich Doug Grean James Guthrie Mick Guzauski Roy Halee Wally Heider David Hentschel Bones Howe Andrew Jackson Andy Johns Glyn Johns Leslie Ann Jones Toshi Kasai Neil Kernon Jacquire King Eddie Kramer Greg Ladanyi Maxime Le Guil Scott Litt James Lock Chris Lord-Alge Tom Lord-Alge Malinda Lowe Reinhold Mack Mike Marciano George Martin Tony Maserati George Massenburg Mario J. McNulty Joe Meek Yuri Morozov Alan Moulder Jack Mullin Evgeny Murzin Roger Nichols Clif Norrell Alex Tumay Paul Northfield Gary Paczosa Hugh Padgham Robert Parker Alan Parsons Dave Pensado Lynn Peterzell Tony Platt Malcolm Pollack Resul Pookutty Bill Porter Bill Putnam Bob Rock Phil Ramone Emitt Rhodes Bruce Robb (producer) Susan Rogers Scott Salem Elliot Scheiner Bill "Bear" Scheniman Andrew Scheps [ 29 ] Al Schmitt Tom Scholz Jim Scott Ken Scott Da-Hong Seetoo Eberhard Sengpiel Mike Shipley Norman Smith H. Sridhar Chris Steinmetz Mike Stone Stephen Street Bruce Swedien Bill Szymczyk Mike Terry Wharton Tiers Devin Townsend Ken Townshend Phil Thornalley John Travis Michael B. Tretow Derek Varnals Robert Venable Tony Visconti Andy Wallace Dan Wallin Kenneth Wilkinson Jonathan Wilson [ 30 ] Mastering [ edit ] List Tom Coyne Mike Dean Kevin Gray Bernie Grundman Steve Hoffman Ted Jensen Dale Becker Bob Katz Bob Ludwig Rodney Mills George Peckham Bob Weston Gavin Lurssen Mike Bozzi Live sound [ edit ] List Dan Healy "Big Mick" Hughes Bruce Jackson Bill Porter Dave Rat Owsley Stanley Charles De Schutter See also [ edit ] Record production portal Category:Audio engineers Category:Acoustical engineers Institute of Professional Sound Professional Lighting and Sound Association Audio restoration Audiography History of sound recording Loudness Sound follower Tape op References [ edit ] ^ "Which Type Of Sound Engineer Are You Destined To Be?" .

www.sheffieldav.com . Retrieved 2019-02-05 .

^ The difference between a producer and an audio engineer , 10 October 2013, archived from the original on 2021-12-15 , retrieved 2019-12-08 ^ "Interview with Phil Ek" .

HitQuarters . 25 May 2009. Archived from the original on 19 July 2011 . Retrieved Sep 3, 2010 .

^ Rosenberg McKay, Dawn.

"Audio Engineer Job Description: Salary, Skills, & More" .

About.com Careers .

Archived from the original on 23 July 2018 . Retrieved 8 Dec 2019 .

^ Smith, S. E.

"What Is Audio Engineering?" .

wiseGeek .

Archived from the original on 8 January 2010 . Retrieved 17 May 2013 .

^ Daley, Dan, "The Engineers Who Changed Recording: Fathers Of Invention" , Sound on Sound magazine, October 2004 ^ University of Salford.

"Graduate Jobs in Acoustics" . Archived from the original on 6 March 2016 . Retrieved 13 May 2013 .

^ a b Acoustical Society of America.

"Acoustics and You" . Archived from the original on 2017-03-08 . Retrieved 13 May 2013 .

^ University of Salford, Acoustics.

"Physics and music technology degrees" . Archived from the original on 8 August 2020 . Retrieved 17 May 2013 .

^ a b National Careers Service.

"Job profiles: Acoustics consultant" . Retrieved 13 May 2013 .

^ Acoustical Society of America.

"PACS 2010 Regular Edition—Acoustics Appendix" . Archived from the original on 2013-05-14 . Retrieved 22 May 2013 .

^ a b Pohlmann, Ken (2010).

Principles of Digital Audio, Sixth Edition . McGraw Hill Professional. p. 336.

ISBN 978-0-07-166347-2 .

^ Morfey, Christopher (2001).

Dictionary of Acoustics . Academic Press. p. 32.

^ Templeton, Duncan (1993).

Acoustics in the Built Environment: Advice for the Design Team . Architectural Press.

ISBN 978-0-7506-0538-0 .

^ Technical Committee on Musical Acoustics (TCMU) of the Acoustical Society of America (ASA).

"ASA TCMU Home Page" . Archived from the original on 2001-06-13 . Retrieved 22 May 2013 .

^ Bader, Rolf (2018). "Musical Acoustics and Signal Processing". In Bader, Rolf (ed.).

Springer Handbook of Systematic Musicology . Springer Handbooks. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer. pp.

25– 28.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-662-55004-5 .

ISBN 978-3-662-55004-5 .

^ Speech Communication Technical Committee.

"Speech Communication" . Acoustical Society of America. Archived from the original on 4 June 2013 . Retrieved 22 May 2013 .

^ a b Huber, D.M. (1995).

Modern Recording Techniques . (5th ed.). Burlington, MA: Focal Press ^ Ncube, Rosina (September 2013).

"Sounding Off: Why So Few Women In Audio?" .

Sound on Sound .

^ a b c Savage, Mark (2012-08-29).

"Why are female record producers so rare?" .

BBC News .

^ "Gale - User Identification Form" .

Go.galegroup.com . Retrieved 3 October 2018 .

^ "Womens Audio Mission - GuideStar Profile" .

Guidestar.org . Retrieved 2017-03-02 .

^ Mathew, Marlene; Grossman, Jennifer; Andreopoulou, Areti (2016-09-20).

"Women in Audio: Contributions and Challenges in Music Technology and Production" . Audio Engineering Society.

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ "A More Inclusive Industry" .

SoundGirls.org . Retrieved 2022-06-27 .

^ Dunbar, Julie C. (2010).

Women, Music, Culture: An Introduction . Taylor & Francis. p. 304.

ISBN 978-0415875622 .

^ a b c d e Haruch, Steve.

"Women account for less than 5 percent of producers and engineers — but maybe not for long - Cover Story - Nashville Scene" .

Nashville Scene .

^ "Front of House (FOH) Engineer" , Get in Media Entertainment Careers ^ Davis, G., Jones R. (1990).

Yamaha Sound Reinforcement Handbook . (2nd ed.) Milwaukee, WI: Hal Leonard Corp.

^ "Andrew Scheps" .

McDonough Management . Retrieved 27 October 2015 .

^ "Jonathan Wilson: Fanfare Reviving The West Coast Sound" .

Sound On Sound . Retrieved 27 October 2015 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Audio engineers .

Audio Engineering Society Audio engineering formulas and calculators Broadcast and Sound Engineering Technicians at the US Department of Labor Recording engineer video interviews A free collection of online audio tools for audio engineers Audio Engineering online course Archived 2008-11-21 at the Wayback Machine under Creative Commons Licence Audio White Papers, Articles and Books AES Pro Audio Reference Authority control databases International FAST National Germany 2 United States France BnF data Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX v t e Engineering History Outline List of engineering branches Specialties and interdisciplinarity Civil Architectural Coastal Construction Earthquake Ecological Environmental Sanitary Geological Geotechnical Hydraulic Mining Municipal/urban Offshore River Structural Transportation Traffic Railway Mechanical Acoustic Aerospace Automotive Biomechanical Energy Manufacturing Marine Naval architecture Railway Sports Thermal Tribology Electrical Broadcast outline Control Electromechanics Electronics Microwaves Optical Power Radio-frequency Signal processing Telecommunications Chemical Biochemical/bioprocess Biological Bioresource Genetic Tissue Chemical reaction Electrochemical Food Molecular Paper Petroleum Process Reaction Materials Biomaterial Ceramics Corrosion Metallurgy Molecular Nanotechnology Polymers Semiconductors Surfaces Computer AI Computer Cybersecurity Data Networks Robotics Software Engineering education Bachelor of Engineering Bachelor of Science Master's degree Doctorate Graduate certificate Engineer's degree Licensed engineer Related topics Engineer Glossaries Engineering A–L M–Z Aerospace engineering Civil engineering Electrical and electronics engineering Mechanical engineering Structural engineering Other Agricultural Audio Automation Biomedical Bioinformatics Clinical Health technology Pharmaceutical Rehabilitation Building services MEP Design Explosives Facilities Fire Forensic Climate Geomatics Graphics Industrial Information Instrumentation Instrumentation and control Logistics Management Mathematics Mechatronics Military Nuclear Ontology Packaging Physics Privacy Safety Security Survey Sustainability Systems Textile Category Commons Wikiproject Portal v t e Music industry Major companies and organizations Representatives AMPROFON ARIA BVMI BPI Music Canada FIMI IFPI (worldwide) PMB PROMUSICAE RIAA SNEP Publishers BMG Rights Management Sony Music Publishing Universal Music Publishing Group Warner Chappell Music Disney Music Publishing Record labels Major : Sony Universal Warner Independent : Concord Independent UK record labels AAMG Retailers Amazon Digital music stores ( iTunes Store ) Fnac HMV Kaspien Virgin Megastores Live music CTS Eventim Live Nation LiveStyle Ticketmaster Major genres Blues Country Easy listening Electronic Experimental Folk Gospel Hip hop Jazz Latin Metal New Age Pop Reggae Rhythm and blues Rock World Sectors and roles Album cover design Artists and repertoire (A&R) Disc jockey Distribution Entertainment law Music education Music executive Music and fashion Music journalism Music publisher Music store Music venue Musical instruments Professional audio store Promotion Radio promotion Record label Record shop Road crew Talent manager Tour promoter Production Arrangement Songwriter Composer Lyricist Conductor Disc jockey Hip hop producer Horn section Record producer Rhythm section Orchestrator Session musician Backup singer Ghost singer Vocal coach Ghostwriter Sound engineer Release formats Single ( Extended play (EP) , 12" single , Cassette single , CD single , Maxi single ) Album Double album , Mixtape , Surprise album Music video Visual album Promotional recording Phonograph record Eight-track Compact cassette CD DVD Airplay Music download Music streaming service Live shows Concert Concert tour Concert residency Music festival Music competition Charts ARIA Charts Billboard Hot 100 Billboard Argentina Hot 100 Billboard Brasil Hot 100 Canadian Hot 100 Circle Chart G-Music chart Irish Singles Chart Italian singles chart GfK Entertainment charts Entertainment Monitoring Africa Oricon charts New Zealand singles chart Rolling Stone Top 100 Sino Chart TME Physical Album Sales Chart SNEP singles chart Sverigetopplistan UK singles chart Publications Billboard HitQuarters Hot Press Kerrang!

Mojo Musica e dischi NME Q Rolling Stone Smash Hits Top of the Pops Television Channels Channel V CMT Fuse Mnet MTV MTV2 Tr3s MuchMusic The Music Factory Viva VH1 The Country Network Series Idol franchise Popstars Star Academy The Four The Voice The X Factor Rising Star Achievements Music award Best-selling music artists In: Brazil Finland Germany Japan United Kingdom (Females) United States Genre: Gospel Latin Nationality: Belgian Brazilian British Italian Swedish Best-selling albums by country Latin Best-selling singles by country Highest-paid musicians Highest-grossing live music artists Highest-grossing concert tours by women Latin Highest-grossing benefit concerts Most-attended concert tours Most-attended concerts Global Recording Artist of the Year Wealthiest musical artists Other Album era Album-equivalent unit A-side and B-side Backmasking Bootleg recording Christian music industry Environmental impact Global Release Day Hidden track Largest music deals Largest recorded music markets Most expensive albums Most valuable records Music certification Parental Advisory Record sales White label Record production portal Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐6np56
Cached time: 20250812014206
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.676 seconds
Real time usage: 0.850 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3397/1000000
Revision size: 33392/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 142755/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3226/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 123201/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.389/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6898589/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  659.998      1 -total
 38.40%  253.467      1 Template:Reflist
 24.31%  160.418     17 Template:Cite_web
 12.70%   83.845      1 Template:Authority_control
 10.16%   67.069      1 Template:Short_description
  8.68%   57.302      6 Template:Navbox
  8.59%   56.716      1 Template:Commons_category
  8.23%   54.292      1 Template:Sister_project
  7.98%   52.649      1 Template:Side_box
  6.30%   41.569      2 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:21189305:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812014206 and revision id 1300124803. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Audio_engineer&oldid=1300124803 " Categories : Audio electronics Audio engineering Broadcasting occupations Filmmaking occupations Mass media occupations Occupations in music Audio engineers Music production Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2015 Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 11:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Audio engineer 41 languages Add topic

