Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Modern planning 2 Appeals 3 Use classes 4 Development management Toggle Development management subsection 4.1 Online access 5 Elements of the modern system 6 Main legislation 7 Criticism 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Town and country planning in the United Kingdom Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Urban planning in the United Kingdom Aerial view of Castle Bromwich showing different land uses Town and country planning in the United Kingdom is the part of UK land law which concerns land-use planning . Its goal is to ensure sustainable economic development and a better environment. Each country of the United Kingdom has its own planning system that is responsible for town and country planning, which outside of England is devolved to the Northern Ireland Assembly , the Scottish Parliament and the Senedd .

In England and Wales, the principal piece of legislation is the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 ; its Scottish counterpart is the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997 . The system is under the overall control of the Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government .

History [ edit ] Notable figures from UK planning history. Clockwise from upper left: Ebenezer Howard , Raymond Unwin , William Morrison , Patrick Abercrombie .

The term 'town planning' first appeared in 1906 and was first used in British legislation in 1909.

[ 1 ] : 1 The roots of the UK town and country planning system as it emerged in the immediate post-war years lay in concerns developed over the previous half century in response to industrialisation and urbanisation . The particular concerns were pollution , urban sprawl , and ribbon development . These concerns were expressed through the work of thinkers such as Ebenezer Howard and the philanthropic actions of industrialists such as the Lever Brothers and the Cadbury family , and architects such as Raymond Unwin , PRIBA, and Patrick Abercrombie .

The Housing, Town Planning, etc. Act 1909 , the Housing, Town Planning, &c. Act 1919 , the Town Planning Act 1925 and the Town and Country Planning Act 1932 were initial moves toward modern urban planning legislation.

By the outbreak of Second World War , thinking was sufficiently advanced that the Ministry of Town and Country Planning was established on 7 February 1943 under William Morrison , the former Postmaster-General .

[ 2 ] During the war, a series of royal commissions looked into specific problems in urban planning and development control. These included: The Barlow Commission (1940) into the distribution of industrial population The Scott Committee into rural land use (1941) The Uthwatt Committee into compensation and betterment (1942) The Reith Report into New Towns (1947) Also, Patrick Abercrombie developed the Greater London Plan for the reconstruction of London , which envisaged moving 1.5 million people from London to new and expanded towns. These intellectual efforts resulted in the New Towns Act 1946 ( 9 & 10 Geo. 6 . c. 68) and the Town and Country Planning Act 1947 .

Modern planning [ edit ] The 1947 act, in effect, nationalised the right to develop land. It required all proposals, with a few exceptions, to secure planning permission from the local planning authority (LPA), with provision to appeal against refusal. It introduced a development charge to capture the planning gain which arises when permission to develop land is granted. This was abolished by the Town and Country Planning Act 1954 passed under subsequent Conservative government.

[ 3 ] Green belts were added in 1955 via a government circular . Furthermore, the 1947 act introduced a requirement, which still exists, on local authorities to develop forward looking policy documents such as local plans or unitary development plans to outline what kind of development is permitted where, and to mark special areas on Local Plan policies maps. It did not introduce a formal system of zoning as used in the United States . Counties developed structure plans that set broad targets for the wider area. Structure plans were always problematic and were often in the process of being replaced by the time they were formally adopted.

Over the years, the planning system has undergone a number of alterations, which were consolidated in the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (TCPA 1990).

Section 106 substantially re-wrote section 52 from the former act, settling the concept of agreements (known as "planning obligation agreements," or more commonly "Section 106 agreements"), under which the developer is subject to detailed arrangements and restrictions beyond those that a planning condition could impose, or by which they make agreed financial contributions beyond the immediate building works to offset development effects on the local community. This was soon amended to allow a developer to self-impose obligations to preempt objections to planning permission. This prevents the planning authority from blocking a permission by merely failing to negotiate.

Three further acts related to planning are associated with this primary act: The Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 , the Planning (Hazardous Substances) Act 1990 , and the Planning (Consequential Provisions) Act 1990 . These four acts are referred to as the Planning Acts. Almost immediately after Parliament passed these acts, the government had further thoughts on the control of land development, which led to the Planning and Compensation Act 1991 , which made important alterations to many of the provisions of the Planning Acts.

The Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 made substantial changes to the English development plan system. It did away with both structure plans and local plans , in favour of local development frameworks (LDFs), which are made up a number of Local Development Documents (LDDs) and supplementary planning documents (SPDs). The regional spatial strategy (RSS), which is produced by regional assemblies in England , replaced the structure plan as the strategic planning document (containing targets for housing and employment development in each district in a region).

A variation on this approach exists in Wales .

LPAs are also now required to produce local development schemes (LDS) – which outline the work the LDDs/SPDs they intend to produce over a three-year period, and a statement of community involvement (SCI), which outlines how the Council will involve the local community. All LDDs and SPDs also have to be accompanied by a sustainability appraisal (SA) and a strategic environmental assessment (SEA). The SEA was orignally a requirement under European Union laws.

Planning Policy Guidance Notes are also being gradually replaced by Planning Policy Statements .

Minor amendments were allowed to planning permissions, recognising that information provided for planning permission does not provide enough detail for actual construction. Working drawings are required first, and architects often make small changes to accommodate a building's technical requirements. Also, plans might change on site to overcome unforeseen problems. Legality of minor amendments was challenged in 2006, and central government advice to many local authorities was that any variation to a planning permission should require planning approval.

The Localism Act 2011 introduced wide-ranging changes to the planning system in England. The bill introduced legal provision under which local communities (led by parish councils or neighbourhood forums) could develop neighbourhood plans . Similar to development plan documents produced by the LPA, neighbourhood plans have statutory weight, so that they are considered in the determination of planning applications.

Appeals [ edit ] An applicant may appeal against a refusal of planning permission. A neighbour who objects to an application has no right of appeal, but may appeal to the local authority ombudsman if they can make a case of maladministration by the local authority. In such a case the ombudsman has no powers to enforce a retraction of the permission, but it may sanction the local authority.

[ 4 ] Appeals can be made: In England, to the Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government.

In Northern Ireland, to the Planning Appeals Commission .

[ 5 ] In Scotland, to the Scottish Government ; Directorate for Planning & Environmental Appeals or a Local Review Body of the local planning authority .

In Wales, to the Senedd .

In England and Wales the appeal is heard by a planning inspector , while in Scotland this role is filled by a reporter .

[ 6 ] There has often been talk [ by whom?

] of making the inspectors independent of government ministers, as in the Planning Appeals Commission in Northern Ireland.

[ 5 ] Use classes [ edit ] Main articles: Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 and Town and country planning in Wales The requirement to obtain planning permission extends not only to new construction, but also some changes of use of a property. To simplify this the Government from time to time publishes a Use Classes Order. Planning permission is not normally required for a change of use within a Class but change of use to a different Use Class generally requires permission. Separate Orders are made in respect of England, Scotland and Wales.

In all cases the appropriate Class is determined by the 'primary purpose' of the use and a use may have other elements that are different but ‘ordinarily incidental’. For example, a restaurant may have some takeaway sales. The use of some properties is also limited by conditions imposed on the original planning permission.

Use Classes in England were extensively revised on 1 September 2020 (the revisions do not apply to Wales). The new Order introduced a new Class E encompassing most business, retail and similar uses replacing the previous Classes A1, A2, A3 and B1, B2 as well as parts of the old Class D (such as health uses and day nurseries).

[ 7 ] It also introduced a new Class F1 and F2 replacing those uses from the previous Class D1 and D2 that had not been swept up into Class E. Class F2 is unusual in that it separates certain small local shops from Class E. As before, a number of uses are deemed sui generis (in a class of its own) and planning permission is required for any change of use to or from such uses.

Prior to September 2020 the Use Classes for England and Wales were: A1: shops A2: financial and professional services A3: restaurants and cafés A4: drinking establishments [ 8 ] A5: hot food takeaways B1: businesses (offices, light industry) B2: general industrial B8: storage and distribution C1: hotels C2: residential institutions C3: dwellinghouses C4: house in multiple occupation (HMO or HiMO) D1: non-residential institutions (schools, libraries, surgeries) D2: assembly and leisure (cinemas, swimming baths, gymnasiums) Classes A3 to A5 were formed in the 2005 amendment by a split of the previous A3 class 'Food and Drink', though this split was not effected in Wales; jurisdiction over secondary planning legislation being by then a matter for the Assembly .

Development management [ edit ] Main article: Development management in the United Kingdom A key part of planning control is exercised in the UK by preventing any significant development of property without permission by the local authority. In Part III of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 , under section 59 the Secretary of State delegates to public bodies the right to grant planning permission.

Online access [ edit ] Historically, planning applications were submitted in paper form to designated Council offices and displayed for a statutory period at public libraries or offices. In December 1995, the London Borough of Wandsworth created a website that published electronic images of planning application documents. This technology greatly improved access to application-related documents for all participants in the planning process. Within ten years, most planning authorities within the UK followed suit.

[ 9 ] These sites are often known as 'Public Access'. Other access methods now include routing inquiries through a centrally-hosted public or privately hosted website, such as UKPlanning [ 10 ] or the national Planning Portal .

[ 11 ] Elements of the modern system [ edit ] Local planning authority Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 General Permitted Development Order National Planning Policy Framework , replacing the Planning Policy Guidance Notes and Planning Policy Statements Design and access statement Main legislation [ edit ] Town and Country Planning Act 1990 , for England and Wales, [ 12 ] plus the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997 and the Planning etc (Scotland) Act 2006 and the Planning Act (Northern Ireland) 2011 Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 Planning Act 2008 Localism Act 2011 A long list of other unconsolidated Acts and Regulations also affect UK planning. For example, the Localism Act 2011 abolished the Infrastructure Planning Commission for national projects, set up by the Planning Act 2008 and recentralised control in the hands of the Secretary of State.

Criticism [ edit ] The aim of recent reforms to the planning system was to simplify and speed up the production of plans.

[ citation needed ] The financial costs and time delays associated with the new system are significant and the Barker Review of Housing Supply (2004) on the planning system suggested some of the requirements were unnecessary and delaying the delivery of sustainable and social housing, and recommended early revisions to the regulations.

[ 13 ] HM Treasury noted the recommendation to redirect a portion of Section 106 financial contributions as a "planning gain supplement"" for wider community needs and has responded by an act of Parliament that will levy "a tax on the increase in the value of land resulting from the grant of permission for development".

[ 14 ] Planning Green Paper Planning white paper (Scotland): Modernising the planning system The impact of the Localism Act on planning has been criticized, for creating a system which has highly ambiguous policy, failing to deliver on housing need, [ 15 ] and effectively incapacitating local or regional authorities from making long term, strategic plans.

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Landscape planning Regional planning Royal Town Planning Institute Town and Country Planning Association Building regulations in the United Kingdom Planning gain Conservation Area (United Kingdom) References [ edit ] ^ Gordon Cherry (1982).

The Politics of Town Planning .

Longman .

ISBN 0582295408 .

^ "Post-war Policy" .

The Cabinet Papers . Kew, Richmond: The National Archives . Retrieved 28 February 2021 .

^ "Post-war policy" .

^ www.planningportal.gov.uk ^ a b Planning Appeals Commission (Northern Ireland) ^ Scottish Executive Inquiry Reporters Unit ^ 2020 No. 757 Town And Country Planning, England. The Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) (Amendment) (England) Regulations 2020 ^ "Drinking establishment" does not specifically refer to alcoholic drinks ^ Pendleton Survey of web access to planning applications ^ UK Planning access to local authority planning applications ^ Planning Portal UK Government's online planning and building site ^ See also the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 , Planning (Hazardous Substances) Act 1990 , and Planning (Consequential Provisions) Act 1990 ^ Barker Review of Housing Supply – Final Report and Recommendations Archived September 17, 2008, at the Wayback Machine HM Treasury.

Archived here.

^ Planning-gain Supplement (Preparations) Bill 2006–07 Chancellor of the Exchequer, Her Majesty's Treasury ^ Shepherd, Edward; Inch, Andy; Sturzaker, John; Marshall, Tim (1 March 2024).

"Ideology, Statecraft and the 'Double Shuffle' of Conservative Planning Reform in England" .

Town Planning Review (TPR) .

95 (2): 151– 174.

doi : 10.3828/tpr.2023.36 .

ISSN 0041-0020 .

^ Fearn, Gareth (1 August 2024).

"Planning incapacitated: Environmental planning and the political ecology of austerity" .

Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space .

56 (5): 1401– 1419.

Bibcode : 2024EnPlA..56.1401F .

doi : 10.1177/0308518X241238880 .

ISSN 0308-518X .

Further reading [ edit ] Gray, Kevin; Gray, Susan Frances (2008).

Elements of Land Law . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-01-99219-72-8 .

External links [ edit ] Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government (England) Scottish Government – Planning and Building The Planning System - Department for Infrastructure (Northern Ireland) v t e Town and country planning in the United Kingdom Legislation and policy Town and Country Planning Act 1990 General Permitted Development Order Highways Act 1980 Localism Act 2011 National Planning Policy Framework Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 Applications and Appeals Planning permission in the United Kingdom Outline Planning Permission Grampian condition Nationally significant infrastructure project Institutions Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government Planning Inspectorate Local planning authority Royal Town Planning Institute Town and Country Planning Association Local development framework Core Strategy Local plan Neighbourhood forum v t e Urban planning History Theories Index Outline General Urban area City Metropolitan area Suburb Land use Planning Planning and zoning commission Growth management World Urbanism Day Labor market area Major branches General Land-use planning Comprehensive planning (US) History of urban planning Spatial planning (Eur) Redevelopment Urban design Urban green space Urbanism Rural Conservation development Preservation development Rural housing Village design statement (UK) Regional planning Regional Planning Association of America Environmental planning Environmental design Environmental impact assessment Recreation resource planning Sustainable development Transportation planning Transportation forecasting Trip distribution Rational planning model Transit-oriented development Professional transportation planner Urban freight distribution Economic development Community economic development Concepts/ theories Movements Athens Charter Car-free movement City Beautiful movement Dark-sky movement Garden city movement Indigenous planning NIMBY New Urbanism Settlement movement Smart growth Structuralism Transition towns YIMBY Theories Collaborative planning Context theory Ekistics Intelligent urbanism Livable streets Market urbanism Radical planning Urban renewal Cities by type Company town / Monotown Commuter town Ghost town Global city Mining community Pit village Man camp Logging camp Model village Planned community (New town) Intentional community Arcology Urban village Boomtown Concepts Affordable housing Cityscape Cluster development Complete Communities Conservation community Creative city Eminent domain (US) Filtering (housing) Gentrification / Brusselization Infill Healthy cities / Healthy community design LEED-ND Leapfrog development Mixed-use development Permeability Placemaking Planning gain Planning Permission Rural flight Temporary use Third place Tract housing Transferable development rights Urban decay Urban growth boundary Urban sprawl / Peri-urbanisation Urban vitality Urbanization Verticalization / High-rise urbanism Zoning People Theorists/ practitioners Edward Bassett Andrés Duany Clarence Perry Clarence Stein Colin Buchanan Daniel Burnham Donald Appleyard Ebenezer Howard Edmund Bacon Guy Benveniste Ian McHarg James Rouse Konstantinos Doxiadis Kevin A. Lynch Le Corbusier Loretta Lees Peter Calthorpe Patrick Geddes Raymond Unwin Thomas Adams List of urban theorists List of urban planners Critics Elizabeth Farrelly Jane Jacobs James Howard Kunstler Lewis Mumford Randal O'Toole Training Planning education Planning Accreditation Board Real estate education Professional organizations Places Countries Australia China Czech Republic Russia Serbia Singapore United Kingdom Taiwan Cities Barcelona Shanghai Sydney Other Africa Communist countries Nazi Germany Ancient Egypt Related fields Architecture Civil engineering Development economics Environmental social science Geography Land development Landscape architecture Marine spatial planning Public health Public policy Real estate development Social sciences Urban ecology Urban economics Cities portal Category List of planned cities List of planning journals Commons NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐647cb4546b‐cc7g9
Cached time: 20250813215749
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.400 seconds
Real time usage: 0.510 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2040/1000000
Revision size: 19904/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 81074/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2375/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 45628/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.228/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6224294/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  410.435      1 -total
 30.79%  126.360      1 Template:Reflist
 27.87%  114.398      6 Template:Navbox
 19.27%   79.096      1 Template:UK_planning
 18.07%   74.178      2 Template:Cite_book
 12.32%   50.574      1 Template:Short_description
  8.36%   34.296      1 Template:Urban_Planning
  7.85%   32.232      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.03%   28.862      2 Template:Fix
  6.13%   25.147      1 Template:By_whom Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1739889:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250813215749 and revision id 1305747537. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Town_and_country_planning_in_the_United_Kingdom&oldid=1305747537 " Categories : English land law Housing in the United Kingdom Law of the United Kingdom Town and country planning in the United Kingdom Towns in the United Kingdom Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from February 2021 Use dmy dates from February 2021 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2012 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2010 This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 21:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Town and country planning in the United Kingdom Add languages Add topic

