Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early years 2 Professor 3 Cardinal 4 Thomism Toggle Thomism subsection 4.1 Papal collaboration 4.2 Vatican Library 5 Death 6 References Toggle the table of contents Giuseppe Pecci 12 languages Deutsch Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano مصرى Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian Jesuit Thomist theologian You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Italian .

(January 2025) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the Italian article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Italian Wikipedia article at [[:it:Giuseppe Pecci]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|it|Giuseppe Pecci}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

His Eminence Giuseppe Pecci S.J.

Cardinal-Deacon of Sant'Agata dei Goti Photo of Cardinal Pecci in 1887 Church Roman Catholic Church Appointed 15 May 1879 Term ended 8 February 1890 Predecessor Frédéric de Fallorx du Cordray Successor Andreas Steinhuber Other post(s) Cardinal Protodeacon (1887–90) Previous post(s) Prefect of the Sacred Congregation of Studies (1884–87) Orders Ordination 6 February 1837 Created cardinal 12 May 1879 by Pope Leo XIII Rank Cardinal-Deacon Personal details Born Giuseppe Pecci ( 1807-12-13 ) 13 December 1807 Carpineto Romano , Papal States Died 8 February 1890 (1890-02-08) (aged 82) Rome , Kingdom of Italy Buried Campo Verano , Rome, Italy Nationality Italian Denomination Catholic (Roman Rite) Parents Dominico Ludovico Pecci Anna Francesca Prosperi-Buzzi Alma mater Collegium Romanum Coat of arms Giuseppe Pecci S.J.

(13 December 1807 – 8 February 1890) was a Jesuit Thomist theologian, whose younger brother, Gioacchino, became Pope Leo XIII and appointed him a cardinal . The Neo-Thomist revival, which Pecci and Leo XIII originated in 1879, remained the leading papal philosophy until Vatican II . He was the last papal relative elevated to cardinal .

Early years [ edit ] Count and Countess Pecci, parents of Giuseppe and Vincenzo Pecci Born in Carpineto Romano , near Rome, Giuseppe was one of the seven children of Count Dominico Ludovico Pecci (2 June 1767 – 8 March 1833), Patrician of Siena , Colonel of the French Army under Napoleon , and his wife Anna Francesca Prosperi-Buzzi (1773 – 9 August 1824).

[ 1 ] His uncle Giuseppe Pecci was an protonotary apostolic and referendary of the Signature of Justice and died in 1806. His brothers included Vincenzo Gioacchino Raffaele Luigi (future Pope Leo XIII) and Giovanni Battista or Giambattista Pecci (26 October 1802 - 28 March 1882), 1st Count Pecci ( Comes Romanus in 1880 by Papal brief ), who married on 8 August 1851 Angela Salina (7 February 1830 - 9 October 1899) and had issue, and sister Anna Maria Pecci, wife of Michelangelo Pecci. From 1807 to 1818 he lived at home with his family. Together with his younger brother Vincenzo, he studied in the Jesuit College in Viterbo from 1818 until 1824.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] His siblings were: [ 4 ] Carlo (1793–1879) Anna Maria (1798–1870) Caterina (1800–1867) Giovanni Battista (1802–1881) Pope Leo XIII (1810–1903) Fernando (1813–1830) In 1824, Their father called him and his brother Vincenzo home to Rome, where their mother was dying; he wanted his children to be with him after the loss of his wife, and so they remained in Rome, attending the Collegium Romanum , a college belonging to the Society of Jesus .
In 1828, the question of occupational choice arose for the two brothers; Giuseppe Pecci professed the Jesuit order, while Vincenzo decided in favour of a diocesan priest.

[ 5 ] The house in Carpineto, in which the Pecci brothers grew up Professor [ edit ] Pecci taught Thomism , the theology and philosophy of St.

Thomas Aquinas , at the Pontifical Gregorian University in Rome in 1847. At the request of his brother, who became Archbishop of Perugia, he was made a professor at the theological seminary in Perugia , where he remained from 1852 through 1859. After the city was taken over by Piedmont forces in 1860, Pope Pius IX called him to Rome and offered him a professorship in theology at La Sapienza University . Pope Pius also called him into the papal commission to prepare the First Vatican Council . Good Thomist theology was hard to come by at that time, with the result that young scholars from other countries were sent to Rome to learn from Pecci and Tommaso Maria Zigliara .

[ 6 ] In 1870 he resigned his professorship because he refused to take the anti-papal oath which was demanded by the new Italian government. He continued his prominent theological research independently.

Giuseppe, Cardinal Pecci. For the most part throughout his life, he refused to be photographed: he considered painting a 'far superior and more benevolent presentation of a human being'.

[ 7 ] Cardinal [ edit ] Coat of arms of Giuseppe Pecci In 1879, the College of Cardinals , led by Camillo, Cardinal di Pietro , insistently asked Pope Leo XIII to elevate his brother to their ranks, [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] and at the age of 71 Giuseppe Pecci was created Cardinal-Deacon of Sant'Agata dei Goti on 12 May 1879 in his brother's first consistory .

[ 11 ] He was the last member of a pope's family made a cardinal.

The ceremony was described by Ludwig von Pastor in his diary:  "On 15 May at 11 am, Pope Leo XIII entered the hall in pontifical vestments, before him the College of Cardinals . The Swiss Guards stood to attention. After the Papal speech, each of the new cardinals, Pecci, John Henry Newman , Joseph Hergenröther and Tommaso Maria Zigliara , received the red hat, all of whom being well-known Church scholars." [ 12 ] Thomism [ edit ] Carpineto in 1878 The elevation of Pecci, a well-known Thomist, took place in the context of the determined efforts of Leo XIII to foster science and Thomist theology throughout the Catholic Church [2] Archived 9 February 2010 at the Wayback Machine . Thomism had lost its role as a leading theology and Leo attempted to re-establish it "for the protection of faith, welfare of society and the advancement of science".

[ 13 ] What he envisaged were not sterile interpretations of it, but a return to the original sources. This new orientation at the beginning of his pontificate was welcomed by Dominicans, Thomist Jesuits like Pecci and numerous bishops throughout the world. Strong opposition also developed as well on several fronts within the Church:  Some considered Thomism simply outdated, while others used it for petty condemnations of dissident views that they did not like.

[ 14 ] As traditional antagonists, Jesuits and Dominicans both claimed leadership in the renewal of Catholic theology.

[ 14 ] Papal collaboration [ edit ] The then-Father Pecci in 1872.

Pope Leo responded with the encyclical Æterni Patris , much of which was co-written by Cardinal Pecci [3] Archived 9 February 2010 at the Wayback Machine on the restoration of Christian philosophy in the schools, which was published on 4 August 1879, and mandated all Catholic universities to teach Thomism; it also created a papal academy for the training of Thomist professors and publishing scholarly editions of the works of St Thomas Aquinas . The leadership of this academy he entrusted to his brother, who aided the creation of similar Thomas Aquinas academies in other places (Bologna, Freiburg (Switzerland), Paris and Lowden). In 1879, Cardinal Pecci was appointed as first Prefect of the Pontifical Academy of St. Thomas Aquinas , which Leo founded on 15 October 1879, and was also appointed Prefect of the Congregation for Studies in February 1884 [4] . (On 28 January 1999, the academy was reoriented to more social issues by Pope John Paul II .) [ 15 ] Pope Leo XIII appointed thirty members, ten each from Rome, from Italy, and from the rest of the world, and provided generous financial support to attract scholars from everywhere. The Pope also personally supported individual Thomist scholars and applauded numerous critical editions of the Angelic Doctor' s texts.

[ 14 ] To balance his Thomist Jesuit appointments, Leo entrusted the overall responsibility of the works of St Thomas Aquinas to the Dominican Order , of which the saint had been a member.

Vatican Library [ edit ] Pope Leo XIII considered the mostly locked-up and neglected Vatican Library "an infinite treasure for the Church and a monument to its role in culture and science".

[ 16 ] He greatly increased staff and organization and appointed Jesuit father Franz Ehrle and Giuseppe Pecci to head the new undertaking as prefect and librarian, respectively. They in turn opened the Vatican Library to the general public after establishing a consultation library of 300,000 volumes.

[ 17 ] Death [ edit ] Cardinal Pecci continued his work as congregation and academy prefect and librarian until he died on 8 February 1890, aged 82, of complications from pneumonia. His body lay in repose in the Basilica of the Twelve Apostles ( Basilica dei Santi Apostoli ) in Rome, where his funeral took place on 12 February. He is buried in the chapel of the Society of Jesus in Campo Verano Cemetery, in Rome.

[ 18 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Vincenzo Gioacchino Raffaele Luigi Pecci, aka Pope Leo XIII" .

www.familysearch.org . Retrieved 3 January 2023 .

^ Kühne 12 ^ peter-hug.ch/lexikon/18_0714 ^ James Martin Miller (1908).

"The life of Pope Leo XIII: containing a full and authentic account of the illustrious pontiff's life and work" . Retrieved 21 February 2022 .

^ Kühne 20 ^ "Home - die Tagespost - Katholische Zeitung für Politik, Gesellschaft und Kultur" . Archived from the original on 12 April 2013 . Retrieved 7 January 2014 .

^ Benno Kühne, Papst Leo XIII Unser Heiliger Vater in seinem Leben und wirken, Benzinger, Einsiedeln, 1880 ^ Kühne, 247 ^ Schmidlin, Papstgeschichte der Neuesten Zeit, Pustet München 1934, 537 ^ Acta Leonis XIII PM Romae, 1881, Acta I, 35 ff ^ Acta Sanctae Sedis (PDF) . Vol. XI. 1878. pp.

587– 8 . Retrieved 30 January 2021 .

^ L. von Pastor, Tagebücher, Heidelberg, 1950 127 ^ Schmidlin 394 ^ a b c Schmidlin 395 ^ Annuario Pontificio 2005, p.1908 ^ Schmidlin 400 ^ Schmidlin 401 ^ [1] Archived 9 February 2010 at the Wayback Machine Catholic Church titles Preceded by Lorenzo Ilarione Randi Cardinal Protodeacon 1887–1890 Succeeded by John Henry Newman Preceded by Antonio Saverio De Luca Prefect of the Sacred Congregation of Studies 16 February 1884 – 29 October 1887 Succeeded by Tommaso Maria Zigliara v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Vatican People Italian People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef RISM Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Giuseppe_Pecci&oldid=1301894825 " Categories : Pope Leo XIII 1807 births 1890 deaths 19th-century Italian Jesuits 19th-century Italian cardinals Cardinals created by Pope Leo XIII 19th-century Italian Roman Catholic theologians Thomists Cardinal-nephews House of Pecci 19th-century Italian male writers Former Jesuits Jesuit cardinals Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Biography articles needing translation from Italian Wikipedia Use dmy dates from October 2020 Pages using Template:Post-nominals with customized linking Pages using S-rel template with ca parameter This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 07:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Giuseppe Pecci 12 languages Add topic

