Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Classification Toggle Classification subsection 1.1 Free and bound morphemes 1.2 Classification of bound morphemes 1.2.1 Derivational bound morphemes 1.2.2 Inflectional bound morphemes 1.3 Allomorphs 1.4 Zero-morpheme 1.5 Content vs. function 2 Other features 3 Morphological analysis 4 Changing definitions 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Morpheme 90 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dagbanli Dansk Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Novial Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Runa Simi Русский Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Словѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟ کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Walon 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Smallest lexical item in a language Some of this article's listed sources may not be reliable .

Please help improve this article by looking for better, more reliable sources. Unreliable citations may be challenged and removed.

( January 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Linguistics Outline History Index General linguistics Diachronic Lexicography Morphology Phonology Pragmatics Semantics Syntax Syntax–semantics interface Typology Applied linguistics Acquisition Anthropological Applied Mathematical Computational Conversation analysis Corpus linguistics Discourse analysis Determinism Distance Documentation Ethnography of communication Ethnomethodology Forensic History of linguistics Interlinguistics Neurolinguistics Philology Philosophy of language Phonetics Psycholinguistics Sociolinguistics Text Translating and interpreting Writing systems Theoretical frameworks Formalist Constituency Dependency Distributionalism Generative Glossematics Functional Cognitive Construction grammar Functional discourse grammar Grammaticalization Interactional linguistics Prague circle Systemic functional Usage-based Structuralism Topics Autonomy of syntax Compositionality Conservative and innovative language Descriptivism Etymology Iconicity Internet linguistics LGBTQ linguistics Origin of language Orismology Orthography Philosophy of linguistics Prescriptivism Second-language acquisition Theory of language Terminology Portal v t e A morpheme is any of the smallest meaningful constituents within a linguistic expression and particularly within a word.

[ 1 ] Many words are themselves standalone morphemes, while other words contain multiple morphemes; in linguistic terminology, this is the distinction, respectively, between free and bound morphemes . The field of linguistic study dedicated to morphemes is called morphology .

In English, inside a word with multiple morphemes, the main morpheme that gives the word its basic meaning is called a root (such as cat inside the word cats ), which can be bound or free. Meanwhile, additional bound morphemes, called affixes , may be added before or after the root, like the -s in cats , which indicates plurality but is always bound to a root noun and is not regarded as a word on its own.

[ 2 ] However, in some languages, including English and Latin , even many roots cannot stand alone; i.e., they are bound morphemes. For instance, the Latin root reg- ('king') must always be suffixed with a case marker: regis , regi , rex ( reg+s ), etc. The same is true of the English root nat(e) — ultimately inherited from a Latin root meaning "birth, born" — which appears in words like native , nation , nature , innate , and neonate .

These sample English words have the following morphological analyses: "Unbreakable" is composed of three morphemes: un- (a bound morpheme signifying negation ), break (a verb that is the root of unbreakable : a free morpheme), and -able (a bound morpheme as an adjective suffix signifying "capable of, fit for, or worthy of").

[ 3 ] The plural morpheme for regular nouns ( -s ) has three allomorphs : it is pronounced /s/ (e.g., in cats / k æ t s / ), /ɪz, əz/ (e.g., in dishes / d ɪ ʃ ɪ z / ), and /z/ (e.g., in dogs / d ɒ ɡ z / ), depending on the pronunciation of the root.

Classification [ edit ] Free and bound morphemes [ edit ] Main article: Bound and free morphemes Every morpheme can be classified as free or bound: [ 4 ] Free morphemes can function independently as words (e.g.

town , dog ) and can appear within lexemes (e.g.

town hall , doghouse ).

Bound morphemes appear only as parts of words, always in conjunction with a root and sometimes with other bound morphemes. For example, un- appears only when accompanied by other morphemes to form a word. Most bound morphemes in English are affixes, specifically prefixes and suffixes . Examples of suffixes are -tion , -sion , -tive , -ation , -ible , and -ing . Bound morphemes that are not affixed are called cranberry morphemes .

Classification of bound morphemes [ edit ] Bound morphemes can be further classified as derivational or inflectional morphemes. The main difference between them is their function in relation to words.

Derivational bound morphemes [ edit ] Derivational morphemes, when combined with a root, change the semantic meaning or the part of speech of the affected word. For example, in the word happiness , the addition of the bound morpheme -ness to the root happy changes the word from an adjective ( happy ) to a noun ( happiness ). In the word unkind , un- functions as a derivational morpheme since it inverts the meaning of the root morpheme (word) kind . Generally, morphemes that affix to a root morpheme (word) are bound morphemes.

Inflectional bound morphemes [ edit ] Inflectional morphemes modify the tense , aspect , mood , person , or number of a verb or the number , grammatical gender , or case of a noun, adjective, or pronoun without affecting the word's meaning or class ( part of speech ). Examples of applying inflectional morphemes to words are adding -s to the root dog to form dogs and adding -ed to wait to form waited . An inflectional morpheme changes the form of a word. English has eight inflections.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Allomorphs [ edit ] Allomorphs are variants of a morpheme that differ in form but are semantically similar. For example, the English plural marker has three allomorphs: /-z/ ( bug s ), /-s/ ( bat s ), or /-ɪz, -əz/ ( bus es ). An allomorph is a concrete realization of a morpheme, which is an abstract unit. That is parallel to the relation of an allophone and a phoneme .

Zero-morpheme [ edit ] Main article: Zero morpheme A zero-morpheme is a type of morpheme that carries semantic meaning, but is not represented by auditory phoneme. A word with a zero-morpheme is analyzed as having the morpheme for grammatical purposes, but the morpheme is not realized in speech. They are often represented by / ∅ / within glosses .

[ 7 ] Generally, such morphemes have no visible changes. For instance, sheep is both the singular and the plural form of that noun; rather than taking the usual plural suffix -s to form hypothetical *sheeps , the plural is analyzed as being composed of sheep + -∅ , the null plural suffix. The intended meaning is thus derived from the co-occurrence determiner (in this case, "some-" or "a-").

[ 8 ] In some cases, a zero-morpheme may also be used to contrast with other inflected forms of a word that contain an audible morpheme. For example, the plural noun cats in English consists of the root cat and the plural suffix -s, and so the singular cat may be analyzed as the root inflected with the null singular suffix - ∅ .

[ 9 ] Content vs. function [ edit ] Content morphemes express a concrete meaning or content , and function morphemes have more of a grammatical role. For example, the morphemes fast and sad can be considered content morphemes. On the other hand, the suffix -ed is a function morpheme since it has the grammatical function of indicating past tense .

Both categories may seem very clear and intuitive, but the idea behind them is occasionally more difficult to grasp since they overlap with each other.

[ 10 ] Examples of ambiguous situations are the preposition over and the determiner your , which seem to have concrete meanings but are considered function morphemes since their role is to connect ideas grammatically.

[ 11 ] Here is a general rule to determine the category of a morpheme: Content morphemes include free morphemes that are nouns, adverbs , adjectives , and main verbs and bound morphemes that are bound roots and derivational affixes.

[ 11 ] Function morphemes may be free morphemes that are prepositions, pronouns , determiners, auxiliary verbs and conjunctions . They may be bound morphemes that are inflectional affixes.

[ 11 ] Other features [ edit ] Roots are composed of only one morpheme, but stems can be composed of more than one morpheme. Any additional affixes are considered morphemes. For example, in the word quirkiness , the root is quirk , but the stem is quirky , which has two morphemes.

Moreover, some pairs of affixes have identical phonological form but different meanings. For example, the suffix -er can be either derivational (e.g.

sell ⇒ seller ) or inflectional (e.g.

small ⇒ smaller ). Such morphemes are called homophonous .

[ 11 ] Some words might seem to be composed of multiple morphemes but are not. Therefore, not only form but also meaning must be considered when identifying morphemes. For example, the word Madagascar is long and might seem to have morphemes like mad , gas , and car , but it does not. Conversely, some short words have multiple morphemes (e.g.

dogs = dog + s ).

[ 11 ] Morphological analysis [ edit ] In natural language processing for Japanese , Chinese , and other languages, morphological analysis is the process of segmenting a sentence into a row of morphemes. Morphological analysis is closely related to part-of-speech tagging , but word segmentation is required for those languages because word boundaries are not indicated by blank spaces.

[ 12 ] The purpose of morphological analysis is to determine the minimal units of meaning in a language (morphemes) by comparison of similar forms: such as comparing "She is walking" and "They are walking" with each other, rather than either with something less similar like "You are reading". Those forms can be effectively broken down into parts, and the different morphemes can be distinguished.

Both meaning and form are equally important for the identification of morphemes. An agent morpheme is an affix like -er that in English transforms a verb into a noun (e.g.

teach → teacher ). English also has another morpheme that is identical in pronunciation (and written form) but has an unrelated meaning and function: a comparative morpheme that changes an adjective into another degree of comparison (but remains the same adjective) (e.g.

small → smaller ). The opposite can also occur: a pair of morphemes with identical meaning but different forms.

[ 11 ] Changing definitions [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( September 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In generative grammar , the definition of a morpheme depends heavily on whether syntactic trees have morphemes as leaves or features as leaves.

Direct surface-to- syntax mapping in lexical functional grammar (LFG) – leaves are words Direct syntax-to-semantics mapping Leaves in syntactic trees spell out morphemes: distributed morphology – leaves are morphemes Branches in syntactic trees spell out morphemes: radical minimalism and nanosyntax – leaves are "nano-" (small) morpho-syntactic features Given the definition of a morpheme as "the smallest meaningful unit", nanosyntax aims to account for idioms in which an entire syntactic tree often contributes "the smallest meaningful unit". An example idiom is "Don't let the cat out of the bag". There, the idiom is composed of "let the cat out of the bag". That might be considered a semantic morpheme, which is itself composed of many syntactic morphemes. Other cases of the "smallest meaningful unit" being longer than a word include some collocations such as "in view of" and "business intelligence" in which the words, when together, have a specific meaning.

The definition of morphemes also plays a significant role in the interfaces of generative grammar in the following theoretical constructs: Event semantics : the idea that each productive morpheme must have a compositional semantic meaning (a denotation ), and if the meaning is there, there must be a morpheme (whether null or overt).

Spell-out : the interface with which syntactic/semantic structures are "spelled out" by using words or morphemes with phonological content. That can also be thought of as lexical insertion into the syntactic.

See also [ edit ] Alternation (linguistics) – Alternate phonetic realization of a morpheme Floating tone – Linguistic term Hybrid word – Word that etymologically derives from at least two languages List of Greek morphemes used in English Morphological parsing – Process of determining the morphemes from which a given word is constructed Morphophonology – Study of the interaction between morphology and phonology Morphotactics Motif-Index of Folk-Literature – Six volume catalogue of folklore motifs used by folklorists, composed by Stith Thompson , featuring a comparable concept in folklore studies Theoretical linguistics – Branch of linguistics which inquires into the nature of language Word stem – Part of a word responsible for its lexical meaning References [ edit ] ^ Haspelmath, Martin (2010).

Understanding Morphology . Andrea D. Sims (2nd ed.). London: Hodder Education. p. 14.

ISBN 978-0-340-95001-2 .

OCLC 671004133 .

^ Kemmer, Suzanne.

"Structure" .

Words in English .

Archived from the original on 31 August 2004 . Retrieved 10 April 2014 .

^ "able" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster.

^ De Kuthy, Kordula (October 22, 2001).

"Morphology" (PDF) .

Linguistics 201: Introduction to Language in the Humanities . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2014-03-20 . Retrieved 19 March 2014 .

^ "Module 1 Concepts: Inflectional Morpheme" .

ENG 411B . Archived from the original on 2013-02-18.

^ Matthew, Baerman (2015).

The Morpheme . Oxford University Press: Oxford University Press. p. 8.

ISBN 9780199591428 .

Archived from the original on 16 June 2022 . Retrieved 30 September 2019 .

^ Gerner, Matthias; Ling, Zhang (2020-05-06).

"Zero morphemes in paradigms" .

Studies in Language. International Journal Sponsored by the Foundation "Foundations of Language" .

44 (1): 1– 26.

doi : 10.1075/sl.16085.ger .

ISSN 0378-4177 .

S2CID 218935697 .

Archived from the original on 2020-09-19 . Retrieved 2020-09-15 .

^ Dahl, Eystein Dahl; Fábregas, Antonio (2018).

"Zero Morphemes" .

Linguistics .

doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780199384655.013.592 .

ISBN 978-0-19-938465-5 .

Archived from the original on 3 November 2019 . Retrieved 3 November 2019 .

^ "Null morpheme – Glottopedia" .

glottopedia.org .

Archived from the original on 2022-06-22 . Retrieved 2022-06-15 .

^ "Morphology II" .

Archived from the original on 16 March 2014 . Retrieved 10 April 2014 .

^ a b c d e f Department of Linguistics (2011).

Language files: Materials for an introduction to language and linguistics (11th ed.). Ohio State University Press.

^ Nakagawa, Tetsuji (2004).

"Chinese and Japanese word segmentation using word-level and character-level information" .

Proceedings of the 20th international conference on Computational Linguistics - COLING '04 . Geneva, Switzerland: Association for Computational Linguistics. pp. 466–es.

doi : 10.3115/1220355.1220422 .

S2CID 2988891 .

Baerman, Matthew (2015), Matthew Baerman (ed.), The Morpheme , Stephen R. Anderson, Oxford University: Oxford University Press, p. 3 [ dead link ] Plag, Ingo (2015), The structure of words: morphology , Sabine Arndt-Lappe, Maria Braun, and Mareile Schramm, Berlin, Germany: De Gruyter, Inc., pp.

71– 112 External links [ edit ] Look up morpheme in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Glossary of reading terms Comprehensive and searchable morpheme reference Linguistics 001 —  Lecture 7 —  Morphology by Mark Lieberman Pronunciation of the word morpheme Archived 2011-07-17 at the Wayback Machine v t e Lexicology Major terms Lexical item Lexicon Lexis Word Elements Chereme Glyphs Grapheme Lemma Lexeme Morpheme Phoneme Seme Sememe Semantic relations Antonymy Hypernymy and hyponymy Meronymy and holonymy Idiom Lexical semantics Semantic network Synonym Troponymy Functions Function word Headword Fields Controlled vocabulary English lexicology and lexicography International scientific vocabulary Lexicographic error Lexicographic information cost Linguistic prescription Morphology Specialized lexicography Linguistics portal v t e Lexicography Types of reference works Dictionary Glossary Lexicon Phrase book Thesaurus Types of dictionaries Advanced learner's Anagram Bilingual Biographical Conceptual Defining vocabulary Electronic Encyclopedic Etymological Explanatory Field Multi-field Single-field Sub-field Historical Idiom Language-for-specific-purposes Machine-readable Medical Monolingual learner's Picture Reverse Rhyme Rhyming Specialized Spelling dictionary Visual Other International scientific vocabulary List of lexicographers List of online dictionaries Linguistics portal Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐lkkcp
Cached time: 20250814223028
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.547 seconds
Real time usage: 0.740 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3616/1000000
Revision size: 18276/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 86829/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1876/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 90141/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.379/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18316724/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  662.019      1 -total
 22.72%  150.383     10 Template:Annotated_link
 21.81%  144.414      1 Template:Reflist
 12.44%   82.324      4 Template:Cite_book
 12.30%   81.431      1 Template:Linguistics
 12.08%   79.953      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  8.42%   55.735      1 Template:Short_description
  6.28%   41.601      1 Template:Unreliable_sources
  6.08%   40.248      2 Template:Ambox
  5.00%   33.100      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:18852:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814223028 and revision id 1301143126. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Morpheme&oldid=1301143126 " Categories : Morphemes Learning to read Linguistics terminology Reading (process) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from January 2023 All articles lacking reliable references Pages with plain IPA Articles needing additional references from September 2011 All articles needing additional references All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2024 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 08:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Morpheme 90 languages Add topic

