Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins 2 Differences between threatcasting and strategic planning 3 Applications 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References Toggle the table of contents Threatcasting 1 language العربية Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Conceptual framework This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article's lead section may be too long .

Please read the length guidelines and help move details into the article's body .

( April 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may be in need of reorganization to comply with Wikipedia's layout guidelines .

Please help by editing the article to make improvements to the overall structure.

( April 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Futures studies Concepts Accelerating change Cashless society Global catastrophic risk Future Earth Mathematics Race Climate Space exploration Universe Historical materialism Kondratiev wave Kardashev scale Moore's law Peak oil Population cycle Resource depletion Singularity Swanson's law Techniques Backcasting Causal layered analysis Chain-linked model Consensus forecast Cross impact analysis Delphi Real-time Delphi Foresight Future-proof Futures wheel Future workshop Horizon scanning Reference class forecasting Scenario planning Systems analysis Threatcasting Trend analysis Technology assessment and forecasting Critical design Design fiction Exploratory engineering FTA Hype cycle Science fiction prototyping Speculative design TRL Technology scouting Related topics Futarchy Transhumanism v t e Threatcasting is a conceptual framework used to help multidisciplinary groups envision future scenarios. It is also a process that enables systematic planning against threats ten years in the future. Utilizing the threatcasting process, groups explore possible future threats and how to transform the future they desire into reality while avoiding undesired futures. Threatcasting is a continuous, multiple-step process with inputs from social science, technical research, cultural history, economics, trends, expert interviews, and science fiction storytelling. These inputs inform the exploration of potential visions of the future.

Once inputs are explored for impact and application, participants create a science fiction story ( science fiction prototyping ) based ten years in the future to add context around human activity. Science Fiction Prototyping consists of a future story about a person in a place doing a thing. The threatcasting process results in creation of many potential futures scenarios—some futures are desirable while others are not. Identifying both types of futures (desirable and undesirable) will help the participant recognize which future to aim toward, and which to avoid. Utilizing the scenarios, participants plot actions necessary in the present and at various intervals working toward the ten year future scenario. These actions will help participants understand how to empower or disrupt the target future scenario. Flags (warning events) are also determined in order to map societal indicators onto the recommended path toward the targeted future. When identified flags appear in society, threatcasting participants map these back to the original forecast to see whether or not they are on track toward the target future scenario.

Origins [ edit ] See also: Science fiction prototyping The notion of threatcasting can be traced back to Brian David Johnson, an applied futurist, who first began using threatcasting, also referred to as futurecasting, in 2011 and to George Hemingway of the Stratalis Group, [ 1 ] who pioneered notion of futurecasting for corporate strategy and innovation industrial markets, including mining [ 2 ] in the same year. Early adopters of threatcasting include the United States Air Force Academy , the Government of California , and the Army Cyber Institute at West Point Military Academy . Official use of the term threatcasting is attributed to Brian David Johnson in a 2014 Gazette article “Drones, smart hydrants considered by experts looking at future of firefighting.” and to George Hemingway, who referenced the same in a 2013 article on "Futurecasting the mining industry".

[ 3 ] Differences between threatcasting and strategic planning [ edit ] Threatcasting is different from traditional strategic planning and scenario analysis processes due to the identification of specific actions, indicators and concrete steps that can be taken today to disrupt, mitigate and recover from future threats.

Applications [ edit ] The Army Cyber Institute at West Point in conjunction with Arizona State University's Global Securities Initiative and the School for the Future of Innovation in Society have established a Threatcasting Lab to host and manage a Cyber Threatcasting Project which looks to envision future cyber threats ten years in the future. The first session of this collaborative group was held at West Point, NY in August 2016.

See also [ edit ] Accelerating change Backcasting Creative science foundation Forecasting Foresight (futures studies) Futures studies Futures techniques Market environment § Environmental scanning Outline of futures studies Science fiction prototyping Scenario planning Strategic foresight Systems thinking Technology roadmap Technology forecasting Trend analysis Notes [ edit ] Knapp, Alex. Brian David Johnson: Intel's Guide to the Future. Forbes, October 13, 2011.

[ 4 ] U.S. Air Force Academy Public Affairs. 'Future-casting' wildfires. United States Air Force Academy. February 7, 2014.

Roeder, Tom. Drones, smart hydrants considered by experts looking at future of firefighting. The Gazette, February 21, 2014.

[ 3 ] Johnson, Brian David. Futurecasting, The Future of Wildfire.

[ 5 ] #innovateearthquakes! FIT's day of technology innovation for disaster management. September 5, 2015.

[ 6 ] Lee, Ryan. "Threatcasting". IEEE Computer, vol. 49, no., pp. 94–95, Oct. 2016, doi:10.1109/MC.2016.305.

Bennett, Michael and Johnson, Brian David. Dark Future Precedents.

[ 7 ] Science Fiction, Futurism and Law. Intelligent Environments 2016. doi:10.3233/978-1-61499-690-3-506 Petrov, Jan. Shmoocon 2017: Threat-Casting, Fake News, and Ransomware. Kraft Kennedy. February 6, 2017.

Johnson, Brian David. A Widening Attach Plain. Army Cyber Institute. February, 2017 References [ edit ] ^ "Futurecasting the Mining Industry" (PDF) .

Stratalis Group . January 2013.

^ "The Stratalis Group | Futurecasting: The Power of Foresight – The Final in a Six Part Series" .

www.stratalisgroup.com . Retrieved 2018-04-29 .

^ a b "Drones, smart hydrants considered by experts looking at future of firefighting" .

Colorado Springs Gazette . Retrieved 2017-02-21 .

^ Knapp, Alex.

"Brian David Johnson: Intel's Guide to the Future" .

Forbes . Retrieved 2017-02-21 .

^ "Futurecasting | The Field Innovation Team" .

fieldinnovationteam.org . Retrieved 2017-02-21 .

^ "The Field Innovation Team" .

www.fieldinnovationteam.org . Retrieved 2017-02-21 .

^ Bennett, Michael; Johnson, Brian David (2016-09-12).

"Dark Future Precedents: Science Fiction, Futurism and Law" (PDF) .

www.creative-science.org .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Threatcasting&oldid=1249753610 " Categories : Futures techniques Strategy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia introduction cleanup from April 2017 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from April 2017 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Wikipedia articles needing reorganization from April 2017 Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 6 October 2024, at 17:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Threatcasting 1 language Add topic

