Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In game theory 2 In industrial relations 3 In behavioral ecology 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Spite (game theory) 2 languages ChiShona 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article is about spite in the context of fair division , a branch of theoretical economics. The word is also used in psychology and sociobiology . For other uses, see Spite (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Spite" game theory – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In fair division problems, spite is a phenomenon that occurs when a player's value of an allocation decreases when one or more other players' valuation increases.  Thus, other things being equal, a player exhibiting spite will prefer an allocation in which other players receive less than more (if more of the good is desirable).

In this language, spite is difficult to analyze because one has to assess two sets of preferences.  For example, in the divide and choose method, a spiteful player would have to make a trade-off between depriving his opponent of cake, and getting more himself.

Within the field of sociobiology , spite is used to describe those social behaviors that have a negative impact on both the actor and recipient(s). Spite can be favored by kin selection when: (a) it leads to an indirect benefit to some third party that is sufficiently related to the actor (Wilsonian spite); or (b) when it is directed primarily at negatively related individuals ( Hamiltonian spite ). Negative relatedness occurs when two individuals are less related than average.

In game theory [ edit ] The iterated prisoner's dilemma provides an example where players may "punish" each other for failing to cooperate in previous rounds, even if doing so would cause negative consequences for both players. For example, the simple " tit for tat " strategy has been shown to be effective in round-robin tournaments of iterated prisoner's dilemma.

In industrial relations [ edit ] There is always difficulty in fairly dividing the proceeds of a business between the business owners and the employees.

When a trade union decides to call a strike , both employer and the union members lose money (and may damage the national economy ). The unionists hope that the employer will give in to their demands before such losses have destroyed the business.

In the reverse direction, an employer may terminate the employment of certain productive workers who are agitating for higher wages or organising a trade union. Losing productive workers is a setback to both the business and the employees but this can serve as an example to others and thus maximise employer power.

In behavioral ecology [ edit ] Polyembryonic wasps, including C. floridanum , exhibit spite through instances of precocious larval development.

[ 1 ] Spite provides an explanation for how natural selection can favor harmful behaviors that are costly to both the actor and the recipient; [ 1 ] spite is typically considered a form of altruism that benefits a secondary recipient.  Two criteria demonstrate that spite is truly occurring: (i) the behavior is truly costly to the actor and does not provide a long-term direct benefit; and (ii) harming behaviors are directed toward relatively unrelated individuals.

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] Appeal to spite Hamilton's rule Spite (sentiment) References [ edit ] ^ a b Gardner, Andy; Ian C.W. Hardy; Peter D. Taylor; Stuart A. West (April 2007).

"Spiteful soldiers and sex ratio conflict in polyembryonic parasitoid wasps" (PDF) .

American Naturalist .

169 (4): 519– 533.

doi : 10.1086/512107 .

PMID 17427122 .

S2CID 3800708 .

^ Davies, Nicholas B.; John R. Krebs; Stuart A. West (1981).

An Introduction to Behavioural Ecology . Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell. pp.

308– 333, 360– 393.

Foster, K.R., Wenseleers, T. & Ratnieks, F.L.W. (2001) Spite: Hamilton's unproven theory.

Annales Zoologici Fennici , p. 38,229-238.

[1] Gardner, A. & West, S.A. (2006) Spite.

Current Biology , p. 16, R662-R664.

[2] Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Spite_(game_theory)&oldid=1199866452 " Categories : Fair division Game theory Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from December 2020 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 28 January 2024, at 04:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Spite (game theory) 2 languages Add topic

