Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Kierkegaardian themes 2 Major premises 3 The Bible 4 Notable Christian existentialists 5 Existential theology 6 Radical existential Christianity 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Christian existentialism 19 languages العربية Català Čeština Dansk Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Malti 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Português Română Русский Suomi 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Existentialist approach to Christian theology Part of a series on the History of Christian theology Background Christian theology Diversity in early Christian theology Adoptionism Arianism Docetism Gnosticism Marcionism Montanism Early Christianity Proto-orthodox Christianity Timeline History of Christianity Template:History of Christianity Ecclesiastical polity Trinitarianism Nontrinitarianism Christology Paterology Pneumatology Mariology Biblical canon Deuterocanon Hermeneutics Theological hermeneutics African American Asian American Philosophical theology Christian philosophy Christian apologetics Persecution and tolerance Historical theology Ecumenical Creeds Apostles' Nicene Chalcedonian Athanasian Patristics and Councils Great church ante-Nicene period Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Cappadocian Fathers Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Augustine Nicaea Ephesus Chalcedon Post-Nicene development Heresy Monophysitism Monothelitism Byzantine Iconoclasm Gregory I Alcuin Photios East–West Schism Scholasticism Aquinas Anselm Palamas Reformation Martin Luther Theology 95 Theses John Calvin Radical Evangelicalism theology Five solae Book of Concord Arminianism English Counter- Trent Jansenism From the Reformation to the World Wars Natural Onto- Practical Pietism John Wesley Great Awakenings Holiness movement Restoration Movement Dispensationalism Covenant theology Existentialism Dogmatics Fundamental/foundational Liberal Catholic Anglo-Catholic Critical realism Political Since the World Wars Vatican II of religions Situational ethics Nouvelle théologie ( Ressourcement ) Death of God Postliberal  •  Narrative Continental philosophy Radical orthodoxy Neo-orthodoxy Reconciliation Analytic in Thomism Theopoetics Ecumenism Digital Systematic Biblical Constructive Eco- Environmental Public Contextualisation and Inculturation Indigenous church mission theory Sino-Christian Feminism in Feminist theology Asian Womanist New Queer Liberation Black Dalit Latin American Minjung Palestinian Postcolonial Fourth Great Awakening Christian Zionism Paleo-orthodoxy Dominion theology extraterrestrials Moderate Christianity Conservative Christianity Emerging church Progressive Christianity Confessing Movement Biotheology Theophysics Christianity portal v t e Christian existentialism is a theo-philosophical movement which takes an existentialist approach to Christian theology. The school of thought is often traced back to the work of the Danish philosopher and theologian Søren Kierkegaard (1813–1855) who is widely regarded as the father of existentialism.

[ 1 ] Kierkegaardian themes [ edit ] Søren Kierkegaard Christian existentialism relies on Kierkegaard's understanding of Christianity . Kierkegaard addressed themes such as authenticity, anxiety, love, and the irrationality and subjectivity of faith, rejecting efforts to contain God in an objective, logical system. To Kierkegaard, the focus of theology was on the individual grappling with subjective truth rather than a set of objective claims – a point he demonstrated by often writing under pseudonyms that had different points of view. He contended that each person must make independent choices, which then constitute his or her existence. Each person suffers from the anguish of indecision (whether knowingly or unknowingly) until committing to a way to live. Kierkegaard posited three stages of human existence: the aesthetic, the ethical, and the religious, the latter coming after what is often called the leap of faith.

[ citation needed ] Kierkegaard argued that the universe is fundamentally paradoxical , and that its greatest paradox is the transcendent union of God and humans in the person of Jesus Christ . He also posited having a personal relationship with God that supersedes all prescribed moralities, social structures and communal norms, [ 2 ] since he asserted that following social conventions is essentially a personal aesthetic choice made by individuals.

[ citation needed ] Major premises [ edit ] One of the major premises of Kierkegaardian Christian existentialism entails calling the masses back to a more genuine form of Christianity. This form is often identified with some notion of Early Christianity , which mostly existed during the first three centuries after Christ's crucifixion . Beginning with the Edict of Milan , which was issued by Roman Emperor Constantine I in AD 313, Christianity enjoyed a level of popularity among Romans and later among other Europeans . And yet Kierkegaard asserted that by the 19th century, the ultimate meaning of New Testament Christianity ( love , cf.

agape , mercy and loving-kindness ) had become perverted, and Christianity had deviated considerably from its original threefold message of grace, humility, and love.

Another major premise of Kierkegaardian Christian existentialism involves Kierkegaard's conception of God and Love . For the most part, Kierkegaard equates God with Love.

[ 3 ] Thus, when a person engages in the act of loving, he is in effect achieving an aspect of the divine . Kierkegaard also viewed the individual as a necessary synthesis of both finite and infinite elements. Therefore, when an individual does not come to a full realization of his infinite side, he is said to be in despair . For many contemporary Christian theologians , the notion of despair can be viewed as sin . However, to Kierkegaard, a man sinned when he was exposed to this idea of despair and chose a path other than one in accordance with God's will .

A final major premise of Kierkegaardian Christian existentialism entails the systematic undoing of evil acts. Kierkegaard asserted that once an action had been completed, it should be evaluated in the face of God, for holding oneself up to divine scrutiny was the only way to judge one's actions. Because actions constitute the manner in which something is deemed good or bad, one must be constantly conscious of the potential consequences of his actions. Kierkegaard believed that the choice for goodness ultimately came down to each individual. Yet Kierkegaard also foresaw the potential limiting of choices for individuals who fell into despair .

[ 4 ] The Bible [ edit ] Christian Existentialism often refers to what it calls the indirect style of Christ's teachings, which it considers to be a distinctive and important aspect of his ministry.  Christ's point, it says, is often left unsaid in any particular parable or saying, to permit each individual to confront the truth on his own.

[ 5 ] This is particularly evident in (but is certainly not limited to) his parables ; for example in the Gospel of Matthew ( Matthew 18:21–35 ). 
A good example of indirect communication in the Old Testament is the story of David and Nathan in 2 Samuel 12:1–14 .

[ citation needed ] An existential reading of the Bible demands that the reader recognize that he is an existing subject , studying the words that God communicates to him personally. This is in contrast to looking at a collection of truths which are outside and unrelated to the reader.

[ 6 ] Such a reader is not obligated to follow the commandments as if an external agent is forcing them upon him, but as though they are inside him and guiding him internally. This is the task Kierkegaard takes up when he asks: "Who has the more difficult task: the teacher who lectures on earnest things a meteor's distance from everyday life, or the learner who should put it to use?" [ 7 ] Existentially speaking, the Bible doesn't become an authority in a person's life until they permit the Bible to be their personal authority.

[ citation needed ] Notable Christian existentialists [ edit ] In addition to Søren Kierkegaard , Christian existentialists include German Protestant theologians Paul Tillich , and Rudolf Bultmann , American existential psychologist Rollo May (who introduced much of Tillich's thought to a general American readership), British Anglican theologian John Macquarrie , American philosopher Clifford Williams , French Catholic philosophers Maurice Blondel , Gabriel Marcel , Louis Lavelle , Emmanuel Mounier , Jacques Maritain and Pierre Boutang and French Protestant Paul Ricœur , German philosopher Karl Jaspers , Spanish philosopher Miguel de Unamuno , Russian philosophers Nikolai Berdyaev and Lev Shestov , and Greek Orthodoxy philosopher Christos Yannaras .

Karl Barth added to Kierkegaard's ideas the notion that existential despair leads an individual to an awareness of God's infinite nature. Russian author Fyodor Dostoevsky could be placed within the tradition of Christian existentialism.

[ citation needed ] Walker Percy, an American author from the twentieth century, gave Christian existentialist critique of contemporary society. "Walker Percy: Prophetic, Existentialist, Catholic Storyteller" (New Connections) by Rev. Robert E. Lauder (Author) The roots of existentialism have been traced back as far as Augustine of Hippo .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Some of the most striking passages in Pascal 's Pensées , including the famous section on the Wager , deal with existentialist themes.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] Jacques Maritain , in Existence and the Existent: An Essay on Christian Existentialism , [ 15 ] finds the core of true existentialism in the thought of Thomas Aquinas .

[ citation needed ] Existential theology [ edit ] In the monograph, Existential Theology: An Introduction (2020), Hue Woodson provides a constructive primer to the field and, he argues, thinkers that can be considered more broadly as engaging with existential theology, defining a French school including Gabriel Marcel , Jacques Maritain , and Jean-Luc Marion , [ 16 ] a German school including Immanuel Kant , Johann Gottlieb Fichte , Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling , Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel , and Dietrich Bonhoeffer , [ 17 ] and a Russian school including Fyodor Dostoyevsky , Leo Tolstoy , and Nikolai Berdyaev .

[ 18 ] Radical existential Christianity [ edit ] It has been claimed that radical existential Christians’ faith is based in their sensible and immediate and direct experience of God indwelling in human terms.

[ 19 ] It is suggested that individuals do not make or create their Christian existence; it does not come as a result of a decision one personally makes. The radical Protestants of the 17th century, like the Quakers , may have been in some ways theo-philosophically aligned with radical existential Christianity.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Antinomian controversy Atheistic existentialism Christian anarchism Christian existential apologetics Christian humanism Christian philosophy Eastern Orthodox theology Fideism Free will in theology Gymnobiblism Jewish existentialism Meaning (existential) Neo-orthodoxy Postliberal theology Postmodern Christianity Presuppositional apologetics Secular theology Theoria Transcendentalism References [ edit ] ^ M.J. Eliade & C.J. Adams (1987).

Encyclopedia of Religion (v.5). Macmillan Publishing Company.

^ Søren Kierkegaard (1846).

Concluding Unscientific Postscript , authored pseudonymously as Johannes Climacus.

^ Søren Kierkegaard (1849).

The Sickness Unto Death Trans. Alastair Hannay (New York: Penguin Books, 2004), 14.

^ Søren Kierkegaard (1849).

The Sickness Unto Death Trans. Alastair Hannay (New York: Penguin Books, 2004), 24.

^ Donald D. Palmer (1996).

Kierkegaard For Beginners . London, England: Writers And Readers Limited. p. 25.

^ Howard V. Hong (1983). "Historical Introduction" to Fear and Trembling . Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, p. x.

^ Søren Kierkegaard (1847).

Works of Love . Harper & Row, Publishers. New York, N.Y. 1962. p. 62.

^ Gordon R. Lewis (Winter 1965).

"Augustine and Existentialism" .

Journal of the Evangelical Theological Society 8,1, pp. 13–22.

^ Michial Farmer (6 July 2010).

"A Primer on Religious Existentialism, Pt. 4: Augustine" . christianhumanist.org ^ Craig J. N. de Paulo, ed. (2006).

The Influence of Augustine on Heidegger: The Emergence of An Augustinian Phenomenology . Lewiston: The Edwin Mellen Press.

^ Desmond Clarke (2011).

"Blaise Pascal" , Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Clifford Williams (July 3, 2005).

"Pascal" . cliffordwilliams.net ^ Michial Farmer (20 July 2010).

"A Primer on Religious Existentialism, Pt. 5: Blaise Pascal" . christianhumanist.org ^ Michial Farmer (27 July 2010).

"A Primer on Religious Existentialism, Pt. 6: Apologetics" . christianhumanist.org ^ Jacques Maritain (1947).

Existence and the Existent: An Essay on Christian Existentialism ( Court traité de l'existence et de l'existent ), translated by Lewis Galantiere and Gerald B. Phelan. New York: Pantheon Books, 1948.

^ Woodson, 2020, p. 50-66 ^ Woodson, 2020, p. 67-91 ^ Woodson, 2020, p. 92-108 ^ Di Giovanni, Aldo (2014).

The Existing Christ: an Existential Christology . Charleston: CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform.

ISBN 9781503134911 .

Further reading [ edit ] Cobb, John B. (1967).

The Structure of Christian Existence (Philadelphia: The Westminster Press) Cochrane, Arthur (1956).

The Existentialists and God (Dubuque: The University of Dubuque Press) Davis, George W. (1957).

Existentialism and Theology: An Investigation of the Contribution of Rudolf Bultmann to Theological Thought (New York: Philosophical Library) Heinemann, F. H. (1958).

Existentialism and the Modern Predicament (New York: Harper and Row) Jansen, G. M, A. (1966).

An Existential Approach to Theology (Milwaukee: The Bruce Publishing Company) Jenkins, David. (1987).

The Scope and Limits of John Macquarrie's Existential Theology (Stockholm: Uppsala) Kuitert, H. M. (1968).

The Reality of Faith: A Way Between Protestant Orthodoxy and Existentialist Theology (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans) Macquarrie, John (1957).

An Existentialist Theology: A Comparison of Heidegger and Bultmann (New York: The Macmillian Company) Martin, Bernard (1963).

The Existentialist Theology of Paul Tillich (New Haven: College and University Press) Michalson, Carl, ed. (1956).

Christianity and the Existentialists (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons) Slaate, Howard A. (1971).

The Paradox of Existentialist Theology: The Dialectics of a Faith-Subsumed Reason-in-Existence (New York: Humanities Press) Spier, J. M. (1953), Christianity and Existentialism (Philadelphia: The Presbyterian and Reformed Publishing Company) Stagg, Frank. (1973).

Polarities of Man's Existence in Biblical Perspective (Philadelphia: The Westminster Press) Williams, J. Rodman. (1965).

Contemporary Existentialism and Christian Faith (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Fall) Woodson, Hue. (2020).

Existential Theology: An Introduction (Eugene: Wipf and Stock) ISBN 978-1-5326-6840-1 External links [ edit ] A website that explores the existential teachings of Jesus, with references to Kierkegaard and Tillich v t e Philosophy of religion Conceptions of God Brahman Demiurge Divine simplicity Egoism God Speaks Holy Spirit Misotheism Pandeism Personal god Process theology Supreme Being Unmoved mover God in Abrahamic religions Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Mormonism Sikhism Baháʼí Faith Wicca Existence of God For Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheist's Wager Evil Free will Hell Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot Theology Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Demonology Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism Christian Atheistic Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Fideism Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Religious Secular Christian Inclusivism Theories about religions Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism Metaphysical Religious Humanistic New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Possibilianism Process theology Religious skepticism Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion (by date active) Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 1800 1850 Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir 1880 1900 Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Sergei Bulgakov Pavel Florensky Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal 1920 postwar George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J L Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew 1970 1990 2010 William L Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Daniel Dennett Loyal Rue Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Desacralization of knowledge Ethics in religion Exegesis History of religion Religion Religious language Religious philosophy Relationship between religion and science Faith and rationality Portal Category v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Western world and culture Foundations Cradle of civilization Old World Greco-Roman world Greece Hellenistic Kingdoms Rome Roman Empire Western Eastern Roman legacy Romanization Romano-Germanic culture Gallo-Roman Christendom History European Bronze Age Classical antiquity Late antiquity Middle Ages early high late Renaissance Modern period Early modern period Age of Discovery Reformation Age of Enlightenment Scientific Revolution Age of Revolution Romanticism Abolitionism Emancipation Capitalism Industrial Revolution Great Divergence Modernism World War I Interwar period Universal suffrage World War II Cold War Post–Cold War era Information age War on terror Culture Alphabet Greek Latin Cyrillic Architecture Art Periods Calendar Cuisine Diet Classical tradition Studies Clothing History Dance Education Esotericism Astrology Folklore Immigration Law Languages Eurolinguistics Standard Average European Literature Canon Media Internet Music Chant Classical Folk Instruments Mythology Painting contemporary Philosophy Science Values Physical culture Sport Religion East–West Schism Western Christianity Decline Secularism Philosophy Ancient Greek philosophy Hellenistic philosophy Ancient Roman philosophy Christian ethics Judeo-Christian ethics Christian philosophy Scholasticism Rationalism Empiricism Existentialism Christian existentialism Humanism Christian humanism Secular humanism Liberalism Conservatism Socialism Continental philosophy Analytic philosophy Post-structuralism Tolerance Paradox Relativism Peritrope Atlanticism Sovereigntism Individualism Values European Religion Abrahamic Christianity Culture Western / Eastern Catholicism Latin Church Eastern Orthodoxy Greek Orthodox Church Protestantism Paganism Baltic Celtic Finnish Germanic Anglo-Saxon Frankish Gothic Old Norse Hellenistic Roman Slavic Neo Agnosticism Atheism Law Natural law Rule of law Equality before the law Constitutionalism Human rights Life Thought Speech Press Religion Property Democracy International law Contemporary integration ABCANZ Armies AER Anglo-Portuguese Alliance ANZUK ANZUS Arctic Council AUKUS AUSCANNZUKUS Baltic Assembly Benelux British–Irish Council BSEC Bucharest Nine CANZUK CBSS CEFTA Council of Europe Craiova Group Eastern European Group Eastern Partnership EEA EFTA EPC ESA EU EU Customs Union Eurozone EU–UK TCA Five Eyes G7 Lancaster House Treaties Lublin Triangle NATO Nordic Council OAS OECD Open Balkan OSCE Pacific Islands Forum PROSUR/PROSUL Rio Treaty Schengen Special Relationship Three Seas Initiative UKUSA Agreement USMCA Visegrád Group West Nordic Council Western Bloc Western European and Others Group Westernization Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Christian_existentialism&oldid=1286139827 " Categories : Christian existentialists Christian philosophy Christian radicalism Christian theological movements Political theories Religious existentialism Søren Kierkegaard Types of existentialism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2008 This page was last edited on 18 April 2025, at 00:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Christian existentialism 19 languages Add topic

