Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Existential themes 3 Influence Toggle Influence subsection 3.1 Main works 4 Works in English translation 5 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 5.1 Philosophical works 5.2 Theater 5.3 Literary and dramatic criticism 6 Notes 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Gabriel Marcel 44 languages Afrikaans العربية Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Lietuvių Magyar Македонски مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French philosopher, playwright and music critic (1889–1973) Gabriel Marcel Born Gabriel Honoré Marcel ( 1889-12-07 ) 7 December 1889 Paris , France Died 8 October 1973 (1973-10-08) (aged 83) Paris, France Relatives Henry Marcel (father) Education Education University of Paris ( MA , 1910) Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Continental [ 1 ] Christian existentialism Existential phenomenology [ 2 ] Personalism Main interests Ontology subjectivity ethics Notable works The Mystery of Being (1951) Notable ideas "The Other" ( autrui ), concrete philosophy ( philosophie concrète ), being vs. having as opposing ways of defining the human person Signature Part of a series on Conservatism in France Ideologies Bonapartism Christian democracy Gaullism Integralism nationalist Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Royalism Sarkozysm Ultramontanism Principles Anti-communism Counter-revolution Dirigisme Elitism Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethnopluralism Family values French culture Imperialism Monarchism Metapolitics Nationalism Nativism Natural order Patriotism Social hierarchy Social order Souverainisme Traditional authority History Ancien Régime Monarchiens Feuillant Catholic and Royal Armies War in the Vendée Thermidorian Reaction Chouannerie Chouan First White Terror Companions of Jehu Muscadins Second White Terror Bourbon Restoration Ultra-royalists Dreyfus affair Second French Empire Philippe Daudet affair Vichy France Algiers putsch of 1961 2024 The Republicans alliance crisis Intellectuals Ballanche Bainville Barbey d'Aurevilly Barruel Barrès Baudelaire de Benoist Blanc de Saint-Bonnet de Bonald Boutang Bruckner Brunetière Brague Cau de Chateaubriand Fustel de Coulanges Cochin Daudet Delsol Dumézil Faguet Faye Freund Girardet Guénon de Gobineau Houellebecq de Jouvenel Lamennais (early) Le Bon Lefebvre Lemaître Le Play Lugan Madiran de Maistre Morel Maffesoli Massis Maurras Maulnier Marcel Nimier Poulat Rémond Renan de Rivarol Rohmer Rueff Siegfried Taine de Tocqueville Thibon Literature Considerations on France (1796) Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism (1797) The Genius of Christianity (1802) The Pope (1819) St Petersburg Dialogues (1821) Democracy in America (1835) The Ancient City (1864) " What Is a Nation?

" (1882) The Crowd (1895) Inquiry into the Monarchy (1900) "The Future of the Intelligentsia" (1905) My Political Ideas (1937) The Reign of Quantity (1945) The Opium of the Intellectuals (1955) Violence and the Sacred (1972) The Camp of the Saints (1973) The Tyranny of Guilt (2006) The French Suicide (2014) Submission (2015) Politicians Bardella Bellamy de Bonald Boulanger Cathelineau de Chateaubriand Ciotti Flandin Fouéré de Gaulle Holeindre Juppé de Kérillis Le Pen (Jean-Marie) Le Pen (Marine) Maurras Malraux MacMahon Maréchal Messiha Messmer Pécresse Pétain Peyrefitte Pichegru Poincaré Poisson de Polignac Pompidou Retailleau de La Rocque de La Tour du Pin Sarkozy Schuman de Vaublanc de Villèle de Villiers Zemmour Commentators Barbier Buisson Camus Cassen Jean Giesbert de Girardin d'Escufon Jamet Lasserre Lévy Marmin Massis Maulnier Ménard Mougeotte Nay Obertone d'Orcival d'Ornellas Pauwels Pujo Sastre Sérant Tasin Venner Parties Active Alliance Royale Debout la France French Future The Nationalists National Republican Movement Future with Confidence National Centre of Independents & Peasants National Rally Reconquête The Republicans Senate Republicans Soyons libres VIA, the Way of the People Defunct Democratic Republican Alliance Feuillants French Agrarian and Peasant Party French Social Party Movement for France Independent Radicals Independent Republicans Party of Order Rally of the French People Popular Liberal Action Rally for France Rally for the Republic Republican Federation Resistance Party Union for a Popular Movement Union for the New Republic Organisations Active Action Française Carrefour de l'Horloge Cité catholique Groupement de Recherche et d'Études pour la Civilisation Européenne Initiative and Liberty Movement La Manif pour tous Les Identitaires March for Life Nouvelle Action Royaliste Rassemblement national de la jeunesse Student Cockade UDR group Union Nationale Inter-universitaire Defunct Action Française (pre Liberation) Camelots du Roi Cercle Proudhon Civitas Croix-de-Feu Independent Republicans Hussards Service d'Action Civique Media Active Atlantico CNews Éléments Famille chrétienne L'Écho du Sud La Croix Le Figaro Le Figaro Magazine Le Point Nouvelle École Radio Courtoisie Valeurs actuelles Defunct La Liberté La Presse La Nation française Le Quotidien de Paris Minute Présent Related topics Archeofuturism Clerical philosophers European New Right Far-right movements in France France profonde French–German enmity French Revolution " Islamo-leftism " List of French conservatives Maurrassisme in Argentina Ligues d'extrême droite Politics of France Remigration Sinistrisme Sovereigntist Right Tocqueville effect Conservatism portal France portal v t e Gabriel Honoré Marcel [ a ] (7 December 1889 – 8 October 1973) was a French philosopher , playwright , music critic and leading Christian existentialist . The author of over a dozen books and at least thirty plays, Marcel's work focused on the modern individual's struggle in a technologically dehumanizing society. Though often regarded as the first French existentialist, he dissociated himself from figures such as Jean-Paul Sartre , preferring the term philosophy of existence or neo-Socrateanism to define his own thought.

The Mystery of Being is a well-known two-volume work authored by Marcel.

Early life and education [ edit ] Marcel was born on 7 December 1889 in Paris , France. His mother, Laure Meyer, who was Jewish , died when he was young, and he was brought up by his aunt and father, Henry Marcel .

Marcel completed his DES thesis [ b ] ( diplôme d'études supérieures [ fr ] , roughly equivalent to an MA thesis) and obtained the agrégation in philosophy from the Sorbonne in 1910, at the unusually young age of 20.  During the First World War he worked as head of the Information Service, organized by the Red Cross to convey news of injured soldiers to their families.

[ 3 ] He taught in secondary schools, was a drama critic for various literary journals, and worked as an editor for Plon , the major French Catholic publisher.

[ 4 ] Marcel was the son of an agnostic , [ 3 ] and was himself not a member of any organized religion until his conversion to Catholicism in 1929. Marcel was opposed to anti-Semitism and supported reaching out to non-Catholics.

He died on 8 October 1973 in Paris.

Existential themes [ edit ] He is often classified as one of the earliest existentialists , although he dreaded being placed in the same category as Jean-Paul Sartre ; Marcel came to prefer the label neo- Socratic (possibly because of Søren Kierkegaard , the father of Christian existentialism , who was a neo-Socratic thinker himself). While Marcel recognized that human interaction often involved objective characterisation of "the other", he still asserted the possibility of "communion" – a state where both individuals can perceive each other's subjectivity.

In The Existential Background of Human Dignity , Marcel refers to a play he had written in 1913 entitled Le Palais de Sable , in order to provide an example of a person who was unable to treat others as subjects.

Roger Moirans, the central character of the play, is a politician, a conservative who is dedicated to defending the rights of Catholicism against free thought. He has set himself up as the champion of traditional monarchy and has just achieved a great success in the city council, where he has attacked the secularism of public schools. It is natural enough that he should be opposed to the divorce of his daughter Therese, who wants to leave her unfaithful husband and start her life afresh. In this instance, he proves himself virtually heartless; all his tenderness goes out to his second daughter, Clarisse, whom he takes to be spiritually very much like himself. But now Clarisse tells him that she has decided to take the veil and become a Carmelite. Moirans is horrified by the idea that this creature, so lovely, intelligent, and full of life, might go and bury herself in a convent and he decides to do his utmost to make her give up her intention... Clarisse is deeply shocked; her father now appears to her as an impostor, virtually as a deliberate fraud...

[ 5 ] In this case, Moirans is unable to treat either of his daughters as a subject, instead rejecting both because each does not conform to her objectified image in his mind. Marcel notes that such objectification "does no less than denude its object of the one thing which he has which is of value, and so it degrades him effectively." [ 6 ] Another related major thread in Marcel was the struggle to protect one's subjectivity from annihilation by modern materialism and a technologically -driven society. Marcel argued that scientific egoism replaces the "mystery" of being with a false scenario of human life composed of technical "problems" and "solutions". For Marcel, the human subject cannot exist in the technological world, instead being replaced by a human object. As he points out in Man Against Mass Society and other works, technology has a privileged authority with which it persuades the subject to accept his place as "he" in the internal dialogue of science; and as a result, man is convinced by science to rejoice in his own annihilation.

[ 7 ] Influence [ edit ] Plaque at the home where Marcel resided from 1933 until his death.

For many years, Marcel hosted a weekly philosophy discussion group through which he met and influenced important younger French philosophers such as Jean Wahl , Paul Ricœur , Emmanuel Levinas , and Jean-Paul Sartre . Marcel was puzzled and disappointed that his reputation was almost entirely based on his philosophical treatises and not on his plays, which he wrote in the hope of appealing to a wider lay audience. He also influenced phenomenologist and Thomistic philosopher Karol Wojtyla (later Pope John Paul II ), who drew on Marcel's distinction between "being" and "having" in his critique of technological change.

[ 8 ] Main works [ edit ] Marcel's major books are the Metaphysical Journal (1927), Being and Having (1933), Homo Viator (1945), and Man Against Mass Society (1955). He gave the Gifford Lectures at the University of Aberdeen between 1949 and 1950, which were published as The Mystery of Being (1951). He also gave the William James Lectures at Harvard in 1961–1962, which were subsequently published as The Existential Background of Human Dignity .

Works in English translation [ edit ] 1948.

The Philosophy of Existence.

Manya Harari , trans. London: The Harvill Press. Later editions were titled The Philosophy of Existentialism .

1949.

Being and Having.

Katherine Farrer, trans. Westminster, London: Dacre Press.

1950.

The Metaphysical Journal.

Bernard Wall, trans. Chicago: Henry Regnery Company.

1951.

The Mystery of Being , Vol. 1, Reflection and Mystery trans.

G. S. Fraser ; Vol. 2, Faith and Reality.

trans. René Hague  London: The Harvill Press.

1956.

Royce 's Metaphysics.

Virginia and Gordon Ringer, trans. Chicago: Henry Regnery Company.

1962.

Man Against Mass Society.

G. S. Fraser, trans. Chicago: Henry Regnery Company.

1962.

Homo Viator: Introduction to a Metaphysic of Hope.

Emma Craufurd, trans. Harper & Brothers.

1963.

The Existential Background of Human Dignity.

Harvard University Press.

1964.

Creative Fidelity.

Translated, with an introduction, by Robert Rosthal. Farrar, Straus and Company.

1967.

Presence and Immortality.

Michael A. Machado, trans. Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press.

1967.

Problematic Man.

Brian Thompson, trans. New York: Herder and Herder.

1973.

Tragic Wisdom and Beyond.

Stephen Jolin and Peter McCormick, trans. Publication of the Northwestern University Studies in Phenomenology and Existential Philosophy, ed.

John Wild . Northwestern University Press.

1984. " An Autobiographical Essay," and "Replies," in The Philosophy of Gabriel Marcel ( Library of Living Philosophers ).

Paul Arthur Schilpp and Lewis Edwin Hahn, eds. La Salle, IL: Open Court.

1998.

Gabriel Marcel's Perspectives on The Broken World: The Broken World, a Four-Act Play, Followed by Concrete Approaches to Investigating the Ontological Mystery.

Katharine Rose Hanley, trans.  Milwaukee: Marquette University Press.

2002.

Awakenings.

Peter Rogers, trans. Milwaukee: Marquette University Press.

2004.

Ghostly Mysteries: Existential Drama: A Mystery of Love & The Posthumous Joke.

Katharine Rose Hanley, trans. Milwaukee: Marquette University Press.

2008.

A Path to Peace: Fresh Hope for the World. Dramatic Explorations: Five Plays by Gabriel Marcel: The Heart of Others/Dot the I/The Double Expertise/The Lantern/Colombyre or The Torch of Peace.

Katharine Rose Hanley, trans. Milwaukee: Marquette University Press.

2009.

Thou Shall Not Die.

Compiled by Anne Marcel. Katharine Rose Hanley, trans. South Bank: St Augustine's Press.

2019.

The Invisible Threshold: Two Plays by Gabriel Marcel.

Brendan Sweetman, Maria Traub, Geoffrey Karabin, eds. Maria Traub, trans. South Bank: St Augustine's Press.

2021.

Thirst.

Michial Farmer, trans. Providence, RI: Cluny Media.

Bibliography [ edit ] Philosophical works [ edit ] Existence et Objectivité (1914).

Journal métaphysique (1914-1923), Paris , Gallimard , 1927.

Être et avoir (1918-1933). Paris, Aubier, 1935.

Du refus à l'invocation , Paris, Gallimard , 1940. (Republished in 1967 under the title Essai de philosophie concrète, Paris, NRF/Gallimard, 1967) Homo viator. Prolégomènes à une métaphysique de l'espérance.

Paris, Aubier, 1945 La Métaphysique de Royce .

Paris, Aubier, 1945 Position et Approches concrètes du mystère ontologique , introduction by Marcel de Corte. Louvain, E. Nauwelaerts; Paris, Librairie philosophique J. Vrin, 1949 Le Mystère de l'être . Paris, Aubier, 1951, 2 volumes.

Les Hommes contre l'humain , Paris, La Colombe, 1951, Republished: Fayard, 1968 Le Déclin de la sagesse.

Paris, Plon, 1954 L'Homme problématique.

Paris, Aubier, 1955 Théâtre et Religion.

Lyon , Éditions E. Vitte, 1958 Présence et Immortalité.

Paris, Flammarion, 1959 La Dignité humaine et ses assises existentielles.

Paris, Aubier, 1964 Entretiens Paul Ricœur, Gabriel Marcel.

Paris, Aubier, 1968, Republished: présence de Gabriel Marcel, 1999 Pour une sagesse tragique et son au-delà.

Paris, Plon, 1968 En chemin, vers quel éveil?

Paris, Gallimard, 1971 Coleridge et Schelling . Paris, Aubier, 1971 Plus décisif que la violence.

Paris, Plon, 1971 Percées vers un ailleurs.

Fayard, 1973 Gabriel Marcel interrogé par Pierre Boutang suivi de Position et approches concrètes du mystère ontologique.

Paris, J.-M. Place Éditeur, 1977 Tu ne mourras pas , textes choisis et présentés by Anne Marcel, preface by Xavier Tilliette , éditions Arfuyen, 2005.

Theater [ edit ] Le Cœur des autres.

Paris, Grasset , 1921 L'Iconoclaste.

Paris, Stock , 1923 Un homme de Dieu.

Paris, Grasset, 1925 La Chapelle ardente (1925), directed by Gaston Baty , Théâtre du Vieux-Colombier .

Le Monde cassé suivi de Position et approches concrètes du mystère ontologique.

Paris, Desclée de Brouwer, 1933.

Chemin de Crète , Paris, Grasset, 1936 - Prix Paul-Hervieu of the Académie française .

Le Dard.

Paris, Plon, 1936 Le Fanal.

Paris, Stock, 1936 La Soif.

Paris, Desclée de Brouwer, 1938, republished under the title of Les cœurs avides , La Table Ronde, 1952 Théâtre comique: Colombyre ou le brasier de la paix - La double expertise - Les points sur les i - Le divertissement posthume. Paris, Albin Michel, 1947 Vers un autre Royaume: L'émissaire - Le signe de la croix. Paris, Plon, 1949 Rome n'est plus dans Rome , Paris, La Table Ronde, 1951 Croissez et multipliez.

Paris, Plon , 1955 Mon temps n'est pas le vôtre.

Paris, Plon, 1955 La Dimension Florestan suivi de la conférence Le Crépuscule du sens commun.

Paris, Plon, 1958 Literary and dramatic criticism [ edit ] Gabriel Marcel et François Mauriac .

[ permanent dead link ] In : François Bréda , Ca critique littéraire et dramatique de Gabriel Marcel , Les Éditions Grinta, Cluj-Napoca , 2004.

Regards sur le théâtre de Claudel , éditions Beauchesne , 1964 Notes [ edit ] ^ Pronounced / m ɑːr ˈ s ɛ l / mar- SEL ; French: [ɡabʁijɛl ɔnɔʁe maʁsɛl] .

^ The title of his 1910 thesis was Coleridge et Schelling ( Coleridge and Schelling ). It was published in 1971 (see Jeanne Parain-Vial, Gabriel Marcel: un veilleur et un éveilleur , L'Âge d'Homme, 1989, p. 12).

References [ edit ] ^ "Category: Continental Philosophy" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Paul T. Brockelman, Existential Phenomenology and the World of Ordinary Experience: An Introduction , University Press of America, 1980, p. 3.

^ a b Marcel, Gabriel (1947).

The Philosophy of Existentialism .

Manya Harari . Paris: Citadel Press.

ISBN 0-8065-0901-5 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Gabriel (-Honoré) Marcel , Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy ' ^ The Existential Background of Human Dignity , pp. 31–32.

^ Homo Viator , p. 23.

^ Ballard, Edward G. (1967). "Gabriel Marcel: The Mystery of Being". In Schrader, George Alfred Jr. (ed.).

Existential Philosophers: Kierkegaard to Merleau-Ponty . Toronto: McGraw-Hill. p. 227.

^ Jeffreys, Derek S. (2007), " 'A Deep Amazement at Man's Worth and Dignity': Technology and the Person in Redemptor hominis ", in Perry, Tim (ed.), The Legacy of John Paul II: An Evangelical Assessment , InterVarsity Press , pp.

37– 56 .

Further reading [ edit ] Emmanuel Levinas , Paul Ricœur and Xavier Tilliette , Jean Wahl et Gabriel Marcel , Beauchesne, 1976, 96 p., ISBN 2-7010-0240-0 Paul Marcus, In Search of the Spiritual: Gabriel Marcel, Psychoanalysis, and the Sacred (London: Karnac), 2012.

ISBN 1780490542 External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Gabriel Marcel .

The Gabriel Marcel Society Gabriel Marcel Collection at the Harry Ransom Center Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy : Gabriel Marcel – by Jill Graper Hernandez.

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy : Gabriel (-Honoré) Marcel – by Brian Treanor.

Homage to Gabriel Marcel (Article from the " Revue Métapsychique " (no. 14, June 1969, pp. 41–52) v t e Continental philosophy Philosophers Adorno Agamben Althusser Arendt Aron Bachelard Badiou Barthes Bataille Baudrillard Bauman Benjamin de Beauvoir Bergson Blanchot Bourdieu Buber Butler Camus Cassirer Castoriadis Cioran Cixous Croce de Man Debord Deleuze Derrida Dilthey Eco Eagleton Engels Fanon Fichte Fisher Foucault Gadamer Gentile Guattari Gramsci Habermas Hegel Heidegger Husserl Ingarden Irigaray Jameson Jaspers Kierkegaard Kojève Koyré Kołakowski Kristeva Lacan Latour Lefebvre Lévi-Strauss Levinas Luhmann Lukács Lyotard Marcel Marcuse Marx Meillassoux Merleau-Ponty Nancy Negri Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Rancière Ricœur Said Sartre Schelling Schmitt Schopenhauer Serres Sloterdijk Spengler Stein Strauss Weber Weil Williams Žižek Theories Absurdism Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Frankfurt School German idealism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Marxism Western Freudo- Neo-Kantianism Non-philosophy Non-representational theory Phenomenology Philosophical pessimism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Psychoanalysis Psychoanalytic theory Romanticism Speculative realism Structuralism Concepts Alterity Always already Angst Apollonian and Dionysian Authenticity Being in itself Binary oppositions Boredom Class struggle Critique Immanent Ideological Postcritique Dasein Death of God Death drive Différance Difference Existence precedes essence Existential crisis Facticity Gaze Genealogy Habitus Hauntology Historical materialism Ideology Interpellation (philosophy) Intersubjectivity Leap of faith Master–slave dialectic Master–slave morality Oedipus complex Ontic Ontopoetics Other Power Ressentiment Self-deception Totalitarianism Trace Transvaluation of values Wertkritik Will to power Hermeneutics of suspicion Discourse Linguistic theory Linguistic determinism Semantics Semiotics Media studies Film theory Linguistic turn Postcolonialism Philosophy of language Category v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal Portals : Biography Catholicism France Philosophy Technology Theatre Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐gs4j5
Cached time: 20250817052838
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.825 seconds
Real time usage: 1.037 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5011/1000000
Revision size: 17902/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 172337/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12084/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 65900/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.490/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15574612/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  778.778      1 -total
 26.03%  202.752      1 Template:Conservatism_in_France
 25.73%  200.411      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 24.19%  188.385      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 14.76%  114.981     24 Template:Lang
 12.48%   97.178      2 Template:Reflist
  8.27%   64.416      1 Template:Cite_IEP
  8.01%   62.418      1 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
  7.78%   60.605      1 Template:Short_description
  6.59%   51.298      2 Template:Efn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:568571:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817052838 and revision id 1296592121. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gabriel_Marcel&oldid=1296592121 " Categories : 1889 births 1973 deaths Writers from Paris 20th-century French dramatists and playwrights 20th-century French philosophers French music critics French Roman Catholics French Roman Catholic writers French philosophers of technology Catholic philosophers French people of Jewish descent Phenomenologists Existentialist theologians Christian existentialists Writers on antisemitism Converts to Roman Catholicism from atheism or agnosticism Members of the Académie des sciences morales et politiques Critics of atheism Ontologists French ethicists University of Paris alumni Hidden categories: Pages with French IPA Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Biography with signature Articles with hCards Articles containing French-language text All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Use Oxford spelling from November 2018 Use dmy dates from November 2018 This page was last edited on 20 June 2025, at 23:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gabriel Marcel 44 languages Add topic

