Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Examples 2 Channel models Toggle Channel models subsection 2.1 Digital channel models 2.2 Analog channel models 3 Types 4 Channel performance measures 5 Multi-terminal channels, with application to cellular systems 6 References Toggle the table of contents Communication channel 38 languages العربية Български Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Ido Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Lietuvių Magyar Mirandés Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский සිංහල Türkçe Українська 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Physical or logical connection used for transmission of information This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( March 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Different types of physical transmission media supporting communication channels A communication channel refers either to a physical transmission medium such as a wire, or to a logical connection over a multiplexed medium such as a radio channel in telecommunications and computer networking . A channel is used for information transfer of, for example, a digital bit stream , from one or several senders to one or several receivers . A channel has a certain capacity for transmitting information, often measured by its bandwidth in Hz or its data rate in bits per second .

Communicating an information signal across distance requires some form of pathway or medium. These pathways, called communication channels, use two types of media: Transmission line -based telecommunications cable (e.g.

twisted-pair , coaxial , and fiber-optic cable ) and broadcast (e.g.

microwave , satellite , radio , and infrared ).

In information theory , a channel refers to a theoretical channel model with certain error characteristics. In this more general view, a storage device is also a communication channel, which can be sent to (written) and received from (reading) and allows communication of an information signal across time.

Examples [ edit ] Examples of communications channels include: A connection between initiating and terminating communication endpoints of a telecommunication circuit .

A single path provided by a transmission medium via either physical separation, such as by multipair cable or separation, such as by frequency-division or time-division multiplexing .

A path for conveying electrical or electromagnetic signals, usually distinguished from other parallel paths.

A data storage device which can communicate a message over time.

[ 1 ] The portion of a storage medium, such as a track or band, that is accessible to a given reading or writing station or head.

A buffer from which messages can be put and got .

In a communications system , the physical or logical link that connects a data source to a data sink.

A specific radio frequency , pair or band of frequencies, usually named with a letter, number, or codeword, and often allocated by international agreement, for example: Marine VHF radio uses some 88 channels in the VHF band for two-way FM voice communication.

Channel 16 , for example, is 156.800 MHz. In the US, seven additional channels, WX1 - WX7, are allocated for weather broadcasts.

Television channels such as North American TV Channel 2 at 55.25 MHz, Channel 13 at 211.25 MHz. Each channel is 6 MHz wide.  This was based on the bandwidth required by analog television signals.  Since 2006, television broadcasting has switched to digital modulation ( digital television ) which uses image compression to transmit a television signal in a much smaller bandwidth, so each of these physical channels has been divided into multiple virtual channels each carrying a DTV channel.

Original Wi-Fi uses 13 channels in the ISM bands from 2412 MHz to 2484 MHz in 5 MHz steps.

The radio channel between an amateur radio repeater and an amateur radio operator uses two frequencies often 600 kHz (0.6 MHz) apart. For example, a repeater that transmits on 146.94 MHz typically listens for a ham transmitting on 146.34 MHz.

All of these communication channels share the property that they transfer information. The information is carried through the channel by a signal .

Channel models [ edit ] Mathematical models of the channel can be made to describe how the input (the transmitted signal) is mapped to the output (the received signal). There exist many types and uses of channel models specific to the field of communication. In particular, separate models are formulated to describe each layer of a communication system.

A channel can be modeled physically by trying to calculate the physical processes which modify the transmitted signal. For example, in wireless communications, the channel can be modeled by calculating the reflection from every object in the environment. A sequence of random numbers might also be added to simulate external interference or electronic noise in the receiver.

Statistically, a communication channel is usually modeled as a tuple consisting of an input alphabet, an output alphabet, and for each pair (i, o) of input and output elements, a transition probability p(i, o) . Semantically, the transition probability is the probability that the symbol o is received given that i was transmitted over the channel.

Statistical and physical modeling can be combined. For example, in wireless communications, the channel is often modeled by a random attenuation (known as fading ) of the transmitted signal, followed by additive noise. The attenuation term is a simplification of the underlying physical processes and captures the change in signal power over the course of the transmission. The noise in the model captures external interference or electronic noise in the receiver. If the attenuation term is complex it also describes the relative time a signal takes to get through the channel. The statistical properties of the attenuation in the model are determined by previous measurements or physical simulations.

Communication channels are also studied in discrete-alphabet modulation schemes. The mathematical model consists of a transition probability that specifies an output distribution for each possible sequence of channel inputs. In information theory , it is common to start with memoryless channels in which the output probability distribution only depends on the current channel input.

A channel model may either be digital or analog.

Digital channel models [ edit ] In a digital channel model, the transmitted message is modeled as a digital signal at a certain protocol layer . Underlying protocol layers are replaced by a simplified model. The model may reflect channel performance measures such as bit rate , bit errors , delay , delay variation , etc. Examples of digital channel models include: Binary symmetric channel (BSC), a discrete memoryless channel with a certain bit error probability Binary asymmetric channel (BAC), similar to BSC, but the probability of a flip from 0 to 1 and vice versa is unequal Binary bursty bit error channel model, a channel with memory Binary erasure channel (BEC), a discrete channel with a certain bit error detection (erasure) probability Packet erasure channel , where packets are lost with a certain packet loss probability or packet error rate Arbitrarily varying channel (AVC), where the behavior and state of the channel can change randomly Analog channel models [ edit ] In an analog channel model, the transmitted message is modeled as an analog signal . The model can be a linear or non-linear , time-continuous or time-discrete (sampled) , memoryless or dynamic (resulting in burst errors ), time-invariant or time-variant (also resulting in burst errors), baseband , passband (RF signal model), real-valued or complex-valued signal model. The model may reflect the following channel impairments: Noise model, for example Additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, a linear continuous memoryless model Phase noise model Interference model, for example crosstalk ( co-channel interference ) and intersymbol interference (ISI) Distortion model, for example a non-linear channel model causing intermodulation distortion (IMD) Frequency response model, including attenuation and phase-shift Group delay model Modelling of underlying physical layer transmission techniques, for example a complex-valued equivalent baseband model of modulation and frequency response Radio frequency propagation model , for example Log-distance path loss model Fading model, for example Rayleigh fading , Ricean fading , log-normal shadow fading and frequency selective (dispersive) fading Doppler shift model, which combined with fading results in a time-variant system Ray tracing models, which attempt to model the signal propagation and distortions for specified transmitter-receiver geometries, terrain types, and antennas Propagation graph , models signal dispersion by representing the radio propagation environment by a graph.

Mobility models , which also causes a time-variant system Types [ edit ] Digital ( discrete ) or analog ( continuous ) channel Transmission medium , for example a fiber-optic cable Multiplexed channel Computer network virtual channel Simplex communication , duplex communication or half-duplex communication channel Return channel Uplink or downlink ( upstream or downstream channel) Broadcast channel , unicast channel or multicast channel Channel performance measures [ edit ] These are examples of commonly used channel capacity and performance measures: Spectral bandwidth in Hertz Symbol rate in baud , symbols/s Digital bandwidth in bit/s measures: gross bit rate (signalling rate), net bit rate (information rate), channel capacity, and maximum throughput Channel utilization Spectral efficiency Signal-to-noise ratio in decibel measures: signal-to-interference ratio , E b /N 0 Bit error rate (BER), packet error rate (PER) Latency in seconds : propagation time , transmission time , round-trip delay , end-to-end delay Packet delay variation Eye pattern Multi-terminal channels, with application to cellular systems [ edit ] This section may be confusing or unclear to readers .

Please help clarify the section . There might be a discussion about this on the talk page .

( March 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) See also: Network topology In networks, as opposed to point-to-point communication, the communication media can be shared between multiple communication endpoints (terminals). Depending on the type of communication, different terminals can cooperate or interfere with each other. In general, any complex multi-terminal network can be considered as a combination of simplified multi-terminal channels. The following channels are the principal multi-terminal channels first introduced in the field of information theory [ citation needed ] : A point-to-multipoint channel , also known as a broadcast medium (not to be confused with broadcasting channel ): In this channel, a single sender transmits multiple messages to different destination nodes. All wireless channels except directional links can be considered as broadcasting media, but may not always provide broadcast service. The downlink of a cellular system can be considered as a point-to-multipoint channel, if only one cell is considered and inter-cell co-channel interference is neglected. However, the communication service of a phone call is unicasting .

Multiple access channel: In this channel, multiple senders transmit multiple possible different messages over a shared physical medium to one or several destination nodes. This requires a channel access scheme, including a media access control (MAC) protocol combined with a multiplexing scheme. This channel model has applications in the uplink of cellular networks.

Relay channel : In this channel, one or several intermediate nodes (called relay, repeater or gap filler nodes) cooperate with a sender to send the message to an ultimate destination node.

Interference channel : In this channel, two different senders transmit their data to different destination nodes. Hence, the different senders can have a possible crosstalk or co-channel interference on the signal of each other. The inter-cell interference in cellular wireless communications is an example of an interference channel. In spread-spectrum systems like 3G, interference also occurs inside the cell if non-orthogonal codes are used.

A unicast channel is a channel that provides a unicast service, i.e. that sends data addressed to one specific user. An established phone call is an example.

A broadcast channel is a channel that provides a broadcasting service, i.e. that sends data addressed to all users in the network. Cellular network examples are the paging service as well as the Multimedia Broadcast Multicast Service .

A multicast channel is a channel where data is addressed to a group of subscribing users. LTE examples are the physical multicast channel (PMCH) and multicast broadcast single frequency network (MBSFN).

References [ edit ] ^ Madhow, U. (2014).

Introduction to Communication Systems . Cambridge University Press. p. 1.

ISBN 9781316060865 .

C. E. Shannon , A mathematical theory of communication , Bell System Technical Journal , vol. 27, pp. 379–423 and 623–656, (July and October, 1948) v t e Telecommunications History Beacon Broadcasting Cable protection system Cable TV Communications satellite Computer network Data compression audio DCT image video Digital media Internet video online video platform social media streaming Drums Edholm's law Electrical telegraph Fax Heliographs Hydraulic telegraph Information Age Information revolution Internet Mass media Mobile phone Smartphone Optical telecommunication Optical telegraphy Pager Photophone Prepaid mobile phone Radio Radiotelephone Satellite communications Semaphore Phryctoria Semiconductor device MOSFET transistor Smoke signals Telecommunications history Telautograph Telegraphy Teleprinter (teletype) Telephone The Telephone Cases Television digital streaming Undersea telegraph line Videotelephony Whistled language Wireless revolution Pioneers Nasir Ahmed Edwin Howard Armstrong Mohamed M. Atalla John Logie Baird Paul Baran John Bardeen Alexander Graham Bell Emile Berliner Tim Berners-Lee Francis Blake Jagadish Chandra Bose Charles Bourseul Walter Houser Brattain Vint Cerf Claude Chappe Yogen Dalal Donald Davies Daniel Davis Jr.

Amos Dolbear Thomas Edison Philo Farnsworth Reginald Fessenden Lee de Forest Elisha Gray Oliver Heaviside Robert Hooke Erna Schneider Hoover Harold Hopkins Gardiner Greene Hubbard Bob Kahn Dawon Kahng Charles K. Kao Narinder Singh Kapany Hedy Lamarr Roberto Landell Innocenzo Manzetti Guglielmo Marconi Robert Metcalfe Antonio Meucci Samuel Morse Jun-ichi Nishizawa Charles Grafton Page Radia Perlman Alexander Stepanovich Popov Tivadar Puskás Johann Philipp Reis Claude Shannon Almon Brown Strowger Henry Sutton Charles Sumner Tainter Nikola Tesla Camille Tissot Alfred Vail Thomas A. Watson Charles Wheatstone Vladimir K. Zworykin Internet pioneers Transmission media Coaxial cable Fiber-optic communication optical fiber Free-space optical communication Molecular communication Radio waves wireless Transmission line telecommunication circuit Network topology and switching Bandwidth Links Network switching circuit packet Nodes terminal Telephone exchange Multiplexing Space-division Frequency-division Time-division Polarization-division Orbital angular-momentum Code-division Concepts Communication protocol Computer network Data transmission Store and forward Telecommunications equipment Types of network Cellular network Ethernet ISDN LAN Mobile NGN Public Switched Telephone Radio Television Telex UUCP WAN Wireless network Notable networks ARPANET BITNET CYCLADES FidoNet Internet Internet2 JANET NPL network TANet Toasternet Usenet Locations Africa Americas North South Antarctica Asia Europe Oceania Global telecommunications regulation bodies Telecommunication portal Category Outline Commons NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐pnfd8
Cached time: 20250812024420
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.338 seconds
Real time usage: 0.445 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1105/1000000
Revision size: 14613/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 44755/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1762/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 17212/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.195/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4682047/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  351.248      1 -total
 27.39%   96.197      1 Template:Telecommunications
 26.89%   94.444      1 Template:Navbox
 24.04%   84.433      1 Template:Reflist
 20.81%   73.102      1 Template:Cite_book
 16.98%   59.641      1 Template:Short_description
 13.66%   47.978      1 Template:More_footnotes_needed
 12.46%   43.771      2 Template:Ambox
 10.06%   35.341      2 Template:Pagetype
  4.77%   16.745      1 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:156700:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812024420 and revision id 1303184952. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Communication_channel&oldid=1303184952 " Categories : Information theory Telecommunication theory Television terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from March 2021 All articles lacking in-text citations Use American English from July 2021 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2010 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2010 This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 14:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Communication channel 38 languages Add topic

