Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Usage 3 References Toggle References subsection 3.1 Sources Toggle the table of contents 3-torus 2 languages Español Nederlands Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Cartesian product of 3 circles This article is about the three-dimensional space. For the two-dimensional surface with three holes, see triple torus .

A view from inside a 3-torus. All of the cubes in the image are the same cube, since light in the manifold wraps around into closed loops.

The three-dimensional torus , or 3-torus , is defined as any topological space that is homeomorphic to the Cartesian product of three circles, T 3 = S 1 × × S 1 × × S 1 .

{\displaystyle \mathbb {T} ^{3}=S^{1}\times S^{1}\times S^{1}.} In contrast, the usual torus is the Cartesian product of only two circles.

Description [ edit ] The 3-torus is a three-dimensional compact manifold with no boundary . It can be obtained by "gluing" the three pairs of opposite faces of a cube , where being "glued" can be intuitively understood to mean that when a particle moving in the interior of the cube reaches a point on a face, it goes through it and appears to come forth from the corresponding point on the opposite face, producing periodic boundary conditions . Gluing only one pair of opposite faces produces a solid torus while gluing two of these pairs produces the solid space between two nested tori.

Usage [ edit ] In 1984, Alexei Starobinsky and Yakov Zeldovich at the Landau Institute in Moscow proposed a cosmological model where the shape of the universe is a 3-torus.

[ 1 ] References [ edit ] ^ Overbeye, Dennis.

New York Times 11 March 2003: Web. 16 January 2011.

“Universe as Doughnut: New Data, New Debate” Sources [ edit ] Thurston, William P.

(1997), Three-dimensional Geometry and Topology, Volume 1 , Princeton University Press, p. 31, ISBN 9780691083049 .

Weeks, Jeffrey R.

(2001), The Shape of Space (2nd ed.), CRC Press, p. 13, ISBN 9780824748371 .

v t e Manifolds ( Glossary , List , Category ) Basic concepts Topological manifold Atlas Differentiable/Smooth manifold Differential structure Smooth atlas Submanifold Riemannian manifold Smooth map Submersion Pushforward Tangent space Differential form Vector field Main results (list) Atiyah–Singer index Darboux's De Rham's Frobenius Generalized Stokes Hopf–Rinow Noether's Sard's Whitney embedding Maps Curve Diffeomorphism Local Geodesic Exponential map in Lie theory Foliation Immersion Integral curve Lie derivative Section Submersion Types of manifolds Closed Collapsing Complete ( Almost ) Complex ( Almost ) Contact Fibered Finsler ( Almost ) Flat G-structure Hadamard Hermitian Hyperbolic Kähler Kenmotsu Lie group Lie algebra Manifold with boundary Nilmanifold Oriented Parallelizable Poisson Prime Quaternionic Hypercomplex ( Pseudo- , Sub- ) Riemannian Rizza Stein ( Almost ) Symplectic Tame Tensors Vectors Distribution Lie bracket Pushforward Tangent space bundle Torsion Vector field Vector flow Covectors Closed/Exact Covariant derivative Cotangent space bundle De Rham cohomology Differential form Vector-valued Exterior derivative Interior product Pullback Ricci curvature flow Riemann curvature tensor Tensor field density Volume form Wedge product Bundles Adjoint Affine Associated Cotangent Dual Fiber ( Co- ) Fibration Jet Lie algebra ( Stable ) Normal Principal Spinor Subbundle Tangent Tensor Vector Connections Affine Cartan Ehresmann Form Generalized Koszul Levi-Civita Principal Vector Parallel transport Related Classification of manifolds Gauge theory History Morse theory Moving frame Singularity theory Generalizations Banach manifold Diffeology Diffiety Fréchet manifold K-theory Orbifold Secondary calculus over commutative algebras Sheaf Stratifold Supermanifold Stratified space This topology-related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=3-torus&oldid=1303363828 " Categories : Topology stubs 3-manifolds Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All stub articles This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 15:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents 3-torus 2 languages Add topic

