Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 History 3 Jewish thought 4 Christian thought Toggle Christian thought subsection 4.1 Criticism 4.2 Scriptural arguments 5 Islamic thought 6 See also 7 References 8 Bibliography 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Divine simplicity 8 languages العربية বাংলা Català Español Français 한국어 Português Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia View of God without parts or features Not to be confused with Monotheism .

Part of a series on the Attributes of God in Christianity Core attributes Omnibenevolence Omnipotence Omnipresence Omniscience Eternity Overarching attributes Aseity Oneness Perfection Trinity Miscellaneous Graciousness Holiness Immanence Immutability Impassibility Impeccability Incomprehensibility Incorporeality Kingship Mission Providence Conservation Righteousness Simplicity Sovereignty Transcendence Veracity Emotions expressed by God Jealousy Love Mercy Will Wrath v t e In classical theistic and monotheistic theology , the doctrine of divine simplicity says that God is simple (without parts). God exists as one unified entity, with no distinct attributes; God's existence is identical to God's essence.

Overview [ edit ] The being of God is identical to the "attributes" of God . Characteristics such as omnipresence , goodness, truth and eternity are identical to God's being, not qualities that make up that being as a collection or abstract entities inherent to God as in a substance ; in God, essence and existence are the same.

[ 1 ] Simplicity denies any physical or metaphysical composition in the divine being. God is the divine nature itself, with no accidents (unnecessary properties) accruing to his nature. There are no real divisions or distinctions of this nature; the entirety of God is whatever is attributed to him. God does not have goodness, but is goodness; God does not have existence, but is existence. According to Thomas Aquinas , God is God's existence and God's essence is God's existence.

[ 2 ] Divine simplicity is the hallmark of God's transcendence of all else, ensuring that the divine nature is beyond the reach of ordinary categories and distinctions (or, at least, their ordinary application). "Simplicity in this way confers a unique ontological status that many philosophers find highly peculiar." [ 3 ] When it comes to God's essential nature or attributes, there are no parts or accidents; this is not to be confused with God's accidental or contingent relation to the world (God's non-essential or contingent properties, not God's nature).

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Varieties of this doctrine exist among Jewish , Christian , and Muslim philosophical theologians, especially during the height of scholasticism . Its origins may be traced back to ancient Greek thought, finding apotheosis in Plotinus' Enneads as the Simplex.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] History [ edit ] Views similar to divine simplicity were held by philosophers such as Plato , Thales and Anaximenes . Classical statements about divine simplicity can be found in Augustine , Anselm and Thomas Aquinas . In early Christianity , Philo of Alexandria said that the belief of God as utterly simple was widely held.

[ 8 ] One of the earliest mentions of divine simplicity in Christian theology is by Irenaeus (130 – c.

202 AD ).

[ 9 ] Early Christian theology viewed simplicity as necessary for preserving God's transcendence; Athenagoras of Athens , in the second century, said that God is indivisible and unchangeable.

[ 8 ] Clement of Alexandria , Basil , and Cyril saw simplicity as preserving the transcendence and perfection of God.

[ 8 ] Jewish thought [ edit ] See also: Jewish principles of faith § Nature of God , Tzimtzum , Apophatic theology § Judaism , Free will in theology § In Jewish thought , and Kuzari § Question of attributes Maimonides , in The Guide for the Perplexed , said: If, however, you have a desire to rise to a higher state, viz., that of reflection, and truly to hold the conviction that God is One and possesses true unity, without admitting plurality or divisibility in any sense whatever, you must understand that God has no essential attribute in any form or in any sense whatever, and that the rejection of corporeality implies the rejection of essential attributes. Those who believe that God is One, and that He has many attributes, declare the unity with their lips, and assume plurality in their thoughts.

[ 10 ] According to Maimonides, there can be no plurality of faculties, moral dispositions, or essential attributes in God. To say that God is all-knowing, all-powerful, and all-good is to introduce plurality, if these qualities are separate attributes. Maimonides concluded that it is untrue to say that God's power is greater than ours, that God's life is more permanent than ours, or God's knowledge is broader than ours. He believed that statements such as "God lives" or "God is powerful" are nonsense if they are interpreted normally, but they can be understood if analyzed as disguised negations. Maimonides also believed that negation is objectionable to the degree that it introduces complexity; God is neither this nor that, and verbal expression fails us. Citing Psalm 65 , he concluded that the highest form of praise of God is silence.

[ 11 ] For others, the axiom of divine unity ( Shema ) forms the understanding of divine simplicity.

Bahya ibn Paquda ( Duties of the Heart 1:8) points out that God's oneness is "true oneness" (האחד האמת), as opposed to "circumstantial oneness" (האחד המקרי). He develops this idea to show that an entity that is truly one must be free of properties, indescribable, and unlike anything else. Such an entity would not be subject to change, utterly independent, and the root of everything.

[ 12 ] The implication of either approach is so strong that the two concepts are often presented as synonymous: "God is not two or more entities, but a single entity of oneness even more single and unique than any single thing in creation ... He cannot be sub-divided into different parts – therefore, He can't be anything other than one. It is a positive commandment to know this, for it is written ( Deuteronomy 6:4) ' ... the Lord is our God, the Lord is one.

' " [ 13 ] Despite its apparent simplicity, this concept raises a number of difficulties. Since God's simplicity does not allow for any structure – even conceptually – divine simplicity appears to entail the following dichotomy : God is absolutely simple, containing no element of form or structure.

God's essence contains every possible element of perfection.

This paradox is articulated by Moshe Chaim Luzzatto in Derech Hashem , who describes the dichotomy as arising from the inability to comprehend absolute unity: God’s existence is absolutely simple, without combinations or additions of any kind. All perfections are found in Him in a perfectly simple manner. However, God does not entail separate domains – even though in truth there exist in God qualities which, within us, are separate ... Indeed the true nature of His essence is that it is a single attribute, (yet) one that intrinsically encompasses everything that could be considered perfection. All perfection therefore exists in God, not as something added on to His existence, but as an integral part of His intrinsic identity ... This is a concept that is very far from our ability to grasp and imagine ...

[ full citation needed ] Christian thought [ edit ] Part of a series on Thomas Aquinas Thomism Scholasticism Apophatic theology Aseity Divine simplicity Analogia entis Quinque viae Beatific vision Actus purus Actus essendi Primum Movens Correspondence theory Hylomorphism Substance theory ( ousia ) Substantial form Quiddity ( essence / accident nature ) Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Transcendentals Aristotelian ethics Cardinal / Theological Natural law Determinatio Just war Satisfaction theory of the atonement Thomistic sacramental theology Just price Concupiscence Intrinsic finality Thomistic theology of merit Compatibilism Theological intellectualism Works Summa Theologica Treatise on Law Summa contra Gentiles Contra Errores Graecorum Commentaries on Aristotle De regno, ad regem Cypri De regimine Judaeorum De principiis naturae, ad fratrem Sylvestrum De aeternitate mundi, contra murmurantes De motu cordis, ad Magistrum Philippum Quaestiones Disputatae de Veritate Commentary on the Book of Causes De iudiciis astrorum Compendium Theologiae Catena aurea Hymns and prayers Adoro te devote Creator ineffabilis Lauda Sion O sacrum convivium Pange lingua gloriosi corporis mysterium Tantum ergo Sacris solemniis Panis angelicus Verbum supernum prodiens O salutaris hostia Influences Aristotle St. Paul Pseudo-Dionysius St. Augustine St. Boethius Avicenna Peter Lombard Averroes Maimonides St. Albertus Magnus Classical Thomists Cantimpré Saint-Cher Beauvais Penyafort Innocent V Lessines Piperno Moerbeke Martí Trilia Houghton Apolda Sutton Auvergne Benedict XI Fontaines Winterburn Colonna Ymbert di Bologna Fiadoni Guidonis Nédellec Paludanus Holkott Regina Bromyard Kydones Eymerich Calecas Ferrer Dominici Gerson Gorkum Sabunde Capreolus Pierozzi de Flandria Torquemada de Rupe Niger Almadura Mirabilibus Savonarola Fabri Gostynin Głogów Tetzel Deza Mazzolini di Ferrara Gaetanus Koellin Pagnino Faber Vitoria Catherinus Ory Soto (Domingo) Cano Pelargus Soto (Pedro) Senensis Mercado Medina de Granada Fernandes Báñez Zumel Porrecta Duperron Medices Lessius Malvenda Lemos Álvarez Oliva Rispoli Riccardi Gravina Poinsot Ripada Molinier Torres Vallgornera Pallavicino Nicolaï Lynch Ferre Gonet Bancel Quétif Massoulié Alexandre Échard Benedict XIII Serry Plessis Gotti Leocata Concina Benedict XIV De Rubeis Burke de Boxadors Mamachi Gazzaniga Neo-Thomism Aertsen Anquín Anscombe Arintero Ashley Barron Bocheński Bouquillon Bourke Canals Coffey Copleston Coreth Cornoldi Daujat De Wulf Fabro Fairweather Farrer Feser Franca Gardet Garrigou-Lagrange Gauthier Geach George Grenier Hawkins von Donnersmarck Henle Hugon Inagaki Jolivet Kleutgen Knasas Komar Koninck Krąpiec Leo XIII Lira Lonergan MacIntyre Maréchal Maritain Marshall Mascall McInerny Meinvielle Millán-Puelles Newman Pace Pecci Pegis Piolanti Pirotta Pius X Ramírez Régis Ripperger Russo Ryan Sanseverino Sertillanges Simon Smith Stein Tanaka Taparelli Torre Ušeničnik White Wilhelmsen Wippel Woodbury Zigliara History Medieval philosophy Condemnations of 1210–1277 Canonization of Thomas Aquinas Second scholasticism Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas School of Salamanca Physical premotion Congregatio de Auxiliis Salmanticenses and Complutenses Neo-scholasticism Æterni Patris Editio Leonina Neo-Thomism in Brazil Analytical Thomism ICUSTA Scholarship Aquinas Index Thomisticus Nova et Vetera Revue thomiste The Cambridge Companion to Aquinas The Oxford Handbook of Aquinas The Thomist Thomas Aquinas Dictionary Art 1476 Altarpiece Carafa Chapel Charles Bridge statue Cortona Triptych Enthroned Madonna and Child with Saints Fiesole Altarpiece Madonna and Child with St Dominic and St Thomas Aquinas San Pietro Martire Triptych The Apotheosis of Saint Thomas Aquinas The Vision of Fray Lauterio The Vision of Saint Thomas Aquinas Temptation of St. Thomas Triumph of Saint Thomas Aquinas Related topics Aristotelianism Actus primus Catholic theology Doctor of the Church Dominican Order Empiricism List of institutions named after Aquinas Saint Thomas Aquinas Church Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e See also: Trinity and Nontrinitarianism Simplicity (or metaphysical, absolute simplicity) states that the characteristics of God are not parts of God which make up God. God is simple; God is those characteristics. God does not have goodness, but is goodness; God does not have existence, but is existence. According to Thomas Aquinas , God is God's existence and God's essence is God's existence.

[ 2 ] God is goodness, which is his nature, which is his essence, which is his existence.

[ 14 ] William F. Vallicella says, "To say that God lacks metaphysical parts is to say inter alia that God is free of matter-form composition, potency-act composition, and existence-essence composition. There is also no real distinction between God as a subject of his attributes and his attributes." [ 15 ] God exhausts what it means to be God and, in principle, there cannot be more than one God.

[ 2 ] Divine simplicity is fundamentally about God's attributes: his nature or essence. The doctrine does not state that God cannot have the "property" of creating a universe.

[ 2 ] [ 14 ] John Duns Scotus has a more moderate view of metaphysical simplicity than Aquinas.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] According to Duns Scotus, there is a formal distinction between God's attributes.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] This distinction is not conceptual or metaphysical.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] The formal distinction is logical; omnipotence is not logically equivalent to omniscience.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Duns Scotus affirms that God's nature is not composed of metaphysical properties or parts.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] Yann Schmitt says, As I already said, for a better understanding of the compatibility between divine simplicity and the distinction of attributes in God, I propose to use the notion of formal distinction developed by Duns Scotus.

FD X is formally distinct from Y if and only if (1) X and Y are inseparable even for an omnipotent being, (2) X and Y have not the same definition, (3) the distinction exists de re.

[ 19 ] The notion of de re is contrasted with de dicto .

De dicto concerns a proposition about what is said, and de re concerns the thing (or being).

[ 20 ] A formal distinction exists between the attribute of omnipotence and the attribute of omniscience because omnipotence and omniscience are inseparable for an omnipotent being (God); omnipotence and omniscience do not have the same definition, and the distinction between them exists de re (not conceptually or propositionally – de dicto ).

[ 20 ] A formal distinction is a logical distinction.

[ 18 ] The upshot for Scotus is that omnipotence and omniscience are logically distinct for God, who does not have the metaphysical properties (or attributes) of omnipotence or omniscience; [ 18 ] metaphysically speaking, God is omnipotence and is omniscient.

[ 18 ] Spatial simplicity is endorsed by most traditional Christian theists, who do not consider God a physical object. Temporal simplicity is endorsed by many theists, but is controversial among Christian theologians.

Thomas V. Morris controversially describes property simplicity as the property of having no properties.

[ 21 ] In the medieval era, theologians and philosophers held a view known as "constituent ontology" wherein natures were constituents of things. According to Aquinas, an individual nature was more like a concrete object than an abstract object. One person's humanity was not the same as another person's humanity; each had human nature, individuated by the matter ( materia signata ) from which each person was composed. For entities which are immaterial (such as angels), there is no matter to individuate their nature; each one is its nature. Each angel is one of a kind, although this claim was controversial .

[ 22 ] Theologians holding the doctrine of property simplicity distinguish modes of divine simplicity by negating any notion of composition from the meaning of terms used to describe it. In quantitative or spatial terms, God is simple – as opposed to being made up of pieces – and present in entirety everywhere if, in fact, present anywhere. In terms of essence, God is simple as opposed to being made up of form and matter, body and soul, or mind and act. If distinctions are made between God's attributes, they are distinctions of the "modes" of God's being rather than real or essential divisions. In terms of subjects and accidents (as in the phrase "goodness of God"), divine simplicity allows for a conceptual distinction between the person of God and the personal attribute of goodness but disallows that God's identity (or "character") is dependent on goodness. According to the doctrine, it is impossible to consider the goodness in which God participates separately from the goodness which God is.

[ 23 ] Aquinas says that as creatures, our concepts are drawn from the creation (the assumption of empiricism ); according to divine simplicity, God's attributes can only be spoken of by analogy since the properties of any created thing differ from its being.

[ 24 ] Divine simplicity was affirmed at the Fourth Lateran Council and First Vatican Council and is accepted in some form by most Christians.

[ 25 ] The simplicity of God is affirmed by the First Vatican Council 's apostolic constitution Dei Filius : The holy Catholic Apostolic Roman Church believes and confesses that there is one true and living God, Creator and Lord of heaven and earth, almighty, eternal, immense, incomprehensible, infinite in intelligence, in will, and in all perfection, who, as being one, sole, absolutely simple and immutable spiritual substance , is to be declared as really and essentially distinct from the world, of supreme beatitude in and from Himself, and ineffably exalted above all things which exist, or are conceivable, except Himself.

— Dei Filius , Chapter I Criticism [ edit ] The concept of divine simplicity as espoused by Thomas Aquinas was condemned, alongside Thomism in general, in a Patriarchal Synod of 1368 organised by the Patriarch of Constantinople Philotheos I , which also canonized Gregory Palamas & re-affirmed the decision of the ninth ecumenical council on Palamas' teachings of the distinction between God's essence & energies being the dogma for the Eastern Orthodox Church .

[ 26 ] Absolute (Thomistic) divine simplicity has been criticized by a number of Christian theologians, including John S. Feinberg, Thomas Morris, William Lane Craig , and Alvin Plantinga ; in his essay "Does God Have a Nature?", Plantinga calls it "a dark saying indeed".

[ 27 ] Plantinga presents three arguments against Thomistic divine simplicity. Concepts can apply univocally to God, even if language to describe God is limited, fragmentary, halting, and inchoate.

[ 28 ] In the concept of something like being a horse, for something to be a horse is known; the concept applies to an object if the object is a horse. If no concepts apply to God, it is confusing to say that there is such a person as God; God does not have properties such as wisdom, creation and omnipotence, and would not have any properties for which there are concepts. God would not have properties such as existence or self-identification. If God transcends human experience, nothing can be said univocally about God; such a claim presupposes knowledge, transcending human experience, which applies to God. One reply to this objection is to distinguish equivocal language and analogical language; the former lacks a univocal element, but the latter has an element of univocal language.

[ 29 ] The claim that God can only be described analogically is, according to Plantinga, a double-edged sword. If univocal language cannot be used to describe God and argue against simplicity, it cannot be used in arguments for Thomistic divine simplicity. If the usual modes of inference in reasoning about God cannot be used, it cannot be argued that God is not distinct from his properties. Plantinga concludes, "This way of thinking begins in a pious and commendable concern for God's greatness and majesty and augustness, but it ends in agnosticism and in incoherence." [ 30 ] Edward Feser has responded to Plantinga.

[ 31 ] Feser says that Plantinga is attacking a strawman when he says that proponents of analogical (religious) language are committed to the view that the language of God is metaphorical and not literal; metaphorical language differs from analogical language, so Plantinga is conflating analogy with metaphor.

[ 31 ] Plantinga presents three criticisms of metaphysical simplicity, saying that it is difficult to grasp the doctrine and difficult to see why anyone would accept it. According to the Thomist doctrine of simplicity states, all abstract objects are identical with God's essence and, hence, God himself. Plantinga says that this clashes with the fact that the property of being a horse is distinct from the property of being a turkey, and both are distinct from God and his essence.

[ 32 ] One response to this objection is to note a distinction between properties and predicates.

[ 29 ] A second response notes that supporters of divine simplicity do not think of God's nature as exemplifying abstract objects that are independent of God.

[ 31 ] Plantinga says that if abstract objects that are identical with God are restricted to the properties God exemplifies, the doctrine remains problematic. Metaphysical simplicity states that God has no accidental (contingent) properties, it seems that God has accidental properties such as having created Adam and knowing that Adam sinned. Some of God's characteristics characterize him in every possible world, and others do not.

[ 33 ] Plantinga also says that the conflation of God's actuality with his potentiality is problematic. As it seems that there are characteristics God has but could have lacked, it also seems that God lacks characteristics he could have had. God has not created all the persons he will create; there is at least one individual essence that God does not now have, but will have. If so, God has potentiality with respect to that characteristic.

[ 34 ] Feser notes that someone who holds to divine simplicity does not have to hold to this view; one can think that God has "Cambridge" properties, which are properties in a loose sense (such as the "property" of being a husband or creating a universe).

[ 31 ] Plantinga's third critique challenges the heart of simplicity. Metaphysical simplicity claims that there is no divine composition; there is no complexity of properties in God, and he is identical with his nature and each of his properties. According to Plantinga, this view has two difficulties. If God is identical with each of his properties, each of his properties is identical with each of his other properties; God has only one property. This flies in the face of the idea that God has power and mercy, neither of which is identical with the other. If God is identical with his properties and each of God's properties is a property, God is a property and has one property: himself. However, properties do not cause anything; no property could have created the world, and no property could know anything. If God is a property, he is an abstract object with no power, life, love, or awareness.

[ 35 ] Feser notes that this objection assumes a Platonist metaphysics about abstract objects. Supporters of divine simplicity do not think of God as a Platonic-abstract property or impersonal; God is personal, personhood, and intelligent.

[ 3 ] God does not only have the concrete property of divine simplicity; for God, God is God's essential "properties" (attributes). A distinction exists between properties and predicates, so humans distinguish power from mercy; in divine simplicity, power and mercy are the same things in God.

[ 31 ] [ 36 ] Vallicella responds to Plantinga by arguing that Plantinga's objections assume a non-constituent ontology and are unconvincing.

[ 15 ] In his 1983 review of "Does God Have a Nature?", Alfred J. Freddoso wrote that Plantinga's critique lacks the depth of analysis to propose jettisoning the theological basis of divine simplicity laid in Christian thought by Augustine, Anselm, Bonaventure, Aquinas, Scotus, Ockham, and others.

[ 37 ] William Lane Craig calls the Thomistic view of property simplicity "philosophically and theologically unacceptable", also objecting to divine simplicity. According to the doctrine, God is similar in all possible worlds . Since the statement "God knows x" is equivalent to "x is true", it is inexplicable why those worlds vary if, in every one, God knows, loves, and wills the same things.

[ 22 ] Feser responded to Craig's objections to divine simplicity.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] Morris calls it is an idea whose implications are difficult to defend, and whose advantages can be had in other ways. It is an idea whose motivation, under close scrutiny, unconvincing.

[ 41 ] John S. Feinberg writes, "These philosophical problems plus the biblical considerations raised earlier lead me to conclude that simplicity is not one of the divine attributes. This doesn't mean that God has physical parts, but that the implications of the doctrine of metaphysical simplicity are too problematic to maintain the doctrine." [ 42 ] Jordan Barrett responded to the claim that divine simplicity is not biblical.

[ 43 ] Jeffrey Brower and Michael Bergmann present a truthmaker defense of divine simplicity.

[ 23 ] Saying "God is omnibenevolent" means that "God is his omnibenevolence"; God is not identical to a property of omnibenevolence; he is identical to God's goodness, and identical to himself.

[ 44 ] [ 23 ] Vallicella says, "Accordingly, to say that God is identical to his omniscience is just to say that God is identical to the truthmaker of 'God is omniscient'. And that amounts to saying that God is identical to God. In this way, one avoids the absurdity of saying that God is identical to a property. What God is identical to is not the property of omniscience but the referent of 'God's omniscience,' which turns out to be God himself. And similarly for the rest of God's intrinsic and essential attributes." [ 45 ] Another truthmaker theory posits a moderate version of divine simplicity between absolute divine simplicity (God is not composed of metaphysical parts) and minimal divine simplicity (God is not composed of spatial, temporal or material parts).

[ 19 ] The deadlock of absolute divine simplicity. According to this view, God would not be composed but would be complex. Yann says, "The minimal truthmaker requirement can then be assumed without any contradiction with divine simplicity. <God is good> is true in virtue of the perfection of God, that is God's goodness. <God is omniscient> is true in virtue of another perfection of God, God's omniscience. We do not have to say that God is identical with His goodness or His omniscience." [ 19 ] Scriptural arguments [ edit ] Writers such as Herman Bavinck and Louis Berkhof have argued that the doctrine of divine simplicity is affirmed by the Epistle of John , since its author seems to identify God with love [ 46 ] and light.

[ 47 ] Advocates of the doctrine have also argued that it is affirmed by Old Testament passages such as Exodus 3:14 (identifying God as "being"), Deuteronomy 6:4 (seen as affirming the oneness of God) and Jeremiah 23:6, identifying God with righteousness. Critics of the doctrine say that it is unlikely that the biblical authors had metaphysics in mind in the verses used, and the lack of explicit verses on the doctrine argues against it.

[ 48 ] Theologians such as Charles Caldwell Ryrie have argued that divine simplicity underscores the scriptural view of God's self-existence.

[ 49 ] Islamic thought [ edit ] See also: Attributes of God in Islam Views of divine simplicity were championed by the Mu'tazili , which resulted in an apophatic theology . By postulating a distinction between existence and essence for all created beings, which was perceived to be uniquely absent in God, Al-Farabi established another model of divine simplicity.

Ibn Sinā supported and elaborated this position; Al-Ghazali contested this identification of divine essence and existence, but saw divine attributes and acts as enveloped in (and indistinct from) the divine essence. This view of divine simplicity was shared with critics of Muslim philosophical writers such as Ibn Taymiyyah .

[ 50 ] See also [ edit ] Aseity Ein Sof (a Jewish Kabalistic concept of divine unity) Essence-Energies Distinction ( Trinitarian , doctrine of the Eastern Orthodox Church ) Euthyphro dilemma Pantheism (conception of God) Tawhid (the Islamic concept of divine unity) Unitarianism (concept of divine unity – opposite Trinitarianism) Wahdat al-Wujood ( Sufi conception of God which borders on Pantheistic and Panentheistic conceptions) References [ edit ] ^ "Summa Theologiae: The simplicity of God (Prima Pars, Q. 3)" .

newadvent.com . Retrieved 2019-10-09 .

^ a b c d "Divine Simplicity | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" .

^ a b c "Divine Simplicity | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" .

^ "Divine Simplicity" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2019.

^ Bussanich John, Plotinus's metaphysics of the One in The Cambridge Companion to Plotinus, ed. Lloyd P.Gerson, p. 42, 1996, Cambridge University Press, UK. For instances, see Plotinus, Second Ennead, Fourth Tractate, Section 8 ( Stephen MacKenna 's translation, Sacred Texts) ^ "The Enneads of Plotinus: The Fifth Ennead: Fourth Tractate: Section 1" .

www.sacred-texts.com .

^ "The Enneads of Plotinus: The Second Ennead: Ninth Tractate: Section 1" .

www.sacred-texts.com .

^ a b c "Divine Simplicity | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" . Retrieved 2022-05-28 .

^ Simons, Jonatán (2023-09-28).

Divine Simplicity in the Theology of Irenaeus . Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-67763-0 .

^ "Moses Maimonides, Guide for the Perplexed, Part 1, chapter 50" . Friedländer tr. [1904], at sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 2013-10-29 .

^ Seeskin, Kenneth (2006-01-24).

"Maimonedes" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Archive . Retrieved 22 April 2014 .

^ Torah.org – The Judaism Site ^ "Mishneh Torah" .

Mada 1:7.

Archived from the original on 16 July 2023.

^ a b "Divine Simplicity" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2019.

^ a b "Divine Simplicity" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2019.

^ a b c d e "Scotus, John Duns | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" .

^ a b c d e "John Duns Scotus" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2019.

^ a b c d "Scotus, John Duns | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" .

^ a b c Schmitt, Yann (2013). The deadlock of absolute divine simplicity.

International Journal for Philosophy of Religion 74 (1):117–130.

^ a b "De re/De dicto – Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy" .

^ Morris, Thomas V. (1997).

Our idea of God : an introduction to philosophical theology . Vancouver, B.C.: Regent College Pub. p. 114.

ISBN 978-1573831017 .

^ a b Craig, William Lane.

"Divine Simplicity" . Retrieved 22 April 2014 .

^ a b c "Divine Simplicity" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2019.

^ White, Thomas Joseph (2022).

"Divine Simplicity" .

St Andrews Encyclopaedia of Theology .

^ "Divine Simplicity | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" .

^ Russell, Norman (September 1, 2022).

Gregory Palamas: The Hesychast Controversy and the Debate with Islam . Liverpool University Press. pp.

413– 415.

ISBN 978-1802077476 .

^ Plantinga, Alvin. "Does God Have a Nature?" in Plantinga, Alvin, and James F. Sennett. 1998.

The analytic theist: an Alvin Plantinga reader . Grand Rapids, Michigan: W. B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, 228.

ISBN 978-0802842299 ^ Plantinga, Alvin (2000).

Does God have a nature?

(Reprinted ed.). Milwaukee: Marquette Univ. Press. p. 18.

ISBN 978-0874621457 .

^ a b "Divine Simplicity | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" .

^ Plantinga, Alvin (2000).

Does God have a nature?

(Reprinted ed.). Milwaukee: Marquette Univ. Press. p. 26.

ISBN 978-0874621457 .

^ a b c d e Edward Feser. Five Proofs of the Existence of God. San Francisco, California:Ignatius Press, 2017 ^ Plantinga, Alvin (2000).

Does God have a nature?

(Reprinted ed.). Milwaukee: Marquette Univ. Press. p. 37.

ISBN 978-0874621457 .

^ Plantinga, Alvin (2000).

Does God have a nature?

(Reprinted ed.). Milwaukee: Marquette Univ. Press. p. 43.

ISBN 978-0874621457 .

^ Plantinga, Alvin (2000).

Does God have a nature?

(Reprinted ed.). Milwaukee: Marquette Univ. Press. p. 46.

ISBN 978-0874621457 .

^ Plantinga, Alvin (2000).

Does God have a nature?

(Reprinted ed.). Milwaukee: Marquette Univ. Press. p. 47.

ISBN 978-0874621457 .

^ "Divine Simplicity" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2019.

^ Freddoso A (1983).

"Review of Does God Have a Nature?" .

Christian Scholar's Review .

12 (2). University of Notre Dame: 78– 83.

^ "Keep It Simple | Edward Feser" . April 2020.

^ "Edward Feser: William Lane Craig on divine simplicity" . November 2009.

^ "Edward Feser: Craig on divine simplicity and theistic personalism" . 15 April 2016.

^ Morris, Thomas V. (1997).

Our idea of God : an introduction to philosophical theology . Vancouver, B.C.: Regent College Pub. p. 115.

ISBN 978-1573831017 .

^ John S. Feinberg (2006).

No One Like Him: the doctrine of God (Revised ed.). Wheaton. Ill.: Crossway Books. p. 335.

ISBN 978-1581348118 .

^ Barrett, J. P. (2017). Divine Simplicity: A Biblical and Trinitarian Account. United Kingdom: Fortress Press.

^ Bergmann, Michael, and Jeffrey Brower. “A Theistic Argument against Platonism (and in Support of Truthmakers and Divine Simplicity)” In Oxford Studies in Metaphysics 2, edited by Dean Zimmerman, 357–386. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006.

^ Vallicella, William F., "Divine Simplicity", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2019 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = < https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2019/entries/divine-simplicity/ > ^ 1 John 4:8 ^ 1 John 1:5 ^ Dolezal, James E. (2011-11-09).

God Without Parts . Wipf & Stock Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-4982-6155-5 .

^ Ryrie, Charles C. (1999-01-11).

Basic Theology: A Popular Systematic Guide to Understanding Biblical Truth . Moody Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-57567-498-8 .

^ Arberry, A.J. (2007).

Revelation and Reason in Islam . New York: Routledge. pp.

104– 108.

ISBN 978-0415438872 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Burell, David.

Aquinas: God and Action . London; Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1979.

Burell, David.

Knowing the Unknowable God: Ibn-Sina, Maimonides, Aquinas . Notre Dame: Notre Dame University Press, 1986.

Brower, Jeffrey. "Making Sense of Divine Simplicity", Faith and Philosophy 25 (1) (2008): 3–30.

Dolezal, James.

God without Parts: Divine Simplicity and the Metaphysics of God's Absoluteness . Eugene: Pickwick Publications, 2011.

Dolezal, James.

"Trinity, Simplicity and the Status of God's Personal Relations" , International Journal of Systematic Theology 16 (1) (2014): 79–98.

Leftow, Brian. "Is God an Abstract Object?".

Nous . 1990.

Maimonides, Moses.

The Guide of the Perplexed , trans. M Friedländer. New York: Dover, 1956.

Plantinga, Alvin.

Does God Have a Nature?

. Milwaukee: Marquette University Press, 1980.

Plato.

Parmenides . Many editions.

Plotinus.

Enneads V, 4, 1; VI, 8, 17; VI, 9, 9–10. Many editions.

Pseudo-Dionysius.

The Divine Names in Pseudo-Dionysius: The Complete Works , trans. Colm Luibheid. New York: Paulist Press, 1987.

Radde-Gallwitz, Andrew.

Basil of Caesarea, Gregory of Nyssa, and the Transformation of Divine Simplicity . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009.

Stump, Eleonore and Kretzmann, Norman. “Absolute Simplicity”.

Faith and Philosophy . 1985.

Thomas Aquinas.

On Being and Essence ( De Esse et Essentia ) , 2nd ed., trans. Armand Maurer, CSB. Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Medieval Studies, 1968.

Thomas Aquinas.

Summa Theologica I, Q. 3, A. 3 "On the Simplicity of God" . Many editions.

Weigel, Peter.

Aquinas on Simplicity: An Investigation into the Foundations of His Philosophical Theology . Bern: Peter Lang, 2008.

Wolterstorff, Nicholas. "Divine Simplicity", In Philosophical Perspectives 5: Philosophy of Religion.

Atascadero, Calif.: Ridgeview Publishing, 1991, 531–552.

External links [ edit ] Divine Simplicity Reasonable Faith Divine Simplicity , Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Divine Simplicity , Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy God and Other Necessary Beings , Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Shaar HaYichud - The Gate of Unity , Dovber Schneuri - A detailed explanation of the paradox of divine simplicity.

v t e Theology Conceptions of God Theism Forms Deism Dystheism Henotheism Hermeticism Kathenotheism Nontheism Monolatry Monotheism Urmonotheismus Mysticism Panentheism Pandeism Pantheism Polydeism Polytheism Spiritualism Theistic finitism Theopanism Concepts Deity Divinity Gender of God and gods Goddess Numen Singular god theologies By faith Abrahamic religions Baháʼí Faith Judaism Christianity Islam Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Tenrikyo Zoroastrianism Concepts Absolute Brahman Emanationism Logos Supreme Being God as Time Good ( Ahura Mazda , Father of Greatness ) Trinitarianism Athanasian Creed Comma Johanneum Consubstantiality Homoousian Homoiousian Hypostasis Perichoresis Shield of the Trinity Trinitarian formula Trinity Trinity of the Church Fathers Trinitarian universalism Eschatology Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Fitra Heaven / Hell By religion Buddhist Christian Hindu Islamic Jewish Taoist Zoroastrian Feminist Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Judaism Mormonism Goddesses Other concepts Attributes of God in Christianity / in Islam Binitarianism Demiurge Divine simplicity Divine presence Egotheism Exotheology Hermeneutics Holocaust Godhead in Christianity Latter Day Saints Great Architect of the Universe Great Spirit Apophatic theology Olelbis Open theism Personal god Phenomenological definition Philo's view Process Tian Unmoved mover Names of God in Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism By faith Christian History Outline Biblical canon Glossary Paterology Christology Pneumatology Cosmology Ecclesiology Eschatology Ethics Hamartiology Messianism Philosophy Political Practical Public Sophiology Soteriology Hindu Ayyavazhi theology Krishnology Islamic Oneness of God Prophets Holy Scriptures Angels Predestination Last Judgment Jewish Abrahamic prophecy Aggadah Denominations Kabbalah Philosophy Pagan Slavic Native Faith Wiccan East Asian Tenrikyo Religion portal Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6dddccb9f6‐dv8xb
Cached time: 20250814192826
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.758 seconds
Real time usage: 0.936 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3649/1000000
Revision size: 40562/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 181094/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4932/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 185980/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.433/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7184440/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  734.489      1 -total
 42.70%  313.604      1 Template:Reflist
 21.20%  155.735     17 Template:Cite_web
 14.14%  103.871     20 Template:Cite_book
 10.73%   78.775      1 Template:Attributes_of_God
 10.25%   75.297      1 Template:Sidebar
  9.87%   72.516      1 Template:Short_description
  7.54%   55.415      1 Template:Theology
  7.26%   53.350      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  6.11%   44.871      3 Template:Blockquote Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:175838:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814192826 and revision id 1305902779. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Divine_simplicity&oldid=1305902779 " Categories : Attributes of God in Christian theology Philosophical analogies Jewish mysticism Jewish philosophy Thomas Aquinas Conceptions of God Christianity and Judaism related controversies Mereology Divinity Classical theism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from July 2024 This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 19:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Divine simplicity 8 languages Add topic

