Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 England and Wales and Ireland 2 Poland 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Attorney at law 10 languages العربية Deutsch Lietuvių Nederlands Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português کوردی Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Lawyer, in some jurisdictions Attorney at law or attorney-at-law , usually abbreviated in everyday speech to attorney , is the preferred term for a practising lawyer in certain jurisdictions, including South Africa (for certain lawyers), Sri Lanka , the Philippines, and the United States . The term has its roots in the verb to attorn , meaning to transfer one's rights and obligations to another.

England and Wales and Ireland [ edit ] The attorney , in the sense of a lawyer who acts on behalf of a client, has an ancient pedigree in English law. The Statute of Merton 1235 uses the Latin expression attorñ in a phrase rendered into English by The Statutes of the Realm as [ 1 ] It is provided and granted that every freeman, which oweth suit to the county, trything, hundred, and wapentake , or to the court of his Lord, may freely make his attorney to do those suits for him.

The term was formerly used in England and Wales and Ireland for lawyers who practised in the common law courts. They were officers of the courts and were under judicial supervision.

[ 2 ] Attorneys did not generally actually appear as advocates in the higher courts, a role reserved (as it still usually is) for barristers .

Solicitors , lawyers who practised in the courts of equity , were considered to be more respectable than attorneys and by the mid-19th century many attorneys were calling themselves solicitors.

[ 2 ] The Supreme Court of Judicature Act 1873 in England and Wales and the Supreme Court of Judicature Act (Ireland) 1877 in Ireland redesignated all attorneys as solicitors.

[ 3 ] The term persists in legal usage in the United Kingdom solely in the instance of patent attorneys , who are legal professionals having sat professional qualifications and are expert in acting in all matters and procedures relating to patent law and practice. They may, or may not, be additionally either solicitors or barristers or have come to the practice through a technical expert route (e.g. following a PhD and period of practice in a scientific or engineering field).

In the now three separate jurisdictions of England and Wales , Ireland , and Northern Ireland , references in any enactment to attorneys, with the exception of patent attorneys, must be construed as references to solicitors.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] The position of Attorney-General also persists.

Poland [ edit ] In Poland , it is used as a free profession of public trust dealing with the provision of legal aid, in particular providing legal advice and consultations, drafting legal opinions, drafting legal acts, and appearing before courts and offices as a proxy or defence counsel. It is carried out on the basis of the Law of 6 July 1982 on attorney-at-law. In addition to the obligations arising from the law, every attorney-at-law and trainee attorney-at-law is also subject to the ethical standards of the attorney-at-law profession, defined in particular in the Code of Ethics for Attorney-at-Law.

See also [ edit ] Look up attorney in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Attorneys in Japan Attorneys in Sri Lanka Attorneys in the United States Attorneys in South Africa Attorney-in-law (Poland) References [ edit ] ^ Luders, Alexander Luders, ed. (1820) [1235 Statute of Merton (originally in Latin)].

The Statutes of the Realm (1963 reprint ed.). London: Dawsons of Pall Mall. page 4, listing 20 Hen III Stat Merton X.

^ a b A. H. Manchester, A Modern Legal History of England and Wales, 1750–1850 , Butterworths: London, 1980.

^ Supreme Court of Judicature Act 1873, s 87; Supreme Court of Judicature Act (Ireland) 1877, s 78; Jowitt's Dictionary of English Law 3rd edition, London: Thomson Reuters (Legal) Limited 2010, p. 190 ^ The Solicitors Act 1974 , section 89(6) as read with section 87(1) ^ Judicature (Northern Ireland) Act 1978 , section 105(2) ^ The Solicitors Act 1954, section 84 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Attorney_at_law&oldid=1300149359 " Categories : Lawyers Professional titles and certifications Professional certification in law Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2023 Use British English from October 2023 Articles containing Medieval Latin-language text This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 14:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Attorney at law 10 languages Add topic

