Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Institutions 3 Main sights 4 Transportation 5 Personalities 6 See also 7 References 8 Literature 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Dahlem (Berlin) 20 languages Afrikaans Cebuano Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 52°27′29″N 13°17′15″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.45806°N 13.28750°E ﻿ / 52.45806; 13.28750 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For other uses, see Dahlem .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Dahlem" Berlin – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Quarter of Berlin in Germany Dahlem Quarter of Berlin "Rost- and Silberlaube" complex of the FU Berlin Location of Dahlem in Steglitz-Zehlendorf and Berlin Dahlem Show map of Germany Dahlem Show map of Berlin Coordinates: 52°27′29″N 13°17′15″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.45806°N 13.28750°E ﻿ / 52.45806; 13.28750 Country Germany State Berlin City Berlin Borough Steglitz-Zehlendorf Founded 1275 Area • Total 8.39 km 2 (3.24 sq mi) Elevation 50 m (160 ft) Population (2023-12-31) [ 1 ] • Total 16,874 • Density 2,000/km 2 (5,200/sq mi) Time zone UTC+01:00 ( CET ) • Summer ( DST ) UTC+02:00 ( CEST ) Postal codes 12203, 14169, 14195 Vehicle registration B Dahlem ( German: [ˈdaːlɛm] ⓘ or [ˈdaːləm] ) is a locality of the Steglitz-Zehlendorf borough in southwestern Berlin . Until Berlin's 2001 administrative reform it was a part of the former borough of Zehlendorf . It is located between the mansion settlements of Grunewald and Lichterfelde West .

Dahlem is one of the most affluent parts of the city and a center for academic research . It is home to the Freie Universität Berlin , with its architecturally significant Philological Library ("The Brain") . Several other research institutions and museums, as well as parts of the Grunewald forest with its renaissance hunting lodge, are located in Dahlem.

The U3 line of the Berlin U-Bahn system connects Dahlem to central Berlin.

History [ edit ] Dahlem Manor The first written account of Dahlem dates to the year 1275. The history of the village is connected to the Dahlem Demesne ( Domäne Dahlem ) first mentioned in 1450. Its estates were sold to the state of Prussia in 1841 and developed by dividing it into lots for building villas and mansions , similar to the development of the older mansion settlements of Lichterfelde West and Grunewald . The Demesne buildings today house a working farm and an agricultural open-air museum . In 1920 the village was amalgamated into Greater Berlin . From 1931 on Martin Niemöller , a leader of the Confessing Church , was pastor of the United Protestant Sankt-Annen-Kirche until he was arrested by the Nazis in 1937.

During the Cold War Dahlem belonged to the American Sector of West Berlin . From 1945 to 1991 the seat of the Allied Kommandatura of Berlin was in Dahlem on Kaiserswerther Straße . Today it serves as the office for the president of the local university . Until 1994, the headquarters of the United States Army Berlin command and the Berlin Brigade were located on Clayallee street. Parts of the building are still used by the Embassy of the United States in Berlin . The former library and Outpost theater across the street today house the Allied Museum . Because many of Berlin's artistic, cultural, and educational institutions were located in the city's historical center in the former eastern part of Berlin , West Berlin authorities established many duplicates in Dahlem - above all the Freie Universität Berlin (" Free University Berlin") in 1948, which was established by students and scholars as an antipole to the increasingly communist " Universität Unter den Linden ". The newly founded university should uphold the traditional values of academic freedom and the educational ideal proposed by Wilhelm von Humboldt .

Rudi Dutschke , spokesman of the German student movement in the 1960s, is buried at the cemetery of the Sankt-Annen-Kirche .

Institutions [ edit ] Freie Universität Berlin (Free University of Berlin, known as FU Berlin) Julius Kühn-Institut (Federal Research Centre for Cultivated Plants) Prussian Privy State Archives of the Prussian Cultural Heritage Foundation German Archaeological Institute Institute for Museum Research Zuse Institute Berlin Several branches of the Max Planck Institute (former Kaiser Wilhelm Institute ) : The Max Planck Institute Archives The Fritz Haber Institute The Max Planck Institute for Human Development The Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics The Max Planck Institute for the History of Science Main sights [ edit ] The Allied Museum of the American , British and French forces in West Berlin The Brücke Museum Museum of European Cultures Dahlem Manor Jesus-Christus church, where most of the legendary Berlin Philharmonic recordings were made from the 1950s through the 1980s owing to its fine acoustics Jagdschloss Grunewald , a renaissance hunting lodge built in 1543 Transportation [ edit ] Dahlem is served by the U3 line on the Berlin U-Bahn system. As in the neighboring Wilmersdorf , the historic metro stations are a special feature of the district. Stations in Dahlem include Breitenbachplatz , Podbielskiallee , Dahlem-Dorf , Thielplatz and Oskar-Helene-Heim .

Breitenbachplatz station Podbielskiallee station Dahlem Dorf station Freie Universität ("Free University") Thielplatz station Oskar-Helene-Heim station Personalities [ edit ] Brigitte Horney Karl-Eduard von Schnitzler Wolf Jobst Siedler Max Schmeling See also [ edit ] Grunewald forest References [ edit ] ^ "Einwohnerinnen und Einwohner im Land Berlin am 31. Dezember 2023" .

Amt für Statistik Berlin-Brandenburg . February 2024.

Literature [ edit ] Durie, William (2012).

The British Garrison Berlin 1945 - 1994: nowhere to go ... a pictorial historiography of the British Military occupation / presence in Berlin . Berlin: Vergangenheitsverlag ( de ).

ISBN 978-3-86408-068-5 .

OCLC 978161722 .

Michael Engel: " Geschichte Dahlems ". Berlin-Verlag (Berlin, 1984), ISBN 3-87061-155-3 External links [ edit ] Media related to Dahlem at Wikimedia Commons v t e Boroughs and quarters of Berlin Charlottenburg-Wilmersdorf (4) Charlottenburg Charlottenburg-Nord Grunewald Halensee Schmargendorf Westend Wilmersdorf Friedrichshain-Kreuzberg (2) Friedrichshain Kreuzberg Lichtenberg (11) Alt-Hohenschönhausen Falkenberg Fennpfuhl Friedrichsfelde Karlshorst Lichtenberg Malchow Neu-Hohenschönhausen Rummelsburg Wartenberg Marzahn-Hellersdorf (10) Biesdorf Hellersdorf Kaulsdorf Mahlsdorf Marzahn Mitte (1) Gesundbrunnen Hansaviertel Mitte Moabit Tiergarten Wedding Neukölln (8) Britz Buckow Gropiusstadt Neukölln Rudow Pankow (3) Blankenburg Blankenfelde Buch Französisch Buchholz Heinersdorf Karow Niederschönhausen Pankow Prenzlauer Berg Rosenthal Stadtrandsiedlung Malchow Weißensee Wilhelmsruh Reinickendorf (12) Borsigwalde Frohnau Heiligensee Hermsdorf Konradshöhe Lübars Märkisches Viertel Reinickendorf Tegel Waidmannslust Wittenau Spandau (5) Falkenhagener Feld Gatow Hakenfelde Haselhorst Kladow Siemensstadt Spandau Staaken Wilhelmstadt Steglitz-Zehlendorf (6) Dahlem Lankwitz Lichterfelde Nikolassee Schlachtensee Steglitz Wannsee Zehlendorf Tempelhof-Schöneberg (7) Friedenau Lichtenrade Mariendorf Marienfelde Schöneberg Tempelhof Treptow-Köpenick (9) Adlershof Alt-Treptow Altglienicke Baumschulenweg Bohnsdorf Friedrichshagen Grünau Johannisthal Köpenick Müggelheim Niederschöneweide Oberschöneweide Plänterwald Rahnsdorf Schmöckwitz Districts Localities Zones Greater Berlin Act Former boroughs Authority control databases International VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dahlem_(Berlin)&oldid=1300922211 " Categories : Localities of Berlin Steglitz-Zehlendorf Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Pages using the Phonos extension Articles needing additional references from October 2021 All articles needing additional references Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using infobox settlement with bad settlement type Coordinates on Wikidata Pages with German IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 04:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dahlem (Berlin) 20 languages Add topic

