Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Analysis and synopsis Toggle Analysis and synopsis subsection 2.1 Clinical evidence (sections I–III) 2.1.1 Exceptions to the pleasure principle 2.1.2 Repetition compulsion 2.1.3 Independence from the pleasure principle 2.2 Speculation (sections IV–VII) 2.2.1 Biology and repetition compulsion 2.2.2 Masochism as clinical manifestation 2.2.3 Conclusion 3 The essay's relation to Freud's grief 4 Continuation of themes in the essay Toggle Continuation of themes in the essay subsection 4.1 Freud's later writing and legacy 5 Critical reception 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Beyond the Pleasure Principle 16 languages العربية Български Català Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano ქართული Latina Magyar Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1920 essay by Sigmund Freud Beyond the Pleasure Principle Author Sigmund Freud Original title Jenseits des Lustprinzips Language German Publication date 1920 Publication place Germany Part of a series of articles on Psychoanalysis Sigmund Freud's couch Concepts Psychosexual development Psychosocial development (Erikson) Unconscious Preconscious Consciousness Psychic apparatus Id, ego and superego Ego defenses Projection Introjection Libido Drive Transference Countertransference Resistance Denial Dreamwork Cathexis Important figures Abraham Adler Balint Bion Breuer Chodorow Erikson Fairbairn Ferenczi Freud (Anna) Freud (Sigmund) Fromm Guattari Horney Irigaray Jacobson Jones Jung Kohut Klein Kristeva Lacan Laing Laplanche Mahler Rank Reich Spielrein Stekel Strachey Sullivan Winnicott Žižek Important works The Interpretation of Dreams (1899) The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901) Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905) Psychology of the Unconscious (1912) Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920) The Ego and the Id (1923) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Mass Psychology of Fascism (1933) The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis (1964) Anti-Oedipus (1972) The Sublime Object of Ideology (1989) Schools of thought Adlerian Ego psychology Jungian Lacanian Interpersonal Intersubjective Marxist Object relations Reichian Relational Self psychology Training Boston Graduate School of Psychoanalysis British Psychoanalytic Council British Psychoanalytical Society Columbia University Center for Psychoanalytic Training and Research International Psychoanalytical Association World Association of Psychoanalysis List of schools of psychoanalysis See also Child psychoanalysis Depth psychology Psychodynamics Psychoanalytic theory Psychology portal v t e Beyond the Pleasure Principle ( German : Jenseits des Lustprinzips ) is a 1920 essay by Sigmund Freud . It marks a major turning point in the formulation of his drive theory , where Freud had previously attributed self-preservation in human behavior to the drives of Eros and the regulation of libido , governed by the pleasure principle . Revising this as inconclusive, Freud theorized beyond the pleasure principle, newly considering the death drives [ 1 ] (or Thanatos , the Greek personification of death [ 2 ] ) which refers to the tendency towards destruction and annihilation, often expressed through behaviors such as aggression , repetition compulsion , and self-destructiveness .

[ 3 ] Overview [ edit ] The essay, marking Freud's major revision of his drive theory, elaborates on the struggle between two opposing drives. In the first few sections, Freud describes these as Eros , which produces creativity, harmony, sexual connection, reproduction, and self-preservation; and the "death drives" (what some call "Thanatos" [ 4 ] ), which brings destruction, repetition, aggression, compulsion, and self-destruction.

In sections IV and V, Freud posits that the process of creating living cells binds energy and creates an imbalance. It is the pressure of matter to return to its original state which gives cells their quality of living. The process is analogous to the creation and exhaustion of a battery. This pressure for molecular diffusion is referred to as a "death-wish". The compulsion of the matter in cells to return to a diffuse, inanimate state extends to the whole living organism. Thus, the psychological death-wish is a manifestation of an underlying physical compulsion present in every cell, which Freud directly corresponds to the death drives.

Freud also states the basic differences, as he saw them, between his approach and Carl Jung 's and summarizes published research into basic drives in Section VI to establish his revisions.

Analysis and synopsis [ edit ] What have been called the "two distinct frescoes or canti " [ 5 ] of Beyond the Pleasure Principle break between sections III and IV. If, as Otto Fenichel remarked, Freud's "new [instinctual] classification has two bases, one speculative, and one clinical", [ 6 ] thus far the clinical. In Freud's own words, the second section "is speculation, often far-fetched speculation, which the reader will consider or dismiss according to his individual predilection" [ 7 ] —it has been noted that "in Beyond the Pleasure Principle , Freud used that unpromising word "speculations" more than once".

[ 8 ] Clinical evidence (sections I–III) [ edit ] Freud begins with "a commonplace then unchallenged in psychoanalytic theory: 'The course of mental events is automatically regulated by the pleasure principle ... a strong tendency toward the pleasure principle ' ".

[ 9 ] After considering the inevitable presence of unpleasant experiences in the life of the mind, he concludes the book's first section to the effect that the presence of such unpleasant experiences "does not contradict the dominance of the pleasure principle ... does not seem to necessitate any far-reaching limitation of the pleasure principle." [ 10 ] Exceptions to the pleasure principle [ edit ] Freud proceeds to look for "evidence, for the existence of hitherto unsuspected forces 'beyond' the pleasure principle." [ 9 ] He found exceptions to the universal power of the pleasure principle—"situations ... with which the pleasure principle cannot cope adequately" [ 11 ] —in four main areas: children's games, as exemplified in his grandson's famous "fort-da" game; [ 12 ] "the recurrent dreams of war neurotics ...; the pattern of self-injuring behaviour that can be traced through the lives of certain people ["fate neurosis"]; the tendency of many patients in psycho-analysis to act out over and over again unpleasant experiences of their childhood." [ 13 ] Repetition compulsion [ edit ] From these cases, Freud inferred the existence of motivations beyond the pleasure principle.

[ 13 ] Freud already felt in 1919 that he could safely postulate "the principle of a repetition compulsion in the unconscious mind, based upon instinctual activity and probably inherent in the very nature of the instincts—a principle powerful enough to overrule the pleasure-principle".

[ 14 ] In the first half of Beyond the Pleasure Principle , "a first phase, the most varied manifestations of repetition , considered as their irreducible quality, are attributed to the essence of drives " [ 15 ] in precisely the same way.

Building on his 1914 article "Recollecting, Repeating and Working Through", Freud highlights how the "patient cannot remember the whole of what is repressed in him, and ... is obliged to repeat the repressed material as a contemporary experience instead of ...

remembering it as something belonging to the past:" [ 16 ] a "compulsion to repeat." Independence from the pleasure principle [ edit ] Freud still wanted to examine the relationship between repetition compulsion and the pleasure principle.

[ 17 ] Although compulsive behaviors evidently satisfied some sort of drive, they were a source of direct unpleasure.

[ 17 ] Somehow, "no lesson has been learnt from the old experience of these activities having led only to unpleasure.  In spite of that, they are repeated, under pressure of a compulsion".

[ 18 ] Also noting repetitions in the lives of normal people—who appeared to be "pursued by a malignant fate or possessed by some 'daemonic' power," [ 18 ] likely alluding to the Latin motto errare humanum est, perseverare autem diabolicum ("to err is human, to persist [in committing errors] is of the devil")—Freud concludes that the human psyche includes a compulsion to repeat that is independent of the pleasure principle.

[ 19 ] [ page needed ] Speculation (sections IV–VII) [ edit ] Arguing that dreams in which one relives trauma serve a binding function in the mind, connected to repetition compulsion, Freud admits that such dreams are an exception to the rule that the dream is the fulfillment of a wish .

[ 20 ] Asserting that the first task of the mind is to bind excitations to prevent trauma (so that the pleasure principle does not begin to dominate mental activities until the excitations are bound), he reiterates the clinical fact that for "a person in analysis ... the compulsion to repeat the events of his childhood in the transference evidently disregards the pleasure principle in every way".

[ 21 ] Biology and repetition compulsion [ edit ] Freud begins to look for analogies of repetition compulsion in the "essentially conservative ... feature of instinctual life ... the lower we go in the animal scale the more stereotyped does instinctual behavior appear".

[ 22 ] Thereafter "a leap in the text can be noticed when Freud places the compulsion to repeat on an equal footing with 'an urge ... to restore an earlier state of things ' " [ 23 ] —ultimately that of the original inorganic condition. Declaring that "the aim of life is death" and "inanimate things existed before living ones", [ 24 ] Freud interprets an organism's drive to avoid danger only as a way of avoiding a short-circuit to death: the organism seeks to die in its own way. He thus found his way to his celebrated concept of the death drive , an explanation that some scholars have labeled as "metaphysical biology".

[ 25 ] Thereupon, "Freud plunged into the thickets of speculative modern biology, even into philosophy, in search of corroborative evidence" [ 26 ] —looking to "arguments of every kind, frequently borrowed from fields outside of psychoanalytic practice, calling to the rescue biology, philosophy, and mythology".

[ 27 ] He turned to prewar experiments on protozoa—of perhaps questionable relevance, even if it is not the case that 'his interpretation of the experiments on the successive generations of protozoa contains a fatal flaw'.

[ 28 ] The most that can perhaps be said is that Freud did not find "any biological argument which contradicts his dualistic conception of instinctual life", [ 29 ] but at the same time, "as Jones (1957) points out, 'no biological observation can be found to support the idea of a death instinct, one which contradicts all biological principles ' " [ 30 ] either.

Another line of enquiry into the relation between psychoanalysis and biology has emerged from Jacques Derrida’s readings of Beyond the Pleasure Principle in his posthumously published lecture series La vie la mort .

[ 31 ] Francesco Vitale has demonstrated how closely Derrida’s interest in the natural sciences is linked to his engagement with Freud, activating the theory of the death drives in terms of a radical re-thinking of biological life as constitutively inscribed by death.

[ 32 ] Within the historiography of psychoanalysis, special attention has been drawn to Freud's cooperation with Sándor Ferenczi about biology. Between 1914 and 1924, Freud and Ferenczi worked on the unfinished project of a so called bioanalysis.

[ 33 ] The aim was to re-interpret organic life departing from psychoanalytic notions. This undertaking has left several traces in Beyond the Pleasure Principle and it forms a psychoanalytic counter-narrative to the popular Darwinisms of Freud's time.

[ 34 ] Masochism as clinical manifestation [ edit ] Freud then continued with a reference to "the harbour of Schopenhauer 's philosophy"; but in groping for a return to the clinical he admitted that "it looks suspiciously as though we were trying to find a way out of a highly embarrassing situation at any price".

[ 35 ] Freud eventually decided that he could find a clinical manifestation of the death instinct in the phenomenon of masochism , "hitherto regarded as secondary to sadism ... and suggested that there could be a primary masochism, a self-injuring tendency which would be an indication of the death instinct".

[ 36 ] In a footnote he cited Sabina Spielrein admitting that "A considerable part of this speculation has been anticipated in a work which is full of valuable matter and ideas but is unfortunately not entirely clear to me: (Sabina Spielrein: Die Destruktion als Ursache des Werdens , Jahrbuch für Psychoanalyse , IV, 1912). She designates the sadistic component as 'destructive'." [ 37 ] To then explain the sexual instinct as well in terms of a compulsion to repeat, Freud inserts a myth from Plato that humans are driven to reproduce in order to join together the sexes, which had once existed in single individuals who were both male and female—still "in utter disregard of disciplinary distinctions"; [ 38 ] and admits again the speculative nature of his own ideas, "lacking a direct translation of observation into theory ... One may have made a lucky hit or one may have gone shamefully astray".

[ 39 ] Conclusion [ edit ] Nevertheless, with the libido or Eros as the life force finally set out on the other side of the repetition compulsion equation, the way was clear for the book's closing "vision of two elemental pugnacious forces in the mind, Eros and Thanatos, locked in eternal battle".

[ 26 ] The essay's relation to Freud's grief [ edit ] Freud's daughter Sophie died at the start of 1920, partway between Freud's first (1919) version and the version of Beyond the Pleasure Principle reworked and published in 1920. Freud insisted that the death had no relation to the contents of the book. In a July 18, 1920, letter to Max Eitingon , Freud wrote, "The Beyond is now finally finished.  You will be able to confirm that it was half ready when Sophie lived and flourished".

[ 40 ] He had however already written (in June) to colleague and psychoanalyst Sándor Ferenczi "that 'curious continuations' had turned up in it, presumably the part about the potential immortality of protozoa". Ernest Jones considers Freud's claim on Eitingon "a rather curious request ... [perhaps] an inner denial of his novel thoughts about death having been influenced by his depression over losing his daughter".

[ 41 ] Others have also wondered about "inventing a so-called death instinct—is this not one way of theorising, that is, disposing of—by means of a theory—a feeling of the "demoniac" in life itself ... exacerbated by the unexpected death of Freud's daughter"?

[ 42 ] —and it is certainly striking that "the term 'death drive'— Todestrieb —entered his correspondence a week after Sophie Halberstadt's death"; so that we may well accept at the very least that the "loss can claim a subsidiary role ... [in]his analytic preoccupation with destructiveness".

[ 43 ] Continuation of themes in the essay [ edit ] On his final page, Freud acknowledges that his theorising "in turn raises a host of other questions to which we can at present find no answer".

[ 44 ] Whatever legitimate reservations there may be about "the improbability of our speculations. A queer instinct, indeed, directed to the destruction of its own organic home", [ 45 ] Freud's speculative essay has proven remarkably fruitful in stimulating further psychoanalytic research and theorising, both in himself and in his followers; and we may consider it as a prime example of Freud in his role "as a problem finder —one who raises new questions ... called attention to a whole range of human phenomena and processes".

[ 46 ] Thus for example André Green has suggested that Freud "turned to the biology of micro-organisms ... because he was unable to find the answers to the questions raised by psychoanalytic practice": the fruitfulness of the questions—in the spirit of ' Maurice Blanchot 's sentence, " La réponse est le malheur de la question " [The answer is the misfortune of the question]' [ 47 ] —remains nonetheless unimpaired.

Freud's later writing and legacy [ edit ] The distinction between pleasure principle and death drive led Freud to restructure his model of the psyche.

[ 48 ] With Beyond the Pleasure Principle , Freud also introduced the question of violence and destructiveness in humans.

[ 48 ] These themes play an important role in Civilization and Its Discontents , in which Freud suggests that civilization has repeatedly tried and failed to repress the death drives. Freud's indication "that in cases of traumatism there is a 'lack of any preparedness for anxiety' ... is a forerunner of the distinction he would later make ... between 'automatic anxiety' and 'anxiety as a signal ' ".

[ 49 ] For Jacques Lacan , repetition compulsion was one of the "four ... terms introduced by Freud as fundamental concepts, namely, the unconscious , repetition , the transference and the drive ".

[ 50 ] Eric Berne adapted the way "Freud speaks of the repetition compulsion and the destiny compulsion ... to apply them to the entire life courses" [ 51 ] of normals and neurotics alike.

Gilles Deleuze observed that "in Beyond the Pleasure Principle , Freud is not really preoccupied with the exceptions to that principle", concluding that "there are no exceptions to the principle—though there would indeed seem to be some rather strange complications in the workings of pleasure." [ 52 ] Both Melanie Klein and Lacan were to adopt versions of the death drive in their own theoretical constructs. "Klein's concept of the death drive differs from Freud's ... but there is an ever-increasing reference to the death drive as a given cause of mental development" [ 53 ] in her works. Lacan for his part considered that "the death drive is only the mask of the symbolic order , in so ... far as it has not been realised", adding modestly of Beyond the Pleasure Principle "... either it makes not the least bit of sense or it has exactly the sense I say it has".

[ 54 ] Critical reception [ edit ] Within the psychoanalytic reception, Beyond the Pleasure Principle may be Freud's most controversial text. At the same time it is likely his most commented text in philosophical literature.

[ 55 ] Ever since its publication in 1920 it has been recognised as the zenith of Freudian metapsychology.

Jacques Lacan described it as an "extraordinary text of Freud's, unbelievably ambiguous, almost confused".

[ 56 ] Peter Gay remarked in Freud: A Life for Our Time that " Beyond the Pleasure Principle is a difficult text ... the reassuring intimacy with clinical experience that marks most of Freud's papers, even at their most theoretical, seems faint here, almost absent".

[ 57 ] On the same terms, Gilles Deleuze wrote in his 1967 literary study Masochism: Coldness and Cruelty that "the masterpiece which we know as Beyond the Pleasure Principle is perhaps the one where he engaged most directly—and how penetratingly—in specifically philosophical reflection." [ 58 ] Ernest Jones , one of Freud's closest associates and a member of his Inner Ring, stated that "the train of thought [is] by no means easy to follow ... and Freud's views on the subject have often been considerably misinterpreted." [ 59 ] Jones concluded that "This book is further noteworthy in being the only one of Freud's which has received little acceptance on the part of his followers".

[ 60 ] Many of Freud's colleagues and students initially rejected the theories proposed in Beyond the Pleasure Principle because the idea of a drive towards death seemed strange.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] References [ edit ] ^ Freud used the plural "death drives" ( Todestriebe ) more often than in the singular .

^ David, Karen Kate (2009).

"Parthanatos, a messenger of death" .

Frontiers in Bioscience (Landmark Edition) .

14 (3): 1116– 1128.

doi : 10.2741/3297 .

ISSN 1093-9946 .

PMC 4450718 .

PMID 19273119 .

^ Eric Berne , What Do You Say After You Say Hello?EDSON (London, 1975) pp. 399-400.

^ Detrixhe, Jonathan J. (2020). "Thanatos". In Zeigler-Hill, Virgil; Shackelford, Todd K. (eds.).

Encyclopedia of Personality and Individual Differences . Cham: Springer International Publishing. pp.

5462– 5463.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-24612-3_637 .

ISBN 978-3-319-24612-3 .

^ Laplanche, Life . p. 107.

^ Otto Fenichel, The Psychoanalytic Theory of Neurosis (London 1946). p. 58.

^ Sigmund Freud, Beyond the Pleasure Principle in On Metapsychology (Middlesex 1987). p. 295.

^ Gay, Freud . p. 704n.

^ a b Gay, Freud . p. 399.

^ Freud, Beyond . p. 280.

^ Jean-Michel Quinodoz, Reading Freud (London 2005). p. 187.

^ Clark, Robert (October 24, 2005).

"Repetition Compulsion" .

The Literary Encyclopedia . Retrieved March 15, 2020 .

^ a b Jones, Life . p. 506.

^ Sigmund Freud, "The Uncanny" (1919), in Studies in Parapsychology (Alix Strachey trans.). p. 44.

^ Jean Laplanche, Life and Death in Psychoanalysis (London 1976). p. 107.

^ Freud, Beyond . p. 288.

^ a b Freud, Beyond . p. 290.

^ a b Freud, Beyond . p. 292.

^ Freud, Sigmund.

Beyond the Pleasure Principle (The Standard Edition) . Trans. James Strachey. New York: Liveright Publishing Corporation, 1961.

^ Freud, Beyond . p. 304.

^ Freud, Beyond . p. 308.

^ Jones, Life . p. 507.

^ Gunnar Karlson, Psychoanalysis in a New Light (Cambridge 2010). p. 147.

^ Freud, Beyond . p. 311.

^ Schuster, Aaron (2016).

The Trouble with Pleasure. Deleuze and Psychoanalysis .

Cambridge, Massachusetts : MIT Press . p.

32 .

ISBN 978-0-262-52859-7 .

^ a b Gay, Freud . p. 401.

^ Laplanche, Life . p. 110.

^ Malcolm Macmillan, Freud evaluated (MIT 1997). p. 400.

^ Jean-Michel Quinodoz, Reading Freud (London 2005). p. 190.

^ Charles Rycroft, A Critical Dictionary of Psychoanalysis (London 1995). p. 31.

^ Jacques Derrida , La vie la mort: Séminaire (1975–1976) , Paris: Seuil 2019.

^ Francesco Vitale, Biodeconstruction. Jacques Derrida and the Life Sciences , transl. Mauro Senatore. Albany: State University of New York Press 2018.

^ Ulrike May, The Third Step in Drive Theory: On the Genesis of Beyond the Pleasure Principle, in: Psychoanalysis and History , July 2015, vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 205-272 ^ Jenny Willner, Neurotic Evolution: Bioanalysis against Biologism in Beyond the Pleasure Principle, in: Towards the Limits of Freudian Thinking. Critical Edition and Readings of Beyond the Pleasure Principle , ed. by Herman Westerink, Jenny Willner, Philippe Van Haute. Leuven University Press 2024, pp. 225-256 https://doi.org/10.2307/jj.18108264.9 ^ Freud, Beyond . p. 322 and p. 328.

^ Jones, Life p. 509 ^ Freud, Beyond . p. 328 ^ Teresa de Lauretis, Freud's Drive (Basingstoke 2008). p. 77.

^ Freud, Beyond . p. 333.

^ Gay, Freud . p. 703.

^ Jones, Life . p. 504.

^ Maria Torok, in Nicolas Abraham/Maria Torok, The Wolf Man's Magic Word (Minneapolis 1986). p. 90.

^ Gay, Freud . p. 395.

^ Freud, Beyond . p. 336.

^ Sigmund Freud, New Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis (London 1991). p. 139.

^ Howard Gardner, Extraordinary Minds (London 1997). p. 82.

^ André Green, in P. B. Talamo et al., W. R. Bion (London 2007). p. 119 and p. 122.

^ a b Angela Richards, "Editor's Note" Metapsychology . p. 272.

^ Quinodox, Reading Freud . p. 189.

^ Jacques Lacan, The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psycho-Analysis (London 1994). p. 12.

^ Eric Berne, What Do You Say After You Say Hello?

(Corgi 1975). p. 58.

^ Gilles Deleuze, Masochism: Coldness and Cruelty (Zone Books, 1989). p. 111.

^ L. Stonebridge/J. Phillips, Reading Melanie Klein (London 1998). p. 30.

^ Lacan, Seminar II . p. 326 and p. 60.

^ Herman Westerink, Jenny Willner: "Dimensions of 'Beyond'. An Introduction", in Towards the Limits of Freudian Thinking. Critical Edition and Readings of Beyond the Pleasure Principle , Leuven UP 2024, pp. 11-28.

https://doi.org/10.2307/jj.18108264.4 ^ Jacques-Alain Miller, The Seminar of Jacques Lacan: Book II (Cambridge 1988). p. 37.

^ Peter Gay , Freud: A Life for Our Time (London 1988). p. 398.

^ Gilles Deleuze, Masochism: Coldness and Cruelty (Zone Books, 1989). p. 111.

^ Ernest Jones, The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud (London 1964). pp. 510–11.

^ Jones, Life . p. 505.

^ Freud, Sigmund.

Civilization and its Discontents .

^ Boeree, Dr. C. George. "Sigmund Freud." Webspace.

2009. Web. 22 July 2010 .

Further reading [ edit ] Jacques Derrida 's The Post Card: From Socrates to Freud and Beyond Bernard Stiegler 's " Desire and Knowledge: The Dead Seize the Living " Herman Westerink, Jenny Willner, Philippe Van Haute (eds.): Towards the Limits of Freudian Thinking. Critical Editions and Readings of Beyond the Pleasure Principle Leuven University Press 2024 https://doi.org/10.2307/jj.18108264 External links [ edit ] Beyond the Pleasure Principle (C. J. M. Hubback, trans., 1922.) Jenseits des Lustprinzips at Project Gutenberg (in German) Laplanche, Jean ; Pontalis, Jean-Bertrand (2018) [1973].

The Language of Psychoanalysis .

Abingdon-on-Thames : Routledge .

ISBN 978-0-429-92124-7 .

[ permanent dead link ] " Death Instincts "  [ sic ]; " Thanatos "; " Nirvana Principle" ; " Compulsion to Repeat " (" Repetition compulsion ").

v t e Sigmund Freud Books On Aphasia (1891) Studies on Hysteria (1895) The Interpretation of Dreams (including On Dreams ) (1899) The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901) Jokes and Their Relation to the Unconscious (1905) Totem and Taboo (1913) Introduction to Psychoanalysis (1916–17) The History of the Psychoanalytic Movement (1917) Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego (1921) The Ego and the Id (1923) The Question of Lay Analysis (1926) The Future of an Illusion (1927) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) Moses and Monotheism (1939) Essays " The Aetiology of Hysteria " (1896) Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905) Delusion and Dream in Jensen's Gradiva (1907) Creative Writers and Day-Dreaming (1908) Leonardo da Vinci, A Memory of His Childhood (1910) On Narcissism (1914) The History of the Psychoanalytic Movement (1914) Some Character-Types Met with in Psycho-Analytic Work (1915) Thoughts for the Times on War and Death (1916) Mourning and Melancholia (1918) Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920) Medusa's Head (1922) Dostoevsky and Parricide (1928) Case studies "Dora" (Ida Bauer) Emma Eckstein Herbert Graf ("Little Hans") Irma's injection "Anna O." ( Bertha Pappenheim ) "Rat Man" Sergei Pankejeff ("Wolfman") Daniel Paul Schreber Original concepts Psychoanalysis Id, ego and superego Libido Preconscious Ego ideal censorship Free association Transference Psychosexual development Oral stage Anal stage Phallic stage Latency stage Genital stage Oedipus complex Father complex Deferred obedience Reality principle Seduction theory Related Bibliography complete works Archives Vienna home and museum London home and museum 1971 statue Interment Freudian slip Humor Inner circle Neo-Freudianism Views on homosexuality Religious views Cultural depictions Freud: The Secret Passion (1962 film) The Visitor (1993 play) Mahler on the Couch (2010 film) A Dangerous Method (2011 film) Freud (2020 TV series) Freud's Last Session (2023 film) Family Martha Bernays (wife) Anna Freud (daughter) Ernst L. Freud (son) Clement Freud (grandson) Lucian Freud (grandson) Walter Freud (grandson) Amalia Freud (mother) Jacob Freud (father) Edward Bernay (nephew) Jofi (dog) Prizes Sigmund Freud Prize Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Beyond_the_Pleasure_Principle&oldid=1306571120 " Categories : Essays by Sigmund Freud History of psychology 1920 essays Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing German-language text Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2022 Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with German-language sources (de) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from October 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 13:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Beyond the Pleasure Principle 16 languages Add topic

