Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mechanical Toggle Mechanical subsection 1.1 Electronic 2 History 3 Applications 4 Fechner color 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Stroboscope 38 languages العربية Asturianu Беларуская Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Кыргызча Lietuvių Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Instrument used to make a cyclically moving object appear to be slow-moving, or stationary This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Stroboscope" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A bouncing ball captured with a stroboscopic flash at 25 images per second.

A strobe light flashing at the proper period can appear to freeze or reverse cyclical motion A stroboscope, also known as a strobe , is an instrument used to make a cyclically moving object appear to be slow-moving, or stationary. It consists of either a rotating disk with slots or holes or a lamp such as a flashtube which produces brief repetitive flashes of light.  Usually, the rate of the stroboscope is adjustable to different frequencies.  When a rotating or vibrating object is observed with the stroboscope at its vibration frequency (or a submultiple of it), it appears stationary.  Thus stroboscopes are also used to measure frequency.

The principle is used for the study of rotating , reciprocating , oscillating or vibrating objects.  Machine parts and vibrating string are common examples.  A stroboscope used to set the ignition timing of internal combustion engines is called a timing light .

Mechanical [ edit ] In its simplest mechanical form, a stroboscope can be a rotating cylinder (or bowl with a raised edge) with evenly spaced holes or slots placed in the line of sight between the observer and the moving object. The observer looks through the holes/slots on the near and far side at the same time, with the slots/holes moving in opposite directions. When the holes/slots are aligned on opposite sides, the object is visible to the observer.

Alternately, a single moving hole or slot can be used with a fixed/stationary hole or slot. The stationary hole or slot limits the light to a single viewing path and reduces glare from light passing through other parts of the moving hole/slot.

Viewing through a single line of holes/slots does not work, since the holes/slots appear to just sweep across the object without a strobe effect.

The rotational speed is adjusted so that it becomes synchronised with the movement of the observed system, which seems to slow and stop. The illusion is caused by temporal aliasing , commonly known as the stroboscopic effect .

Electronic [ edit ] In electronic versions, the perforated disc is replaced by a lamp capable of emitting brief and rapid flashes of light. Typically a gas-discharge or solid-state lamp is used, because they are capable of emitting light nearly instantly when power is applied, and extinguishing just as fast when the power is removed.

By comparison, incandescent lamps have a brief warm-up when energized, followed by a cool-down period when power is removed. These delays result in smearing and blurring of detail of objects partially illuminated during the warm-up and cool-down periods. For most applications, incandescent lamps are too slow for clear stroboscopic effects. Yet when operated from an AC source they are mostly fast enough to cause audible hum (at double mains frequency) on optical audio playback such as on film projection.

The frequency of the flash is adjusted so that it is an equal to, or a unit fraction of the object's cyclic speed, at which point the object is seen to be either stationary or moving slowly backward or forward, depending on the flash frequency.

Neon lamps or light-emitting diodes are commonly used for low-intensity strobe applications. Neon lamps were more common before the development of solid-state electronics, but are being replaced by LEDs in most low-intensity strobe applications.

Xenon flash lamps are used for medium- and high-intensity strobe applications. Sufficiently rapid or bright flashing may require active cooling such as forced-air or water cooling to prevent the xenon flash lamp from melting.

History [ edit ] 1540 Strobolume, a professional grade stroboscope produced by General Radio Close-up view of the 1540 Strobolume control box Joseph Plateau of Belgium is generally credited with the invention of the stroboscope in 1832, when he used a disc with radial slits which he turned while viewing images on a separate rotating wheel. Plateau's device became known as the " Phenakistoscope ". There was an almost simultaneous and independent invention of the device by the Austrian Simon Ritter von Stampfer , which he named the "Stroboscope", and it is his term which is used today. The etymology is from the Greek words στρόβος - strobos , meaning "whirlpool" and σκοπεῖν - skopein , meaning "to look at".

As well as having important applications for scientific research, the earliest inventions received immediate popular success as methods for producing moving pictures , and the principle was used for numerous toys. Other early pioneers employed rotating mirrors, or vibrating mirrors known as mirror galvanometers .

In 1917, French engineer Etienne Oehmichen patented the first electric stroboscope, [ 1 ] building at the same time a camera capable of shooting 1,000 frames per second.

Harold Eugene Edgerton ("Doc" Edgerton) employed a flashing lamp to study machine parts in motion.

[ 2 ] General Radio Corporation then went on to produce this device in the form of their "Strobotac", an early example of a commercially successful stroboscope.

[ 3 ] Edgerton later used very short flashes of light as a means of producing still photographs of fast-moving objects, such as bullets in flight.

Applications [ edit ] Stroboscope on a gramophone turntable Stroboscopes play an important role in the study of stresses on machinery in motion, and in many other forms of research. Bright stroboscopes are able to overpower ambient lighting and make stop-motion effects apparent without the need for dark ambient operating conditions.

They are also used as measuring instruments for determining cyclic speed. As a timing light they are used to set the ignition timing of internal combustion engines .

In medicine, stroboscopes are used to view the vocal cords for the diagnosis of conditions that have produced dysphonia (hoarseness). The patient hums or speaks into a microphone which in turn activates the stroboscope at either the same or a slightly different frequency. The light source and a camera are positioned by endoscopy .

Another application of the stroboscope can be seen on many gramophone turntables. The edge of the platter has marks at specific intervals so that when viewed under fluorescent lighting powered at mains frequency , provided the platter is rotating at the correct speed, the marks appear to be stationary. This will not work well under incandescent lighting , as incandescent bulbs do not significantly strobe. For this reason, some turntables have a neon bulb or LED next to the platter. The LED must be driven by a half wave rectifier from the mains transformer, or by an oscillator.

Flashing lamp strobes have also been adapted as a lighting effect for discotheques and night clubs where they give the impression of dancing in slow motion. The strobe rate of these devices is typically not very precise or very fast, because entertainment applications do not usually require a high degree of performance.

Fechner color [ edit ] Rapid flashing of the stroboscopic light can give the illusion that white light is tinged with color, known as Fechner color . Within certain ranges, the apparent color can be controlled by the frequency of the flash.  Effective stimuli frequencies go from 3 Hz upwards,  with optimal frequencies  of about 4–6 Hz. The colours are  an illusion generated in the mind of the observer and not a real color. The Benham's top demonstrates the effect.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Electrotachyscope Flip book Reciprocating motion Phenakistoscope Praxinoscope Strobe light Strobe tuner Tachometer Thaumatrope Zoetrope References [ edit ] ^ (in French) Les grands Centraliens : Étienne Œhmichen (1884-1955] - Centrale-Histoire - École centrale Paris ^ "Studies at MIT: 1926–1931 " Harold "Doc" Edgerton" . 2009-11-28 . Retrieved 2009-11-28 .

^ "Trade catalogs from General Radio Corp" .

^ Benham, CE (1894).

"The artificial spectrum top" .

scholar.google.com . Retrieved 2021-07-31 .

^ Pilz J, Marre E (1993). "Pattern-induced flicker colors. An ophthalmologic examination method (Article in German)".

Ophthalmologe .

90 (2): 148–54.

PMID 8490297.

^ Schramme J (1992). "Changes in pattern induced flicker colors are mediated by the blue/yellow opponent process".

Vision Research .

32 (11): 2129–34.

doi :10.1016/0042-6989(92)90074-S.

PMID 1304090.

^ . Krantz, John H (2013).

Encyclopedia of Color Science and Technology (PDF) . New York: Springer Science+Business Media.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-642-27851-8_65-2 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Stroboscopes at Wikimedia Commons The dictionary definition of stroboscope at Wiktionary How the Germans Measured Milliseconds MECHANICALLY - Smarter Every Day 283 Demonstration of Phenakistoscope and Stroboscope at North Carolina School of Science and Mathematics v t e Lighting Concepts Accent lighting Color rendering index Color temperature Electric light Glare Light fixture Light pollution Hawaii Hong Kong Lightbulb socket Bi-pin lamp base Edison screw Luminous efficacy Task lighting Methods of generation Incandescent Regular Edison Halogen Nernst Luminescent Cathodoluminescent Electron-stimulated Chemiluminescent Electrochemiluminescence Electroluminescent field-induced polymer Fluorescent Fluorescent lamp ( compact ) Fluorescent induction Photoluminescent Laser headlamp Radioluminescence Solid-state LED lamp Combustion Acetylene/Carbide Argand Campfire Candle Carcel Diya Flare Gas Kerosene Petromax Lantern Fanous Paper Limelight Luchina Magnesium torch Oil Qulliq Rushlight Safety Tilley Torch Electric arc Carbon arc Klieg light Yablochkov candle Gas discharge Deuterium arc Neon Neon lamp Plasma Sulfur Xenon arc Xenon flash High-intensity discharge (HID) Mercury-vapor Metal-halide ceramic Hydrargyrum medium-arc iodide (HMI) Hydrargyrum quartz iodide (HQI) Sodium vapor Stationary Reflector Ellipsoidal reflector Multifaceted reflector Parabolic aluminized reflector (PAR) Aviation obstruction Balanced-arm lamp Chandelier Emergency light Gas lighting Gooseneck lamp Intelligent street lighting Light tube Marine aid to navigation light Nightlight Neon lighting Pendant light Recessed light Sconce Street light in the US Torchère Track lighting Troffer Portable Bicycle lighting Flashlight Mechanically powered Tactical Glow stick Headlamp outdoor Lantern Laser pointer Navigation light Searchlight Solar lamp Automotive Automotive light bulb types Daytime running lamp Headlamp hidden high-intensity discharge sealed beam Rear position lights Reversing lights Safety reflector retroreflector Stop lights Turn signals trafficators Display Decorative Aroma lamp Blacklight Bubble light Christmas lights Crackle tube DJ lighting Electroluminescent wire Lava lamp Marquee Plasma globe Strobe light Theatrical Cinematic Floodlight Footlight Gobo Scoop Spotlight ellipsoidal reflector Stage lighting instrument Industrial Scientific Germicidal Grow light Infrared lamp Stroboscope Tanning Related topics Battlefield illumination Bioluminescence Laser Light art Luminous gemstones Signal lamp Sources Reflected Authority control databases : National Japan Latvia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Stroboscope&oldid=1256579371 " Categories : Audiovisual introductions in 1832 Measuring instruments Medical equipment Hidden categories: Articles with French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2021 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 November 2024, at 16:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Stroboscope 38 languages Add topic

