Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early life and ordination 1.2 Thomist scholarship 1.3 Bishop and cardinal 1.4 World War I German occupation 1.5 Final years and death 2 Honours 3 Views Toggle Views subsection 3.1 Inter-Belgian relations 3.2 Church and science 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Désiré-Joseph Mercier 19 languages Català Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kiswahili Lëtzebuergesch مصرى Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Svenska Walon Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Belgian cardinal (1851–1926) His Eminence Désiré-Joseph Mercier Cardinal Archbishop of Mechelen Primate of Belgium Mercier in 1915 Church Catholic Church Archdiocese Mechelen See Mechelen Appointed 21 February 1906 Term ended 23 January 1926 Predecessor Pierre-Lambert Goosens Successor Jozef-Ernest van Roey Other post(s) Cardinal-Priest of San Pietro in Vincoli (1907-26) Orders Ordination 4 April 1874 by Giacomo Cattani Consecration 25 March 1906 by Antonio Vico Created cardinal 15 April 1907 by Pope Pius X Rank Cardinal-Priest Personal details Born Désiré Félicien François Joseph Mercier ( 1851-11-21 ) 21 November 1851 Braine-l'Alleud , Belgium Died 23 January 1926 (1926-01-23) (aged 74) Brussels , Belgium Buried Saint Rumbold's Cathedral Parents Paul-Léon Mercier Anne-Marie Barbe Croquet Motto Apostolus Jesu Christi ("Apostle of Jesus Christ") Coat of arms Désiré Félicien François Joseph Mercier (21 November 1851 – 23 January 1926) was a Belgian Catholic prelate who served as Archbishop of Mechelen from 1906 until his death in 1926. A Thomist scholar, he had several of his works translated into other European languages. He was known for his book, Les origines de la psychologie contemporaine (1897). He was elevated to the cardinalate in 1907.

Mercier is noted for his staunch resistance to the German occupation of Belgium during World War I . After the invasion, he distributed a strong pastoral letter, Patriotism and Endurance , to be read in all his churches, urging the people to keep up their spirits. He served as a model of resistance.

Styles of Désiré-Joseph Mercier Reference style His Eminence Spoken style Your Eminence Informal style Cardinal See Mechelen Biography [ edit ] Early life and ordination [ edit ] Mercier was born at the château du Castegier in Braine-l'Alleud , as the fifth of seven children of small business owners Paul-Léon Mercier and his wife, Anne-Marie Barbe Croquet. Three of Mercier's sisters became religious sisters. His brother Léon became a physician .

[ 1 ] One of Mercier's maternal uncles was Adrien Croquet. In the 1860s Croquet became a missionary to the Grand Ronde Indian Reservation in western Oregon near the Pacific coast, where his surname was anglicized to Crockett. In the 1870s, a Mercier cousin, Joseph Mercier, joined their uncle Croquet in Oregon. He married a woman of one of the Native American tribes resident there. Today, several thousand descendants of Joseph and his wife are members of the tribe.

[ 2 ] Mercier studied at the College Saint‑Rombaut of Malines (1863-1868), and entered the minor seminary at Mechelen in 1868 to prepare for the church. He attended the Major Seminary, Mechelen , from 1870 to 1873.

[ 3 ] Mercier received the clerical tonsure in 1871, and was ordained to the priesthood by Archbishop Giacomo Cattani , the nuncio to Belgium, on 4 April 1874. Mercier continued with graduate studies, obtaining his licentiate in theology (1877) and doctorate in philosophy from the University of Louvain .

[ 3 ] Thomist scholarship [ edit ] He returned to Malines in 1877 and taught philosophy at the minor seminary and soon after was named spiritual director of the seminarians. His comprehensive knowledge of Thomas Aquinas earned him the newly erected chair of Thomism at Louvain's Catholic university in 1882.

[ 4 ] It was in this post, which he retained until 1905, that he forged a lifelong friendship with Dom Columba Marmion , an Irish Thomist. Raised to the rank of monsignor on 6 May 1887, Mercier founded the Higher Institute of Philosophy at the Louvain University in 1899, which was to be a beacon of neo-Thomist philosophy .

[ citation needed ] He founded in 1894 and edited until 1906 the Revue Néoscholastique , and wrote in a scholastic manner on metaphysics , philosophy, and psychology. Several of his works were translated into English, German, Italian, Polish, and Spanish. His most important book was Les origines de la psychologie contemporaine (1897).

[ 5 ] Bishop and cardinal [ edit ] Cardinal Mercier by Cecilia Beaux , 1919 Mercier is commemorated by this statue by Égide Rombaux outside the Cathedral of St. Michael and St. Gudula in Brussels His reputation within his field gained the recognition of Pope Pius X , and Mercier was appointed as Archbishop of Mechelen and Primate of Belgium on 7 February 1906. He received his episcopal consecration on the following 25 March from Archbishop Antonio Vico , and took as his episcopal motto : Apostolus Jesu Christi . Mercier was created cardinal priest by Pope Pius X in the consistory of 15 April 1907.

[ 6 ] [ 3 ] Three days later Pope Pius gave him his cardinal's ring and assigned him the titular church of S. Pietro in Vincoli .

[ 7 ] During the modernist controversy, Mercier was both progressive and antimodernist. He sought to assess the compatibility of Thomistic philosophy with rapidly developing scientific knowledge.

[ 8 ] He was a brilliant scholar, open to contemporary ideas and sufficiently respected for being able to protect scholars at Louvain, such as Bollandist Hippolyte Delehaye , from accusations of "modernism". Through his influence, Mercier prevented Albin van Hoonacker 's Les douze petits prophètes traduits et commentés ["The twelve minor prophets translated and annotated"] from being placed on the Index .

[ 9 ] Mercier was a close friend of Benedictine Lambert Beauduin and kept apprised of liturgical and ecumenical developments. From 1921 to 1926 he held the regular Malines Conversations with Anglican theologians , notably Charles Wood, 2nd Viscount Halifax , foreshadowing the Catholic Church's future dialogue with the Anglicans . Anglicanism, Mercier believed, must be "united, not absorbed".

[ 10 ] Pope Benedict XV sent his portrait and a letter of whole-hearted support to Mercier in 1916, and at one point told him, "You saved the Church!" [ citation needed ] Mercier was one of the cardinal electors in the 1922 papal conclave , which selected Pope Pius XI .

[ citation needed ] World War I German occupation [ edit ] Main article: Belgium in World War I Poster from the United States Food Administration during World War I In 1914, the German Army attempted a surprise invasion of France by invading neutral Belgium. Mercier had to leave his diocese on 20 August of that same year to attend the funeral of the late Pius X, and participate in the following conclave to elect a new pope.

[ citation needed ] Returning from the conclave Mercier passed through the Port of Le Havre , where he visited wounded Belgian, French and British troops. Once back in his archdiocese, he found Mechelen Cathedral to have been partially destroyed. In the Imperial German atrocities that ensued in the Rape of Belgium , thirteen of the priests in Mercier's diocese were killed, not to mention many civilians, by Christmas 1914. With his pastoral letter, Patriotism and Endurance , of Christmas 1914, Mercier came to personify Belgian resistance to the German occupation . The pastoral letter had to be distributed by hand as the Germans had cut off the postal service. Mercier's passionate, unflinching words were taken to heart by the suffering Belgians. He sometimes became a focus of Allied propaganda during the war.

[ 9 ] He was kept under house arrest by the Germans, and many priests who had read the letter aloud in public were arrested.

[ citation needed ] In Ireland, Cardinal Mercier's detention and indeed the German occupation was used to help recruitment for the British Army among Irish Catholics. Following the war, Mercier helped with the re-establishment of the Irish Franciscan College ( St Anthony's College, Leuven ), with his friend since their seminary days in Louvain, Mons.

James J. Ryan .

[ 11 ] Mercier Press in Ireland is named in his honour.

[ 12 ] Final years and death [ edit ] Following World War I, Mercier undertook an excursion to raise funds to rebuild and stock a new library of the University of Leuven . The original library had been burned by the Germans in the war. In his travels to raise funds, Mercier visited New York City for the only time. In 1919, he addressed the General Convention of the Episcopal Church in Detroit, expressing gratitude for American relief efforts .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Among other projects, Mercier also unsuccessfully attempted to have the League of Nations mandate of Palestine awarded to Belgium.

[ 15 ] Mercier suffered from persistent dyspepsia . In early January 1926 he underwent surgery for a lesion of the stomach . During surgery, the cardinal held a conversation with his surgeon on anatomy while under local anesthesia .

[ 16 ] In his final days, Mercier was visited by King Albert and Queen Elisabeth , Lord Halifax , and family members. He entered a deep coma around 2:00 p.m. on 23 January and died an hour later, at age 74.

[ 17 ] The cardinal was buried at St. Rumbolds Cathedral . He harbored great devotion to the Sacred Heart .

[ 18 ] Honours [ edit ] Papal honorary prelate , by papal decree of 8 November 1889.

[ 19 ] Belgium : Grand Cross in the Order of Leopold [ 20 ] Grand Cross in the Order of Malta [ 20 ] Grand Cross in the Order of Saints Maurice and Lazarus [ 20 ] Luxemburg : Grand Cross in the Order of the Oak Crown [ 20 ] Grand Cross in the Order of the Holy Sepulchre [ 20 ] Grand Cross in the Order of the Double Dragon [ 20 ] Poland : Grand Cross in the Order of the White Eagle [ 20 ] Japan : Imperial Order of the Rising Sun [ 20 ] France : Legion of Honour [ 20 ] Portugal : Order of Christ [ 20 ] Order of Saint Anna [ 20 ] Order of Carol I [ 20 ] Peru : Order of the Sun of Peru [ 20 ] Spain : Order of Isabella the Catholic [ 20 ] Vatican : Pro Ecclesia et Pontifice [ 20 ] Red Cross Medal of the United States [ 20 ] Imperial Order of the Double Dragon , Qing Dynasty China [ 20 ] Views [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Désiré-Joseph Mercier" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Inter-Belgian relations [ edit ] Mercier is known for favouring French speakers and opposing the use of the Dutch language . Though in general social-minded, he was blind to the social aspects of the Flemish Movement and opposed many of its aims. Two examples. (1) Claiming that Dutch could never be a full-fledged cultural language, he fought all attempts to have Flemish high school and university students educated in their native Dutch. He relented only when overwhelmed by the political pressure the Flemish Movement was generating.

[ 21 ] He managed to have Pope Benedict XV address him a letter [ 22 ] in which he admonished priests that they should not address arguments extraneous to their supernatural commitment nor publish on secular subjects without their superior's permission. Mercier promptly published this letter.

Church and science [ edit ] Mercier recognized the mathematical talent of Georges Lemaître as a young seminarian, and urged him to study Einstein 's theories of relativity . Lemaître became an early expert in general relativity as it applied to cosmological questions.

He went on to propose an expanding model of the universe, based on both Einstein's and de Sitter 's models.

Abbé Georges Lemaître developed his "primeval atom" hypothesis, together with researchers of the University of Louvain , and Gamow , Alpher and Herman into the better known Big Bang theory of the origin of the universe.

References [ edit ] ^ Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church.

"Mercier, Desiré" , fiu.edu. Accessed 25 February 2024.

^ Fr. Cawley Martinus, Father Crockett of Grand Ronde: Adrien-Joseph Croquet, 1818–1902, Oregon Missionary, 1860–1898 ^ a b c Courtois, Luc (2017).

"Mercier, Désiré Joseph" . In Ute Daniel; Peter Gatrell; Oliver Janz; Heather Jones; Jennifer Keene; Alan Kramer; Bill Nasson (eds.).

International Encyclopedia of the First World War . Berlin: Freie Universität Berlin.

doi : 10.15463/ie1418.10207/1.1 . Retrieved 15 November 2017 .

{{ cite book }} : |journal= ignored ( help ) ^ Roolf, Christoph.

"Mercier, Désiré Joseph" .

Brill's Digital Library of World War I .

doi : 10.1163/2352-3786_dlws1_beww1_en_0390 .

^ Colby & Williams 1916 , pp. 430–431.

^ Acta Sanctae Sedis (PDF) . Vol. XXXX. 1907. pp.

261– 2 . Retrieved 26 January 2021 .

^ Acta Sanctae Sedis (PDF) . Vol. XXXX. 1907. pp.

263– 266 . Retrieved 26 January 2021 .

^ Aubert, Roger.

Désiré Mercier and the Origins of the Institute of Philosophy .

^ a b De Volder, Jan.

Cardinal Mercier in the First World War , Leuven University Press, 2018 ; ISBN 9789462701649 ^ "A Pope on British Soil" , Time , 7 June 1982.

^ Chronicle , The Catholic Historical Review, Vol. 10, No. 3 (Oct., 1924), pp. 416-431. Catholic University of America Press.

^ About Us , MercierPress.ie. Accessed 25 February 2024.

^ Parsons, Edward Lambe (1961).

"Recollections of General Conventions, 1901-1937" .

Historical Magazine of the Protestant Episcopal Church .

30 (2): 72– 92.

ISSN 0018-2486 .

JSTOR 42972920 .

^ Convention, Episcopal Church General (1920).

Journal of the General Convention of the Protestant Episcopal Church in the United States of America Held in the City of Detroit from October Eighth to October Twenty-fourth, Inclusive, in the Year of Our Lord 1919, with Appendices . convention.

^ Aubert, Roger (1979).

"Les démarches du cardinal Mercier en vue de l'octroi à la Belgique d'un mandat sur la Palestine" .

Bulletins de l'Académie Royale de Belgique .

65 (1): 166– 228.

doi : 10.3406/barb.1979.55400 .

^ "Mercier" , time.com, 11 January 1926.

^ "In Belgium" , time.com, 1 February 1926.

^ "Homage" .

Time . 16 June 1924.

^ "Zoekresultaten" .

www.odis.be .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q "Mercier" . Archived from the original on 29 August 2010 . Retrieved 18 October 2016 .

^ Boudens, Robrecht & Lieve Gevers. "Mercier, Désiré J." Nieuwe Encyclopedie van de Vlaamse Beweging.

Tielt: Lannoo, 1998, pp. 2035–2037.

^ Cum semper, ut ipsi , dated February 10, 1921. Full text (in Italian, despite its Latin title) available here .

Sources This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Colby, F.; Williams, T., eds. (1916).

"Mercier, Desiré Joseph" .

New International Encyclopedia . Vol. 15 (2nd ed.). New York: Dodd, Mead. pp.

430– 431.

Further reading [ edit ] Johan Ickx. 2018.

La guerre et le Vatican: Les secrets de la diplomatie du Saint-Siège (1914-1915) , Paris: Les éditions du Cerf.

Sophie De Schaepdrijver . 1999.

De groote oorlog: het koninkrijk België tijdens de Eerste Wereldoorlog . 7th ed. Amsterdam: Olympus.

Jan De Volder . 2018.

Cardinal Mercier in the First World War. Belgium, Germany and the Catholic Church . Leuven: Leuven University Press.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Désiré-Joseph Mercier .

Désiré-Joseph Mercier at 1914-1918-online The Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church Catholic-Hierarchy Mayence, F. (1922).

"Mercier, Désiré" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (12th ed.).

Newspaper clippings about Désiré-Joseph Mercier in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW Catholic Church titles Preceded by Pierre-Lambert Goosens 18th Archbishop of Mechelen 1906–1926 Succeeded by Jozef-Ernest van Roey v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal v t e Universities of Louvain/Leuven 1425–1797 Old University of Leuven Faculty of Theology Arras College Collegium Trilingue Holy Ghost College Liège College Saint Ivo's College Pope's College Saint Anne's College St Anthony's College Trinity College University Hall Academic staff Alumni 1817–1835 State University of Leuven 1834–1835 Catholic University of Mechlin 1835–1968 Catholic University of Louvain Institutions: American College of the Immaculate Conception St Anthony's College Lovanium University Faculty of Theology University Hall Personalities: Pope Gregory XVI Rector Pierre de Ram Désiré-Joseph Mercier Rector Paulin Ladeuze Georges Lemaître Nobel prizes: Auguste Beernaert Dominique Pire Alumni Belgian American Educational Foundation Sedes Sapientiae Split of the Catholic University of Louvain Since 1968 UCLouvain Campuses Louvain-la-Neuve Brussels Woluwe FUCaM Mons Saint-Louis Brussels CHU Namur UCLouvain Charleroi Cities Louvain-la-Neuve Brussels Woluwe-Saint-Lambert Saint-Gilles Mons Tournai Charleroi Namur Dinant Yvoir Faculties Louvain School of Management Louvain School of Engineering Marie Haps Faculty of Translation and Interpreting Faculty of Economic, Social and Political Sciences and Communication Faculty of Architecture, Architectural Engineering and Urban Planning Research Higher Institute of Philosophy Cyclotron Research Center Center for Operations Research and Econometrics Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters Centre d'Etudes des Crises et Conflits Internationaux Hoover Chair Laboratory for the Analysis of Organisational Communication Systems Hospitals Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc CHU UCLouvain Namur Press Presses universitaires de Louvain Revue philosophique de Louvain International Philosophical Bibliography Cahiers de l'Institut de Linguistique de Louvain Revue d'histoire ecclésiastique Corpus Scriptorum Christianorum Orientalium Subsidiary entities Musée L Aula Magna Louvain-la-Neuve Cyclotron Louvain Coopération Louvain-la-Neuve Science Park Initialis Science Park Académie Louvain Rectors Pierre Macq Bernard Coulie Vincent Blondel Nobel prizes Christian de Duve Albert Claude Miscellaneous Louvain modularity Claroline Orchestre Symphonique des Étudiants de Louvain-la-Neuve 24h vélo de Louvain-la-Neuve Progressive Congolese Students ANLO Oz Ekiga Ion Beam Applications Kot-à-projet Academic staff Alumni KU Leuven Campuses KULAK Cities Leuven Kortrijk Antwerp Ghent Bruges Geel Diepenbeek Aalst Sint-Katelijne-Waver Brussels Faculties Institute of Philosophy Research Leuven Centre for Global Governance Studies Rega Institute for Medical Research Switch Laboratory Hospitals UZ Leuven Press Leuven University Press Revue d'histoire ecclésiastique ITL International Journal of Applied Linguistics Subsidiary entities Arenberg Castle Arenberg Research-Park KU Leuven Association University Hall Rectors Pieter De Somer Marc Vervenne Mark Waer Rik Torfs Luc Sels Other Evangelical Theological Faculty Academic libraries in Leuven · Universities in Leuven Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Greece Argentina Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium 2 Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Désiré-Joseph_Mercier&oldid=1294592467 " Categories : 1851 births 1926 deaths People from Braine-l'Alleud Belgian cardinals 20th-century Belgian Roman Catholic theologians Roman Catholic archbishops of Mechelen-Brussels 20th-century Roman Catholic archbishops in Belgium Belgian people of World War I Knights Grand Cross of the Order of Saints Maurice and Lazarus Members of the Order of the Holy Sepulchre Grand Cordons of the Order of the Rising Sun Recipients of the Order of the Sun of Peru Recipients of the Order of Isabella the Catholic Cardinals created by Pope Pius X Grand Crosses of the Order of Christ (Portugal) 19th-century Belgian Roman Catholic theologians Bishops appointed by Pope Pius X Hidden categories: CS1 errors: periodical ignored Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2019 Articles needing additional references from September 2018 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating text via vb from the New International Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the New International Encyclopedia Commons category link from Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1922 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Pages using S-rel template with ca parameter This page was last edited on 8 June 2025, at 17:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Désiré-Joseph Mercier 19 languages Add topic

