Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Hypothetical scenario 2 End of stellar life 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Blue dwarf (red-dwarf stage) 34 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Беларуская Català Чӑвашла Čeština Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano עברית ქართული Lietuvių Македонски Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hypothetical class of star that develops from a red dwarf For other uses, see Blue dwarf .

Artist's impression of a blue dwarf A blue dwarf is a hypothetical class of star that develops from a red dwarf after it has exhausted much of its hydrogen fuel supply. Because red dwarfs fuse their hydrogen slowly and are fully convective (allowing their entire hydrogen supply to be fused, instead of merely that in the core), they are predicted to have lifespans of trillions of years; the Universe is currently not old enough for any blue dwarfs to have formed yet. Their future existence is predicted based on theoretical models.

[ 1 ] Hypothetical scenario [ edit ] Stars increase in luminosity as they age, and a more luminous star must radiate energy more quickly to maintain equilibrium. For stars more massive than red dwarfs, the resulting internal pressure increases their size, causing them to become red giants with larger surface areas. However, it is predicted that red dwarfs with less than 0.25 solar masses , rather than expanding, will increase radiative rate through an increase in surface temperature , hence emitting more blue and less red light. This is because the surface layers of red dwarfs do not become significantly more opaque with increasing temperature, so higher-energy photons from the interior of the star can escape, rather than being absorbed and re-radiated at lower temperatures as occurs in larger stars.

[ 1 ] Despite their name, blue dwarfs would not necessarily increase in temperature enough to become blue stars. Simulations have been conducted on the future evolution of red dwarfs with stellar mass between 0.06 M ☉ and 0.25 M ☉ .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Of the masses simulated, the bluest of the blue dwarf stars at the end of the simulation had begun as a 0.14 M ☉ red dwarf, and ended with surface temperature approximately 8,600 K (8,330 °C; 15,020 °F), making it a type A blue-white star.

End of stellar life [ edit ] Blue dwarfs are believed to eventually completely exhaust their store of hydrogen fuel, and their interior pressures are insufficient to fuse any other fuel. Once fusion ends, they are no longer main-sequence "dwarf" stars and become so-called white dwarfs – which, despite the name, are not main-sequence "dwarfs" and are not stars, but rather stellar remnants.

[ 1 ] Once the former "blue"-dwarf stars have become degenerate, non-stellar white dwarfs , they cool, losing the remnant heat left over from their final hydrogen-fusing stage. The cooling process also requires enormous periods of time – much longer than the age of the universe at present – similar to the immense time previously required for them to change from their original red dwarf stage to their final blue dwarf stage. The stellar remnant white dwarf will eventually cool to become a black dwarf . (The universe is not old enough for any stellar remnants to have cooled to "black", so black dwarfs are also a well-founded, but still hypothetical object.) It is also theoretically possible for these dwarfs at any stage of their lives to merge and become larger stars, such as helium stars .

[ 4 ] Such stars should ultimately also become white dwarfs , which like the others, will cool down to black dwarfs .

See also [ edit ] Lists of stars Wolf–Rayet star – Heterogeneous class of stars with unusual spectra References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Adams, F.C.; Bodenheimer, P.; Laughlin, G. (2005).

"M dwarfs: Planet formation and long term evolution" .

Astronomische Nachrichten .

326 (10): 913– 919.

Bibcode : 2005AN....326..913A .

doi : 10.1002/asna.200510440 .

^ Laughlin, G.; Bodenheimer, P.; Adams, F.C. (10 June 1997).

"The end of the Main Sequence" .

The Astrophysical Journal .

482 (1): 420– 432.

Bibcode : 1997ApJ...482..420L .

doi : 10.1086/304125 .

S2CID 121940819 .

^ Adams, F.C.; Laughlin, G.; Graves, G.J.M. (2004).

Red dwarfs and the end of the Main Sequence . Revista Mexicana de Astronomía y Astrofísica. Vol. 22. pp.

46– 49.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.692.5492 .

^ Adams, Fred C.; Laughlin, Gregory (1997). "A dying universe: The long-term fate and evolution of astrophysical objects".

Reviews of Modern Physics .

69 (2): 337– 372.

arXiv : astro-ph/9701131 .

Bibcode : 1997RvMP...69..337A .

doi : 10.1103/RevModPhys.69.337 .

S2CID 12173790 .

v t e Stars List Formation Accretion Molecular cloud Bok globule Young stellar object Protostar Pre-main-sequence Herbig Ae/Be T Tauri Herbig–Haro object Hayashi track Henyey track Evolution Main sequence Red-giant branch Horizontal branch Red clump Asymptotic giant branch post-AGB super-AGB Blue loop Planetary nebula Protoplanetary Wolf–Rayet nebula PG1159 Dredge-up OH/IR Instability strip Luminous blue variable Stellar population Supernova Superluminous Hypernova Classification Early Late Main sequence O B A F G K M Subdwarf O B WR OB Subgiant Giant Blue Red Yellow Bright giant Supergiant Blue Red Yellow Hypergiant Yellow Carbon S CN CH White dwarf Chemically peculiar Am Ap/Bp CEMP HgMn He-weak Barium Lambda Boötis Lead Technetium Be Shell B[e] Helium Extreme Blue straggler Remnants Compact star Parker's star White dwarf Helium planet Neutron Radio-quiet Pulsar Binary X-ray Magnetar Stellar black hole X-ray binary Burster SGR Hypothetical Blue dwarf Black dwarf Exotic Boson Electroweak Strange Preon Planck Dark Dark-energy Quark Q Black hole star Black Hawking Quasi-star Gravastar Thorne–Żytkow object Iron Blitzar White hole Nucleosynthesis Deuterium burning Lithium burning Proton–proton chain CNO cycle Helium flash Triple-alpha process Alpha process C burning Ne burning O burning Si burning s-process r-process p-process Nova Symbiotic Remnant Luminous red nova Recurrent Micronova Supernova Structure Core Convection zone Microturbulence Oscillations Radiation zone Atmosphere Photosphere Starspot Chromosphere Stellar corona Alfvén surface Stellar wind Bubble Bipolar outflow Accretion disk Protoplanetary disk Proplyd Asteroseismology Helioseismology Circumstellar dust Cosmic dust Circumstellar envelope Eddington luminosity Kelvin–Helmholtz mechanism Properties Designation Dynamics Effective temperature Luminosity Kinematics Magnetic field Absolute magnitude Mass Metallicity Rotation Gravity darkening Starlight Variable Photometric system Color index Hertzsprung–Russell diagram Color–color diagram Strömgren sphere Kraft break Star systems Binary Contact Common envelope Eclipsing Symbiotic Multiple Cluster Open Globular Super Planetary system Earth-centric observations Sun Solar eclipse Solar radio emission Solar System Sunlight Pole star Circumpolar Constellation Asterism Magnitude Apparent Extinction Photographic Radial velocity Proper motion Parallax Photometric-standard Lists Proper names Arabic Chinese Extremes Most massive Highest temperature Lowest temperature Largest volume Smallest volume Brightest Historical brightest Most luminous Nearest bright Most distant With resolved images With multiple exoplanets Brown dwarfs Red dwarfs White dwarfs Milky Way novae Supernovae Candidates Remnants Planetary nebulae Timeline of stellar astronomy Related Substellar object Brown dwarf Desert Sub Planet Galactic year Galaxy Guest Gravity Intergalactic Neutron star merger Planet-hosting stars Stellar collision Stellar engulfment Tidal disruption event Category Stars portal Portals : Astronomy Outer space Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Blue_dwarf_(red-dwarf_stage)&oldid=1280708521 " Categories : Hypothetical stars Stellar evolution Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 March 2025, at 00:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Blue dwarf (red-dwarf stage) 34 languages Add topic

