Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Development 2 Doctrinal conflicts within the Catholic Church 3 Jesuit tradition 4 Influence on philosophy and theology 5 Emergence of the Scotist School 6 Scotists Toggle Scotists subsection 6.1 15th and 16th centuries 6.2 17th and 18th centuries 6.3 19th century 6.4 20th and 21st centuries 7 Notes 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Scotism 20 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Latina Magyar مصرى پښتو Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophical and theological system Blessed John Duns Scotus (c.1265-1308), the eponym of Scotism.

Part of a series on John Duns Scotus Scotism Scholasticism Univocity Haecceity Immaculate Conception Beatific vision Formal distinction Hylomorphism Scotistic realism Substance theory ( ousia ) Accident Substantial form Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Individuation Existence of God Christology Platonic realism Categories (Aristotle) Problem of universals Metaphysics Christianity and slavery Works Opus Oxoniense Tractatus de Primo Principio Quaestiones Quodlibetales Influences Aristotle ("The Philosopher") St. Paul ("The Apostle") Pseudo-Dionysius St. Augustine ("The Theologian") St. Boethius Avicenna Peter Lombard ("The Master") Averroes ("The Commentator") Maimonides ("Rabbi Moses") St. Albertus Magnus ("The Universal Doctor") St. Thomas Aquinas ("The Angelic Doctor") People Andreas Aureoli Balic Barnewall Baron Bonet Caracciolo Carletti Faber Ferchi Frassen Horan Mac Cathmhaoil Mastrius de Mayronis d'Orbellis Ó Fithcheallaigh Pelagius Punch Scotellus Scriptoris Thomae Sixtus IV Wadding Related Aristotelianism Franciscan Order Oxford University Catholic theology List of Franciscan theologians Empiricism Philosophy Portal Catholicism Portal v t e Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Scotism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Antonio De Fantis , Tabula generalis ac Mare magnum Scotice subtilitatis Scotism is the philosophical school and theological system named after John Duns Scotus , a 13th-century Scottish philosopher-theologian. The word comes from the name of its originator, whose Opus Oxoniense was one of the most important documents in medieval philosophy and Roman Catholic theology , defining what would later be declared the dogma of the Immaculate Conception by Pope Pius IX in his constitution Ineffabilis Deus on 8 December 1854.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Development [ edit ] Scotism developed out of the Old Franciscan School , which dominated theology during the Middle Ages . This school of thought initially followed Augustinism , which dominated theology at the time.

Scotus found the ground already cleared for the conflict with the followers of Aquinas . He made very free use of Aristotelianism , but in its employment exercised sharp criticism, and in important points adhered to the teaching of the Older Franciscan School–especially with regard to the plurality of forms or of souls, the spiritual matter of the angels and of souls, etc., wherein he energetically combatted Aquinas.

Scotism , or what is known as the Later Franciscan School , is thus only a continuation or further development of the older school, with a much wider, although not exclusive acceptance of Peripatetic ideas. The difference between Thomism and Scotism could be expressed by saying that, while both derive from Arabic Neoplatonized Aristotelianism, Thomism is closer to the orthodox Aristotelianism of Maimonides , Averroes and Avicenna , while Scotism reflects the Platonizing tendency going back through Avicebron , the Brethren of Purity , the Liber de Causis and Proclus to Plotinus .

Concerning the relation of these schools to each other, or the relation of Scotus to Alexander of Hales and St. Bonaventure , consult the work of the Flemish Recollect, Mathias Hauzeur . While Thomism was formally endorsed by Pope Leo XIII , [ 3 ] Scotist influence prevailed on a number of important points, not least the doctrine of the Immaculate Conception .

[ citation needed ] Doctrinal conflicts within the Catholic Church [ edit ] Nominalism is older than Scotus, but its revival in Occamism may be traced to the one-sided exaggeration of some propositions of Scotus. Scotist Formalism is the direct opposite of Nominalism, and the Scotists were at one with the Thomists in combatting the latter; Occam himself was a bitter opponent of Scotus. The Council of Trent defined as dogma a series of doctrines especially emphasized by the Scotists (e.g. freedom of the will, free co-operation with grace, etc..). In other points the canons were intentionally so framed that they do not affect Scotism (e.g. that the first man was constitutus in holiness and justice). This was also done at the Vatican Council. In the Thomistic–Molinistic controversy concerning the foreknowledge of God, predestination, the relation of grace to free will , the Scotists took little part. They either supported one of the parties, or took up a middle position, rejecting both the predetermination of the Thomists and the scientia media of the Molinists. In Scotism, God recognizes the free future acts in His essence, and provides a free decree of His will, which does not predetermine human free will, but only accompanies it.

Jesuit tradition [ edit ] Jesuit philosophers and theologians adopted a series of the Scotist propositions. Later authorities reject in part many of these propositions, and another series of propositions was rejected by Catholic theologians based on a misunderstanding – e.g. the doctrine of the univocatio entis , of the acceptation of the merits of Christ and man, etc.

Numerous other propositions have been accepted or at least favourably treated by a large number of Catholic scholars and amongst these are many propositions from psychology: e.g. that the powers of the soul are not merely accidents even natural and necessary of the soul, that they are not really distinct from the substance of the soul or from one another etc.

They also took from Scotism many propositions concerning the doctrine of the angels .

Influence on philosophy and theology [ edit ] Part of a series on Scholasticism Schools Thomism Scotism Occamism Major works Summa Theologica Cur Deus Homo Summa Grammatica Summa logicae Opus Oxoniense Libri Quattuor Sententiarum Precursors Augustine of Hippo Boethius Pope Gregory I Alcuin of York John Scotus Eriugena Philosophers Anselm of Canterbury ("Doctor Marianus") Peter Abelard ("Doctor Scholasticus") Peter Lombard ("The Master") Averroes ("The Commentator") Maimonides ("Rabbi Moses") Albertus Magnus ("Doctor Universalis") Thomas Aquinas ("Doctor Angelicus") Bonaventure ("Doctor Seraphicus") Duns Scotus ("Doctor Subtilis") William of Ockham ("Doctor Invincibilis") Francisco Suárez ("Doctor Eximius") Related Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Dominican Order Franciscan Order Catholic theology Islamic philosophy Empiricism Neoplatonism Neo-scholasticism Protestant scholasticism Problem of universals Protoscholastic writing Philosophy portal Catholicism portal v t e Scotism exercised an influence on the development of philosophy and theology; its importance is not, as is often asserted, purely negative – i.e. it does not consist only in the fact that it exercised a criticism on Thomas Aquinas and the Thomistic school.

A comparison of the Scotist teaching with that of Aquinas has been often attempted – for example, in the abovementioned work of Hauzeur at the end of the first volume; by Sarnano ( Costanzo Torri , Conciliatio omnium controversiarum etc.

(1589– ). In many cases, the differences are mostly in the terminology and a reconciliation is possible if one emphasize certain parts of Scotus or Aquinas and passes over or tones down others. However, some contradictions remain on a number of points.

Generally speaking, Scotism found its supporters within the Franciscan Order; certainly, opposition to the Dominicans (i.e. to Aquinas) made many members of the order disciples of Scotus. However, this does not mean that the foundation and development of Scotism is to be regarded as a product of the rivalry between the two orders. Even Aquinas at first found a few opponents in his order – not all his fellow-Dominicans followed him in every particular (e.g.

Durandus of St. Pourçain ).

The Scotist doctrines were also supported by many Minorites . Furthermore, Scotism found not a few supporters among secular professors and in other religious orders (e.g. the Augustinians , Servites , etc.), especially in England, Ireland, and Spain. Of the Minorites who supported Scotist doctrine, the Conventuals seem to have adhered most faithfully to Scotus, particularly at the University of Padua, where many highly esteemed teachers lectured.

Emergence of the Scotist School [ edit ] It is only at the end of the 15th or the beginning of the 16th century that a special Scotist School can be spoken of. Scotus's works were then collected, brought out in many editions and commentated, etc. Regulations of general chapters, beginning in 1501, frequently recommend or directly prescre Scotism as the teaching of the order.

Scotism appears to have attained its greatest popularity at the beginning of the seventeenth century. Special Scotist chairs appear during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, in locations including Paris, Rome, Coimbra, Salamanca, Alcalá, Padua, and Pavia. In the eighteenth century it had still an important following, but in the 19th it suffered a great decline. One of the reasons for this was the repeated suppressions of the order in almost every country, while the recommendation of the teaching of St. Thomas by several popes could not be favourable to Scotism.

Some sources describe Scotism as merely tolerated by the Catholic Church. The Catholic Encyclopedia disputes this, arguing that none of its propositions have been censured, many prominent Catholic figures have been adherents, and various general statues recommend it. In their decrees Leo XIII and Pius X have recommended not alone St. Thomas, but also Scholasticism in general, and this includes also the Scotist School.

[ citation needed ] Scotists [ edit ] Most Scotists are both philosophers and theologians. Notable Scotists of the fourteenth century included Antonius Andrea and Francis of Mayrone (c. 1280–1328) author of a Tractatus de transcendentibus .

Francis Mayron , who introduced the actus sorbonicus into the University of Paris .

15th and 16th centuries [ edit ] Scotists of the fifteenth century included two popes, Alexander V and Sixtus IV , Elector Frederick III of Saxony and Angelus of Chivasso . The latter's work on Scotist theology was so notorious that it was publicly burned by Martin Luther .

Notable Scotists of the sixteenth century included Paul Scriptoris , noted professor at the University of Tübingen , and the Archbishop of Athens Antonio Trombetta .

17th and 18th centuries [ edit ] The many Scotists of the 17th and 18th centuries include: Angelo Vulpes (Volpe) (d. 1647) wrote Summa and Commen. theologiae Scoti in twelve folio volumes.

Luke Wadding (d. 1657), a well-known annalist, edited with other Irishmen in the College of S. Isidore at Rome the complete works of Scotus (12 vols., Lyons, 1639).

Lambertus Lambrecht (about 1696), named the Viennese Scotus.

Cardinal Lorenzo Brancati di Lauria [ 4 ] (d. 1693), held in high favour by several popes.

Francisco Macedo (d. 1681), a Portuguese, professor at Padua is said to have composed over one hundred writings and was renowned for his public disputations.

Claude Frassen (d. 1711) was for thirty years a celebrated professor at the Sorbonne and wrote "Scotus academicus seu universa theo Scoti".

Bartholomaeus Durandus (Bartélemy Durand) [ 5 ] (d. 1720) wrote the great Clypeus Scotisticae Theologiae .

19th century [ edit ] In the nineteenth century, although Scotism was retained in the schools of the Franciscan Order in accordance with the statutes, there were few works in the Scotist tradition, in any case no celebrated ones.

20th and 21st centuries [ edit ] Though the use of the term Scotism has become a bit antiquated, several contemporary theologians, especially from among the Franciscan Orders, like Kenan Osborne OFM and Daniel Horan OFM, can be seen as in the Scotist tradition. Several recent projects such as the Scotus Project of CUA, the International Scotistic Commission in Rome and the Commission of the Franciscan Intellectual Tradition of the English Speaking Conference of the OFM have sought to increase awareness of Duns Scotus and Scotism on contemporary theology. Scotism has also found a home amongst Anglo-Catholics , including Richard Cross and Thomas Williams, as well as influencing Protestants like William Lane Craig .

[ 6 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Ordinatio III, d.3, q.1 ^ "Papal Definition of the Immaculate Conception" . Archived from the original on 21 January 2000.

^ "Aeterni Patris (August 4, 1879) | LEO XIII" .

www.vatican.va . Retrieved 29 April 2023 .

^ The Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church – Biographical Dictionary – Consistory of September 1, 1681 ^ Bartholomaeus Durandus , Online bibliography of Franciscan Authors.

^ Craig, W. L. (1987). John Duns Scotus on God's Foreknowledge and Future Contingents. Franciscan Studies, 47(1), 98-122.

References [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). " Scotism and Scotists ".

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

External links [ edit ] International Scotistic Commission: Scotism Electronic Resources for Medieval Philosophy v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Scotism&oldid=1299101519 " Categories : Scotism Aristotelianism Scholasticism Catholic theology and doctrine Christian theological movements History of Christianity in Scotland Philosophical schools and traditions Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles needing additional references from July 2025 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2022 Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 15:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Scotism 20 languages Add topic

