Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Schooling 3 Career Toggle Career subsection 3.1 Game Protection Association initiatives 3.2 Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce 3.3 Watershed initiatives 3.4 Grand Canyon management plan 3.5 U.S. Forest Service Game and Fish Handbook 3.6 Gila Wilderness Area 4 Family life and death 5 Ideas 6 Nature writing Toggle Nature writing subsection 6.1 A Sand County Almanac 6.2 Land ethic 6.3 Game Management 6.4 The River of the Mother of God and Other Essays 6.5 A Man's Leisure Time 7 Legacy 8 Works 9 See also 10 Notes 11 References 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Aldo Leopold 26 languages العربية تۆرکجه Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American conservationist (1887–1948) Aldo Leopold Leopold in 1946 Born ( 1887-01-11 ) January 11, 1887 Burlington, Iowa , U.S.

Died April 21, 1948 (1948-04-21) (aged 61) Baraboo, Wisconsin , U.S.

Resting place Aspen Grove Cemetery Burlington, Iowa, U.S.

Occupation Author ecologist forester nature writer Education Yale University Subject Conservation, land ethic, land health, ecological conscience Notable works A Sand County Almanac Spouse Estella Leopold Children A. Starker Leopold , Luna Leopold , Nina Leopold Bradley , A. Carl Leopold , Estella Leopold Website www .aldoleopold .org Aldo Leopold (January 11, 1887 – April 21, 1948) was an American writer, philosopher , naturalist , scientist , ecologist , forester , conservationist , and environmentalist . He was a professor at the University of Wisconsin and is best known for his book A Sand County Almanac (1949), which has been translated into fourteen languages and has sold more than two million copies.

[ 1 ] Leopold was influential in the development of modern environmental ethics and in the movement for wilderness conservation. His ethics of nature and wildlife preservation had a profound impact on the environmental movement , with his ecocentric or holistic ethics regarding land.

[ 2 ] He emphasized biodiversity and ecology and was a founder of the science of wildlife management .

[ 3 ] Early life [ edit ] Rand Aldo Leopold was born in Burlington, Iowa , [ 4 ] on January 11, 1887. His father, Carl Leopold, was a businessman who made walnut desks [ 5 ] and was first cousin to his wife, Clara Starker. Charles Starker, who was Carl's father and Clara's uncle, came to the United States from Germany and studied engineering and architecture.

[ 6 ] Rand Aldo was named after two of his father's business partners—C. W. Rand and Aldo Sommers—although he eventually dropped the use of "Rand". The Leopold family included younger siblings Mary Luize, Carl Starker, and Frederic.

[ 7 ] Leopold's first language was German, [ 8 ] although he mastered English at an early age.

Aldo Leopold's early life was highlighted by the outdoors. Carl would take his children on excursions into the woods and taught his oldest son woodcraft and hunting.

[ 9 ] Aldo showed an aptitude for observation, spending hours counting and cataloging birds near his home.

[ 10 ] His sister Mary later said that even as a young child, "He was very much an outdoorsman, even in his extreme youth. He was always out climbing around the bluffs, or going down to the river, or going across the river into the woods." [ 11 ] He attended Prospect Hill Elementary, where he ranked at the top of his class, and then, the overcrowded Burlington High School. Every August, the family vacationed in Michigan on the forested Marquette Island in Lake Huron , which the children took to exploring.

[ 12 ] Schooling [ edit ] Leopold's entry in the Yale Sheffield Scientific School yearbook, 1908 In 1900, Gifford Pinchot , head of the new Division of Forestry in the Department of Agriculture, donated money to Yale University to begin one of the nation's first forestry schools. Hearing of this development, teenage Leopold decided he wanted to become a forester.

[ 13 ] His parents agreed to let him attend The Lawrenceville School , a preparatory college in New Jersey, to improve his chances of admission to Yale. The Burlington High School principal wrote in a reference letter to the headmaster at Lawrenceville saying that Leopold was "as earnest a boy as we have in school... painstaking in his work.... Moral character above reproach." [ 14 ] He arrived at his new school in January 1904, shortly before he turned 17. He was considered an attentive student, although he was again drawn to the outdoors. Lawrenceville was suitably rural, and Leopold spent much time mapping the area and studying its wildlife.

[ 15 ] Leopold studied at the Lawrenceville School for a year, during which time he was accepted to Yale. Since the Yale School of Forestry granted only graduate degrees, Leopold first enrolled in Sheffield Scientific School 's preparatory forestry courses for his undergraduate studies, in New Haven, Connecticut.

[ 16 ] While Leopold was able to explore the woods and fields of Lawrenceville daily, sometimes to the detriment of his studying, at Yale he had little opportunity to do so; his studies and social life made his outdoor trips few and far between.

[ 17 ] Leopold graduated from the Yale Forestry School in 1909.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Career [ edit ] In 1909, Leopold was assigned to the Forest Service 's District 3 in the Arizona and New Mexico territories. At first, he was a forest assistant at the Apache National Forest in the Arizona Territory. In 1911, he was transferred to the Carson National Forest in northern New Mexico. Leopold was stationed in New Mexico until 1924 because he was developing the first comprehensive management plan for the Grand Canyon , writing the Forest Service's first game and fish handbook, and proposing Gila Wilderness Area , the first wilderness area in the Forest Service system.

[ 20 ] Furthermore, Leopold encouraged many changes within New Mexico and Arizona through his time spent in the region developing these plans.

Game Protection Association initiatives [ edit ] In 1916, Leopold conducted a speaking tour across New Mexico to encourage the formation of wildlife protection associations among local sportsmen. The tour began in Silver City, where Leopold met Miles W. Buford, who went on to establish the Sportsmen’s Association of Southwestern New Mexico. Leopold proposed the creation of a statewide organization, the New Mexico Game Protection Association (NMGPA), which gained support in several cities including Rincon, El Paso, Alamogordo, Cloudcroft, Carlsbad, Roswell, and Albuquerque. In March 1916, the NMGPA held its first convention, attracting over 1,000 members. The association adopted three goals: removing game warden appointments from political influence, establishing game refuges within national forests, and implementing a balance of predators.

[ 21 ] Following the formation of the NMGPA, Leopold returned to his duties with the U.S. Forest Service. After the passage of the Term Permit Act, he began siting and surveying locations in Arizona for private recreational development. During this time, he also promoted and helped establish Game Protection Associations in Arizona towns such as Flagstaff, Springerville, Tucson, and Payson.

[ 21 ] Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce [ edit ] In January 1918, Leopold became Secretary of the Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce. In this role, he supported various initiatives, including the inclusion of labor organizations in the chamber, the promotion of Hispanic and Pueblo architectural styles, and the drainage of parts of the Rio Grande Valley to expand agricultural land.

[ 21 ] Watershed initiatives [ edit ] Leopold rejoined the Forest Service on August 1, 1919, as Assistant District Forester in Charge of Operations, overseeing Region 3, which included 11 national forests. During this period, he became concerned with soil erosion in areas such as the Prescott and Carson National Forests. In December 1923, he authored The Watershed Handbook , a guide for field staff addressing watershed management and recommending the regulation of livestock based on watershed conditions.

[ 21 ] Just a few months into his new role, Leopold’s superior, District Forester Paul Redington, left Region 3 and was succeeded by Frank C. W. Pooler—who openly expressed doubts about Leopold’s suitability for the position. Pooler even arranged a new post for Leopold in a different region. However, Leopold stood his ground and declined the offer, choosing to stay in Albuquerque and New Mexico, where his family and numerous ongoing projects were deeply rooted.

[ 21 ] Grand Canyon management plan [ edit ] Leopold's management plan was visionary for its time, emphasizing sustainable use and ecological preservation. He planned to make regulations with tourism, resource protection, recreational planning, and the long-term vision of the park.

[ 22 ] He felt that there needed to be a control of commercial enterprises, such as shops and concessions because he described them as "repugnant" to the canyon's natural character.

[ 23 ] He suggested there should be designated areas for visitor facilities to minimize environmental disruption. Additionally, He advocated for the cleanup of garbage and sewage to restore the Colorado River 's water quality. Previously, there was history of people dumping garbage in the river.

[ 22 ] He emphasized preserving the canyon’s geological and ecological features, including its stratified rock formations and native flora and fauna. Leopold's plan for recreational planning was to outline strategies for “primitive recreation,” such as hiking, hunting, and fishing, to allow visitors to experience the canyon’s wilderness without degrading it. He recommended trail development to improve access while protecting sensitive areas. Finally, his long-term vision was to prioritized the “greatest good for the greatest number in the long run,” aligning with U.S. Forest Service principles. He laid the groundwork for future park management by advocating for a balance between human enjoyment and ecological health.

[ 22 ] U.S. Forest Service Game and Fish Handbook [ edit ] Wildlife management was largely unregulated, with game and fish populations often depleted due to overhunting, habitat destruction, and lack of coordinated oversight. Leopold recognized the need for a systematic approach to manage wildlife resources.

[ 24 ] In the handbook, Leopold detailed a section on wildlife population management where he provided a guideline for monitoring and regulating game species, such as deer, elk, and fish, to prevent overharvesting.

[ 22 ] He emphasized sustainable hunting and fishing practices to maintain population health. Additionally, he wrote a section on habitat conservation which he stressed the importance of preserving habitats, including forests, rivers, and wetlands, to support wildlife. He included recommendations for mitigating the impacts of grazing and logging on game and fish habitats. In a section about ecological balance, he introduced early concepts of predator-prey dynamics reflecting on his observations of ecological consequences when predators like wolves were eradicated.

[ 22 ] He advocated for a holistic approach to land management considering wildlife as part of the broader ecosystem. Finally, he outlined protocols for U.S. Forest Service rangers to collect data on wildlife populations and enforce regulations. He proposed coordination with local communities and hunters to promote conservation awareness.

[ 22 ] Gila Wilderness Area [ edit ] In 1921, Leopold published an article in the Journal of Forestry titled “The Wilderness and Its Place in Forest Recreational Policy,” arguing for the preservation of roadless areas within national forests. He proposed the Gila as a prime candidate, envisioning it as a space free from roads, motorized vehicles, and industrial development.

[ 25 ] He defined wilderness as “a continuous stretch of country preserved in its natural state, open to lawful hunting and fishing, big enough to absorb a two weeks’ pack trip, and kept devoid of roads, artificial trails, cottages, or other works of man.” As a Forest Service supervisor in District 3, Leopold worked with colleagues like Fred Winn and Don Johnston to survey the Gila and develop a management plan.

[ 25 ] He recommended setting aside 750,000 acres of the Gila National Forest headwaters, an area characterized by canyons, mesas, and diverse wildlife, including elk, deer, and trout. Leopold's proposal gained traction, and in 1924, the Forest Service approved the designation of 755,000 acres as the Gila Wilderness Area , the first such area in the world.

[ 24 ] Leopold saw the Gila as a living laboratory for ecological health, where natural processes like predator-prey dynamics could unfold without human interference. This reflected his early understanding of trophic cascades, later detailed in his essay “Thinking Like a Mountain.” He also valued the Gila for its cultural significance, offering a space for Americans to reconnect with the frontier experience through self-reliant recreation.

[ 25 ] On April 5, 1923, he was elected an associate member (now called "professional member") of the Boone and Crockett Club , a wildlife conservation organization founded by Theodore Roosevelt and George Bird Grinnell .

[ 26 ] In 1924, he accepted transfer to the U.S. Forest Products Laboratory in Madison, Wisconsin, and became an associate director.

[ 4 ] In 1933, he was appointed Professor of Game Management in the Agricultural Economics Department at the University of Wisconsin , the first such professorship of wildlife management.

[ 4 ] At the same time he was named Research Director of the University of Wisconsin–Madison Arboretum .

[ 27 ] Leopold and other members of the first Arboretum Committee initiated a research agenda around re-establishing "original Wisconsin" landscape and plant communities, particularly those that predated European settlement, such as tallgrass prairie and oak savanna .

[ 28 ] Under the Oberlaender Trust of the Carl Schurz Memorial Foundation, Leopold was part of the 1935 group of six U.S. Forest Service associates who toured the forests of Germany and Austria. Leopold was invited specifically to study game management, and this was his first and only time abroad. His European observations would have a significant impact on his ecological thinking, leading him to view the German policies in favor of blocks of monoculture trees in straight lines as a cautionary tale leading to soil degradation and an overall loss of biodiversity.

[ 29 ] After 1935, Leopold was no longer working for the U.S. Forest Service ; he had left the agency in 1928 to work independently and later became a professor at the University of Wisconsin .

[ 20 ] Family life and death [ edit ] Leopold's headstone at his family plot in Aspen Grove Cemetery in Burlington, Iowa Leopold married Estella Bergere, the daughter of a well known ranching family in New Mexico, in northern New Mexico in 1912 and they had five children together.

[ 30 ] They lived in a modest two-story home close to the UW–Madison campus. His children followed in his footsteps as teachers and naturalists: Aldo Starker Leopold (1913–1983) was a wildlife biologist and professor at UC Berkeley; [ 31 ] Luna B. Leopold (1915–2006) became a hydrologist and geology professor at UC Berkeley; Nina Leopold Bradley (1917–2011) was a researcher and naturalist; Aldo Carl Leopold (1919–2009) was a plant physiologist, [ 32 ] who taught at Purdue University for 25 years; and daughter Estella Leopold (1927–2024) was a noted botanist and conservationist and professor emerita at the University of Washington.

Leopold purchased 80 acres in the sand country of central Wisconsin. The once-forested region had been logged, swept by repeated fires, overgrazed by dairy cows, and left barren. He put his theories to work in the field and eventually set to work writing his best-selling A Sand County Almanac (1949) which was finished just prior to his death. Aldo Leopold passed away from a heart attack on April 21, 1948, while helping his neighbors control a grass fire by his farm in Baraboo, Wisconsin.

[ 4 ] [ 33 ] Leopold's home is an official landmark of the city of Madison.

Ideas [ edit ] Early on, Leopold was assigned to hunt and kill bears, wolves, and mountain lions in New Mexico. Local ranchers hated these predators because of livestock losses, but Leopold came to respect the animals. One day after fatally shooting a wolf , Leopold reached the animal and was transfixed by a "fierce green fire dying in her eyes." That experience changed him and put him on the path toward an ecocentric outlook.

[ 34 ] He developed an ecological ethic that replaced the earlier wilderness ethic that stressed the need for human dominance. His rethinking the importance of predators in the balance of nature has resulted in the return of bears and mountain lions to New Mexico wilderness areas.

[ 20 ] By the early 1920s, Leopold had concluded that a particular kind of preservation should be embraced in the national forests of the American West. He was prompted to this by the rampant building of roads to accommodate the "proliferation of the automobile" and the related increasingly heavy recreational demands placed on public lands. He was the first to employ the term "wilderness" to describe such preservation. Over the next two decades, he added ethical and scientific rationales to his defense of the wilderness concept. Leopold believed that it is easier to maintain wilderness than to create it.

[ 35 ] In one essay, he rhetorically asked, "Of what avail are forty freedoms without a blank spot on the map?" Leopold saw a progress of ethical sensitivity from interpersonal relationships, to relationships to society as a whole, to relationships with the land, leading to a steady diminution of actions based on expediency, conquest, and self-interest. Leopold thus rejected the utilitarianism of conservationists such as Theodore Roosevelt .

[ 20 ] Aldo Leopold with quiver and bow seated on rimrock above the Rio Gavilan in northern Mexico while on a bow hunting trip in 1938 By the 1930s, Leopold had become one of the first Americans to publish extensively on the startup discipline of wildlife management. He advocated the scientific management of wildlife habitats by both public and private landholders rather than a reliance on game refuges, hunting laws, and other methods intended to protect specific species of desired game. In his 1933 book Game Management , Leopold defined the science of wildlife management as "the art of making land produce sustained annual crops of wild game for recreational use." But, as Curt Meine [ 20 ] has pointed out, he also considered it to be a technique for restoring and maintaining diversity in the environment.

The concept of "wilderness" also took on a new meaning; Leopold no longer saw it as a hunting or recreational ground, but as an arena for a healthy biotic community, including wolves and mountain lions. In 1935, he helped found the Wilderness Society , dedicated to expanding and protecting the nation's wilderness areas. He regarded the society as "one of the focal points of a new attitude—an intelligent humility toward Man's place in nature." [ 36 ] Science writer Connie Barlow says Leopold wrote eloquently from a perspective that today would be called Religious Naturalism .

[ 37 ] Though often forgotten, thinking about population dynamics and consumption also shaped Leopold’s ecological vision in profound ways. By studying wildlife population fluctuations, Leopold extended many of the ideas about carrying capacity and environmental degradation that Raymond Pearl and Edward Murray East had articulated, and these ideas, in turn, shaped his path-breaking ideas of ecological interconnection. Moreover, although later readers associate Leopold with wildlife ecology, his career helps show how Malthusian ideas of human society intertwined and overlapped with ideas of nature. He was greatly influenced by ecologists who themselves gleaned ideas from Malthusian models of human society, and himself often thought of human events—especially the Great Depression and World War II—in terms of the models of population and consumption that he was developing for animals.

[ 38 ] One of the most influential books for Leopold during that period was Our Vanishing Wildlife by William Temple Hornaday. As one of the earliest works dedicated entirely to the threats facing wild game populations this book significantly shaped Leopold's views. The book sharpened his focus on the importance of game protection, a concern that would remain central to his thinking for many years to come.

[ 39 ] Nature writing [ edit ] Leopold's nature writing is notable for its simple directness. His portrayals of various natural environments through which he had moved, or had known for many years, displayed impressive intimacy with what exists and happens in nature. This includes detailed diaries and journals of his Forest Service activity, hunting and field experience, as well as observations and activities at his Sand County farm.

[ 40 ] He offered frank criticism of the harm he believed was frequently done to natural systems (such as land) out of a sense of a culture or society's sovereign ownership over the land base – eclipsing any sense of a community of life to which humans belong. He felt the security and prosperity resulting from "mechanization" now gives people the time to reflect on the preciousness of nature and to learn more about what happens there; however, he also wrote, "Theoretically, the mechanization of farming ought to cut the farmer's chains, but whether it really does is debatable." [ 41 ] A Sand County Almanac [ edit ] The book was published in 1949, shortly after Leopold's death. The book was structured in a series of monthly essays where he went in depth about land ethics and nature. Several of these monthly essays were accompanied with sketches from the different landscapes and plants he found. Additionally, he would have philosophical segments that would contribute to his land ethic concepts. One of the well-known quotes from the book which clarifies his land ethic is, A thing is right when it tends to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the biotic community . It is wrong when it tends otherwise. (p.262) The concept of a trophic cascade is put forth in the chapter, " Thinking Like a Mountain ", wherein Leopold realizes that killing a predatory wolf carries serious implications for the rest of the ecosystem [ 42 ] — a conclusion that found sympathetic appreciation generations later: In January 1995 I helped carry the first grey wolf into Yellowstone, where they had been eradicated by federal predator control policy only six decades earlier. Looking through the crates into her eyes, I reflected on how Aldo Leopold once took part in that policy, then eloquently challenged it. By illuminating for us how wolves play a critical role in the whole of creation, he expressed the ethic and the laws which would reintroduce them nearly a half-century after his death.

— Bruce Babbitt , former Secretary of the Interior [ 43 ] Thinking Like a Mountain was originally written during World War II and shows that Leopold's thinking was shaped by that global cataclysm.

[ 44 ] Land ethic [ edit ] In "The Land Ethic ", a chapter in A Sand County Almanac , Leopold delves into conservation in "The Ecological Conscience" section. He wrote: "Conservation is a state of harmony between men and land." He noted that conservation guidelines at the time boiled down to: "obey the law, vote right, join some organizations, and practice what conservation is profitable on your own land; the government will do the rest." (p. 243–244) Leopold explained: The land ethic simply enlarges the boundaries of the community to include soils, waters, plants, and animals, or collectively: the land.
This sounds simple: do we not already sing our love for and obligation to the land of the free and the home of the brave? Yes, but just what and whom do we love? Certainly not the soil, which we are sending helter-skelter down river. Certainly not the waters, which we assume have no function except to turn turbines, float barges, and carry off sewage. Certainly not the plants, of which we exterminate whole communities without batting an eye. Certainly not the animals, of which we have already extirpated many of the largest and most beautiful species. A land ethic of course cannot prevent the alteration, management, and use of these 'resources,' but it does affirm their right to continued existence, and, at least in spots, their continued existence in a natural state. In short, a land ethic changes the role of Homo sapiens from conqueror of the land-community to plain member and citizen of it. It implies respect for his fellow-members, and also respect for the community as such.

Aldo Leopold’s contributions to conservation, particularly his role in establishing the Gila Wilderness Area, are deeply intertwined with the evolution of his philosophical views. In the early 20th century, Leopold’s work with the U.S. Forest Service in the American Southwest was grounded in the agency’s utilitarian ethos, which prioritized resource extraction and economic productivity.

[ 20 ] As a forester in Arizona and New Mexico, Leopold initially approached wildlife management with a focus on maximizing game species for human benefit, a perspective aligned with the Progressive Era’s emphasis on efficient resource use. Leopold’s philosophy began to evolve in the 1910s and 1920s, driven by field observations, ecological consequences of his early practices, and intellectual growth.

[ 24 ] By the 1930s, as a professor at the University of Wisconsin, he articulated a holistic, ecocentric worldview that viewed humans as part of a broader “land community.” This shift is most famously encapsulated in his “land ethic,” which he defined in A Sand County Almanac as a moral responsibility to care for the land, including soils, waters, plants, and animals, as an interconnected whole.

[ 1 ] A pivotal moment in Leopold’s transformation occurred around 1909-1910, during his early years in the Apache National Forest. In his essay “Thinking Like a Mountain” , Leopold recounts shooting a wolf and watching it die, observing “a fierce green fire” in its eyes.

[ 20 ] This visceral experience, coupled with witnessing the subsequent ecological fallout, profoundly altered his perspective. The incident highlighted the role of predators in maintaining ecological balance. Without wolves, deer populations surged, overgrazing vegetation and triggering a cascade of environmental damage, including soil erosion and loss of biodiversity. Leopold realized that “the mountain” required all its components—predators, prey, and plants—to function healthily.

[ 35 ] This moment marked a shift from viewing wildlife in isolation to understanding ecosystems as dynamic, interdependent systems. It planted the seed for his later ecocentric philosophy, where no single species, including humans, could be prioritized at the expense of the whole.

[ 22 ] Game Management [ edit ] Game Management was published in 1933, establishing Leopold as one of the leaders and founders of wildlife preservation and ecology.This book was used in his teachings at The University of Wisconsin and led the groundwork for describing methods of how to restore and manage ecosystems using the same tools and methods that were used to destroy them. Game Management is deemed Leopold’s most important work as it founded a new science by combining the likes of agriculture, biology, ecology, and other sciences.

[ 45 ] This book brought about a revolution within conservation and placed Leopold as the founder of the Department of Game Management at The University of Wisconsin.

[ 46 ] For more than 40 years after its publication, it was the leading textbook in the field of wildlife management.

The River of the Mother of God and Other Essays [ edit ] Published nearly 45 years after the death of Leopold, The River of the Mother of God, includes 59 essays drawn from Leopold’s unpublished manuscripts found at The University of Wisconsin and Leopold’s overlooked published work. This collection is titled after one of Leopold’s most popular essays from 1924, “The River of the Mother of God,” but it spans Leopold’s life discussing themes of wilderness preservation, ecology, agriculture, land ethics, and natural esthetics from his teenage years until his last years. This work dives into a deeper view of Leopold and shows the lasting impact he made on the field of conservation.

[ 47 ] A Man's Leisure Time [ edit ] In A Sand County Almanac , Aldo Leopold’s essay “A Man’s Leisure Time” provides us with a thoughtful examination of how leisure enriches our lives by deepening our connection with nature. Leopold believed that how one spends their free time is a good indicator of one’s intelligence and character. Leopold states, “How miserable are the idle hours of the ignorant man!” contributing to his idea that leisure time is meaningful and it is important to take in the nature around when present with the opportunity.

According to Leopold, leisure activities should not be relaxing time but ways to achieve personal growth and understanding. He describes hobbies as "a defiance of the contemporary," suggesting that they allow individuals to step away from the relentless pace of modern life and engage in activities that are rewarding and enriching. Leopold highlights that such pursuits, whether it's collecting fossils or cultivating a garden, can lead to a profound appreciation of the land and how important and amazing nature is.

In this chapter, Mr.Leopold encourages the reader to consider what they do with their free or leisure time in their life. Leopold advocates for activities that promote a deeper understanding of the natural world.

[ 48 ] Legacy [ edit ] In 1933, Aldo Leopold became the first professor of Game Management at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Through his contributions and knowledge about wildlife ecology, he had helped create a new course.

"Game Management" during this time meant the scientific study and the practical application of techniques for maintaining a healthy wildlife population, especially those that are hunted for sport. Through his expertise, the area of wildlife management grew from just managing populations within life to a larger egocialcal approach to managing wildlife population.

Game management was a branch of conservation biology to Aldo Leopold.He was concerned about the whole ecological balance of the environment and not just one species. He created a field that was hit every area ecology, policy, forestry, and ethics. He even published a textbook for his class titles "Game management", also published in 1933.

In 1950 The Wildlife Society honored Leopold by creating an annual award in his name.

[ 49 ] In 1965, the Sand County Foundation was founded in response to Leopold's book "A Sand County Almanac." The Sand County Foundation is a non-profit organization that provides farmers, forestland owners, and other private land owners with environmental and crop production data to encourage effective agricultural and environmental techniques within The United States. Furthermore, the foundation formed a Leopold Conservation Award to recognize farmers, forestland owners, and private land owners for inspirational conservation efforts and leadership within land ethics.

[ 50 ] The Aldo Leopold Foundation of Baraboo, Wisconsin , was founded in 1982 by Aldo and Estella Leopold's five children as a 501(c)3 not-for-profit conservation organization whose mission is "to foster the land ethic through the legacy of Aldo Leopold".

[ 51 ] The Aldo Leopold Foundation owns and manages the original Aldo Leopold Shack and Farm and 300 surrounding acres, in addition to several other parcels. Its headquarters is the green-built Leopold Center where it conducts educational and land stewardship programs. The foundation also acts as the executor of Leopold's literary estate, encourages scholarship on Leopold, and serves as a clearinghouse for information regarding Leopold, his work, and his ideas. It provides interpretive resources and tours for thousands of visitors annually, distributes a curriculum about how to use Leopold's writing and ideas in environmental education.

[ 52 ] The center maintains a robust website and numerous print resources. In 2012, in collaboration with the United States Forest Service , the foundation and the Center for Humans and Nature released the first full-length film about Leopold, titled Green Fire: Aldo Leopold and a Land Ethic for Our Time .

[ 53 ] The film aired on public television stations across the nation and won a Midwest regional Emmy award in the documentary category.

[ 54 ] Aldo Leopold Wilderness Research Institute The Aldo Leopold Wilderness in New Mexico's Gila National Forest was named after him in 1980.

[ 55 ] The Leopold Center for Sustainable Agriculture was established in 1987 at Iowa State University in Ames. It was named in honor of Leopold. Since its founding, it has pioneered new forms of sustainable agriculture practices.

The U.S. Forest Service established the Aldo Leopold Wilderness Research Institute at the University of Montana, Missoula in 1993. It is "the only Federal research group in the United States dedicated to the development and dissemination of knowledge needed to improve management of wilderness , parks , and similarly protected areas ." [ 56 ] The Aldo Leopold Neighborhood Historic District , which includes Leopold's former home in Albuquerque , New Mexico , was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2002.

[ 57 ] The Aldo Leopold Legacy Trail System , a system of 42 state trails in Wisconsin, was created by the state in 2007 to honor Leopold's contributions to the conservation and outdoor recreation. This trail covers more than 1,700 miles across the state of Wisconsin. Many of the trails pass through forests, scenics natural areas, and state parks. There are signs, along the trails, to showcase information about Leopold's life, his conservation work, and natural information about the surrounding area.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] [ 60 ] The Leopold Center for Sustainable Agriculture in Iowa, created through the 1987 Iowa Groundwater Protection Act is committed to "new ways to farm profitably while conserving natural resources as well as reducing negative environmental and social impacts".

[ 61 ] An organization, the Leopold Heritage Group, is "dedicated to promoting the global legacy of Aldo Leopold in his hometown of Burlington, Iowa." This groups preserves and shares Leopold's legacy by providing local events, educational programs,  and conservation projects. The "Leopold Heritage Group", supports efforts to maintain Leopold-relates sites around the area for example, his childhood home and many places that he has explored as a child.

[ 62 ] In 1985, Leopold was inducted along with John Muir , a naturalist and preservationist, as the first inductees to the Wisconsin Conservation Hall of Fame. The Hall of Fame is located in Stevens Point, Wisconsin, it was created to recognize the individuals who have made important contributions to conserving the natural state of resources around the state.

[ 63 ] The Leopold Residence Hall at the University of Wisconsin-Madison was named after him. It opened in 2013.

[ 64 ] Leopold's Preserve in Haymarket, Virginia was established in 2014. This preserve is a 380-acre park that is committed to preserving diverse ecosystems, natural scenes, and protecting threatened land from industrial and commercial development.

[ 65 ] Aldo Leopold is well known for being the founder of wildlife management, he played a key role in establishing ethics in the wildlife world. He was a driving force behind the creation of the Gila National Forest Wilderness, and his legacy lives on today as the Gila National Forest has been standing strong since 1924, when the National Forest was created.

[ 66 ] Works [ edit ] Report on a Game Survey of the North Central States (Madison: SAAMI, 1931) Game Management (New York: Scribner's, 1933) A Sand County Almanac (New York: Oxford, 1949) Round River: From the Journals of Aldo Leopold (New York: Oxford, 1953) A Sand County Almanac and Other Writings on Ecology and Conservation (New York: Library of America, 2013) See also [ edit ] Grey Owl Timeline of environmental events Land Ethic Sand County Foundation Yale School of Forestry & Environmental Studies Aldo Leopold Legacy Trail System Aldo Leopold Wilderness Leopold Wetland Management District Ian McTaggart-Cowan J. Drew Lanham Notes [ edit ] ^ a b "A Sand County Almanac" .

The Aldo Leopold Foundation .

Archived from the original on January 29, 2017.

^ Phillip F. Cramer, Deep Environmental Politics: The Role of Radical Environmentalism in Crafting American Environmental Policy (1998) ^ Errington, pp. 341–350.

^ a b c d "To Her, He Was Simply Dad" .

The Capital Times . February 27, 2008. p. 29 . Retrieved December 24, 2019 – via Newspapers.com .

^ Delhomme, PJ (December 12, 2022).

"B&C Member Spotlight - Aldo Leopold" .

Boone And Crockett Club . Retrieved February 10, 2025 .

^ Bob Hansen. " Bringing up Aldo Archived March 13, 2018, at the Wayback Machine ". Leopold Heritage Group.

^ Lorbiecki, p. 7.

^ Meine, p. 15.

^ Meine, p. 18.

^ Lorbiecki, p. 14.

^ Lorbiecki, p. 9.

^ Meine, p. 22.

^ Lorbiecki, p. 24.

^ Lorbiecki, p. 25.

^ Meine, pp. 37–38.

^ Lorbiecki, p. 31.

^ Meine, p. 52.

^ The Aldo Leopold Foundation.

Aldo Leopold .

^ Legacy of renowned conservationist Aldo Leopold profiled in documentary .

Yale News .

^ a b c d e f g Meine ^ a b c d e "Leopold Legacy – Aldo Leopold Living History" . Retrieved April 23, 2025 .

^ a b c d e f g "Aldo Leopold papers : 9/25/10-11 : Forest Service Records - UWDC - UW-Madison Libraries" .

search.library.wisc.edu . Retrieved April 22, 2025 .

^ "Aldo Leopold's legacy on our national parks" .

OUPblog . August 7, 2016 . Retrieved April 22, 2025 .

^ a b c "Leopold's Wild Idea, Part One | The Aldo Leopold Foundation" .

www.aldoleopold.org . Retrieved April 22, 2025 .

^ a b c "Gila National Forest - History & Culture" .

USDA Forest Service . Retrieved April 22, 2025 .

^ "CONTENTdm" .

cdm16013.contentdm.oclc.org .

^ Court 2012 , pp. 63–64 ^ "History" .

UW Arboretum .

^ "The Oberlaender Trust and American Forestry" .

Forest History Society . Retrieved April 30, 2021 .

^ Leopold Family. " Leopold Family ". The Aldo Leopold Foundation.

^ Raitt, RJ (1984).

"In Memoriam: A. Starker Leopold" (PDF) .

Auk .

101 (4): 868– 871.

doi : 10.2307/4086914 .

JSTOR 4086914 .

^ Mark Staves and Randy Wayne . (December 3, 2009.) " In Memoriam: A. Carl Leopold ".

The Lansing Star . Retrieved on February 2, 2010.

^ Lorbiecki, p. 179.

^ Withgott, Jay; Laposata, Matthew (2012).

Essential Environment: the science behind the stories (4th ed.). Pearson. p. 14.

ISBN 978-0-321-75290-1 .

^ a b Miller, Char (January 2006).

"Aldo Leopold (1921) The Wilderness and Its Place in Forest Recreation Policy, Journal of Forestry 19(7): 718-721" .

Journal of Forestry .

104 (1): 51.

doi : 10.1093/jof/104.1.51 .

^ Flader, p. 29.

^ "Ritualizing Big History" . Metanexus blog. March 14, 2013.

^ Thomas Robertson (2012).

The Malthusian Moment: Global Population Growth and the Birth of American Environmentalism , p 23-29.

^ "Leopold Legacy – Aldo Leopold Living History" . Retrieved April 23, 2025 .

^ "Aldo Leopold Archives – UW Digital Collections" . Retrieved February 22, 2020 .

^ Leopold, A.

A Sand County Almanac (1970 ed.) p. 262) ^ Leopold, Aldo "Thinking Like a Mountain" Archived January 4, 2009, at the Wayback Machine ^ Lorbiecki, quote on back cover ^ Thomas Robertson (2012).

The Malthusian Moment: Global Population Growth and the Birth of American Environmentalism , Rutgers University Press, p 28-29.

^ "Aldo Leopold" .

wilderness.net . Retrieved April 23, 2025 .

^ "Leopold, Aldo" .

University Housing . Retrieved April 23, 2025 .

^ Leopold, Aldo (1991). Flader, Susan (ed.).

The River of the Mother of God and Other Essays (1st ed.). University of Wisconsin Press. pp.

ix– xv.

ISBN 9786612555404 .

^ "A Sand County Almanac | PDF" .

Scribd . Retrieved April 23, 2025 .

^ "Aldo Leopold Memorial Award" .

The Wildlife Society . Retrieved December 17, 2020 .

^ "About Us" .

Sand County Foundation . Retrieved April 23, 2025 .

^ "Mission / Vision" .

The Aldo Leopold Foundation .

^ "Leopold Education Project" .

The Aldo Leopold Foundation . Archived from the original on December 9, 2022 . Retrieved January 2, 2018 .

^ "Green Fire Film" . The Aldo Leopold Foundation. Archived from the original on October 28, 2016 . Retrieved January 2, 2018 .

^ "About Green Fire" .

The Aldo Leopold Foundation .

^ Aldo Leopold Wilderness Archived March 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine , Wilderness.net ^ "About Us" . Aldo Leopold Wilderness Research Institute . Retrieved January 2, 2018 .

^ "National Register of Historic Places Registration Form: Aldo Leopold Neighborhood Historic District" .

National Park Service . October 16, 2002.

with 11 accompanying photos ^ " DNR Secretary: Aldo Leopold's legacy alive on renamed trails Find a Wisconsin State Trail Archived January 3, 2018, at the Wayback Machine . Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.  Retrieved January 2, 2018.

^ " Governor Doyle Names State Trails 'Aldo Leopold Legacy Trail System' ". WI Office of the Governor: Media Room. Retrieved January 31, 2010.

^ " State trails now a legacy to Aldo Leopold ". (June 5, 2009.) The Capital Times . Retrieved January 31, 2010.

^ "Leopold Center for Sustainable Agriculture" .

www.leopold.iastate.edu . November 22, 2019 . Retrieved November 22, 2019 .

^ "Leopold Heritage Group" . Archived from the original on February 28, 2016 . Retrieved November 26, 2009 .

^ "About the Wisconsin Conservation Hall of Fame" .

^ "Leopold Residence Hall" .

University Housing . Retrieved February 20, 2025 .

^ "About Us" .

Leopold's Preserve . Retrieved April 23, 2025 .

^ "Aldo Leopold (1887-1948) The Ethical Ecologist, , U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service" .

www.fws.gov . Retrieved April 23, 2025 .

References [ edit ] Errington, P. L. 1948. "In Appreciation of Aldo Leopold".

The Journal of Wildlife Management , 12(4).

Flader, Susan L. 1974.

Thinking like a Mountain: Aldo Leopold and the Evolution of an Ecological Attitude toward Deer, Wolves, and Forests . Columbia: University of Missouri Press.

ISBN 0-8262-0167-9 .

Lorbiecki, Marybeth. 1996.

Aldo Leopold: A Fierce Green Fire . Helena, Mont.: Falcon Press.

ISBN 1-56044-478-9 .

Meine, Curt. 1988.

Aldo Leopold: His Life and Work . Madison: University of Wisconsin Press .

ISBN 0-299-11490-2 .

Further reading [ edit ] Callicott, J. Baird. 1987.

Companion to A Sand County Almanac: Interpretive and Critical Essays . Madison, Wis.: University of Wisconsin Press.

ISBN 0-299-11230-6 .

Court, Franklin E. (2012).

Pioneers of Ecological Restoration: The People and Legacy of the University of Wisconsin Arboretum . University of Wisconsin Press.

ISBN 978-0-299-28663-7 .

Knight, Richard L. and Suzanne Riedel (ed). 2002.

Aldo Leopold and the Ecological Conscience . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-514944-0 .

Lannoo, Michael J. 2010.

Leopold's Shack and Ricketts's Lab: The Emergence of Environmentalism . Berkeley: University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-520-26478-6 .

Lutz, Julianne.

Aldo Leopold's Odyssey: Rediscovering the Author of A Sand County Almanac . Washington, D.C.: Shearwater Books/Island Press, 2006.

McClintock, James I. 1994.

Nature's Kindred Spirits .

University of Wisconsin Press .

ISBN 0-299-14174-8 .

Nash, Roderick. 1967.

Wilderness and the American Mind, New Haven: Yale University Press.

[ ISBN missing ] Newton, Julianne Lutz. 2006.

Aldo Leopold's Odyssey . Washington: Island Press/Shearwater Books.

ISBN 978-1-59726-045-9 .

Petersen, Harry L. (Fall 2003).

"Aldo Leopold's Contribution to Fly Fishing" (PDF) .

The American Fly Fisher .

29 (4): 2– 10. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 29, 2014 . Retrieved November 16, 2014 .

Sutter, Paul S. 2002.

Driven Wild: How the Fight against Automobiles Launched the Modern Wilderness Movement . Seattle: University of Washington Press.

ISBN 0-295-98219-5 .

Tanner, Thomas. 1987.

Aldo Leopold: The Man and His Legacy . Ankeny, Iowa Soil Conservation Soc. of America.

[ ISBN missing ] Wild, Peter (1978). "8: Move Toward Holism: 'Thinking Like a Mountain,' Aldo Leopold Breaks with the Forest Service".

Pioneer Conservationists of Western America .

Edward Abbey (Introduction). Missoula: Mountain Press Publishing. pp.

93– 103.

ISBN 0878421076 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Aldo Leopold .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Aldo Leopold .

Aldo Leopold Foundation Leopold Heritage Group The Aldo Leopold Archives Digitized archival materials held by the University of Wisconsin–Madison Archives.

Leopold Conservation Award Excerpts from the Works of Aldo Leopold The Land Ethic—neohasid.org The Encyclopedia of Earth Leopold Education Project Aldo Leopold: Learning from the Land Archived May 5, 2019, at the Wayback Machine Documentary produced by Wisconsin Public Television Aldo Leopold at IMDb [1] v t e The Wilderness Society (United States) Wilderness Wilderness Act National Wilderness Preservation System Founders Harold C. Anderson Harvey Broome Bernard Frank Aldo Leopold Benton MacKaye Bob Marshall Ernest Oberholtzer Robert Sterling Yard Notable leaders Ernie Dickerman George Marshall Margaret Murie Gaylord Nelson Sigurd F. Olson Wallace Stegner Howard Zahniser v t e Environmentalism Outline of environmentalism Key topics Climate justice Ecological crisis Environmental conflict Environmental movement History List of environmental conflicts Organizations Environmental studies Human impact on the environment Disciplines Communication Ecology Education Ethics Health History Humanities Law Philosophy Politics Psychology Religion Science Social science Sociology Views Philosophical Political ecology Environmental philosophy Biocentrism Deep ecology Earth jurisprudence Ecocentrism Resacralization of nature Social ecology Political Bioconservatism Bright green environmentalism Disinvestment Eco-capitalism Ecofascism Ecofeminism Eco-nationalism Eco-socialism Eco-terrorism Ecomodernism Free-market environmentalism Green anarchism Green conservatism Green left Green liberalism Green libertarianism Green politics Green syndicalism War on coal Religious Ecotheology Christianity Evangelical Islam Judaism Stewardship (theology) Opposition Anti-environmentalism Environmental skepticism List of environmental killings Biophilia hypothesis Environmentalism of the poor Environmental stewardship Hardline Nature conservation Radical environmentalism Offshoots Anti-fracking movement Anti-nuclear movement Car-free movement Climate movement Conservation movement Cultural environmentalism Degrowth Earth Optimism Eco-anxiety Ecological grief Environmental defender Environmental justice Ethical banking Ethical consumerism Flight shame Impact investing Product stewardship Slow movement Sustainability organization Goals Circular economy Climate action Climate change mitigation Conservation community Ecological civilization Environmental personhood Environmental protection Environmental policy Environmental, social, and corporate governance Environmentally friendly Greening Green economy Greenwashing Natural resource management Environmental resource management Rights of nature Short-haul flight ban Smoke abatement Sustainability Vegetarianism Protests Tree sitting By country Albania Australia Brazil Rio Grande do Sul China Anti-incinerator movement India Chipko movement Israel New Zealand Philippines South Africa Switzerland United Kingdom United States In culture Art Books Ecofiction Conspicuous conservation Film list festivals horror Journalism The Lord of the Rings Music Ecomusicology Motorsport Sculpture Surfing Tourism Eco hotel Publications Environmentalists Environmentalist Environmental defender Water protector Notable people Sunderlal Bahuguna Murray Bookchin David Brower Rachel Carson Jacques Cousteau Ng Cho-nam Tim Flannery Al Gore Aldo Leopold Wangari Maathai Seyyed Hossein Nasr Chico Mendes John Muir Theodore Roosevelt Shōzō Tanaka Greta Thunberg Related topics Barriers to pro-environmental behaviour Business ethics Land ethic Lifeboat ethics Tragedy of the commons Environment portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Korea Sweden Poland Israel Academics CiNii Artists ULAN People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐hmrgn
Cached time: 20250817044800
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.754 seconds
Real time usage: 1.375 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4654/1000000
Revision size: 54565/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 136455/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5596/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 189361/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.446/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9837215/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  754.784      1 -total
 38.33%  289.279      1 Template:Reflist
 23.29%  175.807     29 Template:Cite_web
 16.51%  124.645      1 Template:Infobox_writer
 15.84%  119.535      1 Template:Infobox
 10.86%   81.941      4 Template:Navbox
  8.44%   63.715      1 Template:Short_description
  7.19%   54.245      1 Template:The_Wilderness_Society
  7.16%   54.011      3 Template:Br_separated_entries
  5.13%   38.743      1 Template:Birth_date Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:217706:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044800 and revision id 1302725633. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aldo_Leopold&oldid=1302725633 " Categories : 1887 births 1948 deaths American conservationists American foresters American hunters American non-fiction environmental writers American people of German descent Environmental ethicists John Burroughs Medal recipients People from Burlington, Iowa Writers from Madison, Wisconsin Lawrenceville School alumni Yale University alumni Yale School of Forestry & Environmental Studies alumni Activists from Iowa American nature writers American male non-fiction writers 20th-century American non-fiction writers People from Baraboo, Wisconsin 20th-century American naturalists 20th-century American male writers Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from May 2013 Pages with missing ISBNs Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 27 July 2025, at 05:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aldo Leopold 26 languages Add topic

