Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Early history 2.2 World War II 2.3 Post-war period 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Peenemünde 48 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Cebuano Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Italiano עברית Kurdî Ladin Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar Македонски मराठी Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 54°08′N 13°46′E ﻿ / ﻿ 54.133°N 13.767°E ﻿ / 54.133; 13.767 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For the Nazi Germany facilities for the V-1 flying bomb and the V-2 missile, see Peenemünde Airfield and Peenemünde Army Research Center .

Municipality in Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, Germany Peenemünde Municipality Seaport Coat of arms Location of Peenemünde   within Vorpommern-Greifswald   district Peenemünde Show map of Germany Peenemünde Show map of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern Coordinates: 54°08′N 13°46′E ﻿ / ﻿ 54.133°N 13.767°E ﻿ / 54.133; 13.767 Country Germany State Mecklenburg-Vorpommern District Vorpommern-Greifswald Municipal assoc.

Usedom-Nord Government • Mayor Rainer Barthelmes Area • Total 25.74 km 2 (9.94 sq mi) Elevation 3.0 m (9.8 ft) Population (2023-12-31) [ 1 ] • Total 349 • Density 14/km 2 (35/sq mi) Time zone UTC+01:00 ( CET ) • Summer ( DST ) UTC+02:00 ( CEST ) Postal codes 17449 Dialling codes 038371 Vehicle registration VG Website www.amtusedomnord.de Peenemünde ( German pronunciation: [peːnəˈmʏndə] ⓘ , lit.

' Peene [River] Mouth ' ) is a municipality on the Baltic Sea island of Usedom in the Vorpommern-Greifswald district in Mecklenburg-Vorpommern in north-eastern Germany. It is part of the Amt (collective municipality) of Usedom-Nord . The community is known for the Peenemünde Army Research Center , where the world's first functional large-scale liquid-propellant rocket , the V-2 , was developed.

Geography [ edit ] Peenemünde railway station for service to Zinnowitz The village with its seaport is located on the westernmost extremity of a long sand-spit, where the Peene empties into the Baltic Sea, in the northwestern part of Usedom Island. To the southeast it borders on the sea resort of Karlshagen .

Peenemünde harbour can be reached by ferry boat across the Peene from Kröslin , liners also run along the Baltic coast to Rügen Island. The local railway station is the northern terminus of the Usedomer Bäderbahn line to Zinnowitz . Air service for the village is available at the Peenemünde Airfield .

History [ edit ] Early history [ edit ] Swedish naval landing in 1630 During the 10th and 11th centuries, Peenemünde was part of the region of Circipania , an area settled by the Circipanes, a West Slavic tribe constituent of the Lutici federation . Circipania was incorporated into the Billung March of the Holy Roman Empire in 936, but the Empire's influence in the region decayed by the end of that century after a successful Slavic uprising. During the late 12th century, in the aftermath of the Wendish Crusade , the region fell under the rule of the Duchy of Pomerania . After the Treaty of Kremmen in 1236, most of Circipania was transferred to the Margraviate of Brandenburg .

[ 2 ] The settlement was first mentioned in 1282 under Bogislaw IV, Duke of Pomerania .

The settlement was captured by Sweden in 1630, confirmed by the Peace of Westphalia in 1648. In 1720, it passed to Prussia . It was besieged by Sweden during the Pomeranian War in 1757.

World War II [ edit ] V-2 rocket In World War II , the area was highly involved in the development and production of the V-1 and V-2 rockets, until the production's relocation to Nordhausen . The village's docks were used for the ships which recovered V-2 wreckage from test launches over the Baltic Sea . German scientists such as Wernher von Braun , who worked at the V-2 facility, were known as "Peenemünders". The resistance group around the priest Heinrich Maier passed on plans for the V-1 , V-2 rockets , and the Peenemünde research station to the Allies. The resistance group, later discovered by the Gestapo , was in contact with Allen Dulles , the head of the US secret service OSS in Switzerland. The allied bombers were able to carry out precise air attacks with the sketches of the production facilities. The information was important for Operation Crossbow and Operation Hydra , both pre-missions for Operation Overlord .

During Operation Hydra, the research facility was badly hit by the attack by the RAF bomber command on Peenemünde on the night of August 17–18, 1943. The attack was carried out by a total of 596 bombers (324 Avro Lancaster , 218 Handley Page Halifax , 54 Short Stirling ). There was extensive destruction and the rocket launch of the prototype V-2 was delayed by about two months. 123 people died, including the scientist Walter Thiel. Wernher von Braun was able to save himself in a bunker.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The entire island was captured by the Soviet Red Army on 5 May 1945. The gas plant for the production of liquid oxygen still lies in ruins at the entrance to Peenemünde.

Post-war period [ edit ] The post-war port was a Soviet naval base until turned over to the armed forces of East Germany in 1952. The seaport facilities were used at first by the East German Seepolizei (sea police) after new facilities for police motorboats had been built. On 1 December 1956 the headquarters of the First Flotilla ( de:Erste Flottille (Volksmarine) ) of the East German People's Navy was established at Peenemünde.

The Peenemünde Historical Technical Museum , a World War II museum on the European Route of Industrial Heritage opened in 1992 in the power station of the former Army Testing Site [ 5 ] and the area of the World War II power station (now part of the village). Exhibits include a V-1 and a V-2 .

References [ edit ] ^ "Statistisches Amt M-V – Bevölkerungsstand der Kreise, Ämter und Gemeinden 2023" (XLS) (in German).

Statistisches Amt Mecklenburg-Vorpommern .

^ Bucholz, Werner (1999). Pommern. Deutsche Geschichte im Osten Europas. Siedler, pp. 23ff.

ISBN 3-88680-272-8 ^ Elisabeth Boeckl-Klamper, Thomas Mang, Wolfgang Neugebauer: Gestapo-Leitstelle Wien 1938–1945.

Vienna 2018, ISBN 978-3-902494-83-2 , p 299–305; Hans Schafranek: Widerstand und Verrat: Gestapospitzel im antifaschistischen Untergrund.

Vienna 2017, ISBN 978-3-7076-0622-5 , p 161–248; Fritz Molden: Die Feuer in der Nacht. Opfer und Sinn des österreichischen Widerstandes 1938–1945 . Vienna 1988, p 122; Peter Broucek "Die österreichische Identität im Widerstand 1938–1945" (2008), p 163; Hansjakob Stehle "Die Spione aus dem Pfarrhaus (German: The spy from the rectory)" In: Die Zeit, 5 January 1996; Christoph Thurner "The CASSIA Spy Ring in World War II Austria: A History of the OSS's Maier-Messner Group" (2017), pp 187; Martin Middlebrook "The Peenemünde raid: the night of 17–18 August 1943" (1988).

^ Operation Crossbow - Preliminary missions for the Operation Overlord ^ "The Peenemünde Historical Technical Museum" . Retrieved 8 December 2014 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Peenemünde at Wikimedia Commons Peenemünde travel guide from Wikivoyage Official website of Peenemünde and the Historical Technical Museum (English) V2 Rocket site v t e Towns and municipalities in Vorpommern-Greifswald Ahlbeck Alt Tellin Altwarp Altwigshagen Anklam Bandelin Bargischow Behrenhoff Bentzin Benz Bergholz Blankensee Blesewitz Boldekow Boock Brietzig Brünzow Bugewitz Buggenhagen Butzow Daberkow Dargelin Dargen Dersekow Ducherow Eggesin Fahrenwalde Ferdinandshof Garz Glasow Görmin Grambin Grambow Greifswald Gribow Groß Kiesow Groß Luckow Groß Polzin Gützkow Hammer an der Uecker Hanshagen Heinrichswalde Heringsdorf Hinrichshagen Hintersee Iven Jarmen Jatznick Kamminke Karlsburg Karlshagen Katzow Kemnitz Klein Bünzow Koblentz Korswandt Koserow Krackow Krien Kröslin Kruckow Krugsdorf Krummin Krusenfelde Lassan Leopoldshagen Levenhagen Liepgarten Löcknitz Loddin Loissin Loitz Lubmin Lübs Luckow Lütow Medow Meiersberg Mellenthin Mesekenhagen Mölschow Mönkebude Murchin Nadrensee Neetzow-Liepen Neu Boltenhagen Neu Kosenow Neuenkirchen, Anklam-Land Neuenkirchen, Landhagen Nieden Papendorf Pasewalk Peenemünde Penkun Plöwen Polzow Postlow Pudagla Ramin Rankwitz Rollwitz Rossin Rossow Rothemühl Rothenklempenow Rubenow Rubkow Sarnow Sassen-Trantow Sauzin Schmatzin Schönwalde Spantekow Stolpe an der Peene Stolpe auf Usedom Strasburg Torgelow Trassenheide Tutow Ückeritz Ueckermünde Usedom Viereck Vogelsang-Warsin Völschow Wackerow Weitenhagen Wietstock Wilhelmsburg Wolgast Wrangelsburg Wusterhusen Zemitz Zempin Zerrenthin Ziethen Zinnowitz Zirchow Züssow Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Peenemünde&oldid=1284101430 " Categories : Municipalities in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania Vorpommern-Greifswald Populated coastal places in Germany (Baltic Sea) Port cities and towns in Germany Seaside resorts in Germany Peenemünde Army Research Center and Airfield Military facilities of the Soviet Union in Germany Installations of the Soviet Navy Volksmarine V-2 missile launch sites Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Pages using the Phonos extension CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Pages with German IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 April 2025, at 15:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Peenemünde 48 languages Add topic

