Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Concepts 3 Quantum electronics 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Quantum optics 40 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Кыргызча Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Tagalog Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Quantum electronics ) Sub-field of quantum physics and optics "Quantum electronics" redirects here. For the journal, see Quantum Electronics (journal) .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Quantum optics" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( April 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Quantum optics is a branch of atomic, molecular, and optical physics and quantum chemistry that studies the behavior of photons (individual quanta of light). It includes the study of the particle-like properties of photons and their interaction with, for instance, atoms and molecules. Photons have been used to test many of the counter-intuitive predictions of quantum mechanics , such as entanglement and teleportation , and are a useful resource for quantum information processing .

History [ edit ] Light propagating in a restricted volume of space has its energy and momentum quantized according to an integer number of particles known as photons . Quantum optics studies the nature and effects of light as quantized photons. The first major development leading to that understanding was the correct modeling of the blackbody radiation spectrum by Max Planck in 1899 under the hypothesis of light being emitted in discrete units of energy. The photoelectric effect was further evidence of this quantization as explained by Albert Einstein in a 1905 paper, a discovery for which he was to be awarded the Nobel Prize in 1921.

Niels Bohr showed that the hypothesis of optical radiation being quantized corresponded to his theory of the quantized energy levels of atoms , and the spectrum of discharge emission from hydrogen in particular. The understanding of the interaction between light and matter following these developments was crucial for the development of quantum mechanics as a whole. However, the subfields of quantum mechanics dealing with matter-light interaction were principally regarded as research into matter rather than into light; hence one rather spoke of atom physics and quantum electronics in 1960.

Laser science —i.e., research into principles, design and application of these devices—became an important field, and the quantum mechanics underlying the laser's principles was studied now with more emphasis on the properties of light [ dubious – discuss ] , and the name quantum optics became customary.

As laser science needed good theoretical foundations, and also because research into these soon proved very fruitful, interest in quantum optics rose. Following the work of Dirac in quantum field theory , John R. Klauder , George Sudarshan , Roy J. Glauber , and Leonard Mandel applied quantum theory to the electromagnetic field in the 1950s and 1960s to gain a more detailed understanding of photodetection and the statistics of light (see degree of coherence ). This led to the introduction of the coherent state as a concept that addressed variations between laser light, thermal light, exotic squeezed states , etc. as it became understood that light cannot be fully described just referring to the electromagnetic fields describing the waves in the classical picture. In 1977, Kimble et al. demonstrated a single atom emitting one photon at a time, further compelling evidence that light consists of photons. Previously unknown quantum states of light with characteristics unlike classical states, such as squeezed light were subsequently discovered.

Development of short and ultrashort laser pulses—created by Q switching and modelocking techniques—opened the way to the study of what became known as ultrafast processes.

[ 1 ] Applications for solid state research (e.g.

Raman spectroscopy ) were found, and mechanical forces of light on matter were studied. The latter led to levitating and positioning clouds of atoms or even small biological samples in an optical trap or optical tweezers by laser beam. This, along with Doppler cooling and Sisyphus cooling , was the crucial technology needed to achieve the celebrated Bose–Einstein condensation .

Other remarkable results are the demonstration of quantum entanglement , quantum teleportation , and quantum logic gates . The latter are of much interest in quantum information theory , a subject that partly emerged from quantum optics, partly from theoretical computer science .

[ 2 ] Today's fields of interest among quantum optics researchers include parametric down-conversion , parametric oscillation , even shorter (attosecond) light pulses, use of quantum optics for quantum information , manipulation of single atoms, Bose–Einstein condensates , their application, and how to manipulate them (a sub-field often called atom optics ), coherent perfect absorbers , and many more. Topics classified under the term of quantum optics, especially as applied to engineering and technological innovation, often go under the modern term photonics .

Several Nobel Prizes have been awarded for work in quantum optics. These were awarded as follows: in 2022, Alain Aspect , John Clauser and Anton Zeilinger "for experiments with entangled photons, establishing the violation of Bell inequalities and pioneering quantum information science".

[ 3 ] in 2012, Serge Haroche and David J. Wineland "for ground-breaking experimental methods that enable measuring and manipulation of individual quantum systems".

[ 4 ] in 2005, Theodor W. Hänsch , Roy J. Glauber and John L. Hall "for development of quantum theory of light and development of optical frequency measuring technique".

[ 5 ] in 2001, Wolfgang Ketterle , Eric Allin Cornell and Carl Wieman "for experimental verification of the Bose-Einstein condensation".

[ 6 ] in 1997, Steven Chu , Claude Cohen-Tannoudji and William Daniel Phillips "for laser cooling" .

[ 7 ] Concepts [ edit ] According to quantum theory , light may be considered not only to be an electro-magnetic wave but also a "stream" of particles called photons , which travel with c , the speed of light in vacuum. These particles should not be considered to be classical billiard balls , but quantum mechanical particles described by a wavefunction spread over a finite region.

Each particle carries one quantum of energy, equal to hf , where h is the Planck constant and f is the frequency of the light. That energy possessed by a single photon corresponds exactly to the transition between discrete energy levels in an atom (or other system) that emitted the photon; material absorption of a photon is the reverse process. Einstein's explanation of spontaneous emission also predicted the existence of stimulated emission , the principle upon which the laser rests. However, the actual invention of the maser (and laser) many years later was dependent on a method to produce a population inversion .

The use of statistical mechanics is fundamental to the concepts of quantum optics: light is described in terms of field operators for creation and annihilation of photons—i.e. in the language of quantum electrodynamics .

A frequently encountered state of the light field is the coherent state , as introduced by E.C. George Sudarshan in 1960. This state, which can be used to approximately describe the output of a single-frequency laser well above the laser threshold, exhibits Poissonian photon number statistics. Via certain nonlinear interactions, a coherent state can be transformed into a squeezed coherent state , by applying a squeezing operator that can exhibit super - or sub-Poissonian photon statistics. Such light is called squeezed light . Other important quantum aspects are related to correlations of photon statistics between different beams. For example, spontaneous parametric down-conversion can generate so-called 'twin beams', where (ideally) each photon of one beam is associated with a photon in the other beam.

Atoms are considered as quantum mechanical oscillators with a discrete energy spectrum , with the transitions between the energy eigenstates being driven by the absorption or emission of light according to Einstein's theory.

For solid state matter, one uses the energy band models of solid state physics . This is important for understanding how light is detected by solid-state devices, commonly used in experiments.

Quantum electronics [ edit ] Quantum electronics is a term that was used mainly between the 1950s and 1970s [ 8 ] to denote the area of physics dealing with the effects of quantum mechanics on the behavior of electrons in matter, together with their interactions with photons . Today, it is rarely considered a sub-field in its own right, and it has been absorbed by other fields.

Solid state physics regularly takes quantum mechanics into account, and is usually concerned with electrons. Specific applications of quantum mechanics in electronics is researched within semiconductor physics . The term also encompassed the basic processes of laser operation, which is today studied as a topic in quantum optics. Usage of the term overlapped early work on the quantum Hall effect and quantum cellular automata .

See also [ edit ] Physics portal Atomic, molecular, and optical physics Attophysics Nonclassical light Optomechanics Quantum control Optical phase space Optical physics Optics Quantization of the electromagnetic field Two-state quantum system Spinplasmonics Valleytronics Notes [ edit ] ^ "Optica Publishing Group" .

opg.optica.org .

doi : 10.1364/aop.1.000308 . Retrieved 2025-07-31 .

^ Nielsen, Michael A.; Chuang, Isaac L. (2010).

Quantum computation and quantum information (10th anniversary ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1107002173 .

^ "The Nobel Prize in Physics 2022" . Nobel Foundation. Retrieved 9 June 2023.

^ "The Nobel Prize in Physics 2012" . Nobel Foundation. Retrieved 9 October 2012.

^ "The Nobel Prize in Physics 2005" . Nobelprize.org . Retrieved 2015-10-14 .

^ "The Nobel Prize in Physics 2001" . Nobelprize.org . Retrieved 2015-10-14 .

^ "The Nobel Prize in Physics 1997" . Nobelprize.org . Retrieved 2015-10-14 .

^ Brunner, Witlof; Radloff, Wolfgang; Junge, Klaus (1975).

Quantenelektronik (in German).

Deutscher Verlag der Wissenschaften .

References [ edit ] Gerry, Christopher; Knight, Peter (2004).

Introduction to Quantum Optics . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 052152735X .

The Nobel Prize in Physics 2005 Further reading [ edit ] L. Mandel , E. Wolf Optical Coherence and Quantum Optics (Cambridge 1995).

D. F. Walls and G. J. Milburn Quantum Optics (Springer 1994).

Crispin Gardiner and Peter Zoller , Quantum Noise (Springer 2004).

H.M. Moya-Cessa and F. Soto-Eguibar, Introduction to Quantum Optics (Rinton Press 2011).

M. O. Scully and M. S. Zubairy Quantum Optics (Cambridge 1997).

W. P. Schleich Quantum Optics in Phase Space (Wiley 2001).

Kira, M.; Koch, S. W. (2011).

Semiconductor Quantum Optics . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521875097 .

F. J. Duarte (2014).

Quantum Optics for Engineers . New York: CRC.

ISBN 978-1439888537 .

External links [ edit ] Listen to this article ( 10 minutes ) This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 11 August 2009 ( 2009-08-11 ) , and does not reflect subsequent edits.

( Audio help · More spoken articles ) An introduction to quantum optics of the light field Encyclopedia of laser physics and technology , with content on quantum optics (particularly quantum noise in lasers), by Rüdiger Paschotta.

Qwiki – a quantum physics wiki devoted to providing technical resources for practicing quantum physicists.

Quantiki – a free-content WWW resource in quantum information science that anyone can edit.

Various Quantum Optics Reports v t e Major branches of physics Divisions Pure Applied Engineering Approaches Experimental Theoretical Computational Classical Classical mechanics Newtonian Analytical Celestial Continuum Acoustics Classical electromagnetism Classical optics Ray Wave Thermodynamics Statistical Non-equilibrium Modern Relativistic mechanics Special General Nuclear physics Particle physics Quantum mechanics Atomic, molecular, and optical physics Atomic Molecular Modern optics Condensed matter physics Solid-state physics Crystallography Interdisciplinary Astrophysics Atmospheric physics Biophysics Chemical physics Geophysics Materials science Mathematical physics Medical physics Ocean physics Quantum information science Related History of physics Nobel Prize in Physics Philosophy of physics Physics education research Timeline of physics discoveries v t e Operators in physics General Space and time d'Alembertian Parity Time Particles C-symmetry Operators for operators Anti-symmetric operator Ladder operator Quantum Fundamental Momentum Position Rotation Energy Total energy Hamiltonian Kinetic energy Angular momentum Total Orbital Spin Electromagnetism Transition dipole moment Optics Displacement Hanbury Brown and Twiss effect Quantum correlator Squeeze Particle physics Casimir invariant Creation and annihilation v t e Quantum mechanics Background Introduction History Timeline Classical mechanics Old quantum theory Glossary Fundamentals Born rule Bra–ket notation Complementarity Density matrix Energy level Ground state Excited state Degenerate levels Zero-point energy Entanglement Hamiltonian Interference Decoherence Measurement Nonlocality Quantum state Superposition Tunnelling Scattering theory Symmetry in quantum mechanics Uncertainty Wave function Collapse Wave–particle duality Formulations Formulations Heisenberg Interaction Matrix mechanics Schrödinger Path integral formulation Phase space Equations Klein–Gordon Dirac Weyl Majorana Rarita–Schwinger Pauli Rydberg Schrödinger Interpretations Bayesian Consciousness causes collapse Consistent histories Copenhagen de Broglie–Bohm Ensemble Hidden-variable Local Superdeterminism Many-worlds Objective collapse Quantum logic Relational Transactional Experiments Bell test Davisson–Germer Delayed-choice quantum eraser Double-slit Franck–Hertz Mach–Zehnder interferometer Elitzur–Vaidman Popper Quantum eraser Stern–Gerlach Wheeler's delayed choice Science Quantum biology Quantum chemistry Quantum chaos Quantum cosmology Quantum differential calculus Quantum dynamics Quantum geometry Quantum measurement problem Quantum mind Quantum stochastic calculus Quantum spacetime Technology Quantum algorithms Quantum amplifier Quantum bus Quantum cellular automata Quantum finite automata Quantum channel Quantum circuit Quantum complexity theory Quantum computing Timeline Quantum cryptography Quantum electronics Quantum error correction Quantum imaging Quantum image processing Quantum information Quantum key distribution Quantum logic Quantum logic gates Quantum machine Quantum machine learning Quantum metamaterial Quantum metrology Quantum network Quantum neural network Quantum optics Quantum programming Quantum sensing Quantum simulator Quantum teleportation Extensions Quantum fluctuation Casimir effect Quantum statistical mechanics Quantum field theory History Quantum gravity Relativistic quantum mechanics Related Schrödinger's cat in popular culture Wigner's friend EPR paradox Quantum mysticism Category v t e Quantum information science General DiVincenzo's criteria NISQ era Quantum computing timeline Quantum information Quantum programming Quantum simulation Qubit physical vs. logical Quantum processors cloud-based Theorems Bell's Eastin–Knill Gleason's Gottesman–Knill Holevo's No-broadcasting No-cloning No-communication No-deleting No-hiding No-teleportation PBR Quantum speed limit Threshold Solovay–Kitaev Schrödinger-HJW Quantum communication Classical capacity entanglement-assisted quantum capacity Entanglement distillation Entanglement swapping Monogamy of entanglement LOCC Quantum channel quantum network State purification Quantum teleportation quantum energy teleportation quantum gate teleportation Superdense coding Quantum cryptography Post-quantum cryptography Quantum coin flipping Quantum money Quantum key distribution BB84 SARG04 other protocols Quantum secret sharing Quantum algorithms Algorithmic cooling Amplitude amplification Bernstein–Vazirani BHT Boson sampling Deutsch–Jozsa Grover's HHL Hidden subgroup Magic state distillation Quantum annealing Quantum counting Quantum Fourier transform Quantum optimization Quantum phase estimation Shor's Simon's VQE Quantum complexity theory BQP DQC1 EQP QIP QMA PostBQP Quantum processor benchmarks Quantum supremacy Quantum volume Randomized benchmarking XEB Relaxation times T 1 T 2 Quantum computing models Adiabatic quantum computation Continuous-variable quantum information One-way quantum computer cluster state Quantum circuit quantum logic gate Quantum machine learning quantum neural network Quantum Turing machine Topological quantum computer Hamiltonian quantum computation Quantum error correction Codes 5 qubit CSS GKP quantum convolutional stabilizer Shor Bacon–Shor Steane Toric gnu Entanglement-assisted Physical implementations Quantum optics Cavity QED Circuit QED Linear optical QC KLM protocol Ultracold atoms Neutral atom QC Trapped-ion QC Spin -based Kane QC Spin qubit QC NV center NMR QC Superconducting Charge qubit Flux qubit Phase qubit Transmon Quantum programming OpenQASM – Qiskit – IBM QX Quil – Forest/Rigetti QCS Cirq Q# libquantum many others...

Quantum information science Quantum mechanics topics Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Quantum_optics&oldid=1304395329#Quantum_electronics " Categories : Quantum optics Optics Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2025 All articles needing additional references Articles lacking in-text citations from April 2025 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with multiple maintenance issues All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from May 2013 Articles with hAudio microformats Spoken articles This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 20:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Quantum optics 40 languages Add topic

