Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Newborn care 2 Safe nutrition 3 Sudden infant death syndrome 4 Car seats 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Newborn care and safety 2 languages العربية Kreyòl ayisyen Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia .

See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions.

( June 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Newborn care and safety are activities and precautions recommended for new parents or caregivers. It is an educational goal of many hospitals and birthing centers to promote newborn care and safety as parents take their infant home.

[ 1 ] Newborn care [ edit ] Taking a newborn care class during pregnancy can prepare caregivers for their future responsibilities. During the stay in a hospital or a birthing center, clinicians and nurses help with basic baby care and demonstrate how to perform it. Newborn care basics include: Handling a newborn, including supporting the baby's neck Bathing Dressing Swaddling Soothing [ 1 ] Feeding and burping Cleaning the umbilical cord Using a bulb syringe to clear the baby's nasal passages Taking a newborn's temperature Immunization Change the baby's diaper on time to prevent diaper rash Many new parents appreciate somebody checking in with them and their baby a few days after coming home, and can ask about home visits by a nurse or health care worker. If breastfeeding, the mother can ask whether a lactation consultant can visit her and the baby at home to provide follow-up support and help with finding other resources in the community, such as peer support groups.

[ 1 ] Many first-time parents also welcome the help of an experienced family member or friend. Having a support person stay with the newborn for a few days can give the mother the confidence to go at it alone in the weeks ahead. This can be arranged before delivery.

[ 1 ] The baby's first doctor's visit is another good time to ask any infant care questions. Parents can ask about the various reasons to call the doctor and inquire about the vaccines their baby needs. Young children need vaccines because the diseases they protect against can strike at an early age and can be very dangerous in childhood. This includes both rare diseases and more common ones, such as the flu.

[ 1 ] Caring for a newborn also includes health screening of the newborn. Most of the time this occurs in the hospital or pediatrician's office shortly after birth. Every state screens babies for more than two dozen disorders. Early detection of a disorder can prevent future complications.

[ 2 ] Safe nutrition [ edit ] Main article: Infant food safety Handwashing helps to prevent the spread of foodborne illnesses to children. Pathogenic microorganisms can be transmitted from other children and their diapers , and from uncooked meat, seafood , eggs , dogs, cats , turtles , snakes , birds , lizards , and soil.

[ 3 ] Sudden infant death syndrome [ edit ] Main article: Sudden infant death syndrome Since 1992, the American Academy of Pediatrics has recommended that infants be placed to sleep on their backs to reduce the risk of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), also called crib death. SIDS is the sudden and unexplained death of a baby under 1 year of age. Even though there is no way to know which babies might die of SIDS, recommendations include: Always place the baby on his or her back to sleep, even for naps. This is the safest sleep position for a healthy baby to reduce the risk of SIDS.

Place the baby on a firm mattress, such as in a safety-approved crib. Research [ citation needed ] has shown that placing a baby to sleep on soft mattresses, sofas, sofa cushions, waterbeds, sheepskins, or other soft surfaces raises the risk of SIDS.

Remove soft, fluffy, and loose bedding and stuffed toys from the baby's sleep area. Make sure all pillows, quilts, stuffed toys, and other soft items are kept away from the baby's sleep area.

Do not use infant sleep positioners. Using a positioner to hold an infant on his or her back or side for sleep is dangerous and not needed.

Use infant sleep sacks that are designed to be used with zippers, snaps, or velcro for infants to wear during sleep in place of loose bedding and swaddle blankets which pose a greater risk.

Make sure everyone who cares for the baby knows to place the baby on his or her back to sleep and about the dangers of soft bedding. Talk to child care providers, grandparents, babysitters, and all caregivers about SIDS risk. Remember, every sleep time counts.

Make sure the baby's face and head stay uncovered during sleep. Keep blankets and other coverings away from the baby's mouth and nose. The best way to do this is to dress the baby in sleep clothing so they will not have to use any other covering over the baby. If using a blanket or another covering, make sure that the baby's feet are at the bottom of the crib, the blanket is no higher than the baby's chest, and the blanket is tucked in around the bottom of the crib mattress.

Do not allow smoking around the baby. Don't smoke before or after the birth of the baby and make sure no one smokes around the baby.

Don't let the baby get too warm during sleep. Keep the baby warm during sleep, but not too warm. The baby's room should be at a temperature that is comfortable for an adult. Too many layers of clothing or blankets can overheat the baby.

[ 1 ] Some parents worry that the baby can roll over during the night. However, by the time the baby is able to roll over by itself, the risk for SIDS is much lower. During the time of greatest risk, 2 to 4 months of age, most babies are not able to turn over from their backs to their stomachs.

[ 1 ] Car seats [ edit ] Main article: Child safety seat Newborns and older infants are to use rear-facing car seats. These are required until age 2 or when they reach the upper weight or height limit of that seat. After this, a forward-facing car seat is used.

[ 4 ] Motor vehicle crashes are a leading cause of death for children in the US. Buckling up is the best way to save lives and reduce injuries. Child passenger restraint laws result in more children being buckled up. Only 2 out of every 100 children live in states that require car seat or booster seat use for newborns and infants. A third of children who died in crashes in 2011 were not buckled up. Caregivers promote the safety their newborns by: knowing how to use car seats, booster seats, and seat belts and using them on every trip, no matter how short.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Infant bathing Infant nutrition References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g "Newborn care and safety - womenshealth.gov" .

Womenshealth.gov .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Public Health Media Library" .

Tools.cdc.gov . Retrieved 23 March 2019 .

^ "Health Educators - Food Safety for Moms to Be: Once Baby Arrives" .

Fda.gov . Archived from the original on June 5, 2009 . Retrieved 25 July 2017 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "CDC Features - Child Passenger Safety" .

Cdc.gov . 22 April 2017 . Retrieved 26 July 2017 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "CDC VitalSigns - Child Passenger Safety" .

Cdc.gov . 4 September 2018 . Retrieved 23 March 2019 .

External links [ edit ] Transitioning Newborns from NICU to Home Family Information Packet Promoting Safety and Injuring Prevention , Bright Futures, American Academy of Pediatrics v t e Infants and their care Health ( pediatrics ) Baby food Birth weight Breast pump Breastfeeding Breastfeeding and medications Breastfeeding and mental health Bottle feeding Colic Cradle cap Esotropia Failure to thrive Immunization Infant and toddler safety Infant bathing Infant feeding Infant food safety Infant formula Infant massage Infant respiratory distress syndrome Infant sleep training Neonatal intensive care unit Newborn care and safety Oral rehydration therapy Pedialyte Preterm birth Shaken baby syndrome Soy formula SIDS Development Attachment parenting Baby-led weaning Baby talk Babbling Birth defect Childbirth Crawling Gestational age Infant visual development Irritant diaper dermatitis Infant cognitive development Infant crying Kangaroo care Mother Nursery rhyme Object permanence Parent Parenting Peekaboo Play Prenatal development Prenatal development table Teething Walking Weaning Socialization and culture Attachment Babysitting Child abuse Child care Child custody Children's rights UN Child rights Circumcision Foster care Grandparent visitation Infant swimming Milk bank Nanny Wet nurse Infant care and equipment Baby bouncer Baby gate Baby monitor / Hidden camera Baby powder Baby shampoo Baby toy Baby walker Bib Baby swing Baby transport Bassinet Car seat safety Child vehicular heat stroke deaths Cloth diaper Cradle board Diaper Diaper bag Baby wipes Haberman Feeder High chair Infant bed (American 'crib' and 'cradle', British 'cot') Infant carrier Infant clothing Pacifier Playpen Stroller Supplemental nursing system Swaddling Swim diaper Teether Travel cot Other topics Baby shower Babywearing Child neglect Closed adoption Cry room Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder Infant ear piercing Open adoption Prenatal cocaine exposure Neonatal withdrawal syndrome Parental child abduction Parental responsibility Parenting plan Paternity Paternity fraud NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐hjghg
Cached time: 20250812022708
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.283 seconds
Real time usage: 0.346 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 792/1000000
Revision size: 8118/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 29754/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 984/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 31367/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.184/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4116707/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  308.302      1 -total
 37.04%  114.195      1 Template:Reflist
 29.53%   91.043      5 Template:Cite_web
 23.81%   73.392      1 Template:Infants_and_their_care
 23.14%   71.338      1 Template:Navbox
 18.53%   57.127      1 Template:Tone
 12.23%   37.703      1 Template:Citation_needed
 11.18%   34.478      1 Template:Ambox
 10.75%   33.158      1 Template:Fix
  6.54%   20.154      2 Template:Category_handler Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:54647419:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812022708 and revision id 1292966727. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Newborn_care_and_safety&oldid=1292966727 " Categories : Causes of death Neonatology Infancy Infant mortality Syndromes Child safety Hidden categories: Source attribution Wikipedia articles with style issues from June 2021 All articles with style issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2021 This page was last edited on 29 May 2025, at 21:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Newborn care and safety 2 languages Add topic

