Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Folivory and flight 2 Arboreal folivores 3 Primates 4 Examples 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Folivore 21 languages العربية Català Čeština Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Galego हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Malti Nederlands Polski Português Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Herbivorous animal that specializes in eating leaves Elephants are an example of a mammalian folivore.

In zoology , a folivore is a herbivore that specializes in eating leaves . Mature leaves contain a high proportion of hard-to-digest cellulose , less energy than other types of foods, and often toxic compounds.

[ 1 ] For this reason, folivorous animals tend to have long digestive tracts and slow metabolisms . Many enlist the help of symbiotic bacteria to release the nutrients in their diet. Additionally, as has been observed in folivorous primates, they exhibit a strong preference for immature leaves which tend to be easier to masticate , are higher in energy and protein, and lower in fibre and poisons than more mature fibrous leaves.

[ 1 ] Folivory and flight [ edit ] A hoatzin It has been observed that folivory is extremely rare among flying vertebrates.

[ 2 ] Morton (1978) attributed this to the fact that leaves are heavy, slow to digest, and contain little energy relative to other foods.

[ 2 ] The hoatzin is an example of a flighted, folivorous bird, but it is a weak flier, due to the well-developed foregut (used to digest its food) reducing the area available for flight muscles to attach.

[ 3 ] There are, however, many species of folivorous flying insects.

Some bats are partially folivorous; their method of deriving nourishment from leaves, according to Lowry (1989), is to chew up the leaves, swallowing the sap and spitting out the remainder.

[ 4 ] Arboreal folivores [ edit ] A brown-throated three-toed sloth Arboreal mammalian folivores, such as sloths , koalas , and some species of monkeys and lemurs , tend to be large and climb cautiously.

[ 5 ] Similarities in body shape and head- and tooth-structure between early hominoids and various families of arboreal folivores have been advanced as evidence that early hominoids were also folivorous.

[ 5 ] Primates [ edit ] Standard ecological theory predicts relatively large group sizes for folivorous primates , as large groups offer better collective defense against predators and they face little competition for food among each other. It has been observed that these animals nevertheless frequently live in small groups. Explanations offered for this apparent paradox include social factors such as increased incidence of infanticide in large groups.

[ 6 ] A howler monkey Folivorous primates are relatively rare in the New World , the primary exception being howler monkeys . One explanation that has been offered is that fruiting and leafing occur simultaneously among New World plants. However a 2001 study found no evidence for simultaneous fruiting and leafing at most sites, apparently disproving this hypothesis.

[ 7 ] Examples [ edit ] Examples of folivorous animals include: An okapi Mammals: okapis , elephants , sloths , possums , giant pandas , koalas and various species of monkey , i.e. New World howlers and Old World colobines Birds: The hoatzin of the Amazon region and the kākāpō of New Zealand Reptiles: iguanas [ 8 ] Insects: various kinds of caterpillars , sawflies , beetles , leaf miners and Orthoptera Others: many land gastropod species (snails and slugs) See also [ edit ] Consumer-resource systems Leaf miner , the folivorous strategy of many insects References [ edit ] ^ a b Jones, S., Martin, R., & Pilbeam, D. (1994) The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Human Evolution . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press ^ a b Dudley, R.; Vermeij, G. J. (1992).

"Do the Power Requirements of Flapping Flight Constrain Folivory in Flying Animals?" .

Functional Ecology .

6 (1): 101– 104.

JSTOR 2389776 .

^ Grajal, Alejandro (1995).

"Structure and Function of the Digestive Tract of the Hoatzin (Opisthocomus hoazin): A Folivorous Bird with Foregut Fermentation" (PDF) .

The Auk .

112 (1): 20– 28.

doi : 10.2307/4088763 .

^ Kunz, T. H.; Ingalls, K. A. (1994).

"Folivory in Bats: An Adaptation Derived from Frugivory" .

Functional Ecology .

8 (5): 665– 668.

JSTOR 2389930 .

^ a b Sarmiento, E. E. (1995).

"Cautious climbing and folivory: A model of hominoid differentation" .

Human Evolution .

10 (4): 289– 321.

doi : 10.1007/BF02438967 .

^ Steenbeek, R.; van Schaik, Carel P. (2001).

"Competition and group size in Thomas's langurs ( Presbytis thomasi ): The folivore paradox revisited" .

Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology .

49 ( 2– 3): 100– 110.

doi : 10.1007/s002650000286 .

^ Heymann, Eckhard W. (2001). "Can phenology explain the scarcity of folivory in New World primates?".

American Journal of Primatology .

55 (3): 171– 175.

doi : 10.1002/ajp.1050 .

ISSN 1098-2345 .

PMID 11746280 .

S2CID 8344876 .

^ "The Diet of a Generalized Folivore: Iguana iguana in Panama" .

www.anapsid.org . Retrieved 2024-02-05 .

External links [ edit ] Look up folivore in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

wordquests.info v t e Feeding behaviours Carnivores adult Arachnophagy Avivore Corallivore Durophagy Egg predation Entomophagy Hematophagy Insectivore Lepidophagy Man-eating animal Molluscivore Mucophagy Myrmecophagy Ophiophagy Piscivore Spongivore Vermivore reproductive Oophagy Paedophagy Placentophagy Breastfeeding Weaning cannibalistic Human cannibalism Autocannibalism Sexual cannibalism Herbivores Folivore Florivore Frugivore Graminivore Seed predation Nectarivore Mellivory Palynivore Xylophagy Osteophagy Cellular Phagocytosis Myzocytosis Others Microbivory Bacterivore Fungivore Coprophagia Detritivore Geophagia Omnivore Planktivore Saprophagy Xenophagy Lithotroph Plastivore Pica Methods Predation Ambush predator Apex predator Egg predator Intraguild predator Pursuit predator Aquatic predation Lunge feeder Pivot feeder Ram feeder Suction feeder Bait balls Bottom feeder Feeding frenzy Filter feeder Browsing Cattle feeding Fodder Grazing Forage Hypercarnivore Hypocarnivore Mesocarnivore Parasitism Kleptoparasitism Scavenger Surplus killing Trophallaxis Antipredator adaptation Carnivorous plant Carnivorous fungus Carnivorous protist Category:Eating behaviors Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Folivore&oldid=1292112440 " Categories : Herbivory Folivores Animals by eating behaviors Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 07:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Folivore 21 languages Add topic

