Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Founding 2 Issues and influence 3 Legal challenges 4 Funding 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Idaho Freedom Foundation Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Conservative libertarian think tank Idaho Freedom Foundation Established 2009 ( 2009 ) [ 1 ] President Ronald M. Nate Budget Revenue: $833,000 Expenses: $1.07 million ( FYE December 2023 ) [ 2 ] Subsidiaries Idaho Reporter [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Location Boise, Idaho Website idahofreedom .org This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e The Idaho Freedom Foundation (IFF) is a conservative and libertarian think tank located in Boise, Idaho .

[ 3 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Ronald M. Nate has served as the organization's president since January 2024.

[ 8 ] Founding [ edit ] IFF was begun in 2009 by Wayne Hoffman, who had been the Canyon County Republican Party vice chairman and spokesman for U.S. Rep.

Bill Sali . Formerly, Hoffman was a newspaper reporter for the Idaho Statesman , leaving in 2005, and before that had worked for the South Idaho Press in Burley, the Idaho Press Tribune in Nampa, and a southern Idaho radio station.

[ 1 ] Issues and influence [ edit ] The IFF is influential within the Idaho Legislature and the state's broader politics.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Politico described the IFF as "an arch-conservative group that has driven challenges to so-called RINO politicians in the state." [ 12 ] The IFF's website says it  works to defeat "the state’s socialist public policies." Its Freedom Index rates Idaho legislators on their votes.

[ 13 ] In 2012, the IFF was one of the chief opponents of an Idaho state legislative bill that would have placed restrictions on tanning bed usage.

[ 14 ] In 2013 and 2014, IFF put up billboards criticizing Idaho legislators for their votes to implement a state health insurance exchange.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] In October 2020, the IFF published a video questioning the existence of the COVID-19 pandemic and decrying governmental measures to combat the spread of the pandemic. Several Idaho Republican elected officials, including Janice McGeachin and a number of state legislators, appeared in the video.

[ 17 ] In 2021, the organization criticized Boise State University for holding a "Black Graduation" meant to celebrate Black students in addition to the traditional graduation ceremony. IFF called the event "segregationist." It has urged Idaho lawmakers to cut funding to Boise State.

[ 18 ] In a December 2021 opinion editorial published in the Post Register , former Idaho attorney general and former chief justice of the Idaho Supreme Court Jim Jones criticized the IFF, writing "It's time to clean Idaho's House of disruptive lawmakers who worship at the Freedom Foundation altar and ignore their duty to act responsibly in the interests of their voters." [ 19 ] Legal challenges [ edit ] The IFF has mounted various legal challenges to state and city laws and regulations.

In 2009, IFF was successful in requiring officials from Coeur d'Alene, Idaho , to release public records in regards to the names, genders, salaries of all public employees.

[ 20 ] [ independent source needed ] In 2014, IFF and the American Civil Liberties Union threatened legal action against Boise State University when the school required a student group to pay security fees for bringing a pro-gun speaker to campus. Boise State refunded the student group the cost of the security fees.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] In 2015, IFF sued the Boise School District over its contract with a local teachers union, the Boise Education Association. The case was dismissed due to lack of standing.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] In 2016, IFF Board Chair Brent Regan and IFF sued Butch Otter and others about Idaho's Common Core State Standards Initiative testing. The case was dismissed due to the lack of standing by the plaintiffs.

[ 25 ] In 2019, IFF Board Chair Brent Regan sued Lawerence Denney , arguing that Medicaid expansion was unconstitutional in part because it delegated lawmaking authority to the federal government. The case was dismissed due to the ruling that the foundation of the lawsuit lacked a basis in the law.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] In 2019, IFF sued Boise due to the establishment of two new urban renewal districts which prevents cities from taking on debt or liabilities without a super-majority of voter approval. The case was dismissed and appealed where it was upheld.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] Funding [ edit ] The organization has received funding from Donors Trust and Donors Capital Fund , two donor-advised funds which are not required to disclose their donors. IFF is a member of the State Policy Network , a consortium of conservative and libertarian think tanks that focus on state-level policy.

[ 21 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Russell, Betsy (April 19, 2010).

"Hoffman: 'A rising leader' " . Spokesman-Review . Retrieved 7 April 2015 .

^ "Idaho Freedom Foundation Inc - Nonprofit Explorer" .

ProPublica . 9 May 2013.

^ a b Prentice, George (March 2, 2011).

"Wayne Hoffman Idaho Freedom Foundation director talks taxes, journalism and his growing influence" . Boise Weekly. Archived from the original on 19 September 2015 . Retrieved 6 April 2015 .

^ "Idaho Reporter" . Project for Excellence in Journalism. Archived from the original on 7 April 2015 . Retrieved 7 April 2015 .

^ "Main Street's revenge" . The Economist. May 24, 2014 . Retrieved 7 April 2015 .

the Idaho Freedom Foundation, a libertarian think-tank ^ Krusesi, Kimberlee (March 30, 2015).

"Idaho House passes tax bill overhaul, hikes fuel tax 7 cents" . Idaho Statesman. Associated Press . Retrieved 6 April 2015 .

^ Russell, Betsy (July 5, 2012).

"Popkey: Idaho Power joins forces with libertarian Idaho Freedom Foundation" . Spokesman-Review . Retrieved 7 April 2015 .

^ "Idaho Freedom Foundation Announces New Leadership" .

Idaho Freedom . 2024-01-08 . Retrieved 2024-01-10 .

^ Ridler, Keith (October 7, 2021).

"Mainstream Republicans seek to 'rescue' Idaho – from the GOP" .

Associated Press . Retrieved October 8, 2021 .

^ Butts, Mike (March 14, 2011).

"Idaho Freedom Foundation carries conservative weight at Legislature" .

The Idaho Press-Tribune . Retrieved October 8, 2021 .

^ Malloy, Chuck (August 1, 2021).

"Like them or hate them, the Idaho Freedom Foundation's power grows as attacks mount" .

Idaho Statesman . Retrieved October 8, 2021 .

^ Montellaro, Zach; Bustillo, Ximena.

"Idaho GOP riven by primary civil war" .

POLITICO . Archived from the original on May 7, 2022 . Retrieved 2022-05-15 .

^ Duggan, Alexandra (March 8, 2022).

"Republicans see divide due to Idaho Freedom Foundation politics" .

Idaho Press . Retrieved 2022-05-15 .

^ Yardley, William (March 6, 2012).

"Big Sky, Bright Sun and Melanoma" .

New York Times . Retrieved 7 April 2015 .

^ Russell, Betsy (October 29, 2013).

"Billboards target Idaho lawmakers in their districts" . Spokesman-Review . Retrieved 7 April 2015 .

^ Russell, Betsy (January 15, 2014).

"Freedom Foundation now up to half a dozen anti-incumbent billboards around the state" . Spokesman-Review . Retrieved 7 April 2015 .

^ Idaho Republicans, including Lt. Gov. McGeachin, decry pandemic measures in new video , Spokesman Review (October 27, 2020).

^ Patel, Vimal (July 2, 2021).

"President on a Tightrope: Boise State's leader must tread carefully through the culture war. Others may soon walk the same line" .

The Chronicle of Higher Education . Retrieved July 6, 2021 .

^ Jones, Jim (12 Dec 2021).

"Opinion: What's worse than 'hell to pay?' — Idaho being ruled by the IFF" .

Post Register . Retrieved 5 March 2022 .

^ "CDA Press article: IFF wins release of city employee names" .

Idaho Freedom . 2009-10-13 . Retrieved 2021-08-29 .

^ a b Telerico, Kate (22 March 2019).

"The Idaho Freedom Foundation keeps losing in court. So why does it keep suing?" . Idaho Statesman . Retrieved 23 April 2020 .

^ "ACLU of Idaho Joins Idaho Freedom Foundation, Fire in Calling on Boise State University to Fix Event Policies" .

ACLU of Idaho . 2014-07-14 . Retrieved 2021-08-29 .

^ "Idaho Freedom Foundation Legal Challenge | PDF" .

Scribd . Retrieved 2021-08-29 .

^ Richert, Kevin (2014-10-09).

"Conservative group targets Boise labor deal" .

Idaho Education News . Retrieved 2021-08-29 .

^ "Regan, IFF sue Idaho over Common Core tests | The Spokesman-Review" .

www.spokesman.com . Retrieved 2021-08-29 .

^ "The breakdown: 4 things to know about the Medicaid expansion Supreme Court case" . Retrieved 2021-08-29 .

^ "Regan v. Denney" (PDF) .

^ Betsy, Posted by.

"What the justices said; link to my full story on failure of legal challenge to Medicaid expansion" .

Idaho Press . Retrieved 2021-08-29 .

^ "Regan v. Denney" (PDF) .

^ Carmel, Margaret.

"Freedom Foundation lawsuit over urban renewal appealed to the state Supreme Court" .

Idaho Press . Retrieved 2021-08-29 .

^ Suppe, Ryan.

"Supreme court upholds dismissal of urban renewal complaint against Boise" .

Idaho Press . Retrieved 2021-08-29 .

External links [ edit ] Official website Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Idaho_Freedom_Foundation&oldid=1303701846 " Categories : Libertarian think tanks Political and economic think tanks in the United States Charities based in Idaho Organizations based in Boise, Idaho Organizations established in 2009 2009 establishments in Idaho Conservative organizations in the United States Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from May 2022 This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 15:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Idaho Freedom Foundation Add languages Add topic

