Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Release 4 Reception 5 Soundtrack 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Prozac Nation (film) 17 languages العربية Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia עברית مصرى 日本語 Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 2001 film by Erik Skjoldbjærg Prozac Nation Promotional poster Directed by Erik Skjoldbjærg Screenplay by Frank Deasy Larry Gross Adaptation by Galt Niederhoffer Based on Prozac Nation by Elizabeth Wurtzel Produced by Galt Niederhoffer Brad Weston R. Paul Miller Starring Christina Ricci Jason Biggs Anne Heche Michelle Williams Jonathan Rhys Meyers Jessica Lange Cinematography Erling Thurmann-Andersen Edited by James Lyons Music by Nathan Larson Production companies Millennium Films Cinerenta Distributed by Miramax Films Release dates September 8, 2001 ( 2001-09-08 ) ( TIFF ) March 19, 2005 ( 2005-03-19 ) (United States) Running time 95 minutes Countries United States Germany Language English Budget $9 million [ 1 ] Box office $129,364 [ 2 ] Prozac Nation is a 2001 psychological drama film directed by Erik Skjoldbjærg , starring Christina Ricci , Jason Biggs , Anne Heche , Michelle Williams , Jonathan Rhys Meyers , and Jessica Lange . It is based on Elizabeth Wurtzel 's 1994 memoir of the same name , which describes Wurtzel's experiences with atypical depression .

[ 3 ] The title is a reference to Prozac , the brand name of an antidepressant she was prescribed.

Plot [ edit ] In 1986, Elizabeth "Lizzie" Wurtzel is a 19-year-old accepted into Harvard with a scholarship in journalism. She has been raised by her divorced mother since she was two years old and has not seen her father at all in the last four years. Despite his lack of interest and involvement, Lizzie still misses her father, a contributing factor to her depression. Through a series of flashbacks, it is clear that there was a total communication breakdown between Lizzie's parents, which is soon reflected in Lizzie's own relationship with her mother, Lynne.

Soon after arriving at Harvard, Lizzie decides to lose her virginity to an older student, Noah. Lizzie proceeds to alienate Noah by throwing a loss-of-virginity party immediately afterwards with the help of her roommate Ruby. Although she and Lizzie begin as best friends, Ruby soon becomes another casualty of Lizzie's instability. Although Lizzie's article for the local music column in The Harvard Crimson is presented an award by Rolling Stone early into the semester, Lizzie soon finds herself unable to write, stuck in a vicious cycle with substance abuse.

Lizzie's promising literary career is at risk, as is her mental and physical health. Lynne sends her to expensive psychiatric sessions with Dr. Sterling towards which her father, pleading poverty, implacably refuses to contribute anything. She begins a relationship with another student, Rafe, but struggles with trust issues and fears of abandonment. During the holiday break, she visits his home in Texas. Upon discovering that his sister is severely autistic , Lizzie accuses Rafe of being "a creepy voyeur" who gets off on witnessing the pain of others. Rafe breaks up with her.

Dr. Sterling prescribes Lizzie medication to cope with her spiraling depression following her breakup. Meanwhile, Lynne is hospitalized after a violent mugging. Lizzie helps take care of her, and a relationship of honesty, accountability, and mutual support develops between them. After a long period of treatment under medication and a suicidal gesture , Lizzie stabilizes and begins to adjust to her life.

Cast [ edit ] Christina Ricci as Elizabeth Wurtzel Zoe Miller as Young Elizabeth Wurtzel Jason Biggs as Rafe Anne Heche as Dr. Sterling Michelle Williams as Ruby Jonathan Rhys Meyers as Noah Jessica Lange as Lynne Wurtzel Nicholas Campbell as Donald Wurtzel Lou Reed as Himself Jesse Moss as Sam Sheila Paterson as Elizabeth's Grandmother Release [ edit ] Prozac Nation had its world premiere at the Toronto International Film Festival on September 8, 2001 (three days before the September 11 attacks ); distribution rights were acquired by Miramax Films with the intent of giving the film a wider theatrical release. Months of subsequent test screenings and re-edits of the film never led to a broad commercial release.

[ 1 ] It was released in Norway, Skjoldbjærg's native country, on August 22, 2003. The film was never given a theatrical release in the United States, where it instead premiered on the Starz!

channel on March 19, 2005, [ 4 ] [ 5 ] and was released on DVD on July 5, 2005.

[ 6 ] Frank Deasy, who co-wrote the screenplay, offered his opinion to The Guardian on Miramax's failure to release the film: It's a truthful depiction of depression. And I think the reason Miramax has struggled is the fact that it doesn't have a traditional dramatic structure, in terms of a clear, unqualified ending. Look at the book: Elizabeth is very clear that Prozac has helped her, but you're left with a dilemma, because perhaps she no longer knows who she is. We didn't want to come down heavily on one side or the other. People who've experienced depression like that aspect of the film, but a lot of people don't like it. Miramax certainly don't seem to like it.

[ 7 ] Reception [ edit ] The film received a generally negative reception upon release, scoring 28% on Rotten Tomatoes , based on 25 reviews.

[ 8 ] Todd McCarthy of Variety felt it had a "precise visual style" and that Ricci gave a "smart performance", but criticised some of the editing choices and its overall inability to explore the nuances of depression.

[ 9 ] In a similarly mixed review, Slant Magazine ' s Ed Gonzalez felt the visuals were "contrived" and owed more to films like Requiem for a Dream than to director Skjoldbjærg 's own vision, but said of Ricci, "[she's] splendid when the atomic bomb inside her character's head goes off", further commending her chemistry with co-star Lange .

[ 10 ] Soundtrack [ edit ] What follows is a list of the songs that were played according to the end credits.

"The Promise" – Bruce Springsteen "Mystery Achievement" – The Pretenders "I Will Dare" – The Replacements " Perfect Day " – Lou Reed " Sweet Jane " – Lou Reed "Keep the Promise" – The Pontiac Brothers "Ivory Tower" – The Long Ryders "Who Is Who" – Adolescents "The Real West" – Thin White Rope "Das Testament des Dr. Mabuse" – Propaganda References [ edit ] ^ a b Vinciguerra, Thomas (November 9, 2003).

"For Author of 'Prozac Nation,' Delayed Film Is a Downer" .

The New York Times . Retrieved March 8, 2013 .

^ "Prozac Nation (2001)" .

Box Office Mojo . Retrieved October 18, 2021 .

^ Wurtzel, Elizabeth (1994).

Prozac Nation: Young and Depressed in America . New York: Riverhead Trade . p. 298.

ISBN 978-0-39-568093-3 .

The McLean people have recommended fluoxetine because they have diagnosed me with atypical depression.

^ Dempsey, John; Martin, Denise (February 7, 2005).

"Starz! prescribes 'Prozac' for pay TV" .

Variety . Retrieved October 18, 2021 .

^ Lloyd, Robert (March 19, 2005).

"A true story, in a kinda, sorta way" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved October 18, 2021 .

^ Beierle, Aaron (June 28, 2005).

"Prozac Nation" .

DVD Talk . Retrieved October 18, 2021 .

^ Harris, John (July 18, 2004).

"Release me" .

The Guardian . Retrieved March 8, 2013 .

^ "Prozac Nation (2001)" .

Rotten Tomatoes .

^ McCarthy, Todd (September 10, 2001).

"Prozac Nation" .

Variety . Retrieved June 27, 2024 .

^ Gonzalez, Ed (June 14, 2004).

"Review: Prozac Nation " .

Slant Magazine . Retrieved June 27, 2024 .

External links [ edit ] Official website Prozac Nation at IMDb v t e Films directed by Erik Skjoldbjærg Insomnia (1997) Prozac Nation (2001) Nokas (2010) Pioneer (2013) Pyromaniac (2016) Narvik (2022) Authority control databases International VIAF National Catalonia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Prozac_Nation_(film)&oldid=1298058925 " Categories : 2001 films 2001 drama films 2001 independent films 2000s American films 2000s English-language films 2000s German films 2000s psychological drama films American independent films American psychological drama films Eli Lilly and Company English-language German films English-language independent films Films about bipolar disorder Films about depression Films about virginity Films based on memoirs Films directed by Erik Skjoldbjærg Films set in Harvard University Films scored by Nathan Larson Films shot in Boston Films shot in London Films shot in New Jersey Films shot in Vancouver German independent films German psychological drama films Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from January 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Template film date with 2 release dates This page was last edited on 30 June 2025, at 07:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Prozac Nation (film) 17 languages Add topic

