Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Teaching 3 Philosophical work Toggle Philosophical work subsection 3.1 Defense of teleology 3.2 Fischer–Trendelenburg debate 4 Family 5 Works (selection) Toggle Works (selection) subsection 5.1 Translations 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Friedrich Adolf Trendelenburg 20 languages تۆرکجه Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Italiano Latina مصرى Nederlands Piemontèis Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German philosopher and philologist (1802–1872) Friedrich Adolf Trendelenburg Born ( 1802-11-30 ) 30 November 1802 Eutin , Lübeck , Holy Roman Empire Died 24 January 1872 (1872-01-24) (aged 69) Berlin, Brandenburg , Prussia , German Empire Children Friedrich Education Education University of Kiel Leipzig University University of Berlin ( PhD , 1826) Thesis Platonis de ideis et numeris doctrina ex Aristotele illustrata (On Plato's Doctrine of Ideas and Numbers as Illustrated by Aristotle) (1826) Academic advisors Karl Leonhard Reinhold [ 3 ] August Boeckh [ 4 ] Friedrich Schleiermacher [ 4 ] Georg Ludwig König [ de ] Philosophical work Era 19th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School German idealism Aristotelianism Aristotelian idealism [ 1 ] Institutions University of Berlin Doctoral students Friedrich Paulsen Notable students Franz Brentano Wilhelm Dilthey Rudolf Eucken Ernst Laas Main interests Logic , metaphysics Notable ideas Trendelenburg's gap Motion as the fundamental fact common to being and thought Putting the organic/ teleological view of the world on a modern foundation [ 2 ] Friedrich Adolf Trendelenburg ( / ˈ t r ɛ n d əl ən b ɜːr ɡ / ; [ 5 ] German: [ˈtʁɛndələnbʊʁk] ; 30 November 1802 – 24 January 1872) was a German philosopher and philologist .

Life [ edit ] He was born at Eutin , near Lübeck . He was placed in a gymnasium in Eutin , which was under the direction of Georg Ludwig König [ de ] , [ 6 ] a philologist influenced by Immanuel Kant .

He was educated at the universities of Kiel , Leipzig , Berlin . He became more and more attracted to the study of Plato and Aristotle , and his 1826 doctoral dissertation, Platonis de ideis et numeris doctrina ex Aristotele illustrata ( On Plato's Doctrine of Ideas and Numbers as Illustrated by Aristotle ), was an attempt to reach through Aristotle's criticisms a more accurate knowledge of the Platonic philosophy .

[ 7 ] He declined the offer of a classical chair at Kiel, and accepted a post as tutor to the son of an intimate friend of Karl vom Stein zum Altenstein , the Prussian minister of education. He held this position for seven years (1826–1833), occupying his leisure time with the preparation of a critical edition of Aristotle's De anima (1833; 2nd ed. by Christian Belger, 1877). In 1833 Altenstein appointed Trendelenburg extraordinary professor in Berlin, and four years later he was advanced to an ordinary professorship.

[ 7 ] Teaching [ edit ] For nearly 40 years, he proved himself markedly successful as a teacher, during the greater part of which time he had to examine in philosophy and pedagogics all candidates for the scholastic profession in Prussia. His teaching method was highly regarded by Søren Kierkegaard who called him "one of the most sober philosophical philologists I know." [ 8 ] He was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1861.

[ 9 ] Two of his prominent students were Franz Brentano and Wilhelm Dilthey .

Philosophical work [ edit ] Defense of teleology [ edit ] Trendelenburg's philosophizing is conditioned throughout by his loving study of Plato and Aristotle, whom he regards not as opponents but as building jointly on the broad basis of idealism . His own standpoint may be called a modern version of Aristotelianism . While denying the possibility of an absolute method and an absolute philosophy, as contended for by Hegel and others, Trendelenburg was emphatically an idealist in the ancient or Platonic sense; his whole work was devoted to the demonstration of the ideal in the real . But he maintained that the procedure of philosophy must be analytic , rising from the particular facts to the universal in which we find them explained. We divine the system of the whole from the part we know, but the process of reconstruction must remain approximative. Our position forbids the possibility of a final system. Instead, therefore, of constantly beginning afresh in speculation, it should be our duty to attach ourselves to what may be considered the permanent results of historic developments.

[ 7 ] The classical expression of these results Trendelenburg finds mainly in the Platonico-Aristotelian system. The philosophical question is stated thus: How are thought and being united in knowledge? How does thought get at being? And how does being enter into thought? Proceeding on the principle that like can only be known by like, Trendelenburg next reaches a doctrine peculiar to himself (though based upon Aristotle) that plays a central part in his speculations. Motion is the fundamental fact common to being and thought; the actual motion of the external world has its counterpart in the constructive motion involved in every instance of perception or thought. From motion he proceeds to deduce time, space and the categories of mechanics and natural science. These, being thus derived, are at once subjective and objective in their scope. It is true that matter can never be completely resolved into motion, but the irreducible remainder may be treated, like Aristotle, as an abstraction we asymptotically approach but never reach.

[ 7 ] The facts of existence, however, are not adequately explained by the mechanical categories. The ultimate interpretation of the universe can only be found in the higher category of End or final cause . Here Trendelenburg finds the dividing line, between philosophical systems. On the one side stand those that acknowledge none but efficient causes, which make force prior to thought, and explain the universe, as it were, a tergo ("from the back"). This may be called, typically, Democritism . On the other side stands the organic or teleological view of the world, which interprets the parts through the idea of the whole, and sees in the efficient causes only the vehicle of ideal ends. This may be called in a wide sense Platonism . Systems like Spinozism , which seem to form a third class, neither sacrificing force to thought nor thought to force, yet by their denial of final causes inevitably fall back into the Democritic or essentially materialistic standpoint, leaving us with the great antagonism of the mechanical and the organic systems of philosophy. The latter view, which receives its first support in the facts of life, or organic nature as such, finds its culmination and ultimate verification in the ethical world, which essentially consists in the realization of ends .

Trendelenburg's Naturrecht [the right of nature] may, therefore, be taken as in a manner the completion of his system, his working out of the ideal as present in the real. The ethical end is taken to be the idea of humanity, not in the abstract as formulated by Immanuel Kant , but in the context of the state and of history. Law is treated throughout as the vehicle of ethical requirements. In Trendelenburg's treatment of the state , as the ethical organism in which the individual (the potential man) may be said first to emerge into actuality, we may trace his nurture on the best ideas of Hellenic antiquity.

[ 7 ] Fischer–Trendelenburg debate [ edit ] In 1865 he became involved in an acrimonious controversy on the interpretation of Kant 's doctrine of space with Kuno Fischer , whom he attacked in Kuno Fischer und sein Kant (1869), which drew forth the reply Anti-Trendelenburg (1870).

[ 7 ] The controversy became known in the history of philosophy as the Fischer–Trendelenburg debate .

Trendelenburg's position on the debate (the position that "Kant may establish that space and time are a priori and intuitive conditions for experience in the Transcendental Aesthetic , but this in no way entails that space and time have nothing to do with the objects outside of possible experience") has been variously dubbed as "neglected alternative," "Trendelenburg's gap" [ die trendelenburgische Lücke ], "Pistorius's gap" [ die pistorische Lücke ] (named after Hermann Andreas Pistorius ), or "third possibility" [ die dritte Möglichkeit ].

[ 10 ] Family [ edit ] His son, Friedrich Trendelenburg , was a prominent surgeon; several medical techniques and matters are named for him.

Works (selection) [ edit ] Trendelenburg was also the author of the following: [ 11 ] Elementa Logices Aristotelicae (1836; 9th ed., 1892; Eng. trans. 1881), a selection of passages from the Organon with Latin translation and notes, containing the substance of Aristotle's logical doctrine, supplemented by Erlauterungen zu den Elementen der Aristotelischen Logik (1842; 3rd ed., 1876).

Logische Untersuchungen (Logical Investigations) , 2 vols. (1840; 3rd ed. 1870), and Die logische Frage in Hegels System (1843), important factors in the reaction against Hegel.

Historische Beiträge zur Philosophie (1846–1867), in three volumes, the first of which ( Geschichte der Kategorienlehre ) contains a history of the doctrine of the Categories.

Geschichte der Kategorienlehre I: Aristotle Kategorienlehre; II: Die Kategorienlehre in der Geschichte der Philosophie (1846, reprint: Hildesheim, Olms, 1979).

Des Naturrecht aufdem Grunde der Ethik (1860).

Lücken im Völkerrecht (1870), a treatise on the defects of international law, occasioned by the war of 1870.

Kleine Schriften (1871), papers dealing with non-philosophical, chiefly national and educational subjects.

Zur Geschichte des Wortes Person , Kant-Studien, Bd. 13, Berlin 1908 Ethische Untersuchungen: Genetisch-kritische Fragmentedition . Edited by Christian Biehl.

Exempla critica 5. De Gruyter, Berlin/Boston 2022 Translations [ edit ] A Contribution to the History of the Word Person: A Posthumous Treatise , Open Court Pub. Co., 1910.

Outlines of Logic: An English Translation of Trendelenburg's Elementa , 1898.

See also [ edit ] Hermann Lotze Notes [ edit ] ^ Steven Rockefeller, John Dewey: Religious Faith and Democratic Humanism , Columbia University Press, 1994, p. 78: "[Morris's] studies with Trendelenburg left him with the lasting conviction that philosophy must be grounded in scientific methods of truth, but Trendelenburg guided him away from British empiricism to an Aristotelian idealism." ^ Beiser 2013, p. 122.

^ Beiser 2013, p. 17.

^ a b Beiser 2013, p. 20.

^ "Trendelenburg" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster.

^ Morris 1874, p. 289.

^ a b c d e f Chisholm 1911 , p. 246.

^ Søren Kierkegaard's Journals and Papers , V A 98, 1844 ^ "Book of Members, 1780–2010: Chapter T" (PDF) . American Academy of Arts and Sciences . Retrieved 23 September 2016 .

^ Andrew F. Specht, "Kant and the Neglected Alternative" , December 2014, p. 4.

^ Chisholm 1911 , pp. 246–247.

Attribution This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Trendelenburg, Friedrich Adolf ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 27 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

246– 247.

References [ edit ] Frederick Beiser , Late German Idealism: Trendelenburg and Lotze , Oxford University Press, 2013 [Currently the most complete discussion of Trendelenburg's philosophy.] Graham Bird, A Companion to Kant , John Wiley and Sons, 2009 p. 486ff has an article about Trendelenburg's dispute with Fisher over Kant 's definition of space Hermann Bonitz , Zur Erinnering an Friedrich Adolf Trendelenburg (Berlin, 1872) Buchholtz, Georg (1904).

Die ethischen Grundgedanken Friedrich Adolf Trendelenburgs . Blankenhain: Schlimper.

Ernst Bratuschek, Adolf Trendelenburg (Berlin, 1873) [The first complete intellectual biography of Trendelenburg.] George Sylvester Morris , Friedrich Adolf Trendelenburg (1874).

Paul Kleinert , Grabrede (Berlin, 1872) Carl von Prantl , Gedächtnisrede (Munich, 1873) External links [ edit ] Friedrich Adolf Trendelenburg at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Croatia Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project MathSciNet People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Friedrich_Adolf_Trendelenburg&oldid=1297182614 " Categories : Aristotelian philosophers 1802 births 1872 deaths 19th-century German philosophers People from Eutin People from Oldenburg (state) University of Kiel alumni Leipzig University alumni Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Recipients of the Pour le Mérite (civil class) Humboldt University of Berlin alumni Academic staff of the Humboldt University of Berlin German logicians German metaphysicians German male writers German idealists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages with German IPA Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica This page was last edited on 24 June 2025, at 16:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Friedrich Adolf Trendelenburg 20 languages Add topic

