Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview Toggle Overview subsection 1.1 Doric 1.2 Ionic 1.3 Corinthian 1.4 Non-classical architecture 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Entablature 54 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Seeltersk Simple English Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Entablatures ) Architectural element This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Entablature" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Entablatures at Caesarea Maritima Entablature at the Temple of Venus Genetrix , Rome An entablature ( / ɛ n ˈ t æ b l ə tʃ ər / ; nativization of Italian intavolatura , from in "in" and tavola "table") [ 1 ] is the superstructure of moldings and bands which lies horizontally above columns , resting on their capitals . Entablatures are major elements of classical architecture , and are commonly divided into the architrave (the supporting member immediately above; equivalent to the lintel in post and lintel construction), the frieze (an unmolded strip that may or may not be ornamented), and the cornice (the projecting member below the pediment ).

[ 1 ] The Greek and Roman temples are believed to be based on wooden structures, the design transition from wooden to stone structures being called petrification .

Overview [ edit ] The structure of an entablature varies with the orders of architecture . In each order, the proportions of the subdivisions (architrave, frieze, cornice) are defined by the proportions of the column. In Roman and Renaissance interpretations, it is usually approximately a quarter of the height of the column. Variants of entablature that do not fit these models are usually derived from them.

Doric [ edit ] In the pure classical Doric order entablature is simple. The architrave, the lowest band, is split, from bottom to top, into the guttae , the regulae , and the taenia .

The frieze is dominated by the triglyphs , vertically channelled tablets, separated by metopes , which may or may not be decorated. The triglyphs sit on top of the taenia, a flat, thin, horizontal protrusion, and are finished at the bottom by decoration (often ornate) of 'drops' called guttae, which belong to the top of the architrave. The top of the triglyphs meet the protrusion of the cornice from the entablature. The underside of this protrusion is decorated with mutules , tablets that are typically finished with guttae.

The cornice is split into the soffit , the corona, and the cymatium . The soffit is simply the exposed underside. The corona and the cymatium are the principal parts of the cornice.

Ionic [ edit ] The Ionic order of entablature adds the fascia in the architrave, which are flat horizontal protrusions, and the dentils under the cornice, which are tooth-like rectangular block moldings.

Corinthian [ edit ] The Corinthian order adds a far more ornate cornice, divided, from bottom to top, into the cyma reversa , the dentils, the ovolo , the modillions , the fascia, and the cyma recta . The modillions are ornate brackets, similar in use to dentils, but often in the shape of acanthus leaves.

The frieze is sometimes omitted—for example, on the portico of the caryatides of the Erechtheum —and probably did not exist as a structure in the temple of Diana at Ephesus . Neither is it found in the Lycian tombs, which are reproductions in the rock of timber structures based on early Ionian work.

[ 1 ] The entablature is essentially an evolution of the primitive lintel , which spans two posts, supporting the ends of the roof rafters.

Entablature of the Doric order Entablature of the Ionic order Entablature of the Corinthian order Non-classical architecture [ edit ] The entablature together with the system of classical columns occurs rarely outside classical architecture. It is often used to complete the upper portion of a wall where columns are not present, and in the case of pilasters (flattened columns or projecting from a wall) or detached or engaged columns it is sometimes profiled around them.

[ 2 ] The use of the entablature, irrespective of columns, appeared after the Renaissance.

See also [ edit ] Classical order Classical architecture Prastara , an entablature in the Hindu temple architecture References [ edit ] ^ a b c One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Entablature ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 9 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 654.

^ Poole, homas Henry (1909).

"Entablature" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 5. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Entablatures at Wikimedia Commons Authority control databases National Germany Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Entablature&oldid=1227357406 " Categories : Columns and entablature Architectural elements Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2019 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Italian-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 June 2024, at 07:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Entablature 54 languages Add topic

