Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 History and development Toggle History and development subsection 2.1 Socialism with Chinese characteristics 2.2 Speech at the 19th Congress 2.3 Further developments 3 Content Toggle Content subsection 3.1 Ten affirmations 3.2 Fourteen commitments 3.3 Thirteen achievements 3.4 Six musts 3.5 Components 3.6 Other 4 Influence and reception Toggle Influence and reception subsection 4.1 In education 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Xi Jinping Thought 25 languages العربية 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kiswahili Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Set of policies and ideals from Xi Jinping General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party Xi Jinping for whom the political thought is named.

Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era Simplified Chinese 习近平新时代中国特色社会主义思想 Traditional Chinese 習近平新時代中國特色社會主義思想 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Xí Jìnpíng xīn shídài Zhōngguó tèsè shèhuì zhǔyì sīxiǎng Bopomofo ㄒㄧˊ ㄐㄧㄣˋ ㄆㄧㄥˊ ㄒㄧㄣ ㄕˊ ㄉㄞˋ ㄓㄨㄥ ㄍㄨㄛˊ ㄊㄜˋ ㄙㄜˋ  ㄕㄜˋ ㄏㄨㄟˋ ㄓㄨˇ ㄧˋ ㄙ ㄒㄧㄤˊ Wade–Giles Hsi 2 Chin 4 -p'ing 2 hsin 1 shih 2 -tai 4 Chung 1 -kuo 2 t'e 4 -se 4 she 4 -hui 4 chu 3 -i 4 ssu 1 -hsiang 3 IPA [ɕǐ tɕîn.pʰǐŋ ɕín ʂɻ̩̌.tâɪ ʈʂʊ́ŋ.kwǒ tʰɤ̂.sɤ̂ ʂ] A billboard advertising Xi Jinping Thought in Shenzhen , Guangdong with the symbol of the Chinese Communist Party .

Politics of China Leadership Leadership generations Succession of power Hu–Wen Administration (2002–2012) Xi–Li Administration (2012–2017) Xi's general secretaryship (since 2012) 4th Leadership Core : Xi Jinping 20th Party Politburo : Xi Jinping 14th State Council : Li Qiang Current state leaders Current provincial leaders Party and state leaders Orders of precedence Paramount leader : Xi Jinping First lady : Peng Liyuan Communist Party leader : Xi Jinping State representative : Xi Jinping Head of government : Li Qiang Congress Chairman : Zhao Leji Conference Chairman : Wang Huning Commander-in-chief : Xi Jinping Politburo Standing Committee longest-serving members Related systems Unified power Democratic centralism Collective leadership Organization Department Elections Civil service Constitution Law Constitution Previous constitutions 1954 1975 1978 "People's democratic dictatorship" (Article 1) Democratic centralism (Article 3) Constitutional oath of office (Article 27) Protection of human rights (Article 33) Freedom of religion (Article 36) Highest state organ of power (Article 57) Chinese legal system Civil law tradition Socialist law tradition Laws Legislation Law List of statutes General Principles of the Civil Law (to 2020) Civil Code (from 2021) Marriage Law Labour law Labour Law Labour Contract Law Property law Property Law Intellectual property law Patent law Administrative law Administrative Procedure Law Criminal law Capital punishment Capital offences Death sentence with reprieve Communist Party History Principal leaders Constitution and ideology Admission Oath (Article 6) Socialism with Chinese characteristics Communism Marxism–Leninism Mao Zedong Thought Deng Xiaoping Theory Primary stage of socialism Four Cardinal Principles Three Represents Scientific Outlook on Development Harmonious Socialist Society Xi Jinping Thought Chinese Dream Democracy Whole-process people's democracy Organization National Party Congress ( 20th ) Central Committee ( 20th ) General Secretary ( list ) Xi Jinping Central Politburo ( 20th ) Standing Committee ( 20th ) Central Secretariat ( 20th ) First-ranked secretary: Cai Qi Central Military Commission Chairman : Xi Jinping Vice Chairmen : Zhang Youxia , He Weidong National Security Commission Chairman: Xi Jinping Vice-Chairman: Li Qiang , Zhao Leji , Cai Qi Office Chief: Cai Qi Comprehensively Deepening Reforms Commission Director: Xi Jinping Deputy Directors: Li Qiang , Wang Huning , Cai Qi Secretary-General: Wang Huning Financial & Economic Affairs Commission Director: Xi Jinping Deputy Director: Li Qiang Office Chief: He Lifeng General Office Director : Cai Qi Office of the General Secretary Director: Han Shiming Central Guard Bureau Central Guard Unit Office of the Central Secrecy Commission Organization Department Head : Shi Taifeng Central Commission for Discipline Inspection ( 20th ) Standing Committee ( 20th ) Secretary : Li Xi Commission for Discipline Inspection of the Central Military Commission Secretary: Zhang Shengmin Central Leading Group for Inspection Work Leader: Li Xi Provincial committee Standing committee Secretary Deputy secretaries Party group National People's Congress ( 14th ) Elections Democracy System of people's congress Standing Committee ( 14th ) Council of Chairpersons Chairman : Zhao Leji Vice-Chairpersons Top-ranked: Li Hongzhong Secretary-General : Liu Qi Special Committees Ethnic Affairs Constitution and Law Supervisory and Judicial Affairs Financial and Economic Affairs Education, Science, Culture and Public Health Foreign Affairs Overseas Chinese Affairs Environmental Protection and Resources Conservation Agriculture and Rural Affairs Social Development Affairs Presidium State representative President ( list ): Xi Jinping Presidential Office Chief: Han Shiming Vice President : Han Zheng Executive organ State Council (Central People's Government) Li Qiang Cabinet Premier ( list ): Li Qiang Vice-Premiers ( list ) Ding Xuexiang He Lifeng Zhang Guoqing Liu Guozhong State Councilors Wang Xiaohong Wu Zhenglong Shen Yiqin Secretary-General : Wu Zhenglong Cabinet-level departments National Development & Reform Commission Central bank National Audit Office General Office Secretary-General Deputy Secretaries-General State-owned Assets Supervision & Administration Commission most Central Enterprises Military organ Central Military Commission (CMC) Chairman ( supreme commander ): Xi Jinping Vice Chairmen : Zhang Youxia He Weidong Members: Liu Zhenli Miao Hua Zhang Shengmin Departments: General Office Director: Zhong Shaojun Joint Staff Dept.

Chief : Liu Zhenli Political Work Dept.

Director: Miao Hua Logistic Support Dept.

Director: Zhang Lin Equipment Development Dept.

Director: Xu Xueqiang Training and Administration Dept.

Director: Wang Peng National Defense Mobilization Dept.

Director: Liu Faqing Discipline Inspection Commission Secretary: Zhang Shengmin Politics and Legal Affairs Commission Science and Technology Commission Strategic Planning Office Reform & Organizational Structure Office Int'l Military Cooperation Office Audit Office Offices Administration Agency National armed forces: People's Liberation Army Theater commands People's Armed Police 1st Mobile Contingent 2nd Mobile Contingent China Coast Guard Militia State Council National Defense Mobilization Commission Chairman : Li Qiang Ministry of National Defense Minister : Dong Jun Ministry of Veterans Affairs State Administration for Sci., Tech. & Industry for National Defense Military history Armed conflicts Military modernization Military reform since 2015 CMC Leading Group for Military Reform Leader: Xi Jinping Supervisory organ National Supervisory Commission Director : Liu Jinguo Corruption in China Anti-corruption campaign since 2012 Independent Commission Against Corruption (Hong Kong) Commission Against Corruption (Macau) Judicial organs Supreme People's Court President : Zhang Jun People's Courts Judicial Police Supreme People's Procuratorate Procurator-General : Ying Yong People's Procuratorates Judicial Police Judiciary of Hong Kong Court of Final Appeal Department of Justice Prosecutions Division Law enforcement in Hong Kong Disciplined Services Security Bureau Hong Kong Police Force Judiciary of Macau Court of Final Appeal Public Prosecutions Office Secretariat for Security Macau Security Force Unitary Police Services [ zh ] Public Security Police Judiciary Police [ zh ] United front System of multi-party cooperation and political consultation Political Consultative Conference National Committee ( 14th ) Chairman : Wang Huning Vice-Chairpersons Top-ranked: Shi Taifeng Secretary-General : Wang Dongfeng Political parties : CCP (ruling) United Front Work Department Head : Li Ganjie Democratic parties RCCK CDL CNDCA CAPD CPWDP CZGP JS TDSL Historical parties: KMT CDSP YCP Federation of Industry and Commerce People's organizations Law enforcement CCP Central Politics and Law Commission Secretary : Chen Wenqing Enforced disappearance Ministry of Public Security Minister : Wang Xiaohong Public Security Organs People's Police State Immigration Administration Local public security bureaus Ministry of State Security Minister : Chen Yixin State Security Organs People's Police Ministry of Justice Minister : He Rong Judicial Administrative Organs People's Police People's Armed Police 1st Mobile Contingent 2nd Mobile Contingent China Coast Guard Bureau of Prison Administration [ zh ] Office for Safeguarding National Security Urban Management (chengguan) Propaganda Central Leading Group for Propaganda, Ideology and Culture Leader: Cai Qi Deputy Leaders: Li Shulei , Shen Yiqin Central Guidance Commission on Building Spiritual Civilization Director: Cai Qi Deputy Director: Li Shulei Publicity Department of the Chinese Communist Party Head : Li Shulei General Administration of Press and Publication China Film Administration State Council Information Office China Daily Ministry of Culture and Tourism National Radio and Television Administration China Media Group China Central Television China Global Television Network China National Radio China Radio International Xinhua News Agency Reference News China News Service People's Daily Global Times China Today Censorship in China Great Cannon Great Firewall Overseas censorship Radio jamming Media of China Internal media International communication centers Publishing industry in China Internet in China Internet censorship Central Cyberspace Affairs Commission Director: Cai Qi Cyberspace Administration of China Director: Zhuang Rongwen Hong Kong Macau Central Leading Group on Hong Kong and Macau Affairs Leader: Ding Xuexiang HK & Macau Affairs Office Director: Xia Baolong Hong Kong Liaison Office Macau Liaison Office One country, two systems Special administrative regions Hong Kong Basic Law Chief Executive : John Lee Ka-chiu Hong Kong SAR Government Politics of Hong Kong Pro-Beijing camp Pro-democracy camp Independence movement Mainland & HK CEPA Macao Basic Law Chief Executive : Ho Iat-seng Macau SAR Government Politics of Macau Mainland & Macau CEPA Cross-strait relations Cross-strait relations Chinese Civil War One China Political status of Taiwan Republic of China on Taiwan Taiwan Area "Taiwan Province", PRC Taiwan independence movement Anti-Secession Law Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement Cross-Strait Service Trade Agreement Chinese unification Central Leading Group for Taiwan Affairs Leader: Xi Jinping Deputy Leader: Wang Huning Taiwan Affairs Office Director: Song Tao Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits Foreign relations Central Foreign Affairs Commission Director: Xi Jinping Deputy Director: Li Qiang Secretary-General: Wang Yi Ministry of Foreign Affairs Minister : Wang Yi Spokespersons Diplomatic missions Diplomatic missions of China / in China Foreign aid from China / to China International Development Cooperation Agency Ministry of Commerce Exim Bank of China China Development Bank Belt and Road Initiative Silk Road Fund Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank BRICS New Development Bank Ministry of National Defense International Military Cooperation Office NPC Foreign Affairs Committee CCP International Department State Administration of Foreign Experts Affairs Overseas Chinese Affairs Office Chinese nationality law Chinese passports ( Hong Kong ; Macau ) Visa requirements for Chinese citizens ( Hong Kong , Macau ) Visa policy of China ( Hong Kong ; Macau ) National Immigration Administration Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence Panda diplomacy Beijing Consensus Community of Common Destiny China and the United Nations China and the World Trade Organization Shanghai Cooperation Organisation China–Africa relations China–Arab relations China–Caribbean relations China–European Union relations China–Latin America relations China–Pacific relations China–Russia relations China–United States relations Related topics Administrative divisions Chinese information operations Ethnic minorities Family planning Hukou system Human rights in China Chinese intelligence activity abroad China portal Other countries v t e This article is part of a series about Xi Jinping Personal Awards Bibliography Cult of personality Speech series The Governance of China Zhijiang Xinyu CCP General Secretary General Secretaryship Elections 2012 2017 2022 New Zhijiang Army Policies and theories Belt and Road Initiative Chinese Dream Common prosperity Comprehensively Deepening Reforms Chinese-style modernization Dual circulation Eight Musts Eight-point Regulation Foreign policy Four Comprehensives Four Confidences Four Consciousnesses High-quality development Holistic security concept Houses are for living, not for speculation Major-country diplomacy New concept for development New normal New productive forces Party media takes the party's last name Targeted Poverty Alleviation Three red lines Three Stricts and Three Honests Two Centenaries Two Establishes Two Upholds Thought culture diplomacy ecological civilization economy rule of law strengthening the military Personality cult Wolf warrior diplomacy Whole-process people's democracy Tenure Anti-corruption campaign 709 crackdown Battle against poverty Persecution of Uyghurs Xinjiang internment camps 2018 Party and state reforms 2018 constitutional amendment China–US trade war 2019–20 Hong Kong protests COVID-19 pandemic response CCP centenary Historical resolution 2020–2021 reform spree 2022 Hong Kong visit 2022 COVID-19 protests Diplomatic activities Xi–Chu meeting Xi–Ma Meeting Xi–Kim meetings 2015 Pakistan visit 2015 United States visit 2015 United Kingdom visit 2019 Italy and France visit CPC and World Political Parties Summit 2023 Russia visit 2023 Vietnam visit 2024 France, Serbia and Hungary visit 2025 Russia visit v t e Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era , commonly abbreviated outside China as Xi Jinping Thought , is a political doctrine created during General Secretary Xi Jinping 's leadership of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) that combines Chinese Marxism and national rejuvenation . According to the CCP, Xi Jinping Thought "builds on and further enriches" previous party ideologies and has also been called as the " Marxism of contemporary China and of the 21st century". It is a component of the theoretical system of socialism with Chinese characteristics and the development of Marxism–Leninism , Mao Zedong Thought , Deng Xiaoping Theory , the Three Represents and the Scientific Outlook on Development . The theory's main elements are summarized in the ten affirmations, the fourteen commitments, and the thirteen areas of achievements.

It was first officially mentioned at the 19th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party in 2017, in which it was incorporated into the Constitution of the Chinese Communist Party , leading to a further elevation of Xi's status in the CCP. At the first session of the 13th National People's Congress on 11 March 2018, the preamble of the Constitution of China was amended to mention Xi Jinping Thought.

Terminology [ edit ] In official CCP discourse, Xi Jinping Thought is referred to as "Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era," [ 1 ] [ 2 ] or Xi Jinping Thought on a specific field, such as Xi Jinping Thought on Diplomacy .

[ 3 ] : 31 The first public usage of Xi Jinping sixiang ("Xi Jinping Thought") came in 2017 when Liu Mingfu and Wang Zhongyuan published a book by that name.

[ 3 ] : 25 As of at least early 2024, the CCP does not use "Xi Jinping Thought" in official discourses.

[ 3 ] : 31 In English, "Xi Jinping Thought" is the most common usage, with others including Xi Thought [ 4 ] [ 5 ] and Xiism.

[ 6 ] History and development [ edit ] "Xi Jinping Thought on socialism with Chinese characteristics for a new era" was formally launched at the 19th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party having gradually been developed since 2012, when Xi became General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party .

[ 3 ] : 21–26 News sources have stated that Xi helped create this ideology together with his close advisor, then director of the Central Policy Research Office Wang Huning .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] The first indications of Xi's platform had come out in a speech titled "Some Questions on Maintaining and Developing Socialism with Chinese Characteristics" given to the newly elected Central Committee on 5 January 2013, and was later published by Central Documents Press and the journal Qiushi .

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Socialism with Chinese characteristics [ edit ] Main article: Socialism with Chinese characteristics Much of Xi Jinping Thought comes from Xi's 2013 speech delivered at the 18th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party , delivered a month after he became the CCP General Secretary.

[ 10 ] Beginning his speech, Xi said: "First of all: Socialism with Chinese characteristics is socialism, not any other “ism.” The guiding principles of scientific socialism thus cannot be abandoned. Our Party has always emphasized adherence to the basic principles of scientific socialism, but adapted to the particular conditions of China. This means that socialism with Chinese characteristics is socialism , not some other doctrine... It was Marxism-Leninism and Mao Zedong Thought that guided the Chinese people out of the long night and established a New China , and it was socialism with Chinese characteristics that led to the rapid development of China." [ 11 ] According to Xi, "the consolidation and development of the socialist system will require its own long period of history... it will require the tireless struggle of generations, up to ten generations." [ 10 ] On the relationship with capitalist nations, Xi said, "Marx and Engels ' analysis of the basic contradictions in capitalist society is not outdated, nor is the historical materialist view that capitalism is bound to die out and socialism is bound to win." [ 10 ] Xi also stated: "The fundamental reason why some of our comrades have weak ideals and faltering beliefs is that their views lack a firm grounding in historical materialism ." [ 12 ] Xi showed great interest in why the Soviet Union dissolved , and how to avoid that failure in China: Why did the Soviet Union disintegrate? Why did the Communist Party of the Soviet Union fall from power? An important reason was that the struggle in the field of ideology was extremely intense, completely negating the history of the Soviet Union, negating the history of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, negating Lenin , negating Stalin , creating historical nihilism and confused thinking. Party organs at all levels had lost their functions, the military was no longer under Party leadership. In the end, the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, a great party, was scattered, the Soviet Union, a great socialist country, disintegrated. This is a cautionary tale!

[ 9 ] The concepts behind Xi Jinping Thought were elaborated in Xi's The Governance of China book series, published by the Foreign Languages Press for an international audience. Volume one was published in September 2014, followed by volume two in November 2017, [ 13 ] followed by volume three in June 2020, [ 14 ] followed by volume four in July 2022.

[ 15 ] Xi has praised Karl Marx as "the greatest thinker of modern times" whose teachings enlightened the working classes of the world and has called upon party cadres to adopt Marxist revolutionary principles as a "way of life".

[ 16 ] Socialism with Chinese characteristics is the dialectical unity of the theoretical logic of scientific socialism and the historical logic of China’s social development. It is a scientific socialism rooted in China’s soil, one that reflects the aspirations of the Chinese people, and one that is adapted to the conditions of progress in our times.

It is the only way to comprehensively build a prosperous society, accelerate socialist modernization and realize the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation.

— Xi Jinping, "Uphold and Develop Socialism with Chinese Characteristics", January 5th, 2013, [ 17 ] Speech at the 19th Congress [ edit ] Xi first used the phrase "Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era" in his speech delivered on the opening day of the 19th Party Congress in October 2017. The Politburo Standing Committee (top decision-making body) then prepended "Xi Jinping" to the phrase, in their review of his speech.

[ 18 ] The Congress then affirmed Xi's speech as a guiding political and military ideology of the Chinese Communist Party [ 18 ] and approved its incorporation into the constitution of the party, [ 19 ] [ 20 ] with unanimous support in a show of hands .

[ 21 ] The incorporation made Xi the third Chinese leader (after Mao Zedong and Deng Xiaoping ) to have their names incorporated into the list of fundamental doctrines of the CCP. This demonstrated that Xi was more influential than his two predecessors as General Secretary ( Hu Jintao and Jiang Zemin ). Xi promised to make China strong, propelling the country into a "new era".

[ 22 ] Further developments [ edit ] At the first session of the 13th National People's Congress on 11 March 2018, the preamble of the Constitution of China was amended to mention Xi Jinping Thought. In 2021, the 19th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party approved of a historical resolution , which declared Xi Jinping Thought "a new breakthrough in the Sinicization of Marxism." [ 23 ] The document says the Thought is the "Marxism of contemporary China and of the 21st century and embodies the best Chinese culture and ethos of this era".

[ 24 ] Content [ edit ] Xi Jinping Thought is a component of the theoretical system of socialism with Chinese characteristics . In official party documentation and pronouncements by Xi's colleagues, the thought has been said to be a continuation of previous party ideologues, and it "builds on and further enriches" Marxism–Leninism, Mao Zedong Thought, Deng Xiaoping Theory , the Theory of Three Represents and the Scientific Outlook on Development as part of a series of guiding ideologies that embody "Marxism adapted to Chinese conditions".

[ 18 ] Xi Jinping Thought is summarized into the 10 affirmations ( 十个明确 ), the 14 commitments ( 十四个坚持 ), and the 13 areas of achievements ( 十三个方面成就 ).

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] Additionally, the six musts ( 六个必须坚持 ) are the worldview and methodology of Xi Jinping Thought.

[ 28 ] Ten affirmations [ edit ] During his speech to the 19th CCP National Congress, Xi Jinping introduced the "eight affirmations" ( 八个明确 ), which later developed to the "ten affirmations" with the addition of the 7th and 10th points during the sixth plenum of the 19th Central Committee in 2021.

[ 29 ] Fourteen commitments [ edit ] Ensuring Communist Party of China leadership over all forms of work in China.

The Communist Party of China should take a people-centric approach for the public interest.

The continuation of " comprehensive deepening of reforms ".

Adopting new science-based ideas for "innovative, coordinated, green, open and shared development".

Following " socialism with Chinese characteristics " with " people as the masters of the country ".

Governing China with the Rule of Law.

"Practise socialist core values ", including Marxism–Leninism and socialism with Chinese characteristics.

"Improving people's livelihood and well-being is the primary goal of development".

Coexist well with nature with "energy conservation and environmental protection" policies and "contribute to global ecological safety".

Strengthen the national security of China .

The Communist Party of China should have "absolute leadership over" China's People's Liberation Army .

Promoting the one country, two systems system for Hong Kong and Macau with a future of "complete national reunification " and to follow the One-China principle and 1992 Consensus for Taiwan .

Establish a common destiny between the Chinese people and other peoples around the world with a "peaceful international environment".

Improve party discipline in the Communist Party of China.

[ 26 ] Thirteen achievements [ edit ] In upholding the Party's overall leadership In comprehensively and strictly governing the party In economic construction In comprehensively deepening reform and opening up In political construction In comprehensively governing the country according to the law In cultural constructions In social construction In the construction of ecological civilization In national defense and army building In safeguarding national security In adhering to one country, two systems and promoting reunification of the motherland In diplomatic work [ 30 ] Six musts [ edit ] The "six musts" were first put forward at the 20th CCP National Congress in October 2022. It outlines that the CCP: [ 28 ] Must put the people first Must be self-confident and independent Must uphold the principle of integrity and innovation Must be problem-oriented Must adhere to a systematic approach Must have a global vision Components [ edit ] Xi Jinping Thought is divided into several main components, including: Xi Jinping Thought on Culture Xi Jinping Thought on Diplomacy Xi Jinping Thought on Ecological Civilization Xi Jinping Thought on Economy Xi Jinping Thought on the Rule of Law Xi Jinping Thought on Strengthening the Military Other [ edit ] Xi Jinping Thought seeks to reinvigorate the mass line .

[ 3 ] : 10 In economic matters, Xi Jinping Thought highlights the historical importance of state-owned enterprises : [ 31 ] : 217 [W]ithout the important material foundation that state-owned enterprises have laid for China's development over a long period of time, without the major innovations and key core technologies achieved by state-owned enterprises, and without state-owned enterprises' long-term commitment to a large number of social responsibilities, there would be no economic independence and national security for China, no continuous improvement in people's lives, and no socialist China standing tall in the East of the world.

Influence and reception [ edit ] Finding cultural expressions for Xi Jinping Thought has been a priority. On 27 November 2017, more than 100 of China's top filmmakers, actors and pop stars were gathered for a day in Hangzhou to study the report of the 19th Party Congress featuring Xi Jinping Thought.

[ 32 ] Content from Xi's 2017 speech is used in public messages, described as being 'pervasive' by a Beijing correspondent for The New York Times .

[ 33 ] A poster featuring the slogan " Chinese Dream " comes from the speech, where the phrase is used 31 times.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] In July 2018, the carriages of a train in Changchun Rail Transit were decked out in red and dozens of Xi's quotes to celebrate the 97th anniversary of Chinese Communist Party. The train was described as a "highly condensed spiritual manual" of Xi Jinping Thought by the local government.

[ 36 ] In January 2019, Alibaba Group released an app called Xuexi Qiangguo for studying Xi Jinping Thought.

[ 37 ] In May 2024, the China Cyberspace Research Institute , which is under the Cyberspace Administration of China , announced a large language model whose training data includes Xi Jinping Thought.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] In education [ edit ] On 25 October 2017, Renmin University established a Xi Jinping Thought research center, the first of its kind.

[ 3 ] : 29 By December 2017, 10 such research centers or institutes were approved and, by March 2018, all were in operation.

[ 3 ] : 29 Several dozen were opened by the end of 2018, and degree programs and online modules on Xi Jinping Thought were developed.

[ 3 ] : 29 On 20 July 2020, the China Institute of International Studies opened the Xi Jinping Thought on Diplomacy Studies Center .

[ 40 ] Academics such as Jiang Shigong went on to write expositions of Xi Jinping Thought.

[ 41 ] In December 2019, Fudan University added content concerning the inculcation of teachers and students in Xi Jinping Thought into its charter, leading to protests about academic freedom among the students.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] In mid-2021, the Ministry of Education announced that Xi Jinping Thought would be taught to Chinese students beginning at the primary school level as part of ideological and political education , and announced the Outline for the Study of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era textbook.

[ 44 ] In August 2023, the Introduction to Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era was added as a textbook for ideological and political education in colleges and universities.

[ 45 ] In June 2023, the Institute of China and Contemporary Asia (ICCA) at the Russian Academy of Sciences opened the Modern Ideology of China Research Laboratory, the first research center dedicated to Xi Jinping Thought outside China.

[ 46 ] The ICCA director Kirill Babaev said that the institute aimed to conduct an "in-depth analysis of the ideas and concepts that make up the foundation of the modern Chinese state" and said that the institute would focus on "five areas of modern Chinese ideology – economic policy, internal policy and lawmaking, foreign policy and international relations, defence and security, and ecology and society".

[ 46 ] References [ edit ] ^ Xiang, Bo, ed. (17 March 2018).

"Backgrounder: Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era" .

Xinhua News Agency . Archived from the original on 17 November 2022 . Retrieved 17 November 2022 .

^ Buckley, Chris (26 February 2018).

"Xi Jinping Thought Explained: A New Ideology for a New Era" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 31 October 2022 . Retrieved 16 November 2022 .

^ a b c d e f g h Tsang, Steve ; Cheung, Olivia (2024).

The Political Thought of Xi Jinping .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 9780197689363 .

^ "China's Netizens Push Back on 'Xi Thought' " .

Voice of America . Archived from the original on 1 August 2019 . Retrieved 1 August 2019 .

^ 江巍.

"Courseware on Xi thought launched" .

China Daily .

Archived from the original on 1 August 2019 . Retrieved 1 August 2019 .

^ Kuohsiang, Chen.

"With Xi-ism, is extreme power quietly taking shape in China?" .

ThinkChina . Retrieved 27 May 2024 .

^ Perlez, Jane (13 November 2017).

"Behind the Scenes, Communist Strategist Presses China's Rise" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 23 February 2020 . Retrieved 9 January 2020 .

^ "The meaning of the man behind China's ideology" .

The Economist .

ISSN 0013-0613 .

Archived from the original on 15 October 2019 . Retrieved 9 January 2020 .

^ a b "30 Years After Tiananmen: Memory in the Era of Xi Jinping" .

Journal of Democracy . Retrieved 11 December 2020 .

^ a b c d Greer, Tanner (31 May 2019).

"Xi Jinping in Translation: China's Guiding Ideology" .

Palladium Magazine . Retrieved 11 December 2020 .

^ Jinping, Xi (11 April 2022).

"Regarding the Construction of Socialism with Chinese Characteristics (2013)" .

Redsails.org . Archived from the original on 11 April 2022.

^ Roa, Carlos (4 June 2019).

"On the Anniversary of Tiananmen Square, What Is Xi Jinping Thinking?" .

The National Interest . Retrieved 13 December 2020 .

^ "Second volume of Xi's book on governance published" .

Xinhua News Agency . Archived from the original on 6 December 2017 . Retrieved 6 December 2017 .

^ "Xi Focus: Third volume of "Xi Jinping: The Governance of China" published" .

Xinhua . Archived from the original on 2 July 2020.

^ "Fourth volume of "Xi Jinping: The Governance of China" published-Xinhua" . 12 August 2022. Archived from the original on 12 August 2022 . Retrieved 18 June 2023 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ "China's Xi: Karl Marx a tool to 'win the future' " .

Deutsche Welle . 4 May 2018. Archived from the original on 2 June 2018.

^ "Xi Jinping in Translation: China's Guiding Ideology" . 31 May 2019 . Retrieved 19 January 2023 .

^ a b c Zhang, Ling (18 October 2017).

"CPC creates Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era" .

Xinhua . Archived from the original on 18 October 2017 . Retrieved 19 October 2017 .

^ Phillips, Tom (24 October 2017).

"Xi Jinping becomes most powerful leader since Mao with China's change to constitution" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 24 October 2017 . Retrieved 24 October 2017 .

^ "Xi presents new CPC central leadership, roadmap for next 5 years" .

Xinhua . 24 October 2017.

Archived from the original on 25 October 2017 . Retrieved 24 October 2017 .

^ "Xi Jinping asks party congress if anyone opposes...Xi Jinping" .

BBC News . Retrieved 28 October 2017 .

^ Buckley, Chris (25 October 2017).

"China Enshrines 'Xi Jinping Thought,' Elevating Leader to Mao-Like Status" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 6 May 2023 .

^ Wo-Lap Lam, Willy (23 March 2023).

"Xi Jinping Thought and The End of (Chinese) History" .

Jamestown Foundation . Retrieved 30 March 2023 .

^ "Full text of resolution on Party Constitution amendment" .

Xinhua News Agency . 22 October 2022. Archived from the original on 22 October 2022 . Retrieved 25 October 2022 .

^ Rudolf, Moritz (24 April 2023).

"Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era" .

El País . Retrieved 25 December 2023 .

^ a b Goh, Sui Noi (18 October 2017).

"19th Party Congress: Xi Jinping outlines new thought on socialism with Chinese traits" .

Straits Times .

Archived from the original on 26 October 2017 . Retrieved 28 October 2017 .

^ "His own words: The 14 principles of 'Xi Jinping Thought' " .

BBC Monitoring .

Archived from the original on 28 October 2017 . Retrieved 28 October 2017 .

^ a b "习近平新时代中国特色社会主义思想" [Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era].

www.12371.cn . Retrieved 6 February 2025 .

^ "Ten Definites" .

China Media Project . 12 April 2022 . Retrieved 25 December 2023 .

^ "Full Text: Xi's explanation of resolution on major achievements and historical experience of CPC over past century" .

Xinhua News Agency . 16 November 2021. Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 26 September 2024 .

^ Marquis, Christopher ; Qiao, Kunyuan (2022).

Mao and markets the communist roots of Chinese enterprise . New Haven: Yale University Press .

ISBN 978-0-300-26883-6 .

OCLC 1348572572 .

^ "China sends its top actors and directors back to socialism school" .

The Washington Post . 1 December 2017.

Archived from the original on 7 December 2017.

^ Hernández, Javier C. (28 January 2018).

"The Propaganda I See on My Morning Commute (Published 2018)" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 12 December 2020 .

^ Fewsmith, Joseph.

"Xi Jinping's Fast Start" (PDF) .

China Leadership Monitor .

41 .

Hoover Institute .

^ "Full text of Xi Jinping's report at 19th CPC National Congress" .

China Daily . Retrieved 12 December 2020 .

^ Gan, Nectar (3 July 2018).

"All aboard the propaganda express for Xi Jinping's 'New Era' " .

South China Morning Post .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2018 . Retrieved 3 July 2018 .

^ Linder, A. (14 February 2019).

"China's hottest app is all about making users study Xi Jinping Thought" .

shanghaiist .

Archived from the original on 12 November 2019 . Retrieved 25 July 2019 .

^ Zhuang, Sylvie (21 May 2024).

"China rolls out large language model based on Xi Jinping Thought" .

South China Morning Post . Retrieved 21 May 2024 .

^ "China's latest AI chatbot is trained on President Xi Jinping's political ideology" .

Associated Press . 24 May 2024 . Retrieved 28 May 2024 .

^ Bandurski, David (21 July 2020).

"New Xi Jinping Foreign Affairs Center Opens" .

China Media Project . Retrieved 26 July 2020 .

^ Backer, Larry Catá (June 2018).

"Reflections on Jiang Shigong on 'Philosophy and History: Interpreting the "Xi Jinping Era" through Xi's Report to the Nineteenth National Congress of the CCP' " (PDF) . Working Papers. Coalition for Peace and Ethics. pp.

1– 2.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 July 2019 . Retrieved 26 July 2019 .

^ "Students protest at Shanghai's Fudan University" .

Asia Times . 19 December 2019 . Retrieved 19 December 2019 .

A video circulating this week showed students at Shanghai's Fudan University singing the school song – which extols "academic independence and freedom of thought" – in an apparent protest.{...}Besides removing "freedom of thought," the ministry adds to the charter "arming the minds of teachers and students with Xi Jinping's new era of socialist ideology with Chinese characteristics." It also obliges faculty and students to adhere to "core socialist values" and build a "harmonious" campus environment – a code phrase for the elimination of anti-government sentiment.

^ "Fùdàn dàxué zhāngchéng shānchú sīxiǎng zìyóu xuéshēng chàng xiàogē kàngyì yāoqiú xuéshù dúlì [yǐng] fùdàn dàxué zhāngchéng shānchú sīxiǎng zìyóu xuéshēng chàng xiàogē kàngyì yāoqiú xuéshù dúlì [yǐng]" 復旦大學章程刪除思想自由 學生唱校歌抗議要求學術獨立[影] [Freedom of thought was deleted from Fudan University’s constitution, students sang the school song and protested for academic independence].

Central News Agency (in Chinese (Taiwan)). 18 December 2019.

Archived from the original on 18 December 2019 . Retrieved 19 December 2019 .

^ "China to add 'Xi Jinping Thought' to national curriculum" .

Reuters . 25 August 2021.

^ 中央人民政府.

"习近平新时代中国特色社会主义思想概论教材出版发行" .

Archived from the original on 28 October 2023 . Retrieved 28 August 2023 .

^ a b Liu, Zhen (2 July 2023).

"Russia opens research centre on Xi Jinping's ideology, the first outside China" .

South China Morning Post . Retrieved 3 July 2023 .

Further reading [ edit ] Hu, Angang; Yan, Yilong; Tang, Xiao; Liu, Shenglong (2021).

"2050 China: Becoming A Great Modern Socialist Country" .

Understanding Xi Jinping's Governance . Singapore: Springer.

doi : 10.1007/978-981-15-9833-3 .

ISBN 978-981-15-9832-6 .

ISSN 2662-7426 .

S2CID 230608867 .

External links [ edit ] The Ten Definites v t e Xi Jinping General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party President of China Chairman of the Central Military Commission Policies and theories General secretaryship paramount leader (2012–present) leadership core Li Qiang Government (2023–present) Xi Jinping–Li Keqiang Administration Li Keqiang Government (2013–2023) Li Keqiang Xi Jinping Thought Culture Diplomacy Ecological Civilization Economy Rule of Law Strengthening the Military Both sides of the Taiwan Strait are one family Clear waters and green mountains Chinese Dream Chinese-style modernization Common prosperity Decision on Comprehensively Deepening Reform Document Number Nine Double Eight Strategy Dual circulation Eight Musts Eight-point Regulation Five-in-one Four Comprehensives Four Confidences Four Consciousnesses Four Malfeasances Four Noes Great changes unseen in a century High-quality development Houses are for living, not for speculation New concept for development New normal New productive forces Party media takes the party's last name Public opinion struggle Roll up our sleeves and work hard Holistic national security The East is rising and the West is declining Historical resolution Sense of community for the Chinese nation Supply-side structural reform Xi's Five Points Telling China's stories well Two Cannot be Denied Two Centenaries Two Establishes Two Integrations Two Upholds Whole-process people's democracy Events First term 2012 election as Party general secretary Anti-corruption campaign Wang Qishan (2012–2017) Party's Mass Line Education and Practice Activities August 19 speech Coordinated Development of the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei Region Three Stricts and Three Honests World Internet Conference Deepening National Defense and Military Reform 709 crackdown Toilet Revolution in China 2015 China Victory Day Parade Ma–Xi meeting Xi–Chu Summit Battle against poverty Targeted Poverty Alleviation Two No Worries and Three Guarantees Symposium on News Reporting and Public Opinion Two Studies and One Action Copying the Party Constitution 2017 Hong Kong visit Second term 2017 reelection as Party general secretary Special Campaign to Crack Down on Organized Crime and Eliminate Evil Persecution of Uyghurs in China Xinjiang internment camps 2018 constitutional amendment Deepening the reform of the Party and state institutions China–United States trade war Strategy for Integrated Development of the Yangtze River Delta 2019–20 Hong Kong protests Conference on Dialogue of Asian Civilizations Remain true to our original aspiration and keep our mission firmly in mind 2019 China 70th National Day grand parade COVID-19 pandemic Response Education and Rectification of the Political and Legal Teams 2020 Inner Mongolia protests 70th Anniversary of Chinese People's Volunteers 100th Anniversary of the Chinese Communist Party 2020–2021 reform spree 2022 Winter Olympics 2022 Hong Kong visit Third term 2022 2nd reelection as Party general secretary 2022 COVID-19 protests in China Plan on reforming Party and state institutions 2025 Central Conference on Work Related to Neighboring Countries 2025 China Victory Day Parade Diplomacy Policies Belt and Road Initiative Forum Community of Common Destiny Global Development Initiative Global Security Initiative Global Civilization Initiative Major-country diplomacy New type of international relations Wolf warrior diplomacy China and the Russian invasion of Ukraine Meetings and trips 2013 Russia, Tanzania, South Africa, Congo visit 2015 Pakistan visit 2015 United States visit 2015 United Kingdom visit 2017 Vietnam and Laos visit CPC in Dialogue with World Political Parties High-level Meeting Kim–Xi meetings 2019 Italy and France visit CPC and World Political Parties Summit 2022 Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan visit 2022 China-Arab States Summit 2023 Russia visit China-Central Asia Summit 2023 Vietnam visit 2024 France, Serbia, Hungary visit 2024 Kazakhstan and Tajikistan visit 2024 Peru and Brazil visit 2025 Vietnam, Malaysia and Cambodia visit 2025 Russia visit Works General Secretary Xi Jinping important speech series The Governance of China The Hopes of President Xi I Am the Son of the Yellow Earth Zhijiang Xinyu Family Xi Zhongxun (father) Qi Xin (mother) Ke Lingling (1st wife) Peng Liyuan (2nd wife) Qi Qiaoqiao (sister) Xi Yuanping (brother) Xi Mingze (daughter) Related Amazing China Accelerator-in-Chief Awards Censorship of Winnie-the-Pooh Cult of personality Neoauthoritarianism General Secretary Xi Jinping's Kindness We Never Forget Introduction to Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era Liangjiahe New World New Zhijiang Army Open Letter asking Xi Jinping to Resign Outline for the Study of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era Panama Papers ( Deng Jiagui ) Rhyzodiastes xii Xi Jinping Boulevard Xi Jinping in Fuzhou Xuexi Qiangguo Category:Xi Jinping v t e Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal v t e Socialism History - Outline Schools of thought 21st century Agrarian Communist Democratic Ethical Feminist Green Guild Labourism Syndicalism Liberal Market Marxian Nationalist Reformist Revolutionary Scientific Social democracy Utopian Fourierism Icarianism Owenism Saint-Simonianism Technocracy Libertarian ( from below ) Anarchism Collectivist Communist Free-market Left-wing laissez-faire Green Individualist Insurrectionary Magonism Mutualism Neozapatismo Platformism Communalism Social Syndicalist Left-libertarianism Libertarian Marxism Left communism Council communism Luxemburgism Mao-Spontex Trotskyism Pabloism Posadism Orthodox Third camp Authoritarian ( from above ) Barracks Nechayevism Blanquism Bolshevism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Brezhnevism Castroism Ceaușism Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism Dengism Maoism–Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Prachanda Path Xi Jinping Thought Stalinism Neo-Stalinism National Tkachevism State Lassallism Religious Buddhist Christian anarchism communism Islamic Jewish Regional variants African African-Caribbean Arab Bolivarian Chinese Communist Nationalist Chiangist European Eurocommunism Indian Israeli Indonesian Melanesian Mexican Soviet In one country Real Sri Lankan Third World Yugoslav Key topics and issues Anti-revisionism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Critique of political economy Critique of work Class struggle Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Egalitarianism Equal liberty Equality of opportunity Equality of outcome History of anarchism History of communism History of socialism History of social democracy Impossibilism " The Internationale " Internationalism Socialist Internationals First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Socialist International Land reform Left-wing politics Mixed economy Mode of production Nanosocialism Nationalization Planned economy Post-capitalism Proletarian revolution Reformism Revisionism Socialisation of production Socialist economics Socialist market economy Socialist state State capitalism State-owned enterprise Trade union Welfare state Workers' council Concepts Adhocracy Basic income Calculation in kind Common ownership Cooperative ownership Decentralized planning Direct democracy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal opportunity Free association of producers Industrial democracy Labor-time calculation Labour voucher Organizational self-management Production for use Public ownership Social dividend Socialist mode of production Technocracy Workplace democracy People 16th c.

Tommaso Campanella Thomas More 18th c.

Gracchus Babeuf Louis Antoine de Saint-Just Victor d'Hupay Gabriel Bonnot de Mably Sylvain Maréchal Étienne-Gabriel Morelly 19th c.

Stephen Pearl Andrews Mikhail Bakunin John Goodwyn Barmby Enrico Barone August Bebel Edward Bellamy Eduard Bernstein Louis Blanc Louis Auguste Blanqui Philippe Buchez Georg Büchner Philippe Buonarroti Francisco Largo Caballero Étienne Cabet Edward Carpenter Nikolay Chernyshevsky James Connolly Victor Prosper Considerant Claire Démar Théodore Dézamy W. E. B. Du Bois Prosper Enfantin Friedrich Engels Charles Fourier Emma Goldman William Batchelder Greene Charles Hall Alexander Herzen Thomas Hodgskin Jean Jaurès Mother Jones Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Paul Lafargue Ferdinand Lassalle Pyotr Lavrov Alexandre Ledru-Rollin Pierre Leroux Helen Macfarlane Errico Malatesta Karl Marx Louise Michel Nikolay Mikhaylovsky William Morris Robert Owen Antonie Pannekoek Giovanni Pascoli Constantin Pecqueur Georgi Plekhanov Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Luis Emilio Recabarren Henri de Saint-Simon Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin George Sand Friedrich Wilhelm Schulz Eugène Sue Lysander Spooner Fred M. Taylor William Thompson Pyotr Tkachev Benjamin Tucker Suzanne Voilquin Alfred Russel Wallace Josiah Warren Wilhelm Weitling Oscar Wilde 20th c.

Tariq Ali Salvador Allende Inejirō Asanuma Hafez al-Assad Clement Attlee Aung San Deng Xiaoping Jiang Zemin Henri Barbusse Jyoti Basu Simone de Beauvoir Walter Benjamin Tony Benn Léon Blum Grace Lee Boggs Murray Bookchin Bertolt Brecht Aristide Briand Nikolai Bukharin Cornelius Castoriadis Noam Chomsky M. N. Roy G. D. H. Cole Jeremy Corbyn Marcel Déat Guy Debord Eugene V. Debs John Dewey Alexander Dubček Albert Einstein Faiz Ahmad Faiz Muammar Gaddafi Einar Gerhardsen Mikhail Gorbachev Maxim Gorky Antonio Gramsci Safdar Hashmi Eric Hobsbawm Saddam Hussein Dolores Ibárruri Pablo Iglesias Posse Jayaprakash Narayan Russell Jacoby Kim Jong-il Kim Il Sung Martin Luther King Jr.

Alexandra Kollontai James Larkin E. M. S. Namboodiripad Jack Layton Henri Lefebvre Claude Lefort Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Rosa Luxemburg Lu Xun Alasdair MacIntyre Nestor Makhno Nelson Mandela José Carlos Mariátegui Adrien Marquet Mao Dun Salama Moussa François Mitterrand Imre Nagy Gamal Abdel Nasser Jawaharlal Nehru Ernst Niekisch Ne Win George Orwell Sylvia Pankhurst Fred Paterson Karl Polanyi Pierre Renaudel B. T. Ranadive Bertrand Russell Gaetano Salvemini Bernie Sanders Jean-Paul Sartre Arthur Scargill Léopold Sédar Senghor George Bernard Shaw Sukarno Sun Yat-sen R. H. Tawney E. P. Thompson Ernst Toller Leon Trotsky Ram Manohar Lohia H. G. Wells Cornel West Clara Zetkin Howard Zinn J. Posadas 21st c.

Pedro Castillo Hugo Chávez Bob Crow Hu Jintao Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu Kim Jong Un Hasan Piker Lula da Silva Evo Morales Yanis Varoufakis Xi Jinping Vaush Organizations International socialist organizations Socialist parties See also Economic calculation problem Marxist philosophy New Left Old Left Socialism by country Socialist calculation debate Categories Socialism WikiProject Socialism portal Communism portal Organized Labour portal v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Chinese philosophy Schools Agriculturalism Buddhism Confucianism Han learning Neo-Confucianism New Confucianism Huang–Lao Legalism Mohism Marxism School of Diplomacy School of Names Naturalism Taoism Daoxue Xuanxue Yangism Mixed School Nine Schools of Thought Hundred Schools of Thought Philosophers Eastern Zhou Bu Shang Chunyu Kun Confucius Deng Xi Duanmu Ci Gaozi Gongsun Long Guan Zhong Han Fei Hui Shi Laozi Li Kui Li Si Lie Yukou Mencius Mozi Shang Yang Shen Buhai Shen Dao Su Qin Sun Tzu Wu Qi Ximen Bao Xu Xing Xunzi Yang Zhu Yuan Xian Zhang Yi Zhuang Zhou Zichan Zisi Zou Yan Qin Han Ban Zhao Dong Zhongshu Dongfang Shuo Dou Wu Huan Tan Jia Yi Jia Kui Jing Fang Kong Anguo Liu An Lu Jia Liu Xiang Ma Rong Wang Chong Wang Fu Xun Yue Yang Xiong Three Kingdoms Jin Northern and Southern Bao Jingyan Fan Zhen Fan Ye Ge Hong Guo Xiang Fu Xuan He Yan Huiyuan Ji Kang Sengzhao Wang Su Wang Bi Xiahou Xuan Xie Daoyun Xun Can Yan Zhitui Zhi Dun Sui Tang Fu Yi Jizang Wang Tong Zhang Zhihe Han Yu Li Ao Liu Yuxi Liu Zongyuan Linji Yixuan Five Dynasties Ten Kingdoms Song Cheng Hao Cheng Yi Fan Zhongyan Hu Hong Lu Jiuyuan Shao Yong Shen Kuo Su Song Wang Anshi Wang Chongyang Wang Chuyi Ye Shi Zhang Zai Zhou Dunyi Zhu Xi Yuan Ming Chen Jiru Huang Zongxi Hong Zicheng Jiao Hong Jiao Yu Lai Zhide Li Zhi Liu Bowen Liu Zongzhou Luo Rufang Qian Dehong Wang Ji Wang Gen Wang Yangming Wu Cheng Xu Ai Zhan Ruoshui Qing Chen Hongmou Chen Menglei Dai Zhen Fang Bao Fang Lanfen Fang Quan Feng Guifen Gong Zizhen Gu Yanwu Hong Liangji Ji Yun Ma Qixi Lin Zexu Liu Yiming Pan Pingge Tan Sitong Tang Zhen Wang Fuzhi Wei Yuan Yan Yuan Yu Yue Yu Zhengxie Zhang Xuecheng Zhuang Cunyu Zeng Guofan 20th century Cai Yuanpei Carsun Chang P. C. Chang Chen Daqi Chen Duxiu Chung-ying Cheng Ch'ien Mu Chu Anping Fang Keli Feng Youlan Gan Yang Gu Su Gu Zhun He Guanghu Hu Qiaomu Hu Shih Hua Gang Ray Huang Jiang Qing Jin Yuelin Kang Youwei Lee Shui-chuen Li Shicen Li Zehou Liang Qichao Liang Shuming Lin Yutang Liu Xiaofeng Lu Xun Mao Zedong Mou Zongsan Qiu Renzong Sun Yat-sen Tang Chun-i Tang Yijie Tsang Lap Chuen Xiong Shili Xu Fuguan Yang Changji Yin Haiguang Yu Dunkang Zhang Dongsun Zhang Shenfu Zhou Guoping Zhou Zuoren Concepts Tao De Fa Jian'ai Jing Jing zuo Li Confucianism Neo-Confucianism Ming yun Qi Qing Ren Three teachings Shen Si Ti Tian Mandate of Heaven Wu wei Filial piety Xin Human nature Self-cultivation Yi Yin and yang Yong Zhengming Ziran Topics Logic Theology Metaphysics Politics Ethics Role ethics State consequentialism Ink wash Shan shui Society Epistemology Metaphilosophy Legitimacy Portals : China Politics Communism Socialism Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Xi_Jinping_Thought&oldid=1303871841 " Categories : Xi Jinping Thought Xi Jinping Socialism with Chinese characteristics Ideology of the Chinese Communist Party Culture of the People's Republic of China 2010s establishments in China 2010s in China Eponymous political ideologies Contemporary Chinese philosophy Political history of China Types of socialism State ideologies Marxism–Leninism Chinese nationalism 21st century in philosophy Wang Huning Hidden categories: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown CS1 uses Chinese-language script (zh) CS1 Chinese (Taiwan)-language sources (zh-tw) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2017 Use British English from October 2017 Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing simplified Chinese-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 15:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Xi Jinping Thought 25 languages Add topic

