Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Early years 1.2 Deregulation of talk radio 1.3 The rise of conservative talk radio 2 Audience and advertising 3 Controversy Toggle Controversy subsection 3.1 "Push-and-pull" effect 3.2 Rush Limbaugh–Sandra Fluke controversy 4 Internet broadcasting 5 Future 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Conservative talk radio Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Talk radio format This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Conservative talk radio" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Conservative talk radio is a talk radio format in the United States and other countries devoted to expressing conservative viewpoints of issues, as opposed to progressive talk radio . The definition of conservative talk is generally broad enough that libertarian talk show hosts are also included in the definition. The format has become the dominant form of talk radio in the United States since the 1987 abolition of the fairness doctrine .

[ 1 ] In the United States, the format has included personalities such as Rush Limbaugh , Mark Levin , Glenn Beck , Ben Shapiro , Sean Hannity , Charlie Kirk , Michael Savage , Larry Elder , Dennis Prager , Jim Quinn , Lars Larson , Joe Pags , Bill O'Reilly , Laura Ingraham , Michael Medved , Oliver North , Dan Bongino , Ken Matthews , and Jerry Doyle .

History [ edit ] Early years [ edit ] Notable early conservatives in talk radio ranged from commentators such as Paul Harvey and Fulton Lewis (later succeeded by Lewis's son, Fulton Lewis III ) to long-form shows hosted by Clarence Manion , Bob Grant , Alan Burke , Barry Farber and Joe Pyne . Because of the Fairness Doctrine , a Federal Communications Commission (FCC) policy requiring controversial viewpoints to be balanced by opposing opinions on air, conservative talk did not have the dominance it gained in later years, and liberal hosts were as common on radio as conservative ones. Furthermore, the threat of the Fairness Doctrine discouraged many radio stations from hiring controversial hosts.

By the 1980s, AM radio was in severe decline.

Top 40 radio had already migrated to the higher fidelity of FM , and the few remaining AM formats, particularly country music , were headed in the same direction or, in the case of formats such as MOR , falling out of favor entirely. Talk radio, not needing the high fidelity required for music, became an attractive format for AM radio station operators. However, in order to capitalize on this, operators needed compelling content.

Deregulation of talk radio [ edit ] Conservative talk radio did not experience its significant growth until 1987, when the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) voted to abolish the Fairness Doctrine . The Fairness Doctrine had previously required radio stations to present contrasting views. Subsequent to the FCC's decision to stop using the rule, radio stations could then choose to be either solely conservative or solely liberal.

[ 2 ] Another form of deregulation from the American government came from the Telecommunications Act of 1996 , which allowed companies to own more radio stations and for some shows to become nationally syndicated . Before the deregulation, radio stations were predominantly owned by local community leaders.

[ 2 ] In 1999, following the passage of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, more than 25% of US Radio stations had been sold, with many more being sold each day. As of 2011, Clear Channel Communications (now iHeartMedia ), an industry giant owns over 800 radio stations across the United States, and its largest contract is with Rush Limbaugh , worth $400 million over a span of 8 years.

[ 3 ] Clear Channel Communications rose to become a major figure in talk radio in the United States; although it only owned one major " flagship " caliber radio station ( KFI Los Angeles), Clear Channel owned a large number of key AM stations in other large markets, allowing it to establish a national presence.

[ 3 ] Thus, the deregulation from the abolishment of the Fairness Doctrine and the institution of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 have assisted conservative talk radio as a whole gain popularity throughout the United States.

The rise of conservative talk radio [ edit ] Paul Harvey receiving the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2005 Michael Medved , originally a film critic, joined the early wave of conservative talk hosts in the 1990s.

Sean Hannity was part of the early 2000s wave of new national conservative talkers.

Within the next decade, conservative talk radio became the dominant form of commercial talk radio in the United States; those stations that had homogenized to an all-conservative format soon came to garner more listeners than those that followed the older full-service model (at the time, progressive talk radio did not have enough hosts for a station to field an all-liberal lineup, despite the efforts of populist Chuck Harder ). By 1991, Limbaugh had become the number one most syndicated radio host and AM radio had been revived.

With multiple large-market stations now owned by a small number of companies, syndicated programs could be disseminated more easily than before. During the late 1990s, political talk radio (other than Limbaugh) was still only a portion of the talk radio environment; other subgenres such as lifestyle talk ( Laura Schlessinger ), truck talk ( Bill Mack , Dale Sommers ) or paranormal talk ( Art Bell 's Coast to Coast AM ) and general interest political interviews and talk ( Jim Bohannon , Joey Reynolds ) generally made up AM talk stations’ lineups.

The September 11 attacks brought on a wave of nationalism and a desire to rally around the United States and its government, which was led at the time by the Republican Party . This environment led to a large increase in national conservative talk radio hosts: The Glenn Beck Program , The Sean Hannity Show , The Laura Ingraham Show , Batchelor and Alexander (which follows a news magazine format) and The Radio Factor all launched into national syndication at this time; The Savage Nation , which had launched nationwide a year prior, saw a large increase in syndication around this time as well.

The success of conservative talk radio led to imitation attempts with progressive talk radio in the mid-2000s, led by the launch of Air America Radio . However, Air America suffered from weaker stations and inexperienced management and ceased operations in 2010. By the end of the decade, the format was near extinction. Even longtime noncommercial progressive talk outlet Pacifica found itself in serious financial difficulties, being forced to end local operations of its New York outlet WBAI in 2019 (then forced to resume them after the station's workers revolted).

Audience and advertising [ edit ] Listeners of conservative talk radio in the United States have predominantly been white and religious Americans as they are more prone to being ideological conservatives.

[ 4 ] Furthermore, men were more likely to be listeners of conservative talk radio than women. Recent Arbitron polls have shown that the vast majority of conservative talk radio station listeners are males over the age of 54, with less than 10 percent of the listener base aged 35 to 54. It is also shown that less than one tenth of one percent of conservative talk radio listeners participate (or call in) to the hosts to make comments.

[ 5 ] This specific knowledge of the audience assists advertisers in their goal to attract potential customers, and the stations found that listeners of conservative talk radio are more involved and responsive in AM radio in comparison to music listeners of FM radio.

[ 2 ] Talk radio programs allow for a more personal approach to their shows, which helped contribute to the rise of revenue and popularity of conservative talk radio stations: [ 2 ] "Glenn Beck's relationship with Goldline International is illustrative. When he tells listeners to his radio program that these perilous times make gold an attractive investment, it helps Goldline's potential investors overcome concerns about the wisdom of moving into a market they likely have little understanding of. If Glenn Beck says gold is a good investment, many in Beck's audience are going to feel that he is giving trustworthy advice. Because the host is already talking, the segue into or out of a commercial can be relatively seamless." [ 2 ] Thus, advertisers have found that AM listeners have more trust in the radio personality and use that to their advantage.

Controversy [ edit ] "Push-and-pull" effect [ edit ] Talk radio, has been described as indulging in "edgier" content than network TV conservative political programs on Fox News , etc., which have a broader audience that includes non-right-wing viewers. Radio hosts' remarks on "race, immigration and other subjects" can be more extreme, listeners who call in are more likely "to say what they really think", which gives "the shows a renegade feel and keep listeners loyal and emotionally invested".

[ 6 ] But the advertisers—on which the hosts depend for their "multimillion-dollar paychecks"—can be subject to boycott campaigns when word gets out on beyond the right-wing community about what the hosts and callers have said. Consequently, the host often engage in "push-and-pull" — stoking "listeners' anger" to build ratings, but then pulling back and "disavowing the more extreme views voiced by callers" to avoid a backlash from moderate and liberal public.

[ 6 ] Prior to the January 6, 2021 storming of the United States Capitol , radio hosts were prone to making statements such as the following: "It is time to rip and claw and rake, It is time to go to war, as the left went to war four years ago." ( Glenn Beck , January 4, 2021) [ 6 ] Since stealing elections "is becoming the norm for the Democrat Party " conservatives need to "crush them, crush them. We need to kick their ass."( Mark Levin ) [ 6 ] "I will never surrender and collapse and act as if it's OK when hundreds of thousands have voted illegally." (Bill Cunningham, a syndicated host in Cincinnati, January 4) [ 6 ] "There's no doubt this [the 2020 presidential election] was stolen. No doubt whatsoever." ( Sean Hannity , December 18, 2020): Joe Biden "didn't win this thing [the 2020 United States presidential election ] fair and square, and we are not going to be docile like we've been in the past, and go away and wait till the next election." ( Rush Limbaugh , December 16, 2020) [ 6 ] But later in his December 16 show, Limbaugh said that he had "mixed emotions" about the January 6 march on Washington. In a December 9, 2020 show, Limbaugh declared, "I actually think that we're trending toward secession", and the next day said, "I am not advocating it [secession], have not advocated it, never have advocated it, and probably wouldn't".

[ 6 ] When a caller to Sean Hannity's January 5 show referred to the Democratic governor of Michigan Gretchen Whitmer as "Governor Hitler", Hannity responded, "easy, now. When you make those references, everyone says, 'Hannity allowed someone to make a Nazi comparison!'" [ 6 ] Rush Limbaugh–Sandra Fluke controversy [ edit ] One boycott campaign was instigated during the Rush Limbaugh–Sandra Fluke controversy that spanned from February to March 2012, in which Rush Limbaugh made comments against a Georgetown University Law student, Sandra Fluke, who had been active advocating for including birth control in government-mandated health insurance even when the payer was a Catholic institution. Limbaugh called her a "slut" and "prostitute" under the logic that demanding birth control coverage was the equivalent of demanding "that she ... be paid to have sex", [ 7 ] and that in return for insurance coverage, Fluke should be required to "post the videos" of her having sex online.

[ 8 ] So, Ms. Fluke and the rest of you feminazis, here's the deal. If we are going to pay for your contraceptives, and thus pay for you to have sex, we want something for it, and I'll tell you what it is. We want you to post the videos online so we can all watch.

[ 8 ] Limbaugh continued to dwell on Fluke and her alleged sex life the next day with him saying things like if his daughter had testified that "she's having so much sex she can't pay for it and wants a new welfare program to pay for it", he would be "embarrassed" and "disconnect the phone", "go into hiding", and "hope the media didn't find me".

[ 8 ] In response to Limbaugh's remarks Fluke accused him of attempting to silence her. Several online and social media campaigns were created such as a Flush Rush group [ 9 ] on Facebook and the Stop Rush database.

[ 10 ] As a result, by March 3, over a dozen advertisers [ 11 ] [ 12 ] had discontinued their sponsorship.

[ 13 ] On that day, Limbaugh made a public apology on his show, stating that "... My choice of words was not the best, and in the attempt to be humorous, I created a national stir. I sincerely apologize to Ms. Fluke for the insulting word choices." Fluke replied that she didn't think his apology under boycott pressure changed anything. In response to these events, 12 sponsors withdrew their support of Limbaugh's show.

[ 14 ] Sean Hannity and Michael Savage Sean Hannity and Michael Savage, two nationally syndicated hosts, began a feud that began in January 2014. The conflict started when Savage decided to move the live broadcast of his show, The Savage Nation , from his original 6-9 p.m. ET timeslot (which is timed to mid-afternoon in the Pacific Time Zone ; Savage originates his program from San Francisco , and it was formerly an afternoon drive show for that market) to 3–6 p.m. ET, directly challenging the New York-based Hannity on the East Coast after Cumulus Media dropped Hannity's show from their stations in major markets and picked up Savage from the Talk Radio Network to be syndicated by their Westwood One division.

[ 15 ] Internet broadcasting [ edit ] A few conservative talk radio hosts also syndicate their shows on the internet. In 2011, Glenn Beck started his own television channel initially through Viacom networks. However, as of 2014 Suddenlink Communications is the outlet for the channel. TheBlaze, which also has an internet-radio component on their website employs Beck and many other hosts on their shows.

[ 16 ] The radio channel, TheBlaze Radio Network broadcasts on the internet as well as on satellite radio, Sirius XM. Rush Limbaugh's radio show is also streamed on the internet through iHeartRadio, which ClearChannel Communications owns as well.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Future [ edit ] Dennis Miller , with no prior radio broadcasting experience, hosted a national conservative talk show from 2007 to 2015.

There has been a relative dearth of new radio hosts launched into national syndication since the late 2000s, in part due to personnel declines at local talk stations; most new national hosts have jumped to talk radio from other media (examples include Dennis Miller , a stand-up comic; Fred Thompson , Herman Cain and Mike Huckabee , all former Republican presidential candidates; the late Jerry Doyle , an actor; and Erick Erickson , a professional blogger). This has also opened up opportunities for less orthodox hosts than were common in the 1990s and 2000s; civil libertarian/nationalist Alex Jones , who spent most of the 2000s as a radio host heard primarily on shortwave, began securing syndication deals with mainstream conservative-talk radio stations during the presidency of Barack Obama .

The genre had also lost ground in listenership. By 2014, Limbaugh had been moved to less-listened-to stations in a number of major markets including New York, Los Angeles and Boston, and was no longer the most-listened-to radio host in the United States. In that position for over a decade, by this point classic hits disc jockey Tom Kent had surpassed Limbaugh estimating he had nearly 10 million more listeners across his numerous programs; though unlike Limbaugh, Kent hosts multiple shows, tallying at least 50 hours a week on air, spanning numerous formats from classic hits to top-40 radio , as opposed to Limbaugh's singular three-hour daily program.

[ 19 ] NPR 's drive time programs, Morning Edition and All Things Considered , surpassed Limbaugh in 2016.

[ 20 ] Conservative talk shows on terrestrial radio also faced growing competition from digital outlets, such as satellite radio and podcasts (such as The Joe Rogan Experience ), with Nielsen Audio also reporting declining listenership in talk radio in general among young adults.

[ 21 ] Limbaugh died in February 2021 following a one-year bout with lung cancer; after a run of curated reruns with guest hosts, the show's distributor Premiere Networks introduced The Clay Travis and Buck Sexton Show as a successor in its time slot, which is hosted by sports radio personality Clay Travis and conservative pundit Buck Sexton .

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] See also [ edit ] Media bias in the United States References [ edit ] ^ "Radio" .

faculty.washington.edu .

^ a b c d e Berry, Jeffrey; Sobieraj, Sarah (October 20, 2011).

"Understanding the Rise of Talk Radio" .

PS, Political Science and Politics .

44 (4): 762– 67.

doi : 10.1017/s1049096511001223 .

S2CID 154332167 .

^ a b McBride, Sarah (July 4, 2008).

"Clear Channel, Limbaugh Ink $400 Million New Contract" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved November 18, 2014 .

^ Wicks, Robert; Wicks, Jan; Marimoto, Shauna (October 17, 2013). "Partisan Media Selective Exposure During the 2012 Presidential Election".

American Behavioral Scientist .

58 (9): 1131– 43.

doi : 10.1177/0002764213506208 .

S2CID 143285701 .

^ "Public Radio Today" (PDF) . Arbitron. 2012 . Retrieved November 18, 2014 .

^ a b c d e f g h Robertson, Katie; Grynbaum, Michael M.; Hsu, Tiffany; Collins, Keith (February 10, 2021).

"How Right-Wing Radio Stoked Anger Before the Capitol Siege" .

The New York Times . New York Times . Retrieved February 18, 2021 .

^ The Week Staff (March 9, 2012).

"Rush Limbaugh vs. Sandra Fluke: A timeline" .

The Week . Retrieved November 18, 2014 .

^ a b c "UPDATED: Limbaugh's Misogynistic Attack On Georgetown Law Student Continues With Increased Vitriol" . Media Matters for America.

Archived from the original on March 4, 2012 . Retrieved March 5, 2012 .

^ Arceneaux, Danielle (March 16, 2012).

"What Brands Can Learn From The 'Flush Rush' Movement" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on March 6, 2014 . Retrieved December 5, 2013 .

^ Stelter, Brian (March 2, 2012).

"Attack by Limbaugh Awakens a 'Stop Rush' Campaign" .

New York Times .

Archived from the original on February 16, 2015 . Retrieved December 5, 2013 .

^ Mirkinson, Jack (March 2, 2012).

"Rush Limbaugh Advertisers Pull Commercials in Wake of Sandra Fluke 'Slut' Firestorm" .

The Huffington Post .

Archived from the original on March 2, 2012 . Retrieved March 3, 2012 .

^ David Taintor (March 2, 2012).

"Limbaugh Loses Advertisers After Calling Woman A 'Slut' " . Tpmdc.talkingpointsmemo.com.

Archived from the original on April 10, 2012 . Retrieved April 3, 2012 .

^ Camia, Catalina (March 5, 2012).

"Limbaugh: Apology to student was 'heartfelt' " .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on March 5, 2012 . Retrieved March 5, 2012 .

^ "Rush Limbaugh Continues To Apologize As Advertiser Boycott Rises To 12" .

All Access Music Group . March 5, 2012 . Retrieved November 18, 2012 .

^ Weiniger, Mackenzie (January 24, 2014).

"Savage, Hannity dial up radio feud" .

POLITICO .

^ Steinberg, Brian (October 1, 2014).

"Suddenlink Launches Glenn Beck's TheBlaze After Removing Viacom Outlets" .

Variety . Retrieved December 15, 2014 .

^ McDuling, John (April 4, 2014).

"The remarkable resilience of old-fashioned radio in the US" .

Quartz . Retrieved December 15, 2014 .

^ Sisario, Ben (September 16, 2014).

"Clear Channel Renames Itself iHeartMedia in Nod to Digital" .

The New York Times . Retrieved December 15, 2014 .

^ Tom Kent Radio Network history Archived July 21, 2015, at the Wayback Machine "TKRN reaches 400 station affiliate mark with over 23 million weekly listeners!" This figure encompasses all of Kent's various programs.

^ "NPR Reaches 99 Million People Monthly, GenXers And Millennials Drive Growth" .

NPR . October 25, 2017.

^ "Rush Limbaugh is ailing. And so is the conservative talk-radio industry" .

Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved November 21, 2022 .

^ Steele, Anne (May 27, 2021).

"Rush Limbaugh's Radio Show to Be Taken Over by Clay Travis and Buck Sexton" .

Wall Street Journal .

ISSN 0099-9660 . Retrieved May 27, 2021 .

^ Graham, Jennifer (June 25, 2021).

"Clay and Buck took over for Rush Limbaugh this week. Here's how it went" .

Deseret News . Retrieved August 8, 2021 .

Further reading [ edit ] Matzko, Paul (2020).

The Radio Right: How a Band of Broadcasters Took on the Federal Government and Built the Modern Conservative Movement . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-007322-0 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Conservative talk radio at Wikimedia Commons v t e Journalism Newsroom Journalist ( Staff writer · Correspondent · Photojournalist · News presenter ) Columnist Editors ( Editor-in-chief · Managing editor · Political editor · Editorial board · Assignment editor · Duty editor · Public editor · Editor-at-large · Contributing editor ) Weather presenter News bureau News director Pundit Stringer Profession News Article ( Headline · Byline · Dateline · Report · Special report · Exclusive · Interview · Column · Opinion piece · Editorial · Op-ed ) Writing style ( Five Ws · Inverted pyramid ) Ethics and standards Chequebook Churnalism Codes of ethics Culture Editing ( Copy editing · Corrections · Fact-checking · Spiking ) Fake news ( Websites ) Horse race Journalese Media bias ( False balance ) News values ( Above the fold · Man bites dog ) Objectivity Pink-slime Scandals Sensationalism Sources Tabloid ( Television ) Yellow Beats Arts Business Data Entertainment Environment Fashion Local Medicine Music Politics Science Sports Technology Traffic Video games War Weather World Genres Adversarial Advocacy ( Interventionism ) Analytic Civic Collaborative Comics-based Community Database Enterprise Explanatory Feature story Gonzo Human-interest Immersion Infotainment / Soft media Interpretive Investigative Long-form Narrative New Journalism Opinion Peace Sensor Underground Visual Watchdog Social impact Blogging Citizen Decline of newspapers ( News desert ) Fourth Estate Fifth Estate Editorial independence ( Independent · State ) Freedom of information Freedom of the press ( Defamation · Safety ) Journalism school Media manipulation News propaganda ( Model ) Public relations ( Media relations · News embargo · Press release ) Press conference ( Media scrum · Press gallery · Press line · Press pass · Press pool ) Public service Source protection News media Newspapers ( Newspaper of record · Middle-market · Newspaper formats · Broadsheet · Tabloid · Online · Extra edition ) Magazines Broadcast ( TV and radio ) Digital Multimedia ( Video ) Documentary film News agencies Alternative media Nonprofit List of journalism articles – Outline Portals : Conservatism Current events Journalism Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Conservative_talk_radio&oldid=1295967840 " Categories : Conservative talk radio Radio formats Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from September 2021 Articles needing additional references from September 2021 All articles needing additional references Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 17 June 2025, at 00:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Conservative talk radio Add languages Add topic

