Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Gnosticism and magic texts 2 Interpretation of New Testament usage Toggle Interpretation of New Testament usage subsection 2.1 Begetting 2.2 Uniqueness 2.3 Textual issues in John 1:18 3 References Toggle the table of contents Monogenēs 1 language 한국어 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Biblical term of Greek origin Not to be confused with Monogenic (genetics) or Monogenic system .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia .

See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions.

( January 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs to be updated . The reason given is: The article should incorporate recent scholarship that reanalyzes μονογενής as a compound of mónos and genḗs (cf.

wikt:μονογενής ).

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( July 2025 ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( July 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Monogenes (μονογενής) has two primary definitions, "pertaining to being the only one of its kind within a specific relationship" and "pertaining to being the only one of its kind or class, unique in kind".

[ 1 ] Its Greek meaning is often applied to mean "one of a kind, one and only".

[ 2 ] Monogenēs may be used as an adjective .  For example, monogenēs pais means only child, only legitimate child or special child.

[ 3 ] Monogenēs may also be used on its own as a noun .  For example, o monogenēs means "the only one", or "the only legitimate child".

[ 4 ] The word is used in Hebrews 11:17–19 to describe Isaac , the son of Abraham . However, Isaac was not the only-begotten son of Abraham, but was the chosen, having special virtue.

[ 5 ] Thus, Isaac was "the only legitimate child" of Abraham. That is, Isaac was the only son of Abraham that God acknowledged as the legitimate son of the covenant. It does not mean that Isaac was not literally "begotten" of Abraham, for he indeed was, but that he alone was acknowledged as the son that God had promised.

The term is notable outside normal Greek usage in two special areas: in the cosmology of Plato and in the Gospel of John . As concerns the use by Plato there is broad academic consensus, generally following the understanding of the philosopher Proclus (412–485 AD).

Some interpretations of the word "unique" attempt to preclude birth, yet the full Greek meaning is always in the context of a child (genes). A unique child is also a born child, hence the full meaning of the word "begotten" as found in John 3:16 (KJV) , for example. In applying this to Christ's begottenness, He is unique (virgin birth, for example), but also still the Son of God by birth.

Gnosticism and magic texts [ edit ] Platonic usage also impacted Christian usage, for example in Gnosticism . In Tertullian's Against the Valentinians , he gives the name to one of their thirty aeons as monogenes in a syzygy with makaria , Blessedness.

[ 6 ] Friedrich Preisigke 's Sammelbuch (1922) 4324,15 contains a 3rdC. AD magic invocation by an Egyptian girl called Capitolina placing a papyrus in a box to invoke various gods, pagan, Jewish and Christian, including "Iao Sabaoth Barbare..., God in Heaven, the Only-Begotten" to help her cast a love potion on a young man called Nilos: "I summon you divinities by the bitter necessities that bind you and by those carried away by the wind IO IOE PHTHOUTH EIO PHRE. The Greatest Divinity YAH SABAOTH BARBARE THIOTH LAILAMPS OSORNOPHRI EMPHERA, to God in the heavens, the only-begotten (ho Monogenes) who shakes the depths, sending out the waves and the wind. Thrust forth the spirits of these divinities wherever the box... " [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Similar content is found in: Karl Preisendanz Greek Magical Papyri (1973) Vol.1 p124.

[ 9 ] R. Wunsch Antike Fluchtafeln (Ancient Curse Tablets, 1912) 4,36.

[ 10 ] The problem with magical inscriptions on papyri, walls or ostraca is firstly, dating the source, and secondly, that magical spells by nature tend to be syncretic . In the example provided above, lovestruck Capitolina summons "all the divinities" to release the spirits of "all who drowned in the Nile, the unmarried dead", et cetera to sway the heart of her young man, and, yet she may not have known enough about Judaism or Christianity, or even Gnostic Christianity, to know whether "YAHWEH SABAOTH" and "the Only-Begotten" were the same god or not.

Interpretation of New Testament usage [ edit ] Some aspects of the meaning, or range of meanings, of monogenēs in the New Testament are disputed. Lexicons of the New Testament both reflect and determine debate: Bauer BDAG [ 11 ] Kittel TDNT [ 12 ] Balz EDNT [ 13 ] Friberg ALGNT [ 14 ] Begetting [ edit ] The entrance of "only begotten" into the English Bible was not directly from mono-genes but from the Latin of the Vulgate, which had uni-genitus (one-begotten): [ 15 ] John 3:16 sic enim dilexit Deus mundum ut Filium suum unigenitum daret ut omnis qui credit in eum non pereat sed habeat vitam aeternam.

(Latin Vulgate ) John 3:16 God lufede middan-eard swa þæt he sealde hys akennedan sune þæt nan ne for-wurðe þe on hine ge-lefð. Ac habbe þt eche lyf.

( Hatton Gospels c.1160 AD) John 3:16 For God lovede so the world, that he yaf his oon bigetun sone, that each man that bileveth in him perishe not, but have everlastynge lijf.

( Wycliffe's Bible 1395 AD) The meaning of monogenēs was part of early Christian christological controversy regarding the Trinity . It is claimed that Arian arguments that used texts that refer to Christ as God's "only begotten Son" are based on a misunderstanding of the Greek word monogenēs [ 16 ] and that the Greek word does not mean "begotten" in the sense we beget children but means "having no peer, unique".

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Alternatively in favour that the word monogenēs does carry some meaning related to begetting is the etymological origin mono- (only) + -genes (born, begotten).

[ 19 ] The question is whether the etymological origin was still "live" as part of the meaning when the New Testament was written, or whether semantic shift has occurred. Limiting the semantic change of monogenes is that the normal word monos is still the default word in New Testament times, and that the terms co-exist in Greek, Latin and English: Greek monos → Latin unicus → English "only" Greek monogenes → Latin unigenitus → English "only-begotten" Also there is a question about how separate from the idea of -genes birth and begetting the cited uses of monogenes in the sense of "unique" truly are. For example, the ending -genes is arguably not redundant even in the sense of "only" as per when Clement of Rome (96 AD), and later Origen , Cyril and others, employ monogenes to describe the rebirth of the phoenix . At issue is whether Clement is merely stressing monos unique, or using monogenes to indicate unique in its method of rebirth, or possibly that there is only one single bird born and reborn. Likewise in Plato's Timaeus, the "only-begotten and created Heaven", is still unique in how it is begotten, in comparison to the begetting of animals and men, just as Earth and Heaven give birth to Ocean and Tethys. Of the Liddell Scott references for "unique" ( monogenes being used purely as monos ) that leaves only Parmenides, which (as above) is no longer considered a likely reading of the Greek text.

Additionally the New Testament frame of reference for monogenes is established by uses of the main verb "beget", and readings of complementary verses, for example: Heb. 1:5 "For unto which of the angels said he at any time, "Thou art my Son ( uios mou ei su ), this day have I begotten thee ( ego semeron gegenneka se )"? And again, I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a Son?" (citing Ps.2:7, also cited Acts 13:33, Heb.5:5) 1 John 5:18 "We know that everyone who is begotten of God does not sin" or 1 John 5:18 "We know that the One who is begotten of God does not sin" [ 20 ] Uniqueness [ edit ] This issue overlaps with, and is interrelated with, the question of begetting above. Interpretation of the uniqueness of monogenes in New Testament usage partly depends on understanding of Hellenistic Jewish ideas about inheritance.

Philo stated: On Abraham 194: "In the second place, after he [Abraham] had become the father of this [Isaac] his loved-and-only ( agapetos kai monos ) son, he, from the moment of his birth, cherished towards him all the genuine feelings of affection, which exceeds all modest love, and all the ties of friendship which have ever been celebrated in the world." [ 21 ] On Sacrifice X.(43): "And he [Jacob] learnt all these things from Abraham his grandfather, who was the author of his own education, who gave to the all-wise Isaac all that he had, leaving none of his substance to bastards, or to the spurious reasonings of concubines, but he gives them small gifts, as being inconsiderable persons. For the possessions of which he is possessed, namely, the perfect virtues, belong only to the perfect and legitimate son;" [ 22 ] In his 1894 translation of Philo Charles Duke Yonge rendered "loved-and-only son" ( agapetos kai monos uios ) as "only legitimate son", which is not unreasonable given Philo's parallel comments in On Sacrifice X.43. It also parallels Josephus ' use (see above 20:20) for a legitimate son of the main royal wife.

Likewise in the later Jewish Septuagint revisions: Gen 22:2 of Aquila "take your son Isaac, your only-begotten ( monogenes ) son whom you love" Gen 22:12 of Symmachus "now I know that you fear God, seeing you have not withheld your son, your only-begotten ( monogenes ) son, from me.” In contrast in Proverbs 4:3 Aquila, Symmachus and Theodotion all have monogenes of a mother's only-begotten son where legitimacy is not an issue.

Textual issues in John 1:18 [ edit ] In textual criticism , opinions are divided on whether Jesus is referred to as "only-begotten God" or "only-begotten Son", in John 1:18.

[ 23 ] According to the majority of modern scholars the external evidence favors monogenês theos as the original text. This reading exists primarily in the Alexandrian text-types .

Textus Receptus , the manuscript tradition behind the KJV and many other Bibles, reads ho monogenês huios . This reading ranks second in terms of the number of manuscripts containing it, and has a wider distribution among text-types.

[ 24 ] monogenes theos P75 , P66 , Vaticanus , Sinaiticus etc.

o monogenes uios Alexandrinus , Textus Receptus , Peshitta etc.

This textual issue is complicated by the scribal abbreviations of nomina sacra where "G-d" and "S-n" are abbreviated in the Greek manuscripts by ΘΣ and ΥΣ ( theta - sigma vs upsilon - sigma ) increasing the likelihood of scribal error.

[ 25 ] References [ edit ] ^ Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament and Other Early Christian Literature (BAGD, 3rd Edition) ^ LSJ Dictionary Entry ^ White, The Forgotten Trinity [Minneapolis, MN, Bethany House Publishers, 1998 ^ Richard Murphy, Background To The Bible, Servant Publications, 1978.

^ "Hebrew - Lemma / GrammarTags" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2005-11-05.

^ Andrew Phillip Smith A Dictionary of Gnosticism 2009 Page 163 ^ "285. Charm to bind Capitolina's lover Nilos to her" PGM XV1-21 Provenance unknown 3rd Century AD.

Women and society in Greek and Roman Egypt: a sourcebook by Jane Rowlandson p.360 ^ "Λαιλαμψ Οσορνοφρι Βαρβαρε εν τω ουρανω θεος, ο μονογενης" F. Büchsel, Hinweis auf einen Liebeszauber ThWNT IV p746.

^ "εισακουσον μου, ο εις, μονογενης" ^ Strecker G.

Die Johannesbriefe p.233 "ορκιζωσε τον θεον... τον μονογην τον εξ αυτου αναφανεντα" ^ Arndt, W., Danker, Friedrich W., & Bauer, W. (2000).

A Greek-English lexicon of the New Testament and other early Christian literature (3rd ed.) (658). Chicago: University of Chicago Press: "See also Hdb. on vs. 18 where, beside the rdg. μονογενὴς θεός (considered by many the orig.) an only-begotten one, God (acc. to his real being; i.e. uniquely divine as God’s son and transcending all others alleged to be gods) or a uniquely begotten deity (for the perspective s. J 10:33–36), another rdg. ὁ μονογενὴς υἱός is found. MPol 20:2 in the doxology διὰ παιδὸς αὐτοῦ τοῦ μονογενοῦς Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ. Some (e.g. WBauer, Hdb.; JBulman, Calvin Theological Journal 16, ’81, 56–79; JDahms, NTS 29, ’83, 222–32) prefer to regard μ. as somewhat heightened in mng. in J and 1J to only-begotten or begotten of the Only One, in view of the emphasis on γεννᾶσθαι ἐκ θεοῦ (J 1:13 al.); in this case it would be analogous to πρωτότοκος (Ro 8:29; Col 1:15 al.)." ^ Theological Dictionary of the New Testament edited by Gerhard Kittel, English edition (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1967), pp. 737-41.

Hermann Martin Friedrich Büchsel on μονογενής (and 1 of 14 footnotes) ^ Balz, Horst R., & Schneider, Gerhard. (1990-). Vol. 2: Exegetical dictionary of the New Testament (440). Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans: "Μονογενής means only in all the Lukan passages. In 7:12 (L) it is used of the son born to the widow of Nain. The Gospel writer has inserted μονογενής in 8:42 in the account of the healing of Jairus’s daughter (cf. Mark 5:23: τὸ θυγάτριόν μου) and in 9:38 in the pericope on the epileptic boy (cf. Mark 9:17: τὸν υἱόν μου). In these passages μονογενής intensifies the significance of Jesus’ miracles." ^ Friberg, Timothy, Friberg, Barbara, & Miller, Neva F. (2000). Vol. 4: Analytical lexicon of the Greek New Testament. Baker's Greek New Testament library (266). Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker Books: "μονογενής, ές of what is the only one of its kind of class unique; (1) an only child born to human parents one and only (LU 7.12; 8.42); substantively only child (LU 9.38); (2) as a child born in a unique way; (a) used of God’s Son Jesus only, only begotten; substantively (JN 1.14); (b) used of Abraham’s son Isaac only; substantively ὁ μ. his only true son (HE 11.17)" ^ David Ewert A general introduction to the Bible: from ancient tablets to modern translations 1990 p230 ^ Wayne A. Grudem , Jeff Purswell Bible Doctrine: Essential Teachings of the Christian Faith 1999- Page 113 ^ Richard Abanes Today's Mormonism: Understanding Latter-Day Saints 2007 Page 191 ^ Edward L. Dalcour A definitive look at oneness theology: defending the tri-unity of God 2005 ^ Kenneth L. Barker, Edwin H. Palmer The NIV: the making of a contemporary translation 1986 p121 ^ Kittel TDNT Büchsel on μονογενής Op. cit. "It is not wholly clear whether μονογενής in Jn. denotes also the birth or begetting from God; it probably does, Jn. calls Jesus ὁ γεννηθεὶς ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ, 1 Jn. 5:18. Though many will not accept this, he here understands the concept of sonship in terms of begetting. For him to be the Son of God is not just to be the recipient of God's love. It is to be begotten of God. This is true both of believers and also of Jesus. For this reason μονογενής probably includes also begetting by God. To be sure, Jn. does not lift the veil of mystery which lies over the eternal begetting. But this does not entitle us to assume that he had no awareness of it. Johannine preaching and doctrine is designed to awaken faith, 20:30 f., not to give full and systematic knowledge. Hence it does not have to dispel all mysteries." ^ Philo On Abraham Archived 2012-03-06 at the Wayback Machine ^ Philo On Sacrifice Archived 2012-03-06 at the Wayback Machine ^ Raymond E Brown Introduction to the New Testament Christology 1994 Page 179 ^ The Apologists Bible Commentary on John 1:18 ^ Allen Wikgren footnote in Metzger A Textual Commentary on The Greek New Testament United Bible Societies 2nd ed. p. 170."It is doubtful that the author would have written monogenes theos which may be a primitive transcriptional error in the Alexandrian tradition ΘϹ/ΥΣ. At least a 'D' decision would be preferable. A.W." v t e Gospel of John Bible ( New Testament ) Chapters John 1 Book of Signs 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Book of Glory 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 Epilogue: 21 Verses John 1:1 – 20 ; 23 ; 25 – 33 ; 35 – 42 3:16 14:6 18:38 20:1–31 Content (chronological) Hymn to the Word Wedding at Cana Cleansing of the Temple Dialog with Nicodemus Samaritan woman Healing a sick son at Capernaum Healing the paralytic at Bethesda Feeding the 5000 Walking on water Bread of Life Discourse Jesus and the woman taken in adultery Healing the man blind from birth Good Shepherd Raising of Lazarus Anointing Foot washing Last Supper Farewell Discourse (containing the True Vine ) Passion of Jesus Crucifixion Burial Empty tomb Resurrection of Jesus Doubting Thomas Miraculous catch of fish Restoration of Peter Phrases Disciple whom Jesus loved Doubting Thomas Ecce homo Feast of Dedication I am ...

In the beginning Jesus wept Logos Love one another Noli me tangere Quod scripsi, scripsi That they all may be one The truth will set you free Via et veritas et vita People Andrew Annas Caiaphas Herod Antipas Jesus Christ John the Baptist Joseph of Arimathea Judas Iscariot Mother of Jesus Lazarus Malchus Martha Mary Magdalene Mary, sister of Martha Nathanael Nicodemus Philip Pontius Pilate Simon Peter Thomas Zebedee Groups Angels Pharisees Sadducees Samaritans Sanhedrin Places Ænon Bethabara Bethany Bethsaida Cana Capernaum Galilee Jacob's Well Jerusalem Jordan River Judea Kidron Samaria Sea of Galilee Solomon's Porch Sychar " I am " sayings I am ...

Bread of Life Light of the World Gate for the Sheep Good Shepherd Resurrectio et Vita Via et veritas et vita True Vine Related Authorship Johannine community John the Apostle John the Evangelist John the Presbyter Johannine literature Holy Spirit Textual variants Apocryphon of John Second Apocalypse of John Pillar New Testament Commentary Adaptations St John Passion (J. S. Bach, 1724) Structure Discography Passio (Pärt, 1982) Johannes-Passion (Gubaidulina, 2000) The Gospel of John (2003 film) The Gospel of John (2014 film) Manuscripts Papyrus 2 5 6 22 28 36 39 44 45 52 55 59 60 63 66 75 76 80 84 90 93 95 106 107 108 109 119 120 121 122 128 Ohrid Glagolitic fragments Sources Greek Text Latin Vulgate Wycliffe Version King James Version American Standard Version World English Version Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Monogenēs&oldid=1300329639 " Categories : Childbirth New Testament Greek words and phrases Gospel of John Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles with style issues from January 2023 All articles with style issues Wikipedia articles in need of updating from July 2025 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles that may contain original research from July 2025 All articles that may contain original research Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 13 July 2025, at 18:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Monogenēs 1 language Add topic

