Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Al-Farghani 32 languages العربية বাংলা Български Bosanski Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa Қазақша Kurdî Lëtzebuergesch Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Português Română Русский Slovenščina کوردی Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Тоҷикӣ Türkçe اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Abbasid astronomer (c. 800 – 870) "Alfraganus" redirects here. For the lunar crater, see Alfraganus (crater) .

Al-Farghānī أبو العبّاس أحمد بن محمد بن كثير الفرغاني The statue of al-Farghani in Cairo Born 9th century Fergana valley , Sogdia [ 1 ] Died 9th century Egypt Academic background Influences Ptolemy Academic work Era Islamic Golden Age Main interests Astronomy Notable works The compendium ( jawāmiʿ ) of the Almagest , Treatise on the Astrolabe Influenced Christopher Columbus , Nicolaus Copernicus , Al-Jūzjānī , al-Bīrūnī , Al-Qabisi Abū al-ʿAbbās Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn Kathīr al-Farghānī ( Arabic : أبو العبّاس أحمد بن محمد بن كثير الفرغاني ) also known as Alfraganus in the West ( c.

800 – 870), was an astronomer in the Abbasid court in Baghdad, and one of the most famous astronomers in the 9th century. Al-Farghani composed several works on astronomy and astronomical equipment that were widely distributed in Arabic and Latin and were influential to many scientists. His best known work, Kitāb fī Jawāmiʿ ʿIlm al-Nujūmi (whose name translates to Elements of astronomy on the celestial motions ), was an extensive summary of Ptolemy's Almagest containing revised and more accurate experimental data. Christopher Columbus used Al Farghani's calculations for his voyages to America (but mistakenly interpreted Arabic miles as Roman miles). In addition to making substantial contributions to astronomy, al-Farghani also worked as an engineer, supervising construction projects on rivers in Cairo , Egypt . The lunar crater Alfraganus is named after him.

Life [ edit ] Al-Farghani was born sometime in the early 9th century, and his last name suggests that his birthplace was most likely in Quva city, Farghana, Uzbekistan .

[ 2 ] He has been described as Arab [ 3 ] [ 4 ] or Persian .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] He was involved in the calculation of the diameter of the Earth by the measurement of the meridian arc length, together with a team of scientists under the patronage of the ʿAbbāsid caliph al-Ma'mūn in Baghdad . Later he moved to Cairo, where he composed a treatise on the astrolabe around 856. There, he also supervised the construction of the large Nilometer , called the New Nilometer, on the Rawda Island (in Old Cairo) at the behest of the ʿAbbāsid caliph al-Mutawakkil , which was completed in the year 861.

[ 7 ] This instrument allowed the height of the Nile to be measured in the event of a flood.

[ 2 ] Also in Cairo, al-Farghani was tasked with building a canal, called al-Ja‘fari, by the two brothers Muhammad and Ahmad ibn Musa, who were themselves ordered by al-Mutawakkil to oversee the construction of the canal.

[ 2 ] Reports indicate that al-Farghani made a critical mistake in the design of the canal, and had the entrance of the canal dug too deep for water to enter the rest of the canal without unusually high water levels.

[ 2 ] [ 7 ] Al-Mutawakkil was enraged when he heard of the mistake, and so he sent Sanad ibn ‘Ali to assess the culpability of the brothers Muhammad and Ahmad who contracted al-Fraghani to build it.

[ 2 ] [ 7 ] Sanad ibn ‘Ali ultimately reported (deceitfully) to al-Mutawakkil that there was no mistake in the design of the canal created by al-Farghani, which delayed any consequences long enough for the controversy to cease abruptly after the assassination of al-Mutawakkil in 861 that resulted in the canal remaining unfinished.

[ 2 ] [ 7 ] Al-Farghani died in Egypt sometime after 861.

[ 7 ] There is some debate about whether the two names for al-Farghani, Muhammad ibn Kath lr and Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Kat, mentioned in historical sources refer to two different people, but most historians argue that both names describe just one al-Farghani.

[ 2 ] Works [ edit ] Portrait of Alfraganus in the Compilatio astronomica , 1493 The Ferghani lunar crater is named after him.

The most influential work produced by al-Farghani was his textbook Kitāb fī Jawāmiʿ ʿIlm al-Nujūm ( كتاب في جوامع علم النجوم A Compendium of the Science of the Stars ) or Elements of astronomy on the celestial motions , written sometime between about 833 and 857.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Elements was a descriptive summary of Ptolemy's Almagest that included the findings and revised values of earlier Islamic astronomers.

[ 10 ] Among the revisions included in the book were corrections to calculations of the circumference of the Earth , the Earth's axial tilt , and the apsides of the Sun and the Moon.

[ 10 ] Though al-Farghani's summary of Almagest contained these numerical corrections, the summary itself did not emphasize the mathematics of Ptolemy's astronomical theory and was instead focused more on conveying the conceptual parts of the theory in an easily-understood manner.

[ 11 ] Al-Farghani's book was translated into Latin in the 12th century by John of Seville in 1135 and later by Gerard of Cremona prior to 1175.

[ 11 ] These translations remained very popular in Europe until the time of Regiomontanus .

Dante Alighieri 's knowledge of Ptolemaic astronomy, which is evident in his Divina Commedia as well as other works such as the Convivio , seems to have been drawn from his reading of Alfraganus.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Elements was also translated into Hebrew by Jacob Anatoli sometime from 1231 to 1235.

[ 9 ] This translation of Elements contains an additional section discussing Ptolemy's 48 constellations, which was probably also written by al-Farghani, but is not found in other translations of the book.

[ 9 ] Drawing primarily from Anatoli's Hebrew translation, but also from John of Seville's previous Latin translation, Jacob Christmann translated yet another Latin translation of Elements in 1590.

[ 7 ] [ 9 ] In the 17th century the Dutch orientalist Jacob Golius published the Arabic text on the basis of a manuscript he had acquired in the Near East, accompanied by Golius' own Latin translation, the last recorded, and extensive notes and revisions.

[ 14 ] Al-Farghani also wrote several documents about astronomical instruments. His most famous is his treatise on the astrolabe , which is the oldest surviving document that details the theoretical construction and use of the tool.

[ 8 ] Although historical sources indicate that there were probably other documents regarding the theory of astrolabes (including one written by al-Khwarizmi ) circulating around the time that al-Farghani wrote his treatise, al-Farghani notes in his treatise that he was not aware of any such documents, suggesting that his treatise was a purely original work.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Al-Farghani's treatise on the astrolabe provides the mathematical basis for the construction of the astrolabe, along with tables containing thousands of data points enabling the construction of astrolabes that function at varying lines of longitude.

[ 16 ] [ 11 ] Though a theoretical basis for the construction of an astrolabe is presented in this work, the treatise lacked specific methods for physical construction because the purpose of the treatise was not to give instructions for building an astrolabe, but rather to provide mathematical justification for the functionality of the astrolabe.

[ 8 ] [ 15 ] The work Kitāb al-Fihrist by Ibn al-Nadim suggests that al-Farghani was also responsible for writing a book about the use and function of sundials , though no copies exist in the present day.

[ 8 ] [ 17 ] In the 15th century, Christopher Columbus used al-Farghani's estimate for the Earth's circumference as the basis for his voyages to America . However, Columbus mistook al-Farghani's 7091-foot Arabic mile to be a 4856-foot Roman mile . This error caused him to underestimate the Earth's circumference, leading him to sail to North America while he believed that he was taking a shortcut to Asia .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] See also [ edit ] List of Iranian scientists and scholars References [ edit ] ^ Gillispie, Charles Coulston (1970).

Dictionary of Scientific Biography . Scribner in New York. pp.

541–545 .

ISBN 0-684-10114-9 .

^ a b c d e f g Abdukhalimov, Bahrom (1999).

"Ahmad al-Farghani and His "Compendium of Astronomy" " .

Journal of Islamic Studies .

10 (2): 142– 158.

doi : 10.1093/jis/10.2.142 .

ISSN 0955-2340 .

JSTOR 26198032 .

^ Science , The Cambridge History of Islam , Vol. 2, ed. P. M. Holt, Ann K. S. Lambton, Bernard Lewis, (Cambridge University Press, 1978), 760.

^ " Al-Farghani.

" The Columbia Encyclopedia, 6th ed.. .

Encyclopedia.com.

6 Dec. 2018 https://www.encyclopedia.com .

^ Sir Patrick Moore, The Data Book of Astronomy , CRC Press, 2000, BG 48ref Henry Corbin, The Voyage and the Messenger: Iran and Philosophy , North Atlantic Books, 1998, pg 44 ^ Texts, Documents and Artefacts: Islamic Studies in Honour of D.S. Richards . Edited by Chase F. Robinson, Brill Academic Publishers, BG 25.

^ a b c d e f Complete Dictionary of Scientific Biography . Detroit, MI: Charles Scribner's Sons. 2007.

ISBN 978-0-684-31559-1 .

^ a b c d Palmeri, JoAnn; Bolt, Marvin (2014).

Biographical Encyclopedia of Astronomers . New York: Springer.

ISBN 978-1-4419-9917-7 .

^ a b c d Sela, Shlomo (2016).

"Al-Farghānī on the 48 Ptolemaic Constellations: A Newly Discovered Text in Hebrew Translation" .

Aleph .

16 (2): 249– 365.

doi : 10.2979/aleph.16.2.249 .

ISSN 1565-1525 .

JSTOR 10.2979/aleph.16.2.249 .

S2CID 171343050 .

^ a b Dallal, Ahmad (2010).

Islam, Science, and the Challenge of History .

Yale University Press . p.

32 .

ISBN 9780300159110 .

^ a b c Selin, Helaine (2008).

Encyclopaedia of the History of Science, Technology, and Medicine in Non-Western Cultures . Dordrecht: Springer.

ISBN 978-1-4020-4425-0 .

^ Mary A. Orr, Dante and the Early Astronomers (London: Gall and Inglis, 1913), 233-34.

^ Scott, John A. (2004).

Understanding Dante . Notre Dame: U of Notre Dame P. p.

22 .

ISBN 978-0-268-04451-0 .

^ Alfraganus: Elementa astronomica , in Arabic and Latin, year 1669, translation by Golius. Alfraganus is a medieval Latin spelling of Al-Farghani.

^ a b "Al-Farghānī On the Astrolabe, Richard Lorch (Ed.), in: Boethius, Band 52, Franz Steiner Verlag, Stuttgart (2005), viii + 447 pp. 80.00€, ISBN: 3-515-08713-3".

Historia Mathematica .

34 (4): 433– 434. 2007-11-01.

doi : 10.1016/j.hm.2006.11.003 .

ISSN 0315-0860 .

^ a b Al-Farghani (2005).

On the Astrolabe . Steiner.

ISBN 978-3515087131 .

^ Lorch, Richard; Kunitzsch, Paul (2013-04-01).

"al-Farghānī" .

Encyclopaedia of Islam, THREE .

doi : 10.1163/1573-3912_ei3_com_26973 .

^ Douglas McCormick (2012), Columbus’s Geographical Miscalculations , IEEE ^ S. Frederick Starr (2013), So, Who Did Discover America?

, History Today , Volume 63, Issue 12 Further reading [ edit ] Sabra, Abdelhamid I. (1971).

"Farghānī, Abu'l-ʿAbbās Aḥmad Ibn Muḥammad Ibn Kathīr al-" .

Dictionary of Scientific Biography . Vol. 4. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons . pp.

541– 545.

ISBN 0-684-10114-9 .

DeYoung, Gregg (2007).

"Farghānī: Abū al-ʿAbbās Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn Kathīr al-Farghānī" . In Thomas Hockey; et al. (eds.).

The Biographical Encyclopedia of Astronomers . New York: Springer. p. 357.

ISBN 978-0-387-31022-0 .

( PDF version ) Jacobus Golius (ed.), كتاب محمد بن كثير الفرغاني في الحركات السماوية وجوامع علم النجوم، بتفسير الشيخ الفاضل يعقوب غوليوس / Muhammedis Fil. Ketiri Ferganensis, qui vulgo Alfraganus dicitur, Elementa astronomica, Arabicè & Latinè. Cum notis ad res exoticas sive Orientales, quae in iis occurrunt , Amsterdam 1669; Reprint Frankfurt 1986 and 1997.

El-Fergânî, The Elements of Astronomy , textual analysis, translation into Turkish, critical edition & facsimile by Yavuz Unat, edited by Şinasi Tekin & Gönül Alpay Tekin, Harvard University 1998.

Elements of Chronology and Astronomy - Muhamedis Alfragani Arabis Chronologica et astronomica elementa (in Latin).

Richard Lorch (ed.), Al-Farghānī on the Astrolabe. Arabic text edited with translation and commentary , Stuttgart, 2005, ISBN 3-515-08713-3 .

Yavuz Unat, El-Fergânî, Cevami İlm en-Nucûm ve Usûl el-Harekât es-Semâviyye, Astronominin Özeti ve Göğün Hareketlerinin Esası, T.C. Kültür ve Turizm Bakanlığı, Bilimin ve Felsefenin Doğulu Öncüleri Dizisi 14, Ankara 2012.

Yavuz Unat,  “Fergânî’nin ‘Astronominin Özeti ve Göğün Hareketlerinin Esasları’ Adlı Astronomi Eseri”, DTCF Dergisi, Cilt 38, Sayı 1–2, Ankara 1998, s. 405–423.

Paul Lunde, Al-Farghani and the “Short Degree” , 1992, Saudi Aramco World External links [ edit ] Muḥammad al-Farghānī's Elements of Chronology and Astronomy (an Arabic edition with Latin translation of Kitāb jawāmi' 'ilm al-nujūm wa uṣūl al-ḥarakāt al-samāwīya (" Book of generalities of astronomy and bases of celestial motions ") from the Library of Congress v t e Astronomy in the medieval Islamic world Astronomers by century 8th Ahmad Nahavandi Al-Fadl ibn Naubakht Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī Mashallah ibn Athari Yaʿqūb ibn Ṭāriq 9th Abu Ali al-Khayyat Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi Abu Said Gorgani Al-Farghani Al-Kindi Al-Mahani Abu Hanifa Dinawari Al-Ḥajjāj ibn Yūsuf Al-Marwazi Ali ibn Isa al-Asturlabi Banū Mūsā brothers Iranshahri Khalid ibn Abd al‐Malik al‐Marwarrudhi Al-Khwarizmi Sahl ibn Bishr Thābit ibn Qurra Yahya ibn Abi Mansur 10th al-Sufi Ibn Al-Adami al-Khojandi al-Khazin al-Qūhī Abu al-Wafa Ahmad ibn Yusuf al-Battani Al-Qabisi Ibn al-A'lam Al-Nayrizi Al-Saghani Aṣ-Ṣaidanānī Ibn Yunus Ibrahim ibn Sinan Ma Yize al-Sijzi Al-ʻIjliyyah Nastulus Abolfadl Harawi Haseb-i Tabari al-Majriti Abu al-Hasan al-Ahwazi 11th Abu Nasr Mansur al-Biruni Ali ibn Ridwan Al-Zarqālī Ibn al-Samh Alhazen Avicenna Ibn al-Saffar Kushyar Gilani Said al-Andalusi Ibrahim ibn Said al-Sahli Ibn Mu'adh al-Jayyani Al-Isfizari Ali ibn Khalaf 12th Al-Bitruji Avempace Ibn Tufail Al-Kharaqī Al-Khazini Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Abu al-Salt Averroes Ibn al-Kammad Jabir ibn Aflah Omar Khayyam Sharaf al-Din al-Tusi 13th Ibn al-Banna' al-Marrakushi Ibn al‐Ha'im al‐Ishbili Jamal ad-Din Alam al-Din al-Hanafi Najm al‐Din al‐Misri Muhyi al-Din al-Maghribi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi Zakariya al-Qazwini al-Urdi al-Abhari Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr al‐Farisi Abu Ali al-Hasan al-Marrakushi Ibn Ishaq al-Tunisi Ibn al‐Raqqam Al-Ashraf Umar II Fakhr al-Din al-Akhlati 14th Ibn al-Shatir Al-Khalili Ibn Shuayb al-Battiwi Abū al‐ʿUqūl Al-Wabkanawi Nizam al-Din al-Nisapuri al-Jadiri Sadr al-Shari'a al-Asghar Fathullah Shirazi 15th Ali Kuşçu Abd al‐Wajid Jamshid al-Kashi Kadızade Rumi Ulugh Beg Sibt al-Maridini Ibn al-Majdi al-Wafa'i al-Kubunani 'Abd al-'Aziz al-Wafa'i 16th Al-Birjandi al-Khafri Baha' al-din al-'Amili Piri Reis Takiyüddin 17th Yang Guangxian Ehmedê Xanî Al Achsasi al Mouakket Muhammad al-Rudani Topics Works Arabic star names Islamic calendar Aja'ib al-Makhluqat Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity Tabula Rogeriana The Book of Healing The Remaining Signs of Past Centuries Zij Alfonsine tables Huihui Lifa Book of Fixed Stars Toledan Tables Zij-i Ilkhani Zij-i Sultani Sullam al-sama' Instruments Alidade Analog computer Aperture Armillary sphere Astrolabe Astronomical clock Celestial globe Compass Compass rose Dioptra Equatorial ring Equatorium Globe Graph paper Mural instrument Navigational astrolabe Octant Planisphere Quadrant Sextant Shadow square Sundial Schema for horizontal sundials Triquetrum Concepts Almucantar Apogee Astrology Astrophysics Axial tilt Azimuth Celestial mechanics Celestial spheres Circular orbit Deferent and epicycle Earth's rotation Eccentricity Ecliptic Elliptic orbit Equant Galaxy Geocentrism Gravitational energy Gravity Heliocentrism Inertia Islamic cosmology Moonlight Multiverse Muwaqqit Obliquity Parallax Precession Qibla Salah times Specific gravity Spherical Earth Sublunary sphere Sunlight Supernova Temporal finitism Trepidation Triangulation Tusi couple Universe Institutions Al-Azhar University House of Knowledge House of Wisdom University of al-Qarawiyyin Observatories Constantinople (Taqi al-Din) Maragheh Samarkand (Ulugh Beg) Influences Babylonian astronomy Egyptian astronomy Hellenistic astronomy Indian astronomy Influenced Byzantine science Chinese astronomy Medieval European science Indian astronomy v t e People of Khorasan Scientists Abu Hatam Isfizari Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi Abu Wafa Abu Ubayd Juzjani Abu Zayd Balkhi Alfraganus Ali Qushji Avicenna Birjandi Biruni Hasib Marwazi Ibn Hayyan Abu Ja'far al-Khazin Khazini Khojandi Khwarizmi Nasawi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Omar Khayyam Sharaf al-Din al-Tusi Sijzi Philosophers Algazel Amiri Avicenna Farabi Haji Bektash Veli Nasir Khusraw Sijistani Shahrastani Islamic scholars Abu Dawud al-Sijistani Abu Barakat Nasafi Abu Hanifa Abu Hafs Nasafi Abu Layth Samarqandi Abu Mu'in Nasafi Abu Qasim Samarqandi Ansari Baghavi Bayhaqi Bazdawi Bukhari Dabusi Fatima Samarqandi Ghazali Ghaznawi Hakim Tirmidhi Hakim Nishapuri Ibn Hibban Ibn Mubarak Ishaq ibn Rahwayh Ibn Tayfour Sajawandi Juwayni Kasani Kashifi Lamishi Marghinani Maturidi Mulla al-Qari Muqatil Muslim Nasa'i Qushayri Razi Sabuni Sajawandi Sarakhsi Shaykh Tusi Taftazani Tha'labi Nishapuri Tirmidhi Yahya ibn Adam Zamakhshari Poets and artists Abu Sa'id Abu'l-Khayr Anvari Aruzi Samarqandi Asadi Tusi Attar Nishapuri Behzad Daqiqi Farrukhi Sistani Ferdowsi Jami Kashifi Nasir Khusraw Rabia Balkhi Rudaki Rumi Sanā'ī Historians and political figures Abu'l-Fadl Bayhaqi Abu'l-Hasan Isfarayini Abu'l-Ma'ali Nasrallah Abu Muslim Khorasani Gardizi Ali-Shir Nava'i Ata-Malik Juvayni Aufi Abu Ali Bal'ami Gawhar Shad Ibn Khordadbeh Khalid ibn Barmak Minhaj al-Siraj Juzjani Nizam al-Mulk Tahir ibn Husayn Yahya Barmaki Ahmad ibn Nizam al-Mulk Shihab al-Nasawi Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Academics zbMATH MathSciNet People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Al-Farghani&oldid=1295393592 " Categories : 9th-century deaths People from Fergana Transoxanian Islamic scholars Astronomers from the Abbasid Caliphate Mathematicians from the Abbasid Caliphate 9th-century Iranian mathematicians 9th-century Iranian astronomers 9th-century Arab people Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from April 2023 Articles with hCards Articles containing Arabic-language text CS1 Latin-language sources (la) Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 13 June 2025, at 13:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Al-Farghani 32 languages Add topic

