Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Influences 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 The Dark Ages 2.2 After Iconoclasm 2.3 11th and 12th centuries 2.4 The Paleologan Era 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Byzantine rhetoric 4 languages Ελληνικά Italiano Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e Byzantine rhetoric refers to rhetorical theorizing and production during the time of the Byzantine Empire .  Byzantine rhetoric is significant in part because of the sheer volume of rhetorical works produced during this period.

[ 1 ] Rhetoric was the most important and difficult topic studied in the Byzantine education system, beginning at the Pandidakterion in early fifth century Constantinople , where the school emphasized the study of rhetoric with eight teaching chairs, five in Greek and three in Latin.

[ 2 ] The hard training of Byzantine rhetoric provided skills and credentials for citizens to attain public office in the imperial service, or posts of authority within the Church .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Influences [ edit ] The Byzantine rhetoric of the Byzantine Empire followed largely the precepts of ancient Greek rhetoricians, especially those belonging to the Second Sophistic , including Hermogenes of Tarsus , Menander Rhetor , Aphthonius of Antioch , Libanius , and Alexander Numenius .

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] Another bridge between the Hellenistic tradition of eloquence and Byzantium was the rhetorical school of Gaza that flourished in the fifth and sixth century.

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] Thomas M. Conley divides the history of Byzantine rhetoric into four periods: The Dark Ages, After Iconoclasm, 11th and 12th centuries, and the Paleologan Era.

[ 1 ] The Dark Ages [ edit ] This period includes the formation of the Hermogenean corpus and associated commentary traditions.

[ 1 ] These include Sopater of Apamea and Syrianus 's commentaries of Hermogenes.

[ 1 ] Some commentaries compare rhetoric with philosophy.

[ 1 ] After Iconoclasm [ edit ] After the Iconoclast period, Byzantine scholars collected manuscripts of Greek rhetoricians such as Dionysius of Halicarnassus , Menander Rhetor , and Alexander Numenius .

[ 1 ] Some important Byzantine figures from this period include Photius , John Geometres , and John of Sardis.

[ 1 ] 11th and 12th centuries [ edit ] This is the period of the Comnenan emperors.

[ 1 ] Important Byzantine figures from this period include Michael Psellus , Nikephoros Basilakes , Gregory Pardos of Corinth, and Euthymios Zigabenos .

[ 1 ] This period includes important epideictic speeches for the emperor called basilikoi logoi, many of which compare emperors to King David .

[ 1 ] The Paleologan Era [ edit ] This is the period of the Paleologan emperors.  The influence of the Latin administration prompted translations of Latin works into Greek and a reluctant return to Aristotle.

[ 1 ] Important Byzantine figures include Theodore Metochites , Maximus Planudes , Nikephoras Choumnos , George Gemistius Plethon , and George of Trebizond .

[ 1 ] Theodore Metochites and Nikephoras Choumnos are known for their debates over the value of stylistic obscurity.

[ 1 ] George of Trebizond is known for introducing Hermogenes to the West; his works contribute to the development of Renaissance rhetoric.

[ 1 ] [ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Byzantine university Greek Scholars in the Renaissance Rhetoric References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p Conley, Thomas M. (1990).

Rhetoric in the European tradition . New York: Longman. pp.

53– 71.

ISBN 0-8013-0256-0 .

OCLC 20013261 .

^ a b Jeffreys, Elizabeth (2003).

Rhetoric in Byzantium: Papers from the Thirty-Fifth Spring Symposium of Byzantine Studies . Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. pp.

39– 43.

ISBN 0-7546-3453-1 .

^ Nagy, Gregory (2001).

Greek Literature . Routledge. p. 179.

ISBN 0-415-93771-X .

^ Penella, Robert J. (2020-05-01).

"The rhetorical works of the school of Gaza" .

Byzantinische Zeitschrift .

113 (1): 111– 174.

doi : 10.1515/bz-2020-0007 .

ISSN 1868-9027 .

^ Mack, Peter (2011).

A history of Renaissance rhetoric, 1380-1620 . Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp.

39– 47.

ISBN 978-0-19-959728-4 .

OCLC 727710175 .

Further reading [ edit ] V. Regel and N. Novosadskij (1892–1917).

Fontes rerum byzantinarum.

R. Browning (1962). "The Patriarchal Schools of Constantinople," Byzantion 32, pp. 167–202; 33 (1963), pp. 11–40.

G. Kustas (1970). "The Function and Evolution of Byzantine Rhetoric," Viator 1, pp. 53–73.

G. Kustas (1973).

Studies in Byzantine Rhetoric.

J. Monfasani (1976).

George of Trebizond: A Biography and a Study of His Rhetoric and Logic.

H. Hunger (1978).

Die hochsprachliche profane Literatur der Byzantiner, vol. 1, pp. 65–196.

A. Kazhdan (1984).

Studies on Byzantine Literature of the Eleventh and Twelfth Centuries.

T.M. Conley (1990). “Aristotle’s Rhetoric in Byzantium,” Rhetorica 8, pp. 29–44.

E. Jeffreys (2003).

Rhetoric in Byzantium.

S. Papaioannou (2012).  “Rhetoric and the philosopher in Byzantium,” in B. Bydén and K. Ierodiakonou (eds), The Many Faces of Byzantine Philosophy, pp. 171–97.

S. Papaioannou (2013).

Michael Psellos: Rhetoric and Authorship in Byzantium.

V. Valiavitcharska (2013).

Rhetoric and Rhythm in Byzantium: The Sound of Persuasion.

V. Valiavitcharska (2013). “Rhetoric in the Hands of the Byzantine Grammarian,” Rhetorica 31, pp. 237–60.

C. Barber and S. Papaioannou (2017).

Michael Psellos on Literature and Art: a Byzantine Perspective on Aesthetics .

P. Magdalino (2017). “From ‘Encyclopaedism’ to ‘Humanism’,” in M.D. Lauxtermann and M. Whittow (eds), Byzantium in the Eleventh Century , pp. 3-18.

V. Valiavitcharska (2018). “Aristotle’s antistrophos in Middle Byzantine Accounts of Rhetoric," in Reshaping the Classical Tradition in Byzantine Texts and Contexts . Ed.D. Dimitrijevic, A. Elakovic-Nenadovic, and J. Sijakovic. Belgrade: Faculty of Law of the University of Belgrade.

M. Vogiatzi (2019).

Byzantine Commentaries on Aristotle’s Rhetoric: Anonymous and Stephanus.

V. Valiavitcharska (2020). “The Advanced Study of Rhetoric Between the Seventh and the Ninth Centuries," in Jahrbuch der Österreichischen Byzantinistik . Austrian Academy of Sciences. Band 70, pp. 487–50.

V. Valiavitcharska (2021). “Logos prophorikos in Middle Byzantine Thought," in Studia Patristica. Journal of the Oxford International Conference on Patristic Studies . Vol. 103.

v t e Byzantine Empire topics History Preceding Roman Empire Later Roman Empire Early (330–717) Constantinian–Valentinianic era Constantinian dynasty Valentinianic dynasty Theodosian era Leonid era Justinian era Heraclian era " Byzantine Dark Ages " Twenty Years' Anarchy Middle (717–1204) Isaurian era Nikephorian era Amorian era Macedonian era Doukid era Komnenian era Angelid era Late (1204–1453) Sack of Constantinople Fourth Crusade Frankokratia Latin Empire Byzantine successor states ( Nicaea / Epirus – Thessalonica / Morea / Trebizond – Theodoro ) Palaiologan era Decline of the Byzantine Empire Fall of Constantinople By modern region or territory Albania Anatolia Armenia Bulgaria Corsica Crete Cyprus Dalmatia Egypt Greece Italy Sardinia Sicily Maghreb Malta Mesopotamia Serbia Spain (Iberian Peninsula and Balearic Islands) Syria Thrace Governance Central Emperors Coronation Family tree Empresses Imperial bureaucracy Medieval Greek Senate Early Praetorian prefects Magister officiorum Comes sacrarum largitionum Comes rerum privatarum Quaestor sacri palatii Middle Logothetes tou dromou Sakellarios Logothetes tou genikou Logothetes tou stratiotikou Chartoularios tou sakelliou Chartoularios tou vestiariou Epi tou eidikou Protasekretis Epi ton deeseon Late Megas logothetes Mesazon Provincial Early Praetorian prefectures Dioceses Provinces Quaestura exercitus Exarchate of Ravenna Exarchate of Africa Middle Themata Kleisourai Bandon Catepanates Late Kephale Despotates Foreign relations Treaties Diplomats Diplomacy Wars Military Army Battle tactics Battles Beacon Generals Mercenaries Military manuals Military units Revolts Early Late Roman army East Roman army Foederati Bucellarii Scholae Palatinae Excubitors Middle Themata Kleisourai Tourma Droungos Bandon Tagmata Domestic of the Schools Hetaireia Akritai Varangian Guard Late Komnenian army Pronoia Vestiaritai Palaiologan army Allagion Paramonai Grand domestic Navy Karabisianoi Maritime themata Cibyrrhaeot Aegean Sea Samos Dromon Greek fire Droungarios of the Fleet Megas doux Admirals Naval battles Conflicts Persian Serbian Lombard Arab Bulgarian Rus Norman Georgian Seljuk Ottoman Religion and law Religion Eastern Orthodoxy Byzantine Rite Hesychasm Hayhurum Patriarchate of Constantinople Saints Oriental Orthodoxy Alexandrian Rite Armenian Rite West Syriac Rite Miaphysitism Ecumenical councils Arianism Monophysitism Paulicianism Iconoclasm Great Schism Bogomilism Mount Athos Missionary activity Bulgaria Moravia Serbs Kievan Rus' Jews Law Codex Theodosianus Corpus Juris Civilis Code of Justinian Ecloga Basilika Hexabiblos Mutilation Culture and society Architecture Secular Sacred Cross-in-square Domes Constantinople Basilica Cistern Baths of Zeuxippus Blachernae Palace Chora Church City Walls Great Palace of Constantinople Hagia Irene Hagia Sophia Hippodrome Pammakaristos Church Prison of Anemas Thessalonica Arch of Galerius and Rotunda Byzantine Bath Hagia Sophia Hagios Demetrios Panagia Chalkeon Walls of Thessaloniki Ravenna San Vitale Sant'Apollinare in Classe Sant'Apollinare Nuovo Other locations Daphni Monastery Hosios Loukas Nea Moni of Chios Panagia Gorgoepikoos Saint Catherine's Monastery Mystras Art Icons Enamel Glass Mosaics Early Byzantine mosaics Painters Macedonian period art Komnenian renaissance Economy Agriculture Coinage Mints Trade silk Silk Road Varangians Dynatoi Literature Novel Acritic songs Digenes Akritas Alexander Romance Historians Everyday life Calendar Cities Cuisine Dance Dress Flags and insignia Gardens Hellenization Music Lyra Octoechos People Byzantine Greeks Women Slavery Death Units of measurement Science Learning Encyclopedias Imperial Library Inventions Medicine Philosophy Rhetoric Scholars University University of Constantinople Impact Byzantine commonwealth Byzantine studies Museums Byzantinism Cyrillic script Neo-Byzantine architecture Greek scholars in the Renaissance Third Rome Megali Idea Index Outline Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Byzantine_rhetoric&oldid=1300894143 " Categories : Culture of the Byzantine Empire Rhetoric Byzantine philosophy This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 00:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Byzantine rhetoric 4 languages Add topic

