Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 As revolutionary praxis 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle External links subsection 5.1 Workerism as revolutionary movement 5.2 Workerism as pejorative Toggle the table of contents Workerism 12 languages Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Italiano Nederlands Português Русский Српски / srpski Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ideology focusing on the working class Not to be confused with Wokeism .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Workerism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in French .

(August 2022) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the French article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Consider adding a topic to this template: there are already 1,134 articles in the main category , and specifying |topic= will aid in categorization.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing French Wikipedia article at [[:fr:Opéraïsme]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|fr|Opéraïsme}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e This article is part of a series on Communism in Italy People Battisti Bertinotti Berlinguer Berardi Bordiga Bombacci Cafiero Cagol Colletti Covelli Cossutta Curcio Damen Della Volpe Di Vittorio Diliberto Gennari Feltrinelli Federici Ferrando Ferrero Fortichiari Galleani Gramsci Grieco Iotti Lama Lazzari Losurdo Longo Maitan Malatesta Napolitano Natta Negri Occhetto Panzieri Pasolini Scuderi Screpanti Spinelli Togliatti Toscano Tronti Vattimo Vendola Virno History Biennio Rosso XVII Congress of the PSI I Congress of the PCd'I Proština rebellion Aventine Secession Italian Resistance Red Republic of Caulonia Third De Gasperi government Portella della Ginestra massacre May 1947 crises Manifesto of the 101 Years of Lead Hot Autumn Primavalle fire Assassination of Sergio Ramelli Kidnapping and murder of Aldo Moro Mitterrand doctrine Movement of 1977 Murder of Francesco Di Cataldo Kidnapping of Ciro Cirillo Historic Compromise Ideologies Anarchist communism Autonomism Bordigism Christian communism Council communism Eurocommunism Italian road to socialism Left communism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Maoism Stalinism Marxist humanism Migliorismo Neo-Gramscianism Neo-Marxism Post-Marxism Trotskyism Western Marxism Workerism Principles Anti-clericalism Anti-fascism Anti-imperialism Antimilitarism Class conflict Cultural hegemony Counterhegemony Euroscepticism Feminism Organic centralism Passive revolution Proletarian internationalism Secularism Solidarity Subalterns Current organisations Lotta Comunista (Communist Struggle) Anticapitalist Left CARC Party Communist Alternative Party Communist Front Communist Party Communist Refoundation Party GC Communist Struggle Countercurrent Italian Communist Party (2016) Italian General Confederation of Labour Italian Marxist–Leninist Party Network of Communists People's Union Revolutionary Communist Party Trotskyist League of Italy Unified Communist Party of Italy Workers' Communist Party Defunct organisations Armed Proletarians for Communism Autonomia Operaia Communist Party of Italy (2014) Communist Party of Italy (Marxist–Leninist) Communist Party of Italy (Marxist–Leninist) Red Line Critical Left Front Line Italian Communist Party FGCI The Left – The Rainbow Lotta Continua Movement of Unitarian Communists October 22 Group Party of the Christian Left Party of Italian Communists FGCI Popular Democratic Front Proletarian Democracy Proletarian Unity Party Red Brigades Volante Rossa Workers' Power Media Liberazione il manifesto Pattuglia Il Pioniere Il Politecnico La Plebe Quaderni piacentini Quaderni Rossi Rinascita Società l'Unità Vie Nuove Related topics Anarchism in Italy Bandiera Rossa Bella ciao Christian left Christian socialism Democratic socialism Fischia il vento History of Italy Italian neorealism Politics of Italy Prison Notebooks Social democracy Socialism in Italy Craxism Communism portal Italy portal v t e Workerism is a political theory that emphasizes the importance of or glorifies the working class .

[ 1 ] Workerism, or operaismo , was of particular significance in Italian left-wing politics , being largely embraced in Italian political groups ranging from Italian communists to Italian anarchists .

As revolutionary praxis [ edit ] See also: Autonomism Workerism (or operaismo ) is a political analysis, whose main elements were to merge into autonomism , that starts out from the power of the working class.

Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri , known as operaist and autonomist writers, offer a definition of operaismo , quoting from Karl Marx as they do so: Operaismo builds on Marx's claim that capital reacts to the struggles of the working class; the working class is active and capital reactive.

Technological development: Where there are strikes, machines will follow. "It would be possible to write a whole history of the inventions made since 1830 for the sole purpose of providing capital with weapons against working-class revolt." ( Capital , Vol. 1, Chapter 15, Section 5) Political development: The factory legislation in England was a response to the working class struggle over the length of the working day. "Their formulation, official recognition and proclamation by the State were the result of a long class struggle." ( Capital , Vol. 1, Chapter 10, Section 6) Operaismo takes this as its fundamental axiom: the struggles of the working class precede and prefigure the successive re-structurations of capital.

[ 2 ] The workerists followed Marx in seeking to base their politics on an investigation of working class life and struggle. Through translations made available by Danilo Montaldi and others, they drew upon previous activist research in the United States by the Johnson–Forest Tendency and in France by the group Socialisme ou Barbarie . The Johnson–Forest Tendency had studied working class life and struggles within the Detroit auto industry, publishing pamphlets such as "The American Worker" (1947), "Punching Out" (1952) and "Union Committeemen and Wildcat Strikes" (1955). That work was translated into French by Socialisme ou Barbarie and published, serially, in their journal. They too began investigating and writing about what was going on inside workplaces, in their case inside both auto factories and insurance offices.

The journal Quaderni Rossi ("Red Notebooks", 1961–5), along with its successor Classe Operaia ("Working Class", 1963–6), both founded by Negri and Tronti, developed workerist theory, focusing on the struggles of proletarians.

Associated with this theoretical development was a praxis based on workplace organising, most notably by Lotta Continua . This reached its peak in the Italian " Hot Autumn " of 1969.

By the mid-1970s, however, the emphasis shifted from the factory to "the social factory "—the everyday lives of working people in their communities. The operaist and post-operaist movement was increasingly known as the autonomist movement.

See also [ edit ] Autonomia Operaia Labourism Raniero Panzieri Post-Marxism Potere Operaio Syndicalism Mario Tronti References [ edit ] ^ "workerism - definition of workerism in English - Oxford Dictionaries" .

Oxford Dictionaries - English . Archived from the original on March 4, 2016.

^ Hardt, Michael ; Negri, Antonio (2002).

"Marx's Mole is Dead! Globalisation and Communication" .

eurozine . Archived from the original on 29 June 2011.

Further reading [ edit ] Galimberti, Jacopo (6 September 2022).

Images of Class. Operaismo, Autonomia and the Visual Arts (1962-1988) .

Verso Books .

ISBN 978-1-8397-6531-5 .

Wright, Steve (20 February 2002).

Storming Heaven: Class composition and struggle in Italian Autonomist Marxism .

University of Michigan Press .

ISBN 978-0-7453-1607-9 .

(Extract: The Workerists and the unions in Italy's 'Hot Autumn' at Libcom.org ) Filippini, Michele.

Leaping Forward. Mario Tronti and the History of Political Workerism .

Jan Van Eyck Academie .

ISBN 90-72076-68-0 .

External links [ edit ] Workerism as revolutionary movement [ edit ] Sergio Bologna, Workerism Beyond Fordism: On the Lineage of Italian Workerism at Viewpoint Magazine A critique of autonomism, which grew from operaismo , published by a Trotskyist group Interviews of members of the operaismo movement Archived 2006-12-08 at the Wayback Machine Workerism as pejorative [ edit ] "Workerism" .

Antagonism . Archived from the original on 14 February 2006.

A critique of "workerism" with a Marxian definition of proletariat.

A critique of workerism from an ANC (South Africa) internal bulletin in 1986 . It differentiates three types of workerism.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Workerism&oldid=1304799383 " Categories : Workerism Autonomism Economic ideologies Labor Marxist theory Syndicalism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2021 All articles needing additional references Articles needing translation from French Wikipedia Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing Italian-language text Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 06:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Workerism 12 languages Add topic

