Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Mascots and traditions 2 Emergence of controversy 3 Response to changes by other teams 4 Renewed scrutiny during modern Super Bowl appearances 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Kansas City Chiefs name controversy Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Racism debate in American football Main article: Native American mascot controversy Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e The Kansas City Chiefs logo features an arrowhead The drum used in the Chiefs’ chop The Kansas City Chiefs are one of the professional sports teams involved in the controversy regarding the use of Native American names and imagery, but received less attention than other teams until 2013 when fan behavior at games, including stereotypical headdresses, face paint , performing a "war chant" and tomahawk chop became more publicly known. Protests by change advocates intensified following the name changes of the Washington Commanders and Cleveland Guardians . In addition, the Chiefs have been highly visible due to their participation in the Super Bowl in the 2019, 2020, 2022, 2023, and 2024 seasons and widespread media coverage. Native American groups demonstrated outside the stadium hosting Super Bowl LVII .

[ 1 ] The Kansas City Indian Center has called on the team to change the name and stop the chop.

[ 2 ] Rhonda LeValdo ( Acoma Pueblo ), co-founder of Kansas City's Not In Our Honor Coalition, has called for a new team name and has described the tomahawk chop as synchronized racism.

[ 3 ] Deb Haaland , the first Indigenous US Secretary of the Interior has called on teams with tribal mascots to change mascots, including the Kansas City Chiefs.

[ 4 ] The Chiefs' Chop History [ edit ] The Kansas City Chiefs were the last professional sports team in the United States to adopt a name or logo referencing Native Americans, although indirectly.

[ 5 ] In 1963, the Dallas Texans (AFL) was renamed Chiefs in honor of Kansas City mayor Harold Roe Bartle who was instrumental in relocating the team to Kansas City, Missouri . Bartle, a non-Native, had been nicknamed "Chief" as founder of the Tribe of Mic-O-Say , a Boy Scouts honor camping society.

[ 6 ] Mascots and traditions [ edit ] In 1989, the Chiefs switched from Warpaint , a Pinto horse ridden by a man in a feathered headdress, to their current mascot K. C. Wolf . Warpaint returned in 2009, but was ridden by a cheerleader .

[ 7 ] In July 2021 Warpaint was again retired, the team president stating that it is the right thing to do at this time.

[ 8 ] Emergence of controversy [ edit ] The 1991 Kansas City Chiefs Defense wore redface for charity [ 9 ] American Indian groups have called on sports teams, including the Chiefs, to change nicknames and mascots for many decades.  The National Coalition on Racism in Sports and Media organized in 1991 following calls from Indigenous communities to end these practices.

[ 10 ] Many did not take notice of these requests or the issue until much later.  Following the appearance in the Kansas City Star of photographs of fans attending an October 2013 game wearing feathers and warpaint and doing the tomahawk chop, numerous Native Americans submitted complaints to the publication. One caller, who was especially upset that the photographs were published on Columbus Day , described the images as a "mockery" and "racist". Writing for the Star' s "Public Editor" column, Derek Donovan explained that he found the complaints "reasonable" and suggested that the newspaper depict "other colorful, interesting people in the crowds." [ 11 ] The Kansas City Indian Center officially became involved in calling for change after a local restaurant in December 2013 had a sign widely condemned as racist [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] that read “KC Chiefs Will Scalp the Redskins , Feed Them Whiskey, Send 2 Reservation.” [ 15 ] [ 16 ] The Kansas City Indian Center sent representatives to the restaurant owners to explain why the sign was unacceptable.

[ 17 ] The Star reported in early August 2014 that the team's management was planning discussions with some Native American groups to find a non-confrontational way to eliminate, or at least reduce, offensive behavior.

[ 18 ] Amanda Blackhorse ( Diné ), the lead plaintiff in the trademark case against the Washington Redskins, said the real solution is a name change for the Chiefs.

[ 19 ] Blackhorse attended a protest at a game between the Kansas City Chiefs and the Washington Redskins at Arrowhead Stadium while she was a student at the University of Kansas , reporting "people yelled, 'Go back to your reservation!' 'We won, you lost, get over it!' 'Go get drunk!' And so many different slurs. People threw beers. That, to me, was shocking. I've experienced racism in my lifetime, but to see it outwardly, in the open, and nobody did anything? It was shocking." [ 20 ] Native Americans in Phoenix, Arizona picketed at the game between the Chiefs and the Arizona Cardinals , and have asked the Cardinals' management to bar " Redface ", the wearing of headdresses and face paint, protesting what they perceive to be a mockery of Native American culture.

[ 21 ] A protest took place in Minnesota when the Chiefs played the Vikings on October 18, 2015. "The Kansas City Chiefs have flown under the radar," said Norma Renville, the executive director of Women of Nations Community Advocacy Program and Shelter. "They are contributing to our cultural genocide." [ 22 ] Native Americans at Haskell Indian Nations University in Lawrence, Kansas , asked the Chiefs to stop behavior that invokes stereotypes, such as wearing headdresses and doing the "tomahawk chop", after the team made the playoffs in 2016.

[ 23 ] While there have been efforts to address other issues, such as fans wearing warpaint and headdresses, the "chop" and the accompanying chant is defended by some local Native Americans. However, in a national survey, half of Native Americans said the "tomahawk chop" bothered or offended them, rising to 65% among those more engaged in Native traditions.

[ 24 ] In a statistical analysis of social media comments ( tweets ) leading up to Super Bowl LIV , researchers found many more negative terms associated with the Kansas City team compared to San Francisco. While both teams were referred to in terms related to violence, the Chiefs were much more likely to receive insults related to intelligence (being called stupid) and many insults were specific references to negative Native American stereotypes, such as drunkenness ("firewater"), and being inbred or extinct. The conclusion drawn was support for Natives being insulted, rather than honored, by Native American mascots.

[ 25 ] Response to changes by other teams [ edit ] After the Washington Redskins and Cleveland Indians announced in July 2020 the process of reviewing their names, the Chiefs did not respond to a request for comment.

[ 26 ] The editorial board of the Kansas City Star stated that "It's time for a real examination of all of it: the tomahawk chop, the drum, Arrowhead Stadium , Warpaint , and the costumes worn by fans at the game." [ 27 ] On August 20, 2020, the Chiefs announced that headdresses and Native American style face paint would be banned at Arrowhead Stadium.

[ 28 ] Under the new Arrowhead policy, the portion of the tomahawk chop led by Kansas City Chiefs cheerleaders was subtly modified, now required to lead the chop with a closed fist rather than the traditional open palm.

[ 29 ] Deb Haaland , the first Indigenous US Secretary of the Interior has called on teams with tribal mascots to change mascots, including the Kansas City Chiefs.

[ 4 ] [ 30 ] Despite Native American and national news media statements that they find the practices to be racist, [ 31 ] the Chiefs continue many of the behaviors of other teams with Native American names, including fans wearing headdresses and warpaint, doing the tomahawk chop, and banging a drum.

[ 5 ] However, the ban of Native American headdresses and face paint at Arrowhead Stadium went into effect during the 2020 season opener on September 10, 2020.

[ 32 ] Renewed scrutiny during modern Super Bowl appearances [ edit ] Before the kickoff of Super Bowl LV , members of the Florida Indigenous Rights and Environmental Equity (FIREE) protested for the termination of the Kansas City Chiefs name, chants, celebrations, and fan gear.  Members of the group describe the use of the name and culture as "dishonorable and disrespectful." [ 33 ] For years, fans have been known to wear headdresses and warpaint, mocking Native American culture.  At the Raymond James Stadium where the protest occurred, protestors argued against the issue of the arrowhead, which is part of the team's logo that is plastered on fan gear and the team's uniforms. Protesters fought back at the mockery yelling "We're just saying if you're not going to honor us, don't use the arrowhead." and "you're mocking our people." [ 34 ] Members of FIREE want to express their feelings of pain when teams appropriate their culture, saying “when you make indigenous people into a mascot, it's extremely dehumanizing, especially for children.”  Part of the continuous frustration is caused by the lack of learning and listening from associations and their fans.  Professor Rhonda LeValdo, from Haskell Indian Nations University expresses that the continuous appropriation of these customs is because "too many people don't care about Native Americans unless they can use our likeness for their companies, cars, or costumes." [ 35 ] Alicia Norris, co-founder of FIREE, asks that “all human beings recognize that American Indians are Human Beings not sports team mascots for America's fun and games.” [ 36 ] Along with disappointment and feelings of appropriation, there is a lack of correlation between the chants and fan gear, and the game itself.  The Kansas City Star addressed the issue saying “we embrace the team's on field but don't think a corrosive chant has much to do with it. It isn't fair to ask groups offended by these symbols to wait even longer for change." [ 33 ] During the 2023 playoff season, the Kansas City Indian Center and the Not In Our Honor Coalition made a billboard near the stadium that said "Change The Name and Stop The Chop!" [ 2 ] In advance of Super Bowl LVII , some name change advocates point out the continued discriminatory behaviors by fans in spite of official efforts to eradicate them, and the academic research establishing the harms inherent in any stereotyping. Others point to inclusion of Indigenous voices in the promotion of the game.

[ 37 ] Prior to notification of the protests, a decision was made to have the song "America the Beautiful" interpreted by Colin Denny (Navajo) in Plains Indian Sign Language , as a means of recognizing the number of tribes living in Arizona, the site of the game.

[ 38 ] Protests continued when the Chiefs returned to the Super Bowl the following year for Super Bowl LVIII .

[ 39 ] After musician Taylor Swift started dating Chiefs tight end Travis Kelce in 2023 and gained widespread media attention, the Not in Our Honor Coalition expressed that they hope Taylor Swift speaks out about ending the chop.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] In February 2024, Lily Gladstone (Siksikaitsitapi and Nimíipuu), who was the first Native American person to be nominated for an Academy Award, spoke out about a long history of “exclusion and misrepresentation” of Native Americans in film and society. While acknowledging some gains, they pointed to one of the teams in the Super Bowl, noting “We haven't come that far if you look at one of the teams that's playing,” referring to the Chiefs and calling for an end to the chop and to change the team name.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] See also [ edit ] Atlanta Braves tomahawk chop and name controversy Tomahawk chop References [ edit ] ^ Tang, Terry; Skretta, Dave (February 9, 2023).

"Native Americans renew protests of Kansas City Chiefs mascot" .

AP NEWS . Retrieved February 11, 2023 .

^ a b "Why billboards urging Chiefs to 'change the name and stop the chop' return for playoffs" . Retrieved February 8, 2024 .

^ "Native Americans Want Taylor Swift to Help End K.C. Chiefs' Tomahawk Chop" .

^ a b Castillo, Jessica (July 7, 2020).

"This NFL Team Is Finally Changing Their Offensive Name" .

Teen Vogue .

^ a b Asmelash, Leah (February 1, 2020).

"How the Kansas City Chiefs got their name, and why it's so controversial" .

CNN .

^ Schilling, Vincent (September 21, 2019).

"How the Kansas City Chiefs got their name and the Boy Scout Tribe of Mic-O-Say" .

Indian Country Today .

^ "Warpaint" .

Kansas City Chiefs . Archived from the original on December 14, 2014 . Retrieved November 13, 2014 .

^ Eduardo Medina (July 26, 2021).

"Still Chiefs, Kansas City Team Will Retire Its Mascot 'Warpaint' " .

The New York Times .

^ "Rare Kansas City Chiefs THE TRIBE War Paint Poster (Costacos Brothers 1991) | #525841276" .

Worthpoint .

^ "National Coalition on Racism in Sports and Media" .

www.aimovement.org .

^ DONOVAN, DEREK (October 27, 2013).

"Chiefs fans' 'Indian' dress is problematic" .

The Kansas City Star .

^ HuffPosthttps://www.huffpost.com › entrySonic's Racist Sign About Redskins, Chiefs Prompts Quick Apology ...

^ "Sonic Drive-In apologizes after making racist Chiefs-Redskins sign" .

www.cbssports.com . Retrieved February 7, 2024 .

^ Taylor, Kate (December 10, 2013).

"A Racist Sign at Sonic and 5 Other Franchise PR Disasters" .

Entrepreneur . Retrieved February 7, 2024 .

^ Krol, Debra Utacia.

"With Chiefs in the Super Bowl, some Native people say it's time to erase the offensive name" .

USA TODAY . Retrieved February 7, 2024 .

^ Forbes, Paula (December 9, 2013).

"Sonic Apologizes for Racist Chiefs/Redskins Sign" .

Eater . Retrieved February 7, 2024 .

^ Krol, Debra Utacia.

"With Chiefs in the Super Bowl, some Native people say it's time to erase the offensive name" .

USA TODAY . Retrieved February 8, 2024 .

^ MELLINGER, SAM (August 6, 2014).

"To avoid a cultural free-for-all, Chiefs form alliance with American Indian groups" .

The Kansas City Star .

^ MELLINGER, SAM (June 25, 2014).

"Woman behind fight against Washington's NFL nickname says Chiefs should be on guard" .

The Kansas City Star .

^ "Meet the Native American Woman Who Took on the Washington Football Team" .

Mother Jones . June 18, 2014.

^ Hendley, Matthew (December 10, 2014).

"Native Americans Calling on Arizona Cardinals to Make Policy Against Headdresses, Redface" .

Phoenix New Times . Archived from the original on December 14, 2014 . Retrieved July 3, 2020 .

^ Lytton, Barry (October 16, 2015).

"Native American groups to protest Kansas City Chiefs nickname at Vikings game" .

The Grand Forks Herald . Archived from the original on August 31, 2017 . Retrieved July 3, 2020 .

^ Rothfield, Ariel (January 15, 2016).

"Kansas indigenous group asking Kansas City Chiefs fans to stop the Tomahawk chop" .

KSHB Kansas City . Archived from the original on December 28, 2016 . Retrieved January 16, 2016 .

^ John Eligon (January 29, 2020).

"Celebrating the Kansas City Chiefs, the Chop Divides" .

The New York Times .

^ "Not Your Mascot: Opinions vs Data" .

Indigenous Engineering . Retrieved February 18, 2020 .

^ "Redskins, Indians Considering New Names. Is It Time for the Chiefs to Make a Change?" .

Kansas City Star . July 7, 2020. Archived from the original on July 18, 2020.

^ The Kansas City Star Editorial Board (July 7, 2020).

"Redskins, Indians considering new names. Is it time for the Chiefs to make a change?" .

Kansas City Star .

^ Michael Levenson (August 20, 2020).

"Kansas City Chiefs Ban Headdresses at Stadium" .

The New York Times .

^ Aguilar, Leslie (September 10, 2020).

"Chiefs fans react to changes regarding tomahawk chop, headdresses" . KCTV5.

^ "x.com" .

^ Clarke, Liz.

" 'End racism,' the NFL implored. So what about the Chiefs' name?" .

Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved February 17, 2021 .

^ "Kansas City Chiefs nix headdresses, face paint as team prepares to start NFL season" . KTLA. Associated Press. September 10, 2020 . Retrieved September 13, 2020 .

^ a b Brito, Christopher (February 5, 2021).

"Protest calling for Chiefs to change name and stop using tomahawk chop planned ahead of Super Bowl" .

CBS News .

^ Margo Snipe; Natalie Weber (February 7, 2021).

" 'We're not mascots': Indigenous-led Super Bowl protest decries Chiefs mascot" .

Tampa Bay Times .

^ LeValdo, Rhonda (February 1, 2020).

"The Kansas City Chiefs' "Arrowhead Chop" chant isn't a tribute to people like me. It's racist" .

Vox . Retrieved June 3, 2022 .

^ "Native American group plans Super Bowl protest of Kansas City Chiefs" .

Tampa Bay Times . Retrieved June 3, 2022 .

^ Lopez-Carmen, Victor A.

"Drawing A Line: How Indigenous Representation Plays Out At Super Bowl LVII" .

Forbes . Retrieved February 10, 2023 .

^ Morris, Amanda (February 12, 2023).

"Native American sign language arrives at the Super Bowl" .

Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved February 13, 2023 .

^ Clark, Laura (February 8, 2024).

"Ahead of Super Bowl, filmmakers challenge 'honor' of Kansas City Chiefs name, Native mascots: 'We are not OK with this' " .

yahoo!entertainment .

^ Masciotra, David (February 9, 2024).

"Interview: Stereotyping Native Americans in Sports Is Wrong" .

The Progressive Magazine .

^ "Not In Our Honor Coalition Statement on Taylor Swift at Kansas City Football Game" .

Not In Our Honor . September 25, 2023.

^ Mohammed, Leyla (February 12, 2024).

"Lily Gladstone Said Her Historic Academy Award Nomination Is "Long Overdue" As She Referenced The NFL's Problematic History Of Misrepresenting Native American People" .

Buzzfeed News .

^ Rosen, Evan (February 19, 2024).

"Lily Gladstone blasts KC Chiefs' name and tomahawk chop; SF 49ers 'accountable' too" .

spokesman.com . The Spokesman-Review – via New York Daily News.

External links [ edit ] Not In Our Honor Coalition website End Racism KC v t e Kansas City Chiefs Founded in 1960 Formerly the Dallas Texans (1960–1962) Based and headquartered in Kansas City, Missouri Franchise Franchise History Seasons All-time roster First-round picks Coaches Logos and uniforms Award winners Records Starting quarterbacks ( list ) Stadiums Cotton Bowl Municipal Stadium Arrowhead Stadium Key personnel Chairman & CEO: Clark Hunt President: Mark Donovan General manager: Brett Veach Head coach: Andy Reid Culture Chiefs name controversy Hunt family Lamar Norma Clark H. Roe Bartle George Toma Warpaint K. C. Wolf Cheerleaders Tomahawk chop " (You Gotta) Fight for Your Right (To Party!) " Quarterback Super Ball Holiday Touchdown ChiefsAholic 101 Awards Lore 2018 game vs. Los Angeles Rams Jet Chip Wasp 13 Seconds Corn Dog Super Bowl parade shooting 2024 AFC Championship Game Rivalries Buffalo Bills Denver Broncos Las Vegas Raiders Los Angeles Chargers Former: St. Louis Cardinals and St. Louis Rams (1968–1987; 1995–2015) Wild card berths (10) 1968 1969 1986 1990 1991 1992 1994 2006 2013 2015 Division championships (17) 1962 1966 1971 1993 1995 1997 2003 2010 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 Conference championships (5) 2019 2020 2022 2023 2024 League championships (5) 1962 1969 (IV) 2019 (LIV) 2022 (LVII) 2023 (LVIII) Retired numbers 3 16 18 28 33 36 58 63 78 86 Media Broadcasters Television: KSHB-TV Radio: WDAF-FM Personalities: Dave Armstrong Len Dawson Kendall Gammon Bob Gretz Art Hains Bill Grigsby Kevin Harlan Mitch Holthus Roger Twibell Current league affiliations League: National Football League (1970–present) Conference: American Football Conference Division: West Division Former league affiliation League: American Football League (1960–1969) v t e Native American mascot controversy Professional sports teams Atlanta Braves Tomahawk chop and name controversy Chief Noc-A-Homa Chicago Blackhawks name and logo controversy Kansas City Chiefs name controversy Prior usage Washington Redskins Name controversy Name change advocates Trademark dispute Opinion polls Original Americans Foundation Chief Zee Washington Redhawks Other teams Cleveland Indians name and logo controversy Chief Wahoo Edmonton Eskimos Golden State Warriors College teams NCAA Native American mascot decision Chief Illiniwek Florida State Seminoles Osceola and Renegade Sammy Seminole Fighting Sioux name controversy San Diego State Aztec Warrior List of college teams Youth and school teams Sports teams named Redskins List of secondary school teams Change advocates Amanda Blackhorse Brett Chapman Gregg Deal Stephanie Fryberg Deb Haaland Suzan Shown Harjo Adrienne Keene Jacqueline Keeler Mary Kathryn Nagle Robert Roche Sundance Charlene Teters Philip Yenyo Related Contemporary Native American issues in the United States Cultural appropriation Indigenous intellectual property List of teams Native American mascot laws and regulations Pretendian Redface Redskin Stereotypes of Indigenous peoples of Canada and the United States Tomahawk chop v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kansas_City_Chiefs_name_controversy&oldid=1300658438 " Categories : Anti-Indigenous racism in the United States Native American cultural appropriation NFL controversies Native American-related controversies Sports mascots in the United States Kansas City Chiefs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with excerpts Use mdy dates from January 2025 This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 17:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kansas City Chiefs name controversy Add languages Add topic

