Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Journals 2 Books 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents IOP Publishing 6 languages Français 한국어 Nederlands Русский Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British academic publishing company This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "IOP Publishing" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "IOP Publishing" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) IOP Publishing Parent company Institute of Physics Founded 1874 Country of origin United Kingdom Headquarters location Bristol , England Key people Tom Grinyer (Group CEO) [ 1 ] Antonia Seymour (Chief Executive IOP Publishing) [ 2 ] Publication types Academic journals , magazines Nonfiction topics Science Official website ioppublishing .org IOP Publishing (previously Institute of Physics Publishing ), is the publishing company of the Institute of Physics . It provides publications through which scientific research is distributed worldwide, including journals, community websites, magazines, conference proceedings and books. The Institute of Physics is a scientific charity devoted to increasing the practice, understanding and application of physics . Any financial surplus earned by IOP Publishing goes to support physics through the various activities of the Institute [ citation needed ] .

The main IOP Publishing headquarters is located in Bristol , England. It also has regional offices in Mexico City , Beijing and Tokyo . It has over 500 employees and staff.

It was the first physics publisher to publish a journal on the internet [ citation needed ] . In 1994, the journal Classical and Quantum Gravity was published as a TeX file. In January 1996, the organization launched the full electronic journals programme on the World Wide Web , ahead of other physics publishers.

[ 3 ] Physics World , the monthly magazine of the Institute of Physics, was first published in October 1988.

[ 4 ] The title, published by IOP Publishing won in the App/Digital Edition category for Association/Non-Profit (B-to-B) brands at the Eddie Digital Awards. It also picked up an honourable mention for best Design Cover at the Association/Non-Profit (B-to-B) category in the Ozzie Awards.

[ 5 ] Journals [ edit ] IOP Science is IOPP's the online service platform for journal content. Journals include: [ 6 ] 2D Materials Advances in Natural Sciences: Nanoscience and Nanotechnology AI for Science Applied Physics Express Biofabrication Bioinspiration & Biomimetics Biomedical Materials Biomedical Physics & Engineering Express Chinese Physics B Chinese Physics C Chinese Physics Letters Classical and Quantum Gravity Communications in Theoretical Physics Computational Science & Discovery Convergent Science Physical Oncology ECS Advances ECS Journal of Solid State Science and Technology ECS Meeting Abstracts ECS Sensors Plus The Electrochemical Society Interface Electronic Structure Engineering Research Express Environmental Research Communications Environmental Research Letters Environmental Research: Climate Environmental Research: Ecology Environmental Research: Energy Environmental Research: Food Systems Environmental Research: Health Environmental Research: Infrastructure and Sustainability Environmental Research: Water EPL European Journal of Physics Flexible and Printed Electronics Fluid Dynamics Research Functional Composites and Structures IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering International Journal of Extreme Manufacturing Inverse Problems Izvestiya: Mathematics Japanese Journal of Applied Physics Journal of Breath Research Journal of Physics: Complexity Journal of Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics Journal of Geophysics and Engineering Journal of Instrumentation Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering Journal of Neural Engineering Journal of Optics Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical Journal of Physics B: Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics Journal of Physics Communications Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter Journal of Physics: Conference Series Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics Journal of Physics: Energy Journal of Physics G: Nuclear and Particle Physics Journal of Physics: Materials Journal of Physics: Photonics Journal of Radiological Protection Journal of Reliability Science and Engineering Journal of The Electrochemical Society Journal of Semiconductors Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment Laser Physics Laser Physics Letters Machine Learning: Science and Technology Materials for Quantum Technology Materials Futures Materials Research Express Measurement Science and Technology Methods and Applications in Fluorescence Metrologia Modelling and Simulation in Materials Science and Engineering Multifunctional Materials Nano Express Nano Futures Nanotechnology Neuromorphic Computing and Engineering New Journal of Physics Nonlinearity Nuclear Fusion Physica Scripta Physical Biology Physics Education Physics in Medicine and Biology Physics-Uspekhi Physiological Measurement Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion Plasma Research Express Plasma Science and Technology Plasma Sources Science and Technology Progress in Biomedical Engineering Progress in Energy Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific Quantum Electronics Quantum Science and Technology Reports on Progress in Physics Research in Astronomy and Astrophysics Research Notes of the AAS Russian Chemical Reviews Russian Mathematical Surveys Sbornik: Mathematics Semiconductor Science and Technology Smart Materials and Structures Superconductor Science and Technology Surface Topography: Metrology and Properties The Astronomical Journal The Astrophysical Journal The Astrophysical Journal Letters The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series The Planetary Science Journal Translational Materials Research Some of these journals are published on behalf of other societies; for example, the Astrophysical Journal group of titles are published in partnership with the American Astronomical Society .

Books [ edit ] IOP Publishing sold its books publishing division (with the imprint Adam Hilger ) to Taylor & Francis in 2005.

[ 7 ] As a consequence of recent significant changes in the publishing landscape and demand for ebooks, IOP Publishing launched an ebook programme in 2012.

[ 8 ] IOP Publishing partnered with Morgan & Claypool on a book programme which is focussed on researchers who are in the early stages of their research careers, or the ones who would like to approach a research field more broadly and across different disciplines.

[ 9 ] In 2014 IOP Publishing and the American Astronomical Society announced an electronic book publishing partnership as part of the AAS's mission to enhance and share humanity’s scientific understanding of the universe.

[ 10 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Institute of Physics appoints new CEO" . Retrieved 12 January 2022 .

^ "Antonia Seymour, Chief Executive, IOP Publishing" .

^ 125 Years: The Physical Society & The Institute of Physics . 1999.

^ " 'Top five physics discoveries' chosen by magazine" . BBC. 3 October 2013 . Retrieved 25 May 2016 .

^ "Physics World celebrates digital award win" . PPA. 29 October 2015. Archived from the original on 3 June 2016 . Retrieved 25 May 2016 .

^ "Journals" . Ingenta . Retrieved 25 May 2016 .

^ "Taylor & Francis Group Corporate Website - Members of the Group" . Taylorandfrancisgroup.co.uk . Retrieved 20 September 2013 .

^ "IOP Publishing launches ebook initiative" . PPA. 18 October 2012. Archived from the original on 9 April 2016 . Retrieved 20 September 2013 .

^ "The state of scholarly e-books today and tomorrow: Olaf Ernst, IOP Publishing" . Research Information. 9 April 2013 . Retrieved 25 May 2016 .

^ "AAS and IOP team up to enhance knowledge of the universe" . Research Information. 17 December 2013 . Retrieved 25 May 2016 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Institute of Physics Awards Appleton Medal Blodgett Medal Born Medal Bragg Medal Burnell Medal Chadwick Medal Curie Medal Dirac Medal Edwards Medal Faraday Medal FInstP Franklin Medal Gabor Medal Glazebrook Medal Holweck Medal Hoyle Medal Jackson Medal Joule Medal Kelvin Medal Massey Medal Maxwell Medal Meitner Medal Moseley Medal Mott Medal Newton Medal Occhialini Medal Payne-Gaposchkin Medal Paterson Medal Phillips Award President's Medal Rayleigh Medal Rutherford Medal Simon Memorial Prize Somerville Medal Tabor Medal Thomson Medal Young Medal Historical Awards Chree Medal Duddell Medal Guthrie Medal Swan Medal Publications IOP Publishing Physics World Reports on Progress in Physics Proceedings of the Physical Society Measurement Science and Technology Presidents James Menter Brian Flowers Brian Pippard Basil Mason Bas Pease Denys Wilkinson Robert Clayton Alec Merrison Godfrey Stafford Cyril Hilsum Roger Blin-Stoyle [ de ] Clive Foxell Arnold Wolfendale Brian Manley Gareth Roberts Peter Williams David Wallace John Enderby Peter Saraga Jocelyn Bell Burnell Marshall Stoneham Jocelyn Bell Burnell (Interim) Peter Knight Frances Saunders Roy Sambles Julia Higgins Jonathan Flint Formed from Institute of Physics Physical Society Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Norway Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=IOP_Publishing&oldid=1304374179 " Categories : Institute of Physics Publishing companies of the United Kingdom Academic publishing companies Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2015 Articles needing additional references from March 2013 All articles needing additional references Articles lacking reliable references from October 2015 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2020 Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 17:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents IOP Publishing 6 languages Add topic

