Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Corporate structure 3 Operation 4 Reception 5 2019 closure 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents National Congress of Australia's First Peoples Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Peak body for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians, 2010-2019 National Congress of Australia's First Peoples Industry Policy and advocacy Founded 2010 Website https://webarchive.nla.gov.au/awa/20150411171519/http://nationalcongress.com.au/ The National Congress of Australia's First Peoples was the national representative body for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians from 2009 to 2019.

History [ edit ] Planning to establish National Congress was undertaken by a committee established by then Social Justice Commissioner of the Australian Human Rights Commission , [ 1 ] Tom Calma . The organisation was announced in November 2009.

[ 2 ] Its first elected co-chairs were Jody Broun and Les Malezer. Subsequent chairs included Kirstie Parker , Jackie Huggins and Rod Little.

[ citation needed ] It was registered as a charity in December 2012, [ 3 ] but in June 2019 went into voluntary administration .

[ 4 ] Corporate structure [ edit ] National Congress was a public company limited by guarantee .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Membership was open to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander individuals and organisations.  Two important features of National Congress' organisational structure were gender parity, and oversight of elections and day to day operations by an ethics council [ 7 ] .

National Congress consisted of a Board of 8 directors (four women and four men) of which two (one woman and one man) were elected directly by the members to serve as co-chairs for a term on two years.

[ 8 ] There were three membership categories: peak and national organisations which formed Chamber 1; Chamber 2 (i.e. regional, state, territory or other organisations) and Chamber 3 (individual members).

[ 9 ] Members of each chamber elected 20 female and 20 male delegates, who in turn, elected one female and one male director to sit on the board.

[ 10 ] Each year, all of the delegates were invited to attend a two-day National Congress meeting which established broad policy positions.

[ 11 ] The Board met monthly.

National Congress maintained a secretariat in Redfern, Sydney, headed by a CEO who was responsible for day to day operations related to media, membership services, event management, public relations, financial and human resources management, and policy analysis and development services.  The first CEO was Lindon Coombes, who was followed by Geoff Scott and Gary Oliver.

[ citation needed ] The first National Congress meeting of 120 delegates was held in June 2011.

[ 12 ] Operation [ edit ] According to its 2017 submission to the Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commission : National Congress of Australia's First Peoples ("National Congress") is the national elected and representative body for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples in Australia. Established in 2010, National Congress has grown from inception to comprise and serve over 180 organisations and almost 9000 individual members. National Congress advocates for self-determination and the implementation of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous peoples . National Congress believes it is essential that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are central participants in decisions impacting on our lives and communities, and in all areas including our lands, health, education, law, governance and economic empowerment. We promote respect for our cultures and recognition as the core of our national heritage. National Congress has focused its energies on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander recognition and status of our rights, including the areas of health, education, land and sea rights , social justice, Constitutional reform and sovereignty. Additionally National Congress has been heavily involved in a wide range of other matters, including political relations, cultural maintenance and development, revitalisation of our languages, treaty discussions, employment and economic empowerment, housing, family violence, children and youth safety, disabilities, governance and leadership. In our role as the voice of Australia's First Peoples and as a product of consultation with our members and communities, National Congress provides expert perspectives on important issues affecting our Peoples. National Congress has been centrally involved in providing context and articulating the importance of: the 1967 referendum 50th Anniversary, Closing the Gap , the Federal Budget, the 'Change the Date' campaign and consultation with various arms of the United Nations amongst others.

[ 13 ] Reception [ edit ] Australian Human Rights Commissioner Mick Gooda welcomed the formation as a milestone moment for Indigenous Australians.

[ 14 ] Northern Land Council CEO Kim Hill also welcomed the formation of the Congress.

[ 15 ] Aboriginal activist Noel Pearson criticised the Congress as "a blackfella's wailing wall".

[ 5 ] 2019 closure [ edit ] In 2013 the Australian Government withdrew funding of National Congress.

[ 16 ] It was forced out of operation in July 2019 after its reserves had been exhausted. At that time the company had about 10,000 members and 180 affiliated community organisations.

[ 17 ] Ken Wyatt , then the recently appointed Minister for Indigenous Australians in the Morrison government , made a decision not to revive the organisation.

[ 17 ] See also [ edit ] Indigenous voice to government References [ edit ] ^ "Our future in our hands (2009) | Australian Human Rights Commission" .

humanrights.gov.au . Retrieved 26 September 2022 .

^ "2009 Media Release: New National Congress of Australia's First Peoples announced" .

Australian Human Rights Commission . 22 November 2009 . Retrieved 3 August 2020 .

^ "National Congress Of Australia's First Peoples Ltd: History" .

Australian Charities and Not-for-Profit Commission . Retrieved 3 August 2020 .

^ Wellington, Shahni (24 July 2019).

"Exclusive: Co-chairs stood down amidst funding turmoil for Congress" .

NITV . Retrieved 3 August 2020 .

^ a b Jopson, Debra (3 May 2010).

"New indigenous 'company' structured to keep politicians at arm's length" .

The Age . Retrieved 29 May 2010 .

^ "ASIC Free Company Name Search: NATIONAL CONGRESS OF AUSTRALIA'S FIRST PEOPLES LIMITED" .

Australian Securities and Investments Commission . 19 April 2010 . Retrieved 29 May 2010 .

^ "12 Apr 2015 - ETHICS COUNCIL National Congress of Australia's First Peoples" .

Trove . Archived from the original on 11 April 2015 . Retrieved 5 October 2022 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ "12 Apr 2015 - NATIONAL BOARD National Congress of Australia's First Peoples" .

Trove . Archived from the original on 11 April 2015 . Retrieved 5 October 2022 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ "12 Apr 2015 - MEMBERSHIP National Congress of Australia's First Peoples - Archived Website" .

Trove . Archived from the original on 12 April 2015 . Retrieved 5 October 2022 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ "12 Apr 2015 - NATIONAL BOARD National Congress of Australia's First Peoples" .

Trove . Archived from the original on 11 April 2015 . Retrieved 5 October 2022 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ "12 Apr 2015 - About Us National Congress of Australia's First Peoples - Archived Website" .

Trove . Archived from the original on 11 April 2015 . Retrieved 5 October 2022 .

^ corporateName=Commonwealth Parliament; address=Parliament House, Canberra.

"4. Examples of advisory structures" .

www.aph.gov.au . Retrieved 28 September 2022 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "NATIONAL CONGRESS OF AUSTRALIA'S FIRST PEOPLES LTD Annual Information Statement 2017" .

^ Gooda, Mick (2 May 2010).

"2010 Media Release: First National Executive is a milestone moment for Indigenous Australians" .

Australian Human Rights Commission . Retrieved 27 June 2010 .

^ "National Congress of Australia's First Peoples" (PDF) .

Northern Land Council . 4 May 2010 . Retrieved 27 June 2010 .

^ Lorena Allam (12 June 2019).

"Dodson, Burney call for government to fund National Congress of Australia's First Peoples" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 15 April 2020 .

^ a b Morgan, Cassandra (17 October 2019).

"National Congress of Australia's First Peoples' closure a step back for Aboriginal people: Rod Little" .

The Canberra Times . Retrieved 3 August 2020 .

v t e Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Peoples Aboriginal Australians Communities Aboriginal groups Tasmanians Torres Strait Islanders Victorians Western Australians Individuals Activists Musicians People from politics and public service Performing artists Sportspeople Visual artists Writers Culture Astronomy Bora Corroboree Country Deadly Awards Deities The Dreaming Enumeration Elders Flags Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander Kinship Kurdaitcha Literature of Indigenous Australians Marn Grook Message stick NAIDOC Week National Indigenous Human Rights Awards Outstation movement Religion and mythology Riji Seasons Sacred sites Smoking ceremony Songlines Traditional custodianship Tjurunga Torres Strait Islands Language(s) Avoidance speech Australian Aboriginal English Macro-Gunwinyguan languages Australian Creole Language groups Loanwords into English Palawa Pama–Nyungan languages Placenames Sign languages Taboo on the dead Torres Strait English Torres Strait Island languages Organisations ATSIC Aboriginal Medical Service Aborigines Advancement League Aborigines Progressive Association AIATSIS Australian Aboriginal Progressive Association Australian Aborigines' League Mass media National Congress of Australia's First Peoples National Indigenous Council Office of the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations Politics Registered Aboriginal Party Reconciliation Australia National Reconciliation Week Sorry Day TSRA Land councils Central Land Council Kimberley Land Council Maralinga Tjarutja Metropolitan Local Aboriginal Land Council NSW Aboriginal Land Council Northern Land Council South West Aboriginal Land and Sea Council Tiwi Land Council Bushcraft Boomerang Buka Bush bread Bush tucker Bush medicine Coolamon Dugout canoe Fibrecraft Fire-stick farming Food groups Humpy Possum-skin cloak Scarred tree Soaks Spinifex resin Sweets Waddy Woomera Arts Artefacts Bark painting Contemporary visual art Dance Didgeridoo Dreaming Music Music groups Rock NATSIA Award Papunya Tula Sandpainting Vibe Visual art Yininmadyemi History Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 Australian Frontier Wars Bathurst War Hawkesbury and Nepean Wars Caledon Bay crisis Cummeragunja walk-off Day of Mourning Gurindji Strike Historical figures History Prehistory Australian history wars King plates Massacres Black War Missions Native police Native Title Act 1993 New Deal for Aborigines Pilbara strike Pintupi Nine Stolen Generations Apology Tent embassy Western Australia Issues 1967 Referendum Constitutional recognition Crime Health Land rights Native title Protected Area Media portrayal Northern Territory National Emergency Response Self-determination Reconciliation Stolen Generations Half-Caste Act Uluru Statement from the Heart Treaty Truth Voice Voting rights Authority control databases VIAF Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Congress_of_Australia%27s_First_Peoples&oldid=1304444366 " Categories : Commonwealth Government agencies of Australia Indigenous Australian politics 2010 establishments in Australia Defunct organisations serving Indigenous Australians Hidden categories: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use Australian English from July 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from July 2018 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2023 This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 02:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents National Congress of Australia's First Peoples Add languages Add topic

