Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Brundtland commission 2 Development of concept Toggle Development of concept subsection 2.1 Individual well-being 3 Models for a sustainable livelihood approach Toggle Models for a sustainable livelihood approach subsection 3.1 SDGs 3.2 SCDF 3.3 UNDP 3.4 CARE 3.5 DFID 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Sustainable livelihood 2 languages العربية فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Development concept This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards . The specific problem is: A couple of references are clearly still in progress and need to be finished. Lead paragraph is very dense and technical and doesn't give a good introduction to a reader unfamiliar with the terminology.

Please help improve this article if you can.

( December 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Climate change and society Effects · Risk Climate change mitigation Cities Urban heat island Eco-anxiety Ecological footprint Ecological grief Effects of climate change on human health Environmental Conflict Degradation Effects of aviation Impacts of agriculture Extreme weather Drought Flood Heat wave Storm surge Tropical cyclones Wildfire Food security Agriculture Desertification Fisheries Livestock Infectious diseases Mental health / Psychology List of environmental conflicts Sea level rise Coastal erosion Coastal flooding Small island countries Water security Water cycle Water scarcity Economics · Finance Autonomous building Bright green environmentalism Carbon footprint Carbon accounting Carbon offsets and credits Global warming potential Greenhouse gas inventory Net zero emissions Carbon price Carbon bubble Carbon emission trading Carbon fee and dividend Carbon tax Social cost of carbon Circular economy Clean growth Climate change scenario Climate finance Corporate environmental responsibility Corporate sociopolitical activism Corporate sustainability Degrowth Eco-city Ecological economics Ecovillage Energy economics Environmental design Environmental finance ESG Ethical banking Green accounting Green bank Green bond Green bubble Green building Green building and wood Green economy Green home Green recovery Greening Insurance Act of God Extreme event attribution Resilience Risk management Vulnerability Low-carbon economy Mitigation economics Natural building Reuse Sustainable Agriculture Architecture Capitalism City Consumer behaviour Diet Finance Industries Livelihood Sourcing Used good Zero-energy building Zero heating building Social issues · Ethics Children Climate justice Debt Cyclability Deep ecology Dirty hands Ecosophy Environmental racism Environmentalism Ethical consumerism Fossil fuel divestment Gender Greenwashing Human rights Indigenous peoples Just transition List of climate change controversies Migration Mitigation co-benefits Poverty Psychology of climate change denial Public interest design Queer ecology Security Social ecology (ethics) Social responsibility Stewardship (theology) Urban forest inequity Walkability Women Communication Climate crisis Education Greenwashing Media coverage Popular culture fiction art Psychology of denial Public opinion Scientific consensus on climate change Politics Climate movement Eco-capitalism Green left Green liberalism Eco-socialism Green politics History Political economy Climate governance Climate movement Conspiracy theories Denial Global warming controversy Litigation Individual actions UNFCCC UN conferences Kyoto Protocol Paris Agreement Portal Glossary Index v t e Sustainable Livelihood emerges at the intersection of development and environmental studies to offer a new way to think about  work, production and distribution. Specifically, the work of vulnerable populations (e.g., low income population living in the bottom of the pyramid , indigenous communities , etc.) are discussed in this concept to build a sustainable future where inequality is eliminated in households.

[ 1 ] The term reflects a concern with extending the focus of poverty studies beyond the physical manifestations of poverty to include also vulnerability and social exclusion .

[ 2 ] The term sustainable refers to an individual's ability to provide for themselves in a viably long manner. "Sustainability" also refers to the ability to undergo external shocks or stresses and recover from such traumas by maintaining or improving one's livelihood .

[ 3 ] The sustainable livelihood framework provides a structure for holistic poverty alleviation action.

[ 4 ] The sustainable livelihood approach focuses on finding resolutions to the problems of vulnerable communities by creating human-centered, participatory, and dynamic development opportunities. It is a bridge connecting the environment and humans to live in harmony.

[ 5 ] One example of an activity that aims for enhancing sustainable livelihood is the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) proposed by the United Nations. All of their 17 goals for 2030 are the aimings that the world needs to be achieved to ensure that "no one is left behind" and a sustainable world.

[ 6 ] However, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, all 17 goals are experiencing significant delay and need to be tackled in a collaborative way beyond the flame of the goals.

[ 7 ] The neutrality of this article is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met .

( December 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) History [ edit ] The term Sustainable Livelihood was first proposed in a rural context, [ 8 ] and was later amended by the Brundtland Commission. Authors Gibson-Graham, Cameron, and Healy highlight the measure of well-being and how an individual's well-being contributes to their ability to survive well.

[ 9 ] Brundtland commission [ edit ] The sustainable livelihoods idea was first introduced by the Brundtland Commission on Environment and Development, and the 1992 United Nation's  Conference on Environment and Development expanded the concept, advocating for the achievement of sustainable livelihoods as a broad goal for poverty eradication.

In 1992 Robert Chambers and Gordon Conway [ 10 ] proposed the following composite definition of a sustainable rural livelihood, which is applied most commonly at the household level: "A livelihood comprises the capabilities, assets (stores, resources, claims and access) and activities required for a means of living: a livelihood is sustainable which can cope with and recover from stress and shocks, maintain or enhance its capabilities and assets, and provide sustainable livelihood opportunities for the next generation; and which contributes net benefits to other livelihoods at the local and global levels and in the short and long term." [ 11 ] Development of concept [ edit ] Stemming from theory regarding sustainable development , a sustainable livelihood approach incorporates the collective concerns for environmental and economic resources and individual focus.

[ 12 ] Individual well-being [ edit ] In an analysis of various 24 hour clocks, Gibson-Graham et al. synthesize five categories for overall well-being: Material, Occupational, Social, Community, and Physical.

[ 13 ] Holistic interventions prove to be challenging to measure, furthermore, quantitative data on qualitative phenomena (such as well-being) is similarly challenging to record.

[ 14 ] Models for a sustainable livelihood approach [ edit ] There are several organizations incorporating a Sustainable Livelihood approach into their ongoing poverty alleviation efforts; [ 2 ] the models by which they adapt the Sustainable Livelihood approach are discussed below.

SDGs [ edit ] The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are the goals for creating a sustainable world aiming for 2030 by tackling various issues, including poverty. In 2015, this action was adopted by the United Nations and started. For every 17 goals, there are specific goals under the primary goal, and they are approached comprehensively on national, community, and individual scales.

[ 15 ] The United Nations issues a progress report annually indicating the progress of each SDG.

[ 7 ] SCDF [ edit ] The acronym stands for The Smart Community Development Framework and aims to find the problems of vulnerable communities in order to propose resolutions to establish sustainable livelihoods. The primary purpose is to identify each community's needs and determine a society-specific solution to eliminate the vulnerability of that community, especially poverty. The framework focuses on empowering communities to make their own decisions about the problems by creating an environment where issues would be solved permanently since the people in that environment actively participate in overcoming the challenges.

[ 16 ] UNDP [ edit ] The United Nations Development Programme utilizes a sustainable livelihood approach to development through the evaluation of different types of capital.

[ 17 ] The UNDP identifies five key types of capital: human, social, natural, physical, and financial. The access individuals have to these assets determines how the UNDP designs initiatives to directly or indirectly facilitate development. The UNDP also uses an asset based approach to poverty alleviation, examining how individuals leverage assets and cope with external sources of shock or stress.

[ 2 ] CARE [ edit ] CARE (Cooperative for Assistance and Relief Everywhere) focuses on emergency relief administration and long-term development programs.

[ 18 ] In 1994, CARE developed a Household Livelihood Security framework to better monitor, evaluate, and track the work they conduct.

[ 2 ] CARE's application of a sustainable livelihood framework moves away from a sectorial approach and focuses on holistic development techniques.

[ 19 ] DFID [ edit ] The Department for International Development is the United Kingdom's department dedicated to eradicating extreme poverty and administering foreign aid.

[ 20 ] The DFID leverages a sustainable livelihoods framework to focus holistically on activities directly related to improving an individual's livelihood.

[ 2 ] Human-centered, multi-leveled, sustainable, and dynamic initiatives are all incorporated into the DFID's measures.

[ 21 ] See also [ edit ] Brundtland Commission Sustainable Development Goals Department for International Development United Nations Development Programme CARE (relief agency) References [ edit ] ^ Xaxa, Virginius; Saha, Debdulal; Singha, Rajdeep (2017).

Work, institutions and sustainable livelihood : issues and challenges of transformation . Springer.

ISBN 978-981-10-5756-4 .

OCLC 1007700690 .

^ a b c d e Krantz, Lasse (February 2001). "The Sustainable Livelihood Approach to Poverty Reduction".

Sida .

^ Serrat, Olivier (May 23, 2017).

The Sustainable Livelihoods Approach. In: Knowledge Solutions . Singapore: Springer. pp.

21– 26.

ISBN 978-981-10-0983-9 .

^ Holland, Jeremy and James Blackburn. Whose Voice? Participatory Research and Policy Change. IT Publications, London, 1998.

^ Serrat O. (2017) The Sustainable Livelihoods Approach. In: Knowledge Solutions. Springer, Singapore.

https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-0983-9_5 ^ Nations, United.

"What the SDGs Mean" .

United Nations . Retrieved December 2, 2022 .

^ a b "— SDG Indicators" .

unstats.un.org . Retrieved December 2, 2022 .

^ WCED 1987a: 2-5 (source from IDS Disc paper 296) ^ "Take Back Work." Take Back the Economy: an Ethical Guide for Transforming Our Communities, by J. K. Gibson-Graham et al., University of Minnesota Press, 2013.

^ WCED 1987a: 2-5 are (source from IDS Disc paper 296) ^ "The Sustainable Livelihoods Approach: A Framework for Knowledge Integration Assessment" (PDF) .

www.humanecologyreview.org .

[ better source needed ] ^ missing source - look at SD page ^ Take back the Economy, Ch: Take Back Work, page 21-22 ^ Tao, Teresa C. H.; Wall, Geoffrey (June 1, 2009).

"A Livelihood Approach to Sustainability" .

Asia Pacific Journal of Tourism Research .

14 (2): 137– 152.

doi : 10.1080/10941660902847187 .

ISSN 1094-1665 .

S2CID 154135332 .

^ "Sustainable Development Goals | United Nations Development Programme" .

UNDP . Retrieved December 2, 2022 .

^ Ribeiro, Lucas F.V.; McMartin, Dena W. (February 23, 2019).

"A methodological framework for sustainable development with vulnerable communities" .

African Journal of Science, Technology, Innovation and Development .

11 (2): 133– 139.

doi : 10.1080/20421338.2018.1532629 .

ISSN 2042-1338 .

S2CID 169300837 .

^ "Guidance Note" (PDF) .

undp.org . Retrieved December 20, 2019 .

^ careadmin (August 29, 2013).

"CARE Humanitarian | Home" .

CARE . Retrieved December 20, 2019 .

^ "Application of CARE's Livelihoods Approach | Eldis" .

www.eldis.org . Retrieved December 20, 2019 .

^ "About us" .

GOV.UK . Retrieved December 20, 2019 .

^ "DFID's Sustainable Livelihoods Approach and its Framework" (PDF) .

GLOPP . Retrieved December 20, 2019 .

v t e Sustainability Outline Index Principles Anthropocene Environmentalism Global governance Human impact on the environment Planetary boundaries Development Consumption Anthropization Anti-consumerism Circular economy Durable good Earth Overshoot Day Ecological footprint Ethical Green consumption Micro-sustainability Over-consumption Product stewardship Simple living Social return on investment Steady-state economy Sustainability Advertising Brand Marketing myopia Sustainable Consumer behaviour Market Systemic change resistance Tragedy of the commons World population Control Demographic transition Dependency ratio List Family planning Intergenerational equity Population ageing Sustainable population Technology Appropriate Environmental technology Natural building Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable industries Sustainable packaging Biodiversity Biosecurity Biosphere Conservation biology Endangered species Holocene extinction Invasive species Energy Carbon footprint Renewable energy Sustainable energy Food Civic agriculture Climate-smart agriculture Community-supported agriculture Cultured meat Sustainable agriculture Sustainable diet Sustainable fishery Water Air well (condenser) Bioretention Bioswale Blue roof Catchwater Constructed wetland Detention basin Dew pond Footprint Hydroelectricity Hydropower Infiltration basin Irrigation tank Marine energy Micro hydro Ocean thermal energy conversion Pico hydro Rain garden Rainwater harvesting Rainwater tank Reclaimed water Retention basin Run-of-the-river hydroelectricity Scarcity Security Small hydro Sustainable drainage system Tidal power Tidal stream generator Tree box filter Water conservation Water heat recycling Water recycling shower Water-sensitive urban design Accountability Corporate environmental responsibility Corporate social responsibility Environmental accounting Environmental full-cost accounting Environmental planning Generational accounting Sustainability Accounting Measurement Metrics and indices Reporting Standards and certification Sustainable yield Economic Debt Sustainability Analysis Fiscal sustainability Applications Advertising Art Business City Cultural sustainability Climate finance Community Disinvestment Eco-capitalism Eco-cities Eco-investing Eco-socialism Ecovillage Environmental finance Green economy Construction Fashion Finance Gardening Geopark Green Development Infrastructure Marketing Green roof Greening Impact investing Landscape Livelihood Living Market Organic movement Organizations Procurement Refurbishment Socially responsible business Socially responsible marketing Sanitation Sourcing Space Sustainability organization Tourism Transport Urban drainage systems Urban infrastructure Sustainable management Environmental Fisheries Forest Humanistic capitalism Landscape Materials Natural resource Planetary Recycling Waste Agreements and conferences UN Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm 1972) Brundtlandt Commission Report (1983) Our Common Future (1987) Earth Summit (1992) Rio Declaration on Environment and Development (1992) Agenda 21 (1992) Convention on Biological Diversity (1992) Lisbon Principles (1997) Earth Charter (2000) UN Millennium Declaration (2000) Earth Summit 2002 (Rio+10, Johannesburg) UN Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20, 2012) Sustainable Development Goals (2015) UNESCO MONDIACULT conferences Category Lists Science Studies Degrees Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sustainable_livelihood&oldid=1301226753 " Categories : Sustainable development Sustainability Hidden categories: All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from December 2021 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from January 2020 Articles needing cleanup from December 2019 All pages needing cleanup Cleanup tagged articles with a reason field from December 2019 Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from December 2019 Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes from December 2024 All Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 19:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sustainable livelihood 2 languages Add topic

