Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Abstracting and indexing 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Monthly Weather Review 5 languages Deutsch Français Монгол Português Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Academic journal Monthly Weather Review Discipline Atmospheric sciences , meteorology Language English Edited by Ron McTaggart-Cowan Publication details History 1872–present Publisher American Meteorological Society (United States) Frequency Monthly Open access Delayed, 1 year Impact factor 2.8 (2023) Standard abbreviations ISO 4 ( alt ) · Bluebook ( alt ) NLM ( alt ) · MathSciNet ( alt ) ISO 4 Mon. Weather Rev.

Indexing CODEN ( alt · alt2 ) · JSTOR ( alt ) · LCCN ( alt ) MIAR · NLM ( alt ) · Scopus · W&L CODEN MWREAB ISSN 0027-0644 (print) 1520-0493 (web) LCCN 74648196 OCLC no.

436659104 Links Journal homepage Online access Online archive The Monthly Weather Review is a peer-reviewed scientific journal published by the American Meteorological Society . It covers research related to analysis and prediction of observed and modeled circulations of the atmosphere, including technique development, data assimilation , model validation , and relevant case studies. This includes papers on numerical techniques and data assimilation techniques that apply to the atmosphere and/or ocean environment. The current editor-in-chief is Ron McTaggart-Cowan ( Environment and Climate Change Canada ).

History [ edit ] Source: [ 1 ] The journal was first published in January 1873 by the United States Army Signal Corps , but issues were later extended back to the start of the federal government's fiscal year (July 1872). It was issued by the Office of the Chief Signal Officer until 1891. In 1891, the Signal Office's meteorological responsibilities were transferred to the Weather Bureau under the United States Department of Agriculture . The Weather Bureau published the journal until 1970 when the Bureau became part of the newly formed National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , which published it until the end of 1973. Since 1974, it has been published by the American Meteorological Society .

[ 2 ] Abstracting and indexing [ edit ] The journal is abstracted and indexed in Current Contents /Physical, Chemical & Earth Sciences and the Science Citation Index .

[ 3 ] According to the Journal Citation Reports , the journal has a 2020 impact factor of 3.735.

[ 4 ] References [ edit ] ^ Schultz, David M.; Potter, Sean (2022).

" Monthly Weather Review at 150 Years: Its History, Impact, and Legacy" .

Monthly Weather Review .

1 (1): 3– 57.

Bibcode : 2022MWRv..150....3S .

doi : 10.1175/MWR-D-21-0267.1 – via American Meteorological Society.

^ '' Monthly Weather Review'' , National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Central Library.

^ "Master Journal List" .

Intellectual Property & Science .

Thomson Reuters . Retrieved 2014-03-28 .

^ "Monthly Weather Review".

2020 Journal Citation Reports .

Web of Science (Science ed.).

Thomson Reuters . 2021.

External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Monthly Weather Review Official website NOAA Central Library - Free access to articles prior to 1974 v t e Journals published by the American Meteorological Society Artificial Intelligence for the Earth Systems Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society Earth Interactions Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology Journal of Atmospheric and Oceanic Technology Journal of Climate Journal of Hydrometeorology Journal of Physical Oceanography Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences Meteorological Monographs Monthly Weather Review Weather and Forecasting Weather, Climate, and Society Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Monthly_Weather_Review&oldid=1293532741 " Categories : Meteorology journals Monthly journals English-language journals Delayed open access journals Publications established in 1872 1872 establishments in the United States American Meteorological Society academic journals Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Monthly journals (infobox) Delayed open access journals (infobox) Wikisource templates with missing id This page was last edited on 2 June 2025, at 06:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Monthly Weather Review 5 languages Add topic

