Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Comics 2 Literature 3 Film and television Toggle Film and television subsection 3.1 Film 3.2 Television 4 Video games 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Nanopunk 10 languages Deutsch Español فارسی 한국어 Italiano Русский Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Subgenre of science fiction Nanopunk refers to an emerging subgenre of science fiction that is still very much in its infancy in comparison to its ancestor-genre, cyberpunk , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] and some of its other derivatives .

[ 3 ] The genre is especially similar to biopunk , [ 4 ] but describes a world where nanites and bio-nanotechnologies are widely in use and nanotechnologies are the predominant technological forces in society.

The genre is mainly concerned with the artistic, psychological, [ 2 ] and societal impact of nanotechnology, rather than aspects of the technology which itself is still in its infancy. Unlike cyberpunk, which can be distinguished by a gritty and low-life yet technologically advanced character, nanopunk can have a darker dystopian character that might examine potential risks by nanotechnology as well as a more optimistic outlook that might emphasize potential uses of nanotechnology .

[ 5 ] [ 4 ] Comics [ edit ] M. Rex (1999) features nanites as the source of power for the title character.

Scooby Apocalypse (2016–2019) reveals early on that a nanite virus originating from Velma's 'Elysium Project' experiment is the reason behind people becoming monsters.

Literature [ edit ] Kathleen Ann Goonan ( Queen City Jazz – 1997) and Linda Nagata were some of the earliest writers to feature nanotech as the primary element in their work.

[ 2 ] Neal Stephenson 's The Diamond Age is a coming of age story, set in a future in which nanotechnology affects all aspects of life.

[ 6 ] Some novels of Stanislaw Lem , including Weapon System of the Twenty First Century or The Upside-down Evolution , The Invincible and Peace on Earth as well as Greg Bear 's Blood Music [ 7 ] could also be considered precursors of nanopunk.

Michael Crichton novel Prey (2002).

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 8 ] Another of Crichton's novels, Micro (2011), could also be an example, but it focuses more on the idea of size-manipulation and shrinking of objects rather than nanotechnology.

Nathan McGrath 's Nanopunk (2013) is set in an icebound near-future where almost half the world's population has been wiped out. Alister, a child when "The Big Freeze" began is now a teenager in a society slowly finding its feet. Unaware of his nano-infection he sets out to find his lost sister and is joined by Suzie, a militant cyber-activist . Their hacking attracts the attention of Secret Services and a ruthless private military corporation and their search becomes a deadly race for survival.

Linda Nagata's Tech Heaven (1995) is a futuristic thriller about Katie, a woman whose husband is about to die of injuries sustained in a helicopter crash. Instead of dying, he gets his body cryogenically preserved so that he can be reawakened when med-tech is advanced enough to heal him. The problem is that it winds up taking far more than the estimated few years for this to happen.

[ 9 ] Alastair Reynolds ' Chasm City could also be considered nanopunk.

[ 10 ] Film and television [ edit ] Film [ edit ] Faction (2020 Film) Honey, I Shrunk the Kids (1989 film) Osmosis Jones (2001 film) The Day the Earth Stood Still (2008 film) G.I. Joe: The Rise of Cobra (2009 film) Transcendence (2014 film) Ant-Man (2015 film) Television [ edit ] Futurama , " Parasites Lost " (2001) - Fry is infected by parasites that increase his intelligence and health, but ultimately chooses to get rid of them with miniature droids.

Justice League , "Tabula Rasa" (2003) - The villain, Amazo , is an android composed of nanites that allow him to mimic abilities.

Static Shock , "Hoop Squad" (2004) - The villain, Dr. Odium, is a scientist specializing in nanotechnology who was fired for attempting to experiment on humans.

Doctor Who , " The Doctor Dances " (2005) - Two ships seen in the episode contain nanogenes that can heal wounds.

Generator Rex (2010–2013) - Nanites are central to the premise of the series, in which an accident caused them to spread across the world and infect almost all life. Protagonist Rex Salazar is able to control his own nanites and cure the mutations caused by them, and thus works for the government agency Providence, battling nanite mutants (called E.V.O.S).

Video games [ edit ] Anarchy Online (2001) Crysis (2007–2013) Deus Ex (2000) Metal Gear Solid series Supreme Ruler 2020 (2008) Red Faction (2001) See also [ edit ] Biopunk Cyberpunk derivatives Kathleen Ann Goonan Nanotechnology in fiction Posthuman Postcyberpunk Societal impact of nanotechnology References [ edit ] ^ Cochran, Tanya R.; Ginn, Sherry; Zinder, Paul (2014).

The Multiple Worlds of Fringe: Essays on the J.J. Abrams Science Fiction Series . McFarland. p. 156.

ISBN 978-0-7864-7567-4 . Retrieved 20 May 2015 .

^ a b c Newitz, Annalee (17 January 2008).

"io9 Talks to Kathleen Ann Goonan About Nanopunk and Jazz" . Archived from the original on 2 April 2015 . Retrieved 20 May 2015 .

^ a b "Nanopunk, Definition and Examples of Nanotechnology Based Nanopunk Speculative Science Fiction" .

AZoNano . June 12, 2007 . Retrieved January 24, 2021 .

^ a b c "Nanopunk Science Fiction" . Archived from the original on 2016-12-20 . Retrieved 2015-05-20 .

^ Huereca, Rafael Miranda.

"The evolution of cyberpunk into postcyberpunk - The role of cognitive cyberspaces, wetware networks and nanotechnology in science fiction" (PDF) . Retrieved 19 May 2015 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Sohn, Stephen Hong (2008).

"Alien/Asian: Imagining the Racialized Future" (PDF) .

MELUS .

33 (4). The Society for the Study of the Multi-Ethnic Literature of the United States.

doi : 10.1093/melus/33.4.5 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 April 2015 . Retrieved 19 May 2015 .

^ "The Influence of Popular Culture and Science Fiction on the Public Perception of Emerging Technologies – Focus: Nanotechnology" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-12-28.

^ Johnson, Reed (December 22, 2003).

"A quantum leap" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved January 24, 2021 .

^ Newitz, Annalee (December 22, 2006).

"Underrated SF Classic: Linda Nagata's "Tech Heaven" (review)" .

Wired News .

^ Heikkilä, Ville (November 2013).

Restoration of identity from space in Alastair Reynolds's Chasm City (PDF) (MA thesis). University of Tampere . Retrieved 19 May 2015 .

v t e Cyberpunk List of cyberpunk works Contributors Bruce Bethke Pat Cadigan Philip K. Dick William Gibson Sogo Ishii Tom Maddox Mamoru Oshii Katsuhiro Otomo Rudy Rucker Ridley Scott John Shirley Masamune Shirow Neal Stephenson Bruce Sterling Subcultures Japanese cyberpunk Cyberdelic Cybergoth Cypherpunk Electrohippies Themes Philosophy Transhumanism Cognitive liberty Morphological freedom Human enhancement Artificial intelligence AI in fiction Cyberspace Cybercrime Cyberculture Digital revolution Information technology Megacorporation Evil corporation Virtual reality Augmented reality Derivative genres Tech noir Steampunk works Dieselpunk Biopunk works Nanopunk Solarpunk Hopepunk Category v t e Nanotechnology Overview History Organizations Popular culture Outline Impact and applications Nanomedicine Nanotoxicology Green nanotechnology Regulation Nanomaterials Fullerenes Nanotubes Carbon Non-carbon Nanoparticles characterization Molecular self-assembly Self-assembled monolayer Supramolecular assembly DNA nanotechnology Solid lipid nanoparticle Nanoelectronics Molecular scale electronics Nanolithography Scanning probe microscopy Atomic force microscope Scanning tunneling microscope Molecular nanotechnology Molecular assembler Nanorobotics Mechanosynthesis Category Commons Science portal Technology portal v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nanopunk&oldid=1298435462 " Categories : Nanopunk Cyberpunk subgenres Postcyberpunk Biopunk Fiction about nanotechnology Transhumanism 2000s neologisms Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 July 2025, at 13:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nanopunk 10 languages Add topic

