Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Administrative system 3 A Pirate State?

4 References 5 Sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Aetolian League 41 languages Alemannisch العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Latina Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Confederation of tribal communities and cities in ancient Greece For the 1959–1964 football league in England, see Aetolian League (football) .

League of the Aetolians Koinon tōn Aitōlōn 4th century BC–188 BC Capital Thermon (meeting place) Common languages Doric Greek , Koine Greek Religion Ancient Greek religion Government Confederation of tribal communities and cities Strategos Legislature Aetolian assembly Historical era Classical Antiquity • Established 4th century BC • Treaty with Rome after the Roman–Seleucid War 188 BC Preceded by Succeeded by Aetolia Greece in the Roman era Today part of Greece The Aetolian (or Aitolian ) League ( Ancient Greek : Κοινὸν τῶν Αἰτωλῶν ) [ 1 ] was a confederation of tribal communities and cities [ 2 ] in ancient Greece centered in Aetolia in Central Greece . It was probably established during the early Hellenistic era , in opposition to Macedon and the Achaean League . Two annual meetings were held at Thermon and Panaetolika. The league occupied Delphi from 290 BC and steadily gained territory  until, by the end of the 3rd century BC, it controlled the whole of central Greece with the exception of Attica and Boeotia . At its peak, the league's territory included Locris , Malis , Dolopes, parts of Thessaly , Phocis , and Acarnania . In the latter part of its power, certain Greek city-states joined the Aetolian League such as the Arcadian cities of Mantineia , Tegea , Phigalia and Kydonia on Crete .

[ 3 ] During the classical period the Aetolians were not highly regarded by other Greeks, who considered them to be semi-barbaric and reckless.

[ 4 ] Their League had a complex political and administrative structure, and their armies were easily a match for the other Greek powers. However, during the Hellenistic period , they emerged as a dominant state in central Greece and expanded by the voluntary annexation of several Greek city-states to the League. Still, the Aetolian League had to fight against Macedonia and were driven to an alliance with Rome , which resulted in the final conquest of Greece by the Romans.

History [ edit ] Theater of Calydon , Aetolia Ancient regions of central Greece including Aetolia, prior to its expansion The Aetolians were a recognised ethnic group with a religious centre at Thermos from at least the seventh century BC. 
During the Peloponnesian War , the Aetolians were initially neutral, but when the Athenians tried to invade Aetolia in 426 BC , the Aetolians forced them to retreat.

[ 5 ] In the course of the fourth century, the league offered passive support to more powerful states and was rewarded for it, receiving Aeolis from the Thebans in 367 BC and Naupactus from Philip II of Macedon in 338 BC. Sometime in this century, the Koinon tōn Aitōlōn (League of the Aetolians) was founded, but it is uncertain when. One suggestion is that the league was founded by Epaminondas in 367 BC.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Grainger believes that it was founded much later, around the time of the rise of Philip II of Macedon.

[ 8 ] Archaeology indicates that settlements in Aetolia began to grow in size and complexity over the course of this century.

After the death of Philip II in 336 BC, the Aetolians joined the Thebans in opposing Alexander the Great and the stress of their defeat caused the league to implode. Over the next decade it seems to have been reconstituted and in the later years of Alexander's reign the Aetolians seized Oeniadae against his will.

The Aetolian League joined the Athenians in the Lamian war against Antipater which broke out after Alexander's death in 323 BC and continued to oppose Macedonian power throughout the Wars of the Diadochi , participating in invasions of Macedon in 320, 316/5 and 313 BC. Around 301 BC, the Aetolians took control of Parnassus , including the panhellenic sanctuary of Delphi , which they would continue to control for over a century.

Demetrius Poliorcetes launched the Fifth Sacred War , 289-287 BC, in an attempt to remove them, but was defeated and driven from Macedonia altogether with the help of Pyrrhus of Epirus . A Sixth Sacred War , 281 BC, led by Areus I was rebuffed by the Aetolians alone and in 280 BC, they took control of Heraclea in Trachis , which gave them control over the crucial pass at Thermopylae .

[ 9 ] Territory of the Aetolian League in 200 BC.

In 279 BC, they were victorious in battle against the Gauls , who had invaded Greece and were threatening the sanctuary of Delphi . After their victory they earned the appreciation of the rest of the Greeks and they were admitted as a new member into the Amphictyonic League .

In 232 BC, the Illyrians under Agron attacked the Aetolians, and managed to take many prisoners and booty.

[ 10 ] In 229 BC, the Aetolians participated in a naval battle off the island of Paxos in a coalition with Korkyra and the Achaean League , and were defeated by a coalition of Illyrians and Acarnanians ; as a result, the Korkyreans were forced to accept an Illyrian garrison in their city, which was put under the command of Demetrius of Pharos.

[ 11 ] In the Social War , 220-217 BC, the Aetolian League fought against the Kingdom of Macedonia .

Philip V of Macedon invaded Aetolia and sacked the city of Thermos as a response to the Aetolians' invasion at the city of Dodona in Epirus.

The league was the first Greek ally of the Roman Republic , siding with the Romans during the First Macedonian War , 215-205 BC, and helping to defeat Philip V of Macedon at the Battle of Cynoscephalae in 197 BC, during the Second Macedonian War . However, it grew increasingly hostile to Roman involvement in Greek affairs and only a few years later sided with Antiochus III , the anti-Roman king of the Seleucid Empire , during the Roman-Syrian War . The defeat of Antiochus in 189 BC robbed the league of its principal ally and made it impossible to stand alone in continued opposition to Rome. The league was forced to sign a peace treaty with Rome that made it a subject ally of the republic. Although it continued to exist in name, the power of the league was broken by the treaty and it never again constituted a significant political or military force.

Administrative system [ edit ] Thermos, sanctuary and assembly place of the Aetolian League The league had a federal structure, which could raise armies and conduct foreign policy on a common basis. It also implemented economic standardization, levying taxes, using a common currency and adopting a uniform system of weights and measures. There may not have been any central archive of state documents. However, the constituent communities of the league enjoyed substantial autonomy. At times the league was unable (or unwilling) to prevent its members from undertaking military actions against states that had treaties with it. The league members were grouped together in a number of tele (districts), which seem to have had administrative and juridical powers of some sort.

[ 12 ] The league's central administrative apparatus consisted of an assembly, a council, and a number of magistrates. The Ekklesia (Assembly) was open to all citizens of all member communities of the league. The assembly was the ultimate authority within the league, with responsibility for declarations of war and peace, but its power was limited by the infrequency with which it met. Two meetings took place a year, one at the Thermica festival which was held at Thermos on the autumnal equinox and another in spring at the Panaetolica festival which took place at a different site each year. Emergency meetings could also be called.

[ 13 ] The exact competencies of the Council, referred to as a boula or synedrion in different documents, relative to the Assembly are not clear. It consisted of delegates elected by each of the constituent communities of the league in proportion to their size. By the late third century BC it had around 1500 members - too large for it to have been in continuous session. A small portion of the council's members, known as the apokletoi ("Select-men"), conducted day-to-day business, such as sending and receiving embassies.

[ 13 ] The league's archons (magistrates) were elected by the assembly each year at the Thermica. The chief executive was the strategos (General), who commanded the league's armies, received all diplomatic contacts from other states in first instance, and presided over meetings of the assembly, the council, and the select-men. The office could be held multiple times, but only after an interval of, probably, four years. The hipparchos (Cavalry Commander), originally a minor post, became the General's deputy from the late 260s BC, but his exact responsibilities are not clear. The third in command was the Grammateus ( Secretary ). These three officials were Eponymous archons (eponymous magistrates), which is to say that they were named in the dating formula for all decrees of the league. From around 260 BC, there were also seven tamiai (Treasurers) and seven epilektarchoi (Commanders of the Elite), who managed financial and military matters respectively. There were a number of boularchoi (Council Commanders) who seem to have been a steering committee for the Council. When these first appear in the 260s, there were two of them, but by the end of the third century BC they had risen to six or more, presumably as a result of the continued expansion of the league's membership (and thus of the size of the Council).

[ 13 ] From 278 the league sent delegates to the Amphictyonic League (Delphic Amphictyony), gradually increasing over time until the league held a majority of the seats on the council, which increasingly became an instrument of Aetolian power projection. From the 260s, the secretary of the Amphictyonic council was always an Aetolian. These delegates seem to have been elected along with the other magistrates at the Thermica, but their relative rank is not clear.

[ 14 ] A Pirate State?

[ edit ] The Aetolian League acquired a reputation for piracy and brigandage . Though some historians recognize a pro- Achaean bias in the portrayal of the League by Polybius , many modern historians also accept his portrayal as largely justified. For example, Walbank is explicit in seeing the Aetolians as systematically using piracy to supplement their income due to the meager resources of their region [ 15 ] and Will simply assumes the truth of the charge.

[ 16 ] By contrast, Grainger devotes a whole chapter to examining Aetolian involvement in piracy along with the charges that the Aetolians were temple robbers.  He finds it hard to credit that Aetolia was involved in piracy given that Aetolia lacked a fleet of even the basic sort.  Further by contrast with more general historians, those that have made specific studies of piracy and brigandage barely mention Aetolia.  He lists the times that the Aetolians were accused of temple robbery and argues that the weight of these accusations should take into account that these are usually made by political opponents of the League and refer to occasions that were already some way in the past when the accusations were made.

[ 17 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Αἰτωλός - Ancient Greek (LSJ) 👍" .

lsj.gr . Retrieved 2020-07-28 .

^ Grainger, 1999 ^ Hogan, 2008 ^ West, 1902 ^ Thucydides 3.94 ^ "ΟΜΗΡΙΚΗ ΕΡΕΥΝΑ: Οι Αιτωλοί από τον Όμηρο μέχρι την ύστερη αρχαιότητα" .

^ N. Tod, A selection of Greek Historical Inscriptions , vol. 2, p. 137 ^ John D. Grainger, The League of the Aetolians, p. 49 ^ Scholten, Joseph B. (2000).

The politics of plunder : Aitolians and their koinon in the early Hellenistic era, 279-217 . Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press. pp.

15– 25.

ISBN 0520201876 .

^ Polybius 2.3 ^ Polybius, 2.10 ; Wilkes, p. 160.

^ Scholten, Joseph B. (2000).

The politics of plunder : Aitolians and their koinon in the early Hellenistic era, 279-217 . Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press. pp.

64– 5, 90.

ISBN 0520201876 .

^ a b c Scholten, Joseph B. (2000).

The politics of plunder : Aitolians and their koinon in the early Hellenistic era, 279-217 . Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press. pp.

26– 28, 62.

ISBN 0520201876 .

^ Scholten, Joseph B. (2000).

The politics of plunder : Aitolians and their koinon in the early Hellenistic era, 279-217 . Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press. pp. 38, 66– 67.

ISBN 0520201876 .

^ Walbank, CAH (2) VII 1, 232 and 255 ^ CAH (2) VII 1, 107 ^ John D Grainger, The League of the Aetolians chap 2 Sources [ edit ] John D. Grainger (1999) The League of the Aitolians ( Google Books ).

C. Michael Hogan, Cydonia , Modern Antiquarian, January 23, 2008 [1] Krzysztof Kęciek (2002) "Kynoskefalaj 197 p.n.e" Serie Historic Battles Published in Warsaw by Bellona.

Joseph B. Scholten (2000) The Politics of Plunder: Aitolians and Their Koinon in the Early Hellenistic Era ( Google Books ).

Willis Mason West (1902) Ancient History to the Death of Charlemagne , Allyn and Bacon.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Aetolian League at Wikimedia Commons v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aetolian_League&oldid=1298945135 " Categories : Aetolian League Greek city-state federations Hellenistic Greece States and territories established in the 4th century BC Former confederations Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 July 2025, at 18:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aetolian League 41 languages Add topic

