Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education and career Toggle Education and career subsection 1.1 Books and other writings 1.1.1 Germany: The Empire Within 1.1.2 The Greedy Hand 1.1.3 The Forgotten Man 1.1.4 Coolidge 1.1.5 Other work 1.2 Awards and honors 2 Personal 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Amity Shlaes 2 languages Polski Shqip Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American writer (born 1960) Amity Shlaes Shlaes in 2017 Born Amity Ruth Shlaes ( 1960-09-10 ) September 10, 1960 (age 64) Alma mater Yale University ( BA ) Free University of Berlin Genre Nonfiction Subject History Notable awards Bastiat Prize (2002) Bradley Prize (2021) Spouse Seth Lipsky ​ ( m.

1988) ​ Children 4 Website www .amityshlaes .com Amity Ruth Shlaes ( / ʃ l eɪ s / SHLAYSS ; [ 1 ] born September 10, 1960) is an American conservative author, writer, and columnist .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Shlaes has written five books, including three New York Times Bestsellers . She currently chairs the board of trustees of the Calvin Coolidge Presidential Foundation [ 4 ] and serves as a Presidential Scholar at The King's College in New York City. She is a recipient of the Bastiat Prize and, more recently, the Bradley Prize .

Education and career [ edit ] In 1982, Shlaes graduated from Yale University with a bachelor's degree in English , magna cum laude .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] She attended the Freie Universitaet Berlin on a DAAD fellowship. She is Jewish.

[ 7 ] She is a current events columnist for Forbes at the front of the magazine, rotating with Paul Johnson and David Malpass. Until 2013, she wrote a syndicated column for Bloomberg News .

[ 8 ] Shlaes also writes a print column for Forbes magazine, rotating with Lee Kwan Yew , David Malpass , and Paul Johnson . Shlaes is also a regular contributor to Marketplace , the public radio show. She has appeared on numerous other radio and television shows over the course of her career.

[ 8 ] Before writing her column for Bloomberg, Shlaes was a columnist for the Financial Times for five years, until September 2005. Before that she was a member of the editorial board of The Wall Street Journal , specializing in economics.

[ 8 ] She followed the collapse of communism for The Wall Street Journal Europe and in the early 1990s she served as the Journal's op-ed editor.

[ 8 ] Over the years, she has written for The New Yorker , The American Spectator , Commentary , The Spectator (UK) , Foreign Affairs , Forbes , National Review , The New Republic , the Süddeutsche Zeitung and Die Zeit , among others.

[ 8 ] Her obituary of Milton Friedman appeared in The New York Sun .

[ 9 ] For two years (2012 and 2013), Shlaes worked at the George W. Bush Presidential Center , leading the economic growth project.

[ 10 ] In 2011, she was named director of the 4% Growth Project at the George W. Bush Institute . This initiative is aimed at illuminating ideas and reforms that can yield faster, higher quality economic growth. Before joining the Bush Institute she served a decade as a senior fellow in economic history at the Council on Foreign Relations (CFR), an independent, nonpartisan membership organization, think tank , and publisher.

[ 11 ] As a senior fellow in Economic History at CFR David Rockefeller Studies Program, Shlaes worked within the Maurice R. Greenberg Center for Geo-economic Studies (CGS), dedicated to promoting better understanding among policymakers and academic specialists of how economic and political forces interact to influence world affairs.

[ 12 ] Since Fall 2008, Shlaes has served as an adjunct associate professor of economics at New York University Stern School of Business , teaching a course titled "The Economics of the Great Depression".

[ 13 ] She also serves as a Presidential Scholar at The King's College in New York City.

[ 14 ] She chairs the jury for the Hayek Prize of Manhattan Institute for Policy Research , a $50,000 book prize. She has served on the jury of the Bastiat Prize. Shlaes has won both prizes.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] In the past, she was a trustee of the German Marshall Fund .

[ citation needed ] Books and other writings [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Germany: The Empire Within [ edit ] Shlaes's first book was Germany: The Empire Within , about German national identity at the time of reunification. She has also written articles about this time period, including a piece in The New Yorker on the Deutsche mark and the euro .

[ 17 ] The Greedy Hand [ edit ] She followed that book with The Greedy Hand: How Taxes Drive Americans Crazy and What to Do About It.

It was a national bestseller.

[ 18 ] Fred Goldberg , a former IRS Commissioner, called it "a terrific book on the history of politics and taxing in America ... a must read—whether you come from the left, right, or mushy middle." [ 19 ] Steve Forbes described The Greedy Hand as "the economic bible for those who believe in growth".

[ 19 ] The Forgotten Man [ edit ] Shlaes's next book, The Forgotten Man: A New History of the Great Depression , was published in 2007 and was a study of the Great Depression in the United States and the New Deal . This book argues that both Presidents Herbert Hoover and Franklin Delano Roosevelt promoted economic policies that were counterproductive, prolonged the Great Depression, and established a modern "entitlement trap." [ 19 ] The Forgotten Man was a New York Times bestseller for 19 weeks, with over 250,000 copies in print.

[ citation needed ] It has also been published in German, Italian, Korean, Chinese (Mandarin) and Japanese.

Economist Paul Krugman has criticized The Forgotten Man , taking issue with its central tenet that New Deal policies exacerbated the Great Depression. Krugman wrote of "a whole intellectual industry, mainly operating out of right-wing think tanks, devoted to propagating the idea that FDR actually made the Depression worse.... But the definitive study of fiscal policy in the 1930s, by the MIT economist E. Cary Brown, reached a very different conclusion: Fiscal stimulus was unsuccessful 'not because it does not work, but because it was not tried'." [ 20 ] Krugman specifically accused Shlaes of disseminating "misleading statistics." [ 21 ] Shlaes responded to Krugman in The Wall Street Journal , specifically saying that for her estimates of employment and unemployment during the period she used the Lebergott/Bureau of Labor Statistics series.

[ 22 ] She wrote that statistician Stanley Lebergott "intentionally did not include temporary jobs in emergency programs—because to count a short-term, make-work project as a real job was to mask the anxiety of one who really didn't have regular work with long-term prospects." [ 22 ] Shlaes went on to say that if the Obama administration "proposes F.D.R.-style recovery programs, then it is useful to establish whether those original programs actually brought recovery. The answer is, they didn't." [ 23 ] Writing in Forbes , Hudson Institute fellow Diana Furchtgott-Roth first lays out Shlaes's view: "She points out that federal spending during the New Deal did not restore economic health.

[ 24 ] Unemployment stayed high and the Dow Jones Industrial average stayed low." After then explaining Krugman's position that "the New Deal failed to spend enough money to achieve full employment," Furchtgott-Roth concludes, "the new president needs to listen to many voices." [ 24 ] Journalist Jonathan Chait has called the book self-contradictory, misleading, and inaccurate.

[ 25 ] Novelist and essayist John Updike criticized the book as "a revisionist history of the Depression".

[ 26 ] Coolidge [ edit ] Shlaes in 2013 Shlaes is the author of Coolidge , which debuted at number three on the New York Times bestseller list.

[ 27 ] Former Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan listed it as one of the best books of 2013.

[ 28 ] On February 13, 2013, MSNBC published an excerpt of Coolidge onto its Morning Joe blog as part of a discussion on "books breaking new ground on the way we think about American presidents ... [including] Coolidge who has reemerged as a hero of small government Republicanism.".

[ 29 ] During the show, Sam Tanenhaus , editor of The New York Times Book Review , praised Shlaes as "a brilliant journalist, who has a great feel for where the Republican party happens to be at any particular moment and instead of just echoing what's being said, she'll look ahead a bit ... she's saying there's an older style of Republican politics that the party may be able to recapture." [ 30 ] In an interview with the National Review Online , Shlaes said she was interested in profiling Coolidge because he is "the forgotten president.... But his economic performance and his statesmanship suggest [he] belongs in the top quarter of presidents." [ 31 ] In The Wall Street Journal , Shlaes explains how Calvin Coolidge was able to cut taxes especially the top marginal rates by following Andrew Mellon's method of "scientific taxation", reduce the national debt , and balance the budget. Shlaes writes "those who are even now pondering presidential runs for 2016 would do well to heed Silent Cal's deeds." [ 32 ] The Economist gives Shlaes' and her latest book high praise for revisiting an overlooked presidency. "American readers who believe intervention to be a good thing are likely to blanch at a controversial new biography of Coolidge ... However, if they are brave enough to read on they will also discover a presidency of remarkable achievement that has received too little attention.... Ms. Shlaes's biography provides a window onto an unfairly tarnished period. It deserves to be widely read." [ 33 ] Robert Merry of The Wall Street Journal praised Coolidge , writing, "The Coolidge years represent the country's most distilled experiment in supply-side economics.... That success is the central Coolidge legacy, brought home with telling authority in Ms. Shlaes's work." [ 34 ] Jacob Heilbrunn of The New York Times commends Shlaes' thorough work, commenting, "(Shlaes) has assiduously researched Coolidge's life, drawing both on his private papers (going so far as to photograph his appointment books) and on contemporary newspaper reports." [ 35 ] Philip Seib, professor and director of the Center on Public Diplomacy at the University of Southern California, praises Shlaes for revealing Coolidge's fiscal discipline in the Dallas Morning News . He writes, "Calvin Coolidge was very much a man and a president of his times. Shlaes deserves thanks for helping us, nearly a century after his tenure, to consider his approach to economic policy and the presidency, as well as his place in history." [ 36 ] Coolidge debuted on the New York Times Best Seller list for nonfiction on March 3, 2013, at number three.

[ 37 ] Other work [ edit ] Shlaes also wrote the foreword to Seeds of Destruction , a book by Glenn Hubbard , Dean of Columbia Business School , and economist Peter Navarro .

[ 38 ] She also wrote the introduction to Wall Street Journal editor George Melloan's The Great Money Binge: Spending Our Way to Socialism .

[ 39 ] In 2003, she coauthored, with the late Robert Bartley of The Wall Street Journal , a piece on tax philosophy, published in the Manhattan Institute's Turning Intellect into Influence.

[ 19 ] She also contributed to, along with Harold James and Samuel Gregg, 2012 the book Natural Law, Economics and the Common Good , which examines the nature and scope of ethics in relation to global economics, especially in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis.

[ 40 ] Shlaes also was a contributor to the special 30th anniversary edition of the scholarly journal Tax Notes . Her essay was titled "The Future of American Taxation".

In 2012, she authored an article entitled 'Growth Lessons from Calvin Coolidge' in The 4% Solution: Unleashing the Economic Growth America Needs , published by the George W. Bush Presidential Center .

Great Society: A New History was published in 2019 as a companion to The Forgotten Man .

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] In the book, she argues that Lyndon B. Johnson 's Great Society was a failure despite the planners' good intentions.

[ 43 ] Awards and honors [ edit ] In 2001, Shlaes was included in Yale Alumni Magazine ' s list of "Who's Been Blue".

[ 44 ] She was the 2002 co-winner of the International Policy Network's Frederic Bastiat Prize, an international prize for writing on political economy.

[ citation needed ] In 2003, she spent several months at the American Academy in Berlin as the JP Morgan Fellow for finance and economy.

[ citation needed ] She gave the 2004 Bradley lecture at the American Enterprise Institute . Her speech, titled "The Chicken vs. the Eagle", looked at the effect of the National Recovery Administration on entrepreneurs.

[ 45 ] She was awarded the 2007 Deadline Club award for Opinion writing, [ 46 ] and the Newswomen's Club of New York's Front Page Award for her Bloomberg columns.

[ 47 ] Personal [ edit ] Shlaes married fellow journalist Seth Lipsky in 1988. They have four children.

References [ edit ] ^ "Amity Shlaes, Author, 'Coolidge'" at 13 s.

^ Shesol, Jeff (2014-06-12).

"Amity Shlaes's Anti-New Deal Graphic Novel" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved 2023-05-01 .

^ Kabaservice, Geoffrey (December 5, 2019).

"Review | Searching for socialism in the Great Society" .

Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 2023-05-01 .

^ Mayer, Jane (March 27, 2017).

"The Reclusive Hedge-Fund Tycoon Behind the Trump Presidency" .

The New Yorker .

^ Online Yale Alumni directory ^ "Amity Shlaes" . Ashbrook.org. 2008-04-28.

Archived from the original on 19 November 2010 . Retrieved 2010-11-20 .

^ "Defending Christmas Trees and Tolerance" .

^ a b c d e "Amity Shlaes" . Amity Shlaes . Retrieved 20 April 2012 .

^ "Friedman's Warmth" .

The New York Sun . 2006-11-17 . Retrieved 2010-11-20 .

^ "George W. Bush Institute, a public policy think tank, has been active and growing since November 2009 | Dallasnews.com - News for Dallas, Texas - The Dallas Morning News" . Archived from the original on 2013-05-21.

^ "About" . Council on Foreign Relations . Retrieved 20 April 2012 .

^ "Mission" . Council on Foreign Relations . Retrieved 20 April 2012 .

^ "Amity Shlaes" . New York University. Archived from the original on 15 April 2012 . Retrieved 20 April 2012 .

^ "Which President Had the Best Last Year in Office?" .

Politico . December 27, 2015.

^ "The Bastiat Prize for Journalism" .

reason.com . Retrieved 25 February 2015 .

^ "Friedrich Hayek Lecture and Book Prize" .

Manhattan Institute for Policy Research . Archived from the original on 25 February 2015 . Retrieved 25 February 2015 .

^ Shlaes, Amity (28 April 1997).

"Loving the Mark" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved 2019-12-14 .

^ Shlaes, Amity (November 18, 2005).

"Think the mortgage tax deduction is all good? Think again" . CNN . Retrieved 9 October 2016 .

^ a b c d "Books" . Retrieved 20 April 2012 .

^ Krugman, Paul (10 November 2012).

"Franklin Delano Obama?" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 20 April 2012 .

^ Krugman, Paul (19 November 2008).

"Amity Shlaes strikes again" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 20 April 2012 .

^ a b Shlaes, Amity (29 November 2008).

"The Krugman Recipe for Depression" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 20 April 2012 .

^ Schuessler, Jennifer (12 December 2012).

"Inside the List" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 20 April 2012 .

^ a b Furchtgott-Roth, Diana (3 December 2008).

"The Economic Fight Of The Year" .

Forbes . Retrieved 20 April 2012 .

^ Chait, Jonathan (18 March 2009).

"Wasting Away In Hooverville" .

The New Republic . Retrieved 20 April 2012 .

^ Updike, John (2 July 2007).

"Laissez-faire Is More" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved 20 April 2012 .

^ "Best Sellers" .

New York Times . 3 March 2013 . Retrieved 14 March 2014 .

^ Kennedy, Simon (13 December 2013).

"Rich and famous reveal their best books of the year" .

Vancouver Sun . Retrieved 14 March 2014 .

^ "An except from Amity Shlaes' Coolidge" . MSNBC. 2013-02-13 . Retrieved 21 February 2013 .

^ "Morning Joe: Lessons Learned from American Presidents" . MSNBC . Retrieved 26 February 2013 .

^ Lopez, Kathryn Jean (2013-02-13).

"Coolest Cal" . National Review Online . Retrieved 21 February 2013 .

^ Shlaes, Amity (2013-02-19).

"The Coolidge Lesson on Taxes and Spending" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 21 February 2013 .

^ "Calvin Coolidge and the Great Depression: When less led to more" .

The Economist . 23 February 2013 . Retrieved 26 February 2013 .

^ Merry, Robert (2013-02-08).

"Calvin Coolidge for President" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 21 February 2013 .

^ Heilbrunn, Jacob (2013-02-14).

"The Great Refrainer" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 21 February 2013 .

^ Seib, Philip.

"Book review: 'Coolidge,' by Amity Shlaes" . Dallas Morning News . Retrieved 21 February 2013 .

^ "Best Sellers" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 15 March 2013 .

^ Shlaes, Amity (14 August 2010).

"Seeds of Destruction-Foreword by Amity Shlaes" .

Glenn Hubbard . Archived from the original on 1 August 2012 . Retrieved 20 April 2012 .

^ Melloan, George (2009-11-17).

The Great Money Binge: Spending Our Way to Socialism . Threshold Editions.

ISBN 978-1439164075 .

^ Natural Law, Economics and the Common Good . Amazon. 8 March 2012 . Retrieved 20 April 2012 .

^ "Great Society - Amity Shlaes - Hardcover" .

HarperCollins Publishers: World-Leading Book Publisher . Retrieved 2020-01-17 .

^ Shlaes, Amity (2019-09-10).

Great Society: A New History (First ed.). New York, NY.

ISBN 978-0-06-170642-4 .

OCLC 1004923262 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ "The Failure of LBJ's Great Society and What It Means for the 21st Century" .

Reason.com . 2020-01-16 . Retrieved 2020-01-17 .

^ "Famous Yalies" . Yale Alumni Magazine . Retrieved 4 September 2016 .

^ "Bio" . Amity Shlaes . Retrieved 20 April 2012 .

^ "2007 Deadline Club Awards" . Deadline Club. Archived from the original on 8 February 2012 . Retrieved 20 April 2012 .

^ "Newswomen's Club of New York Announces 2007 Front Page Awards Winners" (Press release). Newswomens Club of New York . Retrieved 20 April 2012 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Amity Shlaes .

Official website Appearances on C-SPAN Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Korea Israel Academics CiNii People DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Amity_Shlaes&oldid=1297109243 " Categories : 1960 births Living people 21st-century American biographers 21st-century American women writers American economics writers American libertarians American people of Jewish descent American political writers American women biographers American women columnists Bastiat Prize winners The Wall Street Journal people Writers from New York (state) Yale University alumni Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2015 Commons category link from Wikidata People appearing on C-SPAN Place of birth missing (living people) This page was last edited on 24 June 2025, at 05:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Amity Shlaes 2 languages Add topic

