Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Classification Toggle Classification subsection 1.1 Cold steppe 1.2 Subtropical steppe 2 Human impact 3 See also 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Sources 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Steppe 92 languages Адыгэбзэ Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego ГӀалгӀай گیلکی 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Ирон Íslenska Italiano ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Олык марий Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Qırımtatarca Română Русский Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Temperate steppe ) Ecoregion of plain grasslands without trees Look up steppe in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

This article is about the ecological zone type. For other uses, see Steppe (disambiguation) .

Two types of steppes, classified by climate: Cold steppe climate Hot steppe climate The Great Eurasian Steppe (highlighted in on the map), acted as a passageway for cultures across the vast Eurasian landmass.

In physical geography , a steppe ( / s t ɛ p / ) is an ecoregion characterized by grassland plains without closed forests except near rivers and lakes.

[ 1 ] Steppe biomes may include: the montane grasslands and shrublands biome the tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas, and shrublands biome the temperate grasslands, savannas, and shrublands biome A steppe is usually covered with grass and shrubs , depending on the season and latitude . The term steppe climate denotes a semi-arid climate , which is encountered in regions too dry to support a forest , but not dry enough to be a desert .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Steppes are usually characterized by a semi-arid or continental [ citation needed ] climate. Temperature extremes can be recorded in the summer of up to 45 °C (115 °F) and in winter of down to −55 °C (−65 °F). Besides this major seasonal difference, fluctuations between day and night are also significant: in both the highlands of Mongolia and northern Nevada , 30 °C (85 °F) can be reached during the day with sub-freezing readings at night.

Steppes average 250–500 mm (10–20 in) of annual precipitation and feature hot summers and cold winters when located in mid-latitudes. In addition to the precipitation level, its combination with potential evapotranspiration defines a steppe climate.

Classification [ edit ] Steppe can be classified by climate: [ 4 ] Temperate steppe: the true steppe, found in continental climates [ failed verification ] can be further subdivided, as in the Rocky Mountains Steppes [ 4 ] Subtropical steppe: a similar association of plants occurring in the driest areas with a Mediterranean climate ; [ failed verification ] it usually has a short wet period It can also be classified by vegetation type, e.g.

shrub-steppe and alpine-steppe .

Cold steppe [ edit ] The world's largest steppe region, often referred to as "the Great Steppe ", is found in Eastern Europe and Central Asia , and neighbouring countries stretching from Ukraine in the west through Russia , Kazakhstan , Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan to the Altai , Koppet Dag and Tian Shan ranges in China . The Eurasian Steppe had a significant role in the spread of the horse, the wheel and Indo-European languages .

[ 5 ] In the Eurasian steppe, soils often consist of chernozem .

The inner parts of Anatolia in Turkey , Central Anatolia and East Anatolia in particular and also some parts of Southeast Anatolia , as well as much of Armenia and Iran are largely dominated by cold steppe.

The Pannonian Plain is another steppe region in Central Europe , centered in Hungary but also including portions of Slovakia , Poland , Ukraine , Romania , Serbia , Croatia , Slovenia , and Austria . Another large steppe area ( prairie ) is located in the central United States , western Canada and the northern part of Mexico . The shortgrass prairie steppe is the westernmost part of the Great Plains region. The Columbia Plateau in southern British Columbia , Oregon , Idaho , and Washington state , is an example of a steppe region in North America outside of the Great Plains.

In South America , cold steppe can be found in Patagonia and much of the high elevation regions east of the southern Andes .

Relatively small steppe areas can be found in the interior of the South Island of New Zealand .

In Australia , a moderately sized temperate steppe region exists in the northern and northwest regions of Victoria , extending to the southern and mid regions of New South Wales . This area borders the semi-arid and arid Australian Outback which is found farther inland on the continent.

Subtropical steppe [ edit ] In Europe , some Mediterranean areas have a steppe-like vegetation, such as central Sicily in Italy , southern Portugal , parts of Greece in the southern Athens area, [ 6 ] and central-eastern Spain , especially the southeastern coast (around Murcia ), and places cut off from adequate moisture due to rain shadow effects such as Zaragoza .

In northern Africa , the Mediterranean area also hosts the same steppe-like vegetation, such as the Algerian-Moroccan Hautes Plaines and by extension the North Saharan steppe and woodlands .

In Asia , a subtropical steppe can be found in semi-arid lands that fringe the Thar Desert of the Indian subcontinent as well as much of the Deccan Plateau in the rain shadow of the Western Ghats , and the Badia of the Levant .

In Australia , subtropical steppe can be found in a belt surrounding the most severe deserts of the continent and around the Musgrave Ranges .

In North America this environment is typical of transition areas between zones with a Mediterranean climate and true deserts, such as Reno, Nevada , the inner part of California , and much of western Texas and adjacent areas in Mexico.

Human impact [ edit ] Humans have severe impacts on their environments. Among many examples the following two give only an impression.

The formation of the forest steppe of Eastern Europe in the fourth millennium BC appeared in the context of the Trypillia culture and very probably, the economy of this culture with its large settlements contributed to the process.

[ 7 ] The formation of the Błędów Desert in Poland in the Middle Ages was certainly man-made.

[ 8 ] Steppe in Mongolia Steppe in Kazakhstan Steppe in Russia Steppe in Hungary Cold Patagonian steppe near Fitz Roy , Argentina Prairie in Alberta , Canada Sagebrush steppe in northeastern Nevada ( U.S. Route 93 ) Steppe in West Texas See also [ edit ] Grassland Plain Prairie Savanna Tugay Tundra References [ edit ] ^ Compare: Chibilyov, Alexander (2002). "Steppe and Forest-steppe". In Shahgedanova, Maria (ed.).

The Physical Geography of Northern Eurasia . Oxford regional environments. Vol. 3 (reprint ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press (published 2003). p. 248.

ISBN 978-0-19-823384-8 . Retrieved 30 January 2020 .

There are many definitions of steppes. For example, Allan (1946) provides fifty-four definitions of this term. Stamp and Clark (1979) define steppes as 'mid-latitude areas dominated by herbaceous vegetation and termed locally steppes, prairies, pampas, high veldts, downland, etc.' ^ Costa, Daniel (2024).

"Steppe" .

^ "Steppe" .

^ a b "Ecoregions of the United States-Ecological Subregions of the United States" .

fs.usda.gov .

U.S. Forest Service , U.S. Department of Agriculture . Retrieved 25 October 2016 .

^ Anthony, David W.

(15 August 2010) [2007].

The Horse, the Wheel, and Language: How Bronze-Age Riders from the Eurasian Steppes Shaped the Modern World (reprint ed.). Princeton: Princeton University Press (published 2010). p. 240.

ISBN 978-0-691-14818-2 . Retrieved 12 June 2022 .

[...] the critical era when innovative Proto-Indo-European dialects began to spread across the steppes.

^ "Hellinikon" .

HNMS.gr . Greece: Hellenic National Meteorological Service. Archived from the original on 2007-03-12 . Retrieved 2013-09-08 .

^ Kirleis, Wiebke; Corso, Marta Dal; Pashkevych, Galyna; Schlütz, Frank; Hofmann, Robert; Terna, Andreea; Dreibrodt, Stefan; Rud, Vitalii; Videiko, Mykhailo Y.; Müller, Johannes (2024-01-01).

"A complex subsistence regime revealed for Cucuteni–Trypillia sites in Chalcolithic eastern Europe based on new and old macrobotanical data" .

Vegetation History and Archaeobotany .

33 (1): 75– 90.

doi : 10.1007/s00334-023-00936-y .

ISSN 1617-6278 .

^ "Ecology of a Mining Town: Evolution of Environment, Society and Economy from the Middle Ages to the Early Modern Period" .

www.roots-compass.org . Retrieved 2025-01-29 .

Sources [ edit ] Ecology and Conservation of Steppe-land Birds by Manuel B.Morales, Santi Mañosa, Jordi Camprodón, Gerard Bota. International Symposium on Ecology and Conservation of steppe-land birds. Lleida, Spain. December 2004.

ISBN 978-84-87334-99-3 Look up steppe in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Steppes .

"The Steppes" . barramedasoft.com.ar. 1998–2008 . Retrieved 2008-04-04 .

v t e Phytogeography : Vegetation classification Physiognomy Forests , Tropical , woodlands , arboretum Shrublands , heath , scrubs, thickets , fruticetum Dwarf-shrubland , subshrublands , dwarf-scrubs, suffruticetum Herbaceous communities , grasslands , steppes , prairies , herbetum Savannas , parklands Scarcely vegetated areas, desert vegetation ( Desert , Barren vegetation ) Latitude Tropical Subtropical Temperate Subpolar Polar Climatic regime Pluvial , rainy , ombrophilous Cloudy Seasonal Drought Altitude Montane Submontane Lowland Coastal Leaves Loss of leaves Deciduous , caducifolious Semi-deciduous , semicaducifolious Evergreen , perennifolious Leaf hardness Sclerophyll , stiff leaves Orthophyll, hyptiophyll leaves Leaf form Aciculifolious, needle-leaved Latifolious, broad-leaved Substrate Terrestrial vegetation Aquatic vegetation Riparian Mangrove Swampy See also Biogeographic realms Biomes Floristic kingdoms Plant habits Plant life-forms Vegetation v t e Earth 's landforms List of landforms Mountainous Butte Flat Hill Mountain range Plateau Ridge Tableland Valley Continental plain Ice sheet Plain Steppe Tundra Fluvial Alluvial fan Beach Canyon Cave Channel Cliff Floodplain Lake island Levee Meander Oasis Pond Rapids River delta mouth Strait Swamp Valley Waterfall Glacial Arête Cirque Esker Fjord Glacier Ice field Tunnel valley Oceanic and coastal landforms Atoll Bay Cape Channel Coast Continental shelf Coral reef Estuary Island Isthmus Lagoon Mid-ocean ridge Oceanic trench Peninsula Seamount Volcanic island Volcanic Caldera Geyser Guyot Lava dome Lava field Submarine volcano Volcanic crater Volcanic crater lake Volcanic dam Volcanic island Volcanic plateau Volcanic plug Volcano Wall rock Aeolian Desert Dry lake Dune Sandhill Tundra Artificial Artificial island Artificial reef Bridge Building Canal Dam Ditch Land reclamation Levee Polder Quarry Reservoir Road Tunnel See also: Geographical feature v t e Biogeographic regions Biomes Terrestrial biomes Polar/montane Tundra Taiga Montane grasslands and shrublands Alpine tundra Temperate Coniferous forests Broadleaf and mixed forests Deciduous forests Grasslands, savannas, and shrublands Tropical and subtropical Coniferous forests Cloud forest Moist broadleaf forests list Dry broadleaf forests Grasslands, savannas, and shrublands Dry Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub Deserts and xeric shrublands Steppe Wet Flooded grasslands and savannas Riparian Wetland Mangroves Aquatic biomes Pond Littoral Intertidal Kelp forests Coral reefs Neritic zone Pelagic zone Benthic zone Hydrothermal vents Cold seeps Demersal zone Other biomes Endolithic zone Biogeographic realms Terrestrial Afrotropical Antarctic Australasian Holarctic Nearctic Palearctic Indomalayan Neotropical Oceanian Marine Antarctic/Southern Ocean Arctic Central Indo-Pacific Eastern Indo-Pacific Temperate Australasia Temperate Northern Atlantic Temperate Northern Pacific Temperate South America Temperate Southern Africa Tropical Atlantic Tropical Eastern Pacific Western Indo-Pacific Subdivisions Biogeographic provinces Bioregions Ecoregions Lists of ecoregions Global 200 ecoregions See also Altitudinal zonation Ecological classification Floristic kingdoms Vegetation classifications Wallace Line Zoogeography Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Internet Encyclopedia of Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐bs6zj
Cached time: 20250811235001
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.483 seconds
Real time usage: 0.666 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2652/1000000
Revision size: 11787/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 103130/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3325/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 79816/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.301/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9190949/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  556.266      1 -total
 22.79%  126.766      1 Template:Reflist
 16.82%   93.545      6 Template:Navbox
 14.29%   79.465      2 Template:Cite_book
 13.10%   72.871      1 Template:Vegetation
 11.62%   64.660      1 Template:Short_description
  9.29%   51.691      3 Template:Sister_project
  9.03%   50.241      3 Template:Side_box
  7.52%   41.810      1 Template:Mim
  6.67%   37.083      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:54048:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250811235001 and revision id 1297901720. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Steppe&oldid=1297901720 " Categories : Grasslands Montane grasslands and shrublands Temperate grasslands, savannas, and shrublands Ecoregions Plains Prairies Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2023 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from October 2023 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 June 2025, at 06:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Steppe 92 languages Add topic

