Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Background Toggle Background subsection 2.1 Creation of the People's Republic 2.2 Great Leap Forward 2.3 Impact of international tensions and anti-revisionism 2.4 Views of revolutionary practice 2.5 Socialist Education Movement and Hai Rui Dismissed from Office 3 1966: Outbreak Toggle 1966: Outbreak subsection 3.1 Notification 3.2 Mass rallies (May–June) 3.3 Bombard the Headquarters (July) 3.4 Red August and the Sixteen Points 3.5 Destruction of the Four Olds (August–November) 3.6 Central Work Conference (October) 3.7 End of the year 4 1967: Seizure of power 5 1968: Purges Toggle 1968: Purges subsection 5.1 Mao meets with Red Guard leaders (July) 5.2 Mao's cult of personality and "mango fever" (August) 5.3 Down to the Countryside Movement (December) 6 1969–1971: Lin Biao Toggle 1969–1971: Lin Biao subsection 6.1 PLA encroachment 6.1.1 Restoration of State Chairman position 6.2 Project 571 6.2.1 Lin's flight and plane crash 7 1972–1976: The Gang of Four Toggle 1972–1976: The Gang of Four subsection 7.1 Deng Xiaoping's rehabilitation (1975) 7.2 Death of Zhou Enlai 7.3 Tiananmen incident 7.4 Death of Mao Zedong and the Gang of Four's downfall 8 Aftermath Toggle Aftermath subsection 8.1 Transitional period 8.2 Repudiation and reform under Deng 9 Atrocities Toggle Atrocities subsection 9.1 Death toll 9.2 Massacres 9.3 Violent struggles, struggle sessions, and purges 9.4 Repression of ethnic minorities 9.5 Rape and sexual abuse 10 Cultural impact and influence Toggle Cultural impact and influence subsection 10.1 Red Guards riot 10.2 Academics and intellectuals 10.3 Education system 10.4 Slogans and rhetoric 10.5 Arts and literature 10.5.1 Opera and music 10.5.2 Visual arts 10.5.3 Literature 10.5.4 Film 10.6 Historical sites 10.7 Media 11 Foreign relations 12 Evaluations 13 See also 14 Notes 15 References Toggle References subsection 15.1 Citations 15.2 Sources 16 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 16.1 General 16.2 Specific topics 16.3 Commentaries 16.4 Fictional treatments 16.5 Memoirs by Chinese participants 17 External links Toggle the table of contents Cultural Revolution 112 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kriyòl gwiyannen Кыргызча ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Patois ភាសាខ្មែរ Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vahcuengh Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt 文言 Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Period of sociopolitical turmoil in China (1966–1976) This article is about the movement in China. For events elsewhere also called the "Cultural Revolution", see Cultural Revolution (disambiguation) . For revolutions in culture generally, see List of cultural, intellectual, philosophical and technological revolutions .

Cultural Revolution Propaganda poster depicting Mao Zedong , above a group of soldiers from the People's Liberation Army . The caption reads, "The Chinese People's Liberation Army is the great school of Mao Zedong Thought ".

Duration 16 May 1966 – 6 October 1976 ( 1966-05-16 – 1976-10-06 ) (10 years and 143 days) Location China Motive Preservation of communism by purging capitalist and traditional elements, and power struggle between Maoists and pragmatists.

Organized by Politburo of the Chinese Communist Party Cultural Revolution Group Outcome Economic activity impaired, historical and cultural material destroyed.

Deaths Estimates vary from hundreds of thousands to millions (see § Death toll ) Property damage Cemetery of Confucius , Temple of Heaven , Ming tombs Arrests Jiang Qing , Zhang Chunqiao , Yao Wenyuan , and Wang Hongwen Cultural Revolution Chinese 文化大革命 Literal meaning "Great Cultural Revolution" Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Wénhuà dàgémìng Bopomofo ㄨㄣˊ ㄏㄨㄚˋ ㄉㄚˋ ㄍㄜˊ ㄇㄧㄥˋ Gwoyeu Romatzyh Wenhuah dahgerminq Wade–Giles Wen 2 -hua 4 ta 4 -ko 2 -ming 4 Tongyong Pinyin Wún-huà dà-gé-mìng IPA [wə̌n.xwâ tâ.kɤ̌.mîŋ] Wu Romanization Ven 平 ho 去 du 去 keh 入 min 去 Hakka Pha̍k-fa-sṳ Vùn-fa thai-kiet-min Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Màhn-faa daaih-gaak-mihng Jyutping man4 faa3 daai6 gaak3 ming6 IPA [mɐn˩ fa˧ taj˨ kak̚˧ mɪŋ˨] Southern Min Hokkien POJ Bûn-hoà tāi-kek-bēng Eastern Min Fuzhou BUC Ùng-huá dâi gáik-mêng Formal name Simplified Chinese 无产阶级文化大革命 Traditional Chinese 無產階級文化大革命 Literal meaning "Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution" Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Wúchǎnjiējí wénhuà dàgémìng Bopomofo ㄨˊ ㄔㄢˇ ㄐㄧㄝ ㄐㄧˊ ㄨㄣˊ ㄏㄨㄚˋ ㄉㄚˋ ㄍㄜˊ ㄇㄧㄥˋ Wade–Giles Wu 2 -ch ʻ an 2 -chieh 1 -chi 2 wen 2 -hua 4 ta 4 -ko 2 -ming 4 Tongyong Pinyin Wú-chǎn-jie-jí wún-huà dà-gé-mìng IPA [ǔ.ʈʂʰàn.tɕjé.tɕǐ wə̌n.xwâ tâ.kɤ̌.mîŋ] Wu Romanization Vu 平 tshae 上 cia 平 cih 入 ven 平 ho 去 du 去 keh 入 min 去 Hakka Pha̍k-fa-sṳ Vû-sán-kiê-kip vùn-fa thai-kiet-min Yue: Cantonese Jyutping mou4 caan2 gaai1 kap1 man4 faa3 daai6 gaak3 ming6 IPA [mɔw˩ tsʰan˧˥ kaj˥ kʰɐp̚˥ mɐn˩ fa˧ taj˨ kak̚˧ mɪŋ˨] Southern Min Hokkien POJ Bû-sán-kai-kip bûn-hòa tōa kek-bēng Eastern Min Fuzhou BUC Ù-sāng-găi-ngék ùng-huá dâi gáik-mêng History of the People's Republic of China 1949–1976: Mao era Revolution Land Reform Movement Proclamation Korean War Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries Three-anti and Five-anti Campaigns First five-year plan Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence Bandung Conference Sufan movement Hundred Flowers Campaign Anti-Rightist Campaign Canton Fair Great Leap Forward Great Chinese Famine Anti-Right Deviation Struggle Two Bombs, One Satellite Seven Thousand Cadres Conference Socialist Education Movement Third Front Cultural Revolution Abolition of the presidency UN representation Richard Nixon visit 1976–1989: Hua & Deng era Gang of Four Boluan Fanzheng 1978 Truth Criterion Controversy New Enlightenment Reform and opening up Special economic zones China–United States relations Three Communiqués Four Modernizations Sino-Vietnamese War Beijing Spring Strike Hard Against Crime Campaign Sino-British Joint Declaration Campaign against spiritual pollution Bourgeois liberalization Opposition 863 Program 1986 Chinese student demonstrations Sino-Portuguese Joint Declaration 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre 1989–2002: Jiang era Shanghai Stock Exchange Pudong New District Deng's southern tour 1992 consensus One country, two systems Handover of Hong Kong Handover of Macau 1998 floods US bombing of the Belgrade embassy Persecution of Falun Gong China Western Development Hainan Island incident APEC China 2001 Accession to the WTO Forum on China–Africa Cooperation Shanghai Cooperation Organisation 2002–2012: Hu era 2002–2004 SARS outbreak Shenzhou 5 Visit of Lien Chan South–North Water Transfer Project Qinghai–Tibet railway 2008 Sichuan earthquake Three Links with Taiwan 2008 Summer Olympics Expo 2010 BRICS Three Gorges Dam West–East Gas Pipeline High-speed rail 2012–present: Xi era Anti-corruption campaign Chang'e 3 Supercomputing Meeting with Ma Ying-Jeou Xiong'an Persecution of Uyghurs Xinjiang internment camps China–United States trade war Tiangong space station 2019–2020 Hong Kong protests 2020 Hong Kong national security law COVID-19 pandemic Zero-COVID 2020–2021 reform spree 2022 Winter Olympics 2022 COVID-19 protests in China Artificial Intelligence Cold War Belt and Road Initiative APEC China 2014 2016 G20 Hangzhou summit 9th BRICS summit China International Import Expo Constitution Beijing Shanghai Culture Economy Education Geography Politics China portal v t e Part of a series on Revolution Characteristics Bourgeois Colour Communist Counter-revolutionary Democratic Nonviolent Passive Permanent Proletarian From above Wave Social Methods Boycott Civil disorder Civil war Class struggle Contentious politics Coup d'état Demonstration Human chain Direct action Guerrilla warfare Insurgency Mass mobilization Mutiny Protest Rebellion Resistance Nonviolent Civil Disobedience Riot Samizdat Strike action Tax resistance Terror Examples English Atlantic American Brabant Liège French Haitian Spanish American Serbian Greek 1820s 1830 July Belgian Texas 1848 Italian states February German Hungarian Eureka Bulgarian unification Philippine Iranian First Second Young Turk Mexican Chinese Xinhai Communist Cultural 1917–1923 Russian German Siamese Spanish August Guatemalan Hungarian (1956) Cuban Rwandan Nicaraguan Argentine Carnation Saur People Power 1989 Yogurt Velvet Romanian Singing Bolivarian Bulldozer Rose Orange Tulip Kyrgyz Arab Spring Tunisian Egyptian Yemeni Euromaidan Second Arab Spring Sudanese Politics portal v t e The Cultural Revolution , formally known as the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution , was a sociopolitical movement in the People's Republic of China (PRC). It was launched by CCP chairman Mao Zedong in 1966 and lasted until his death in 1976. Its stated goal was to preserve Chinese socialism by purging remnants of capitalist and traditional elements from Chinese society .

In May 1966, with the help of the Cultural Revolution Group , Mao launched the Revolution and said that bourgeois elements had infiltrated the government and society with the aim of restoring capitalism. Mao called on young people to bombard the headquarters , and proclaimed that "to rebel is justified". Mass upheaval began in Beijing with Red August in 1966. Many young people, mainly students, responded by forming cadres of Red Guards throughout the country.

Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung became revered within his cult of personality . In 1967, emboldened radicals began seizing power from local governments and party branches, establishing new revolutionary committees in their place while smashing public security, procuratorate and judicial systems . These committees often split into rival factions, precipitating armed clashes among the radicals . After the fall of Lin Biao in 1971, the Gang of Four became influential in 1972, and the Revolution continued until Mao's death in 1976, soon followed by the arrest of the Gang of Four.

The Cultural Revolution was characterized by violence and chaos across Chinese society. Estimates of the death toll vary widely, typically ranging from 1–2 million, including a massacre in Guangxi that included acts of cannibalism , as well as massacres in Beijing, Inner Mongolia , Guangdong , Yunnan , and Hunan .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Red Guards sought to destroy the Four Olds (old ideas, old culture, old customs, and old habits), which often took the form of destroying historical artifacts and cultural and religious sites. Tens of millions were persecuted, including senior officials such as Liu Shaoqi , Deng Xiaoping and Peng Dehuai ; millions were persecuted for being members of the Five Black Categories , with intellectuals and scientists labelled as the Stinking Old Ninth . The country's schools and universities were closed, and the National College Entrance Examinations were cancelled. Over 10 million youth from urban areas were relocated under the Down to the Countryside Movement .

In December 1978, Deng Xiaoping became the new paramount leader of China , replacing Mao's successor Hua Guofeng . Deng and his allies introduced the Boluan Fanzheng program and initiated economic reforms , which, together with the New Enlightenment movement , gradually dismantled the ideology of Cultural Revolution. In 1981, the Communist Party publicly acknowledged numerous failures of the Cultural Revolution, declaring it "responsible for the most severe setback and the heaviest losses suffered by the people, the country, and the party since the founding of the People's Republic." Given its broad scope and social impact, memories and perspectives of the Cultural Revolution are varied and complex in contemporary China. It is often referred to as the "ten years of chaos" ( 十年动乱 ; shí nián dòngluàn ) or "ten years of havoc" ( 十年浩劫 ; shí nián hàojié ).

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Etymology [ edit ] The terminology of cultural revolution appeared in communist party discourses and newspapers prior to the founding of the People's Republic of China. During this period, the term was used interchangeably with "cultural construction" and referred to eliminating illiteracy in order to widen public participation in civic matters. This usage of "cultural revolution" continued through the 1950s and into the 1960s, and often involved drawing parallels to the May Fourth Movement or the Soviet cultural revolution of 1928–1931.

[ 5 ] : 56 Background [ edit ] Creation of the People's Republic [ edit ] Main article: Proclamation of the People's Republic of China On 1 October 1949, Mao Zedong declared the People's Republic of China, symbolically bringing the decades-long Chinese Civil War to a close. Remaining Republican forces fled to Taiwan and continued to resist the People's Republic in various ways. Many soldiers of the Chinese Republicans were left in mainland China, and Mao Zedong launched the Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries to eliminate these soldiers left behind, as well as elements of Chinese society viewed as potentially dangerous to Mao's new government.

Great Leap Forward [ edit ] Main articles: Great Leap Forward and Great Chinese Famine See also: Seven Thousand Cadres Conference The Great Leap Forward, similar to the Five-year plans of the Soviet Union , was Mao Zedong's proposal to make the newly created People's Republic of China an industrial superpower. Beginning in 1958, the Great Leap Forward did produce, at least on the surface, incredible industrialization, but also caused the Great Chinese Famine , while still falling short of projected goals.

[ citation needed ] In early 1962, at CCP's Seven Thousand Cadres Conference , Mao made self-criticism , after which he took a semi-retired role, leaving future responsibilities to Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping .

[ citation needed ] This section is an excerpt from Great Leap Forward .

[ edit ] This article is part of a series about Mao Zedong Personal Early life Former Residence Death and state funeral Memorial Hall Ideology Maoism Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Prachanda Path Leadership Tenure Revolution Land Reform Movement Proclamation Korean War Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries Three-anti and Five-anti Campaigns First five-year plan Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence Bandung Conference Sufan movement Hundred Flowers Campaign Anti-Rightist Campaign Canton Fair Great Leap Forward Great Chinese Famine Two Bombs, One Satellite Seven Thousand Cadres Conference Socialist Education Movement Third Front Cultural Revolution Abolition of the presidency UN representation Richard Nixon visit Works Bombard the Headquarters A Critique of Soviet Economics On Contradiction On Guerrilla Warfare On New Democracy On Practice On Protracted War On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People On the People's Democratic Dictatorship On the Ten Major Relationships Oppose Book Worship Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung Reply to Li Shuyi Report on an Investigation of the Peasant Movement in Hunan Selected Works of Mao Tse-Tung The Shian Kian Weekly Review Poetry Changsha The Double Ninth Loushan Pass Legacy Cult of personality Chairman Mao en route to Anyuan Portraits overlooking Tiananmen 1989 vandalism incident Statues Young Fuzhou Chengdu Long Live the Victory North Park Commune inspection v t e The Great Leap Forward stemmed from multiple factors, including "the purge of intellectuals , the surge of less-educated radicals, the need to find new ways to generate domestic capital, rising enthusiasm about the potential results mass mobilization might produce, and reaction against the sociopolitical results of the Soviet Union 's development strategy." [ 6 ] Mao ambitiously sought an increase in rural grain production and an increase in industrial activity. Mao was dismissive of technical experts and basic economic principles, which meant that industrialization of the countryside would solely be dependent on the peasants . Grain quotas were introduced with the idea of having peasants provide grains for themselves and support urban areas. Output from the industrial activities such as steel was also supposed to be used for urban growth.

[ 6 ] Local officials were fearful of the Anti-Right Deviation Struggle and they competed to fulfill or over-fulfill quotas which were based on Mao's exaggerated claims, collecting non-existent "surpluses" and leaving farmers to starve to death. Higher officials did not dare to report the economic disaster which was being caused by these policies, and national officials, blaming bad weather for the decline in food output, took little or no action.

Impact of international tensions and anti-revisionism [ edit ] Main article: Sino-Soviet split In the early 1950s, the PRC and the Soviet Union (USSR) were the world's two largest communist states. Although initially they were mutually supportive, disagreements arose after Nikita Khrushchev took power in the USSR. In 1956, Khrushchev denounced his predecessor Josef Stalin and his policies , and began implementing economic reforms . Mao and many other CCP members opposed these changes, believing that they would damage the worldwide communist movement.

[ 7 ] : 4–7 Mao believed that Khrushchev was a revisionist , altering Marxist–Leninist concepts, which Mao claimed would give capitalists control of the USSR. Relations soured. The USSR refused to support China's case for joining the United Nations and reneged on its pledge to supply China with a nuclear weapon.

[ 7 ] : 4–7 Mao denounced revisionism in April 1960. Without pointing at the USSR, Mao criticized its Balkan ally, the League of Communists of Yugoslavia . In turn, the USSR criticized China's Balkan ally, the Party of Labour of Albania . In 1963, CCP began to denounce the USSR, publishing nine polemics.

[ 7 ] : 7 Other Soviet actions increased concerns about potential fifth columnists . As a result of the tensions following the Sino-Soviet split, Soviet leaders authorized radio broadcasts into China stating that the Soviet Union would assist "genuine communists" who overthrew Mao and his "erroneous course".

[ 8 ] : 141 Chinese leadership also feared the increasing military conflict between the United States and North Vietnam , concerned that China's support would lead the United States to seek out potential Chinese assets.

[ 8 ] : 141 Views of revolutionary practice [ edit ] Mao contended that capitalist tendencies had begun to grow in China.

[ 9 ] : 151 He viewed the Cultural Revolution as perpetual revolution aimed at opposing "representatives of the bourgeoisie and counterrevolutionary revisionists" who had "sneaked into the party, the government, the army, and cultural circles." [ 9 ] : 151–152 The meaning and nature of revolution was a frequent theme in the speeches of central leadership during the Cultural Revolution.

[ 10 ] : 71 They contended that the Cultural Revolution was an unprecedented event that had to be carried out by the people rather than directed from above and that the best test was revolutionary practice.

[ 10 ] : 71 Tao Zhu stated: [ 10 ] : 71 You can't say you are the true revolutionaries and they are fake. This is mass organizing. Their organizations may also be revolutionary. You may have a revolutionary competition. Good ones will grow, bad ones will collapse ... True or fake revolutionaries will be distinguished in revolutionary practice.

Socialist Education Movement and Hai Rui Dismissed from Office [ edit ] See also: Socialist Education Movement and Hai Rui Dismissed from Office In 1963, Mao launched the Socialist Education Movement .

[ 11 ] Mao set the scene by " cleansing " powerful Beijing officials of questionable loyalty. His approach was executed via newspaper articles, internal meetings, and by his network of political allies.

[ 11 ] In late 1959, historian and deputy mayor of Beijing Wu Han published a historical drama entitled Hai Rui Dismissed from Office . In the play, an honest civil servant , Hai Rui , is dismissed by a corrupt emperor. While Mao initially praised the play, in February 1965, he secretly commissioned Jiang Qing and Yao Wenyuan to publish an article criticizing it. Yao described the play as an allegory attacking Mao; flagging Mao as the emperor, and Peng Dehuai, who had previously questioned Mao during the Lushan Conference , as the honest civil servant.

[ 7 ] : 15–18 Yao's article put Beijing mayor Peng Zhen on the defensive. Peng, Wu Han's direct superior, was the head of the Five Man Group , a committee commissioned by Mao to study the potential for a cultural revolution. Peng Zhen, aware that he would be implicated if Wu indeed wrote an "anti-Mao" play, wished to contain Yao's influence. Yao's article was initially published only in select local newspapers. Peng forbade its publication in the nationally distributed People's Daily and other major newspapers under his control, and not pay heed to Yao's petty politics.

[ 7 ] : 14–19 While the "literary battle" against Peng raged, Mao fired Yang Shangkun —director of the party's General Office , an organ that controlled internal communications—making unsubstantiated charges. He installed loyalist Wang Dongxing , head of Mao's security detail. Yang's dismissal likely emboldened Mao's allies to move against their factional rivals.

[ 7 ] : 14–19 On 12 February 1966, the "Five Man Group" issued a report known as the February Outline . The Outline as sanctioned by the party center defined Hai Rui as a constructive academic discussion and aimed to distance Peng Zhen formally from any political implications. However, Jiang Qing and Yao Wenyuan continued their denunciations. Meanwhile, Mao sacked Propaganda Department director Lu Dingyi , a Peng ally.

[ 7 ] : 20–27 Lu's removal gave Maoists unrestricted access to the press. Mao delivered his final blow to Peng at a high-profile Politburo meeting through loyalists Kang Sheng and Chen Boda . They accused Peng of opposing Mao, labeled the February Outline "evidence of Peng Zhen's revisionism", and grouped him with three other disgraced officials as part of the "Peng-Luo-Lu-Yang Anti-Party Clique".

[ 7 ] : 20–27 On 16 May, the Politburo formalized the decisions by releasing an official document condemning Peng and his "anti-party allies" in the strongest terms, disbanding his "Five Man Group", and replacing it with the Maoist Cultural Revolution Group (CRG).

[ 7 ] : 27–35 1966: Outbreak [ edit ] The Cultural Revolution can be divided into two main periods: spring 1966 to summer 1968 (when most of the key events took place) a tailing period that lasted until fall 1976 [ 12 ] The early phase was characterized by mass movement and political pluralization. Virtually anyone could create a political organization, even without party approval. Known as Red Guards, these organizations originally arose in schools and universities and later in factories and other institutions. After 1968, most of these organizations ceased to exist, although their legacies were a topic of controversy later.

[ 12 ] Notification [ edit ] Main article: 16 May Notification The 16 May Notification In May 1966, an expanded session of the Politburo was called in Beijing. The conference was laden with Maoist political rhetoric on class struggle and filled with meticulously prepared 'indictments' of recently ousted leaders such as Peng Zhen and Luo Ruiqing . One of these documents, distributed on 16 May, was prepared with Mao's personal supervision and was particularly damning: [ 7 ] : 39–40 Those representatives of the bourgeoisie who have sneaked into the Party, the government, the army, and various spheres of culture are a bunch of counter-revolutionary revisionists. Once conditions are ripe, they will seize political power and turn the dictatorship of the proletariat into a dictatorship of the bourgeoisie. Some of them we have already seen through; others we have not. Some are still trusted by us and are being trained as our successors, persons like Khrushchev for example, who are still nestling beside us.

[ 7 ] : 47 Later known as the "16 May Notification", this document summarized Mao's ideological justification for CR.

[ 7 ] : 40 Initially kept secret, distributed only among high-ranking party members, it was later declassified and published in People's Daily on 17 May 1967.

[ 7 ] : 41 Effectively it implied that enemies of the Communist cause could be found within the Party: class enemies who "wave the red flag to oppose the red flag." The only way to identify these people was through "the telescope and microscope of Mao Zedong Thought ." [ 7 ] : 46 While the party leadership was relatively united in approving Mao's agenda, many Politburo members were not enthusiastic, or simply confused about the direction.

[ 13 ] : 13 The charges against party leaders such as Peng disturbed China's intellectual community and the eight non-Communist parties .

[ 7 ] : 41 Mass rallies (May–June) [ edit ] " Sweep Away All Cow Demons and Snake Spirits ", an editorial published on the front page of People's Daily on 1 June 1966, calling for the proletariat to "completely eradicate" the " Four Olds [...] that have poisoned the people of China for thousands of years, fostered by the exploiting classes".

[ 14 ] : 50 After the purge of Peng Zhen, the Beijing Party Committee effectively ceased to function, paving the way for disorder in the capital. On 25 May, under the guidance of Cao Yi'ou [ zh ] —wife of Mao loyalist Kang Sheng— Nie Yuanzi , a philosophy lecturer at Peking University , authored a big-character poster along with other leftists and posted it to a public bulletin. Nie attacked the university's party administration and its leader Lu Ping. Nie insinuated that the university leadership, much like Peng, were trying to contain revolutionary fervor in a "sinister" attempt to oppose the party and advance revisionism.

[ 7 ] : 56–58 Mao promptly endorsed Nie's poster as "the first Marxist big-character poster in China". Approved by Mao, the poster rippled across educational institutions. Students began to revolt against their school's party establishments. Classes were cancelled in Beijing primary and secondary schools, followed by a decision on 13 June to expand the class suspension nationwide. By early June, throngs of young demonstrators lined the capital's major thoroughfares holding giant portraits of Mao, beating drums, and shouting slogans.

[ 7 ] : 59–61 When the dismissal of Peng and the municipal party leadership became public in early June, confusion was widespread. The public and foreign missions were kept in the dark on the reason for Peng's ousting. Top Party leadership was caught off guard by the sudden protest wave and struggled with how to respond. After seeking Mao's guidance in Hangzhou , Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping decided to send in 'work teams'—effectively 'ideological guidance' squads of cadres—to the city's schools and People's Daily to restore some semblance of order and re-establish party control.

[ 7 ] : 62–64 The work teams had a poor understanding of student sentiment. Unlike the political movement of the 1950s that squarely targeted intellectuals, the new movement was focused on established party cadres, many of whom were part of the work teams. As a result, the work teams came under increasing suspicion as thwarting revolutionary fervor.

[ 7 ] : 71 Party leadership subsequently became divided over whether or not work teams should continue. Liu Shaoqi insisted on continuing work-team involvement and suppressing the movement's most radical elements, fearing that the movement would spin out of control.

[ 7 ] : 75 Bombard the Headquarters (July) [ edit ] Mao–Liu conflict In 1966, Mao broke with Liu Shaoqi (right), then serving as President , over the work-teams issue. Mao's polemic Bombard the Headquarters was widely recognized as targeting Liu, the purported "bourgeois" party headquarters Mao waves to the crowd on the banks of the Yangtze before his swim across, July 1966 In July, Mao, in Wuhan, crossed the Yangtze River, showing his vigor. He then returned from Wuhan to Beijing and criticized party leadership for its handling of the work-teams issue. Mao accused the work teams of undermining the student movement, calling for their full withdrawal on 24 July. Several days later a rally was held at the Great Hall of the People to announce the decision and reveal the tone of the movement to teachers and students. At the rally, Party leaders encouraged the masses to 'not be afraid' and take charge of the movement, free of Party interference.

[ 7 ] : 81–84 The work-teams issue marked a decisive defeat for Liu; it also signaled that disagreement over how to handle the CR's unfolding events would irreversibly split Mao from the party leadership. On 1 August, the Eleventh Plenum of the 8th Central Committee was convened to advance Mao's radical agenda. At the plenum, Mao showed disdain for Liu, repeatedly interrupting him as he delivered his opening day speech.

[ 7 ] : 94 Red Guards in Beijing From left: (1) Students at Beijing Normal University making big-character posters denouncing Liu Shaoqi ; (2) Big-characters posted at Peking University ; (3) Students at No. 23 Middle School in Beijing reading People's Daily during the "Resume Classes" campaign On 28 July, Red Guard representatives wrote to Mao, calling for rebellion and upheaval to safeguard the revolution. Mao then responded to the letters by writing his own big-character poster entitled Bombard the Headquarters , rallying people to target the "command centre (i.e., Headquarters) of counterrevolution." Mao wrote that despite having undergone a communist revolution, a "bourgeois" elite was still thriving in "positions of authority" in the government and Party.

[ 15 ] This statement has been interpreted as a direct indictment of the party establishment under Liu and Deng—the purported "bourgeois headquarters" of China. The personnel changes at the Plenum reflected a radical re-design of the party hierarchy. Liu and Deng kept their seats on the Politburo Standing Committee, but were sidelined from day-to-day party affairs. Lin Biao was elevated to become the CCP's number-two; Liu's rank went from second to eighth and was no longer Mao's heir apparent.

[ 15 ] A struggle session targeting Liu Shaoqi's wife Wang Guangmei Along with the top leadership losing power the entire national Party bureaucracy was purged. The extensive Organization Department , in charge of party personnel, virtually ceased to exist. The top officials in the Propaganda Department were sacked, with many of its functions folded into the CRG.

[ 7 ] : 96 Red August and the Sixteen Points [ edit ] Main article: Red August Mao and Lin Biao surrounded by rallying Red Guards in Beijing, December 1966 Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung led the Red Guards to commit to their objective as China's future.

[ 7 ] : 107 By December 1967, 350 million copies had been printed.

[ 16 ] : 61–64 During the Red August of Beijing, on 8 August 1966, the party's General Committee passed its "Decision Concerning the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution," later to be known as the "Sixteen Points". This decision defined the Cultural Revolution as "a great revolution that touches people to their very souls and constitutes a new stage in the development of the socialist revolution in our country:" [ 17 ] [ 7 ] : 92–93 Although the bourgeoisie has been overthrown, it is still trying to use the old ideas, culture, customs and habits of the exploiting classes to corrupt the masses, capture their minds and endeavour to stage a comeback. The proletariat must do the exact opposite: it must meet head-on every challenge of the bourgeoisie ... to change the mental outlook of the whole of society. At present, our objective is to struggle against and overthrow those persons in authority who are taking the capitalist road, to criticize and repudiate the reactionary bourgeois academic "authorities" and the ideology of the bourgeoisie and all other exploiting classes and to transform education, literature and art and all other parts of the superstructure not in correspondence with the socialist economic base, so as to facilitate the consolidation and development of the socialist system.

The implications of the Sixteen Points were far-reaching. It elevated what was previously a student movement to a nationwide mass campaign that would galvanize workers, farmers, soldiers and lower-level party functionaries to rise, challenge authority, and re-shape the superstructure of society.

Tiananmen Square on 15 September 1966, the occasion of Chairman Mao's third of eight mass rallies with Red Guards in 1966.

[ 18 ] On 18 August in Beijing, over a million Red Guards from across the country gathered in and around Tiananmen Square for an audience with the chairman.

[ 7 ] : 106–107 Mao mingled with Red Guards and encouraged them, donning a Red Guard armband. Lin also took centre stage, denouncing perceived enemies in society that were impeding the "progress of the revolution".

[ 13 ] : 66 Subsequently, violence escalated in Beijing and quickly spread.

[ 2 ] [ 19 ] : xvi The 18 August rally was filmed and shown to approximately 100 million people in its first month of release.

[ 20 ] : 53 On 22 August, a central directive was issued to prevent police intervention in Red Guard activities, and those in the police force who defied this notice were labeled counter-revolutionaries. Central officials lifted restraints on violent behavior.

Xie Fuzhi , the national police chief, often pardoned Red Guards for their "crimes".

[ 7 ] : 124–126 The campaign included incidents of torture, murder, and public humiliation. Many people who were indicted as counter-revolutionaries died by suicide. During Red August, 1,772 people were murdered in Beijing; many of the victims were teachers who were attacked or killed by their own students.

[ 2 ] In September, Shanghai experienced 704 suicides and 534 deaths; in Wuhan, 62 suicides and 32 murders occurred during the same period.

[ 7 ] : 124 Peng Dehuai was brought to Beijing to be publicly ridiculed.

Destruction of the Four Olds (August–November) [ edit ] Main article: Four Olds See also: Great Exchange of Revolutionary Experience The remains of the Wanli Emperor at the Ming tombs. Red Guards dragged the remains of the Wanli Emperor and Empresses to the front of the tomb, where they were posthumously "denounced" and burned [ 21 ] Between August and November 1966, eight mass rallies were held, drawing in 12 million people, most of whom were Red Guards.

[ 7 ] : 106 To aid Red Guards in traveling, the Great Exchange of Revolutionary Experience program, which lasted from September 1966 to early 1967, gave them free food and lodging throughout the country.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 7 ] : 110–113 At the rallies, Lin called for the destruction of the Four Olds; namely, old customs, culture, habits, and ideas.

[ 13 ] : 66 [ 24 ] : 146 Some changes associated with the Four Olds campaign were mainly benign, such as assigning new names to city streets, places, and even people; millions of babies were born with "revolutionary" names.

[ 25 ] Other aspects were more destructive, particularly in the realms of culture and religion. Historical sites throughout the country were destroyed. The damage was particularly pronounced in the capital, Beijing. Red Guards laid siege to the Temple of Confucius in Qufu , [ 7 ] : 119 and other historically significant tombs and artifacts.

[ 26 ] Libraries of historical and foreign texts were destroyed; books were burned. Temples, churches, mosques, monasteries, and cemeteries were closed and sometimes converted to other uses, or looted and destroyed.

[ 27 ] Marxist propaganda depicted Buddhism as superstition, and religion was looked upon as a means of hostile foreign infiltration, as well as an instrument of the ruling class.

[ 28 ] Clergy were arrested and sent to camps; many Tibetan Buddhists were forced to participate in the destruction of their monasteries at gunpoint.

[ 28 ] The cemetery of Confucius was attacked by Red Guards in November 1966.

[ 26 ] [ 29 ] This statue of the Yongle Emperor was originally carved in stone, and was destroyed in the Cultural Revolution. A metal replica is in its place.

The remains of the 8th century Buddhist monk Huineng were attacked during the Cultural Revolution.

A frieze damaged during the Cultural Revolution, originally from a garden house of a rich imperial official in Suzhou.

In September 1966, central Party authorities under Zhou Enlai issued the Instructions on Grasping Revolution, Promoting Production , which directed that "one must grasp revolution on one hand and promote production on the other hand.

[ 30 ] : 251 Central Work Conference (October) [ edit ] In October 1966, Mao convened a Central Work Conference, mostly to enlist party leaders who had not yet adopted the latest ideology. Liu and Deng were prosecuted and begrudgingly offered self-criticism.

[ 7 ] : 137 After the conference, Liu, once a powerful moderate pundit, was placed under house arrest, then sent to a detention camp, where he was denied medical treatment and died in 1969. Deng was sent away for a period of re-education three times and was eventually sent to work in an engine factory in Jiangxi . Rebellion by party cadres accelerated after the conference.

[ 31 ] End of the year [ edit ] On 5 October, the Central Military Commission and the PLA's Department of General Political Tasks directed military academies to dismiss their classes to allow cadets to become more involved in the Cultural Revolution.

[ 24 ] : 147 In doing so, they were acting on Lin Biao's 23 August 1966 for "three month turmoil" in the PLA.

[ 24 ] : 147 In Macau , rioting broke out during the 12-3 incident .

[ 32 ] : 84 The event was prompted by the colonial government's delays in approving a new wing for a CCP elementary school in Taipa .

[ 32 ] : 84 The school board illegally began construction, but the colonial government sent police to stop the workers. Several people were injured in the resulting melee . On December 3, 1966, two days of rioting occurred in which hundreds were injured and six to eight were killed, leading to a total clampdown by the Portuguese government.

[ 33 ] The event set in motion Portugal's de facto abdication of control over Macau, putting Macau on the path to eventual absorption by China.

[ 32 ] : 84–85 By the beginning of 1967, a wide variety of grassroots political organizations had formed. Beyond Red Guard and student rebel groups, these included poor peasant associations, workers' pickets, and Mao Zedong Thought study societies, among others. Communist Party leaders encouraged these groups to "join up", and these groups joined various coalitions and held various cross-group congresses and assemblies.

[ 5 ] : 60 1967: Seizure of power [ edit ] Main article: Seizure of power (Cultural Revolution) See also: Violent struggle , Rebel Faction (Cultural Revolution) , Conservative Faction (Cultural Revolution) , and Smashing gong-jian-fa Mass organizations coalesced into two factions, the radicals who backed Mao's purge of the Communist party, and the conservatives who backed the moderate party establishment. The "support the left" policy was established in January 1967.

[ 34 ] Mao's policy was to support the rebels in seizing power; it required the PLA to support "the broad masses of the revolutionary leftists in their struggle to seize power." [ 34 ] In March 1967, the policy was adapted into the "Three Supports and Two Militaries" initiative, in which PLA troops were sent to schools and work units across the country to stabilize political tumult and end factional warfare.

[ 35 ] : 345 The three "Supports" were to "support the left", "support the interior", "support industry". The "two Militaries" referred to "military management" and "military training".

[ 35 ] : 345 The policy of supporting the left failed to define "leftists" at a time when almost all mass organizations claimed to be "leftist" or "revolutionary".

[ 34 ] PLA commanders had developed close working relations with the party establishment, leading many military units to repress radicals.

[ 36 ] Spurred by the events in Beijing, power seizure groups formed across the country and began expanding into factories and the countryside. In Shanghai, a young factory worker named Wang Hongwen organized a far-reaching revolutionary coalition, one that displaced existing Red Guard groups. On 3 January 1967, with support from CRG heavyweights Zhang Chunqiao and Yao Wenyuan, the group of firebrand activists overthrew the Shanghai municipal government under Chen Pixian in what became known as the January Storm , and formed in its place the Shanghai People's Commune .

[ 37 ] [ 16 ] : 115 Mao then expressed his approval.

[ 31 ] Rebel factions of Red Guards marching in Shanghai, 1967 Shanghai's was the first provincial level government overthrown.

[ 31 ] Provincial governments and many parts of the state and party bureaucracy were affected, with power seizures taking place. In the next three weeks, 24 more province-level governments were overthrown.

[ 31 ] "Revolutionary committees" were subsequently established, in place of local governments and branches of the Communist Party.

[ 38 ] For example, in Beijing, three separate revolutionary groups declared power seizures on the same day. In Heilongjiang, local party secretary Pan Fusheng seized power from the party organization under his own leadership. Some leaders even wrote to the CRG asking to be overthrown.

[ 7 ] : 170–72 In Beijing, Jiang Qing and Zhang Chunqiao targeted Vice-Premier Tao Zhu . The power-seizure movement was appearing in the military as well. In February, prominent generals Ye Jianying and Chen Yi , as well as Vice-Premier Tan Zhenlin , vocally asserted their opposition to the more extreme aspects of the movement, with some party elders insinuating that the CRG's real motives were to remove the revolutionary old guard. Mao, initially ambivalent, took to the Politburo floor on 18 February to denounce the opposition directly, endorsing the radicals' activities. This resistance was branded the February Countercurrent [ 7 ] : 195–196 —effectively silencing critics within the party.

[ 13 ] : 207–209 Red Guards marching in Guizhou , 1967. The banner in the center reads: "The People's Liberation Army firmly supports the proletarian revolutionary faction." Although in early 1967 popular insurgencies were limited outside of the biggest cities, local governments began collapsing all across China.

[ 39 ] : 21 Revolutionaries dismantled ruling government and party organizations, because power seizures lacked centralized leadership, it was no longer clear who believed in Mao's revolutionary vision and who was exploiting the chaos for their own gain. The formation of rival revolutionary groups and manifestations of long-established local feuds, led to violent struggles between factions.

[ citation needed ] Tension grew between mass organizations and the military. In response, Lin Biao issued a directive for the army to aid the radicals. At the same time, the army took control of some provinces and locales that were deemed incapable of handling the power transition.

[ 13 ] : 219–221 In Wuhan, as in many other cities, two major revolutionary organizations emerged, one supporting and one attacking the conservative establishment.

Chen Zaidao , the Army general in charge of the area, forcibly repressed the anti-establishment demonstrators. Mao flew to Wuhan with a large entourage of central officials in an attempt to secure military loyalty in the area. On 20 July 1967, local agitators in response kidnapped Mao's emissary Wang Li , in what became known as the Wuhan Incident . Subsequently, Chen was sent to Beijing and tried by Jiang Qing and the rest of the CRG. Chen's resistance was the last major open display of opposition within the PLA.

[ 7 ] : 214 The Gang of Four's Zhang Chunqiao admitted that the most crucial factor in the Cultural Revolution was not the Red Guards or the CRG or the "rebel worker" organisations, but the PLA. When the PLA local garrison supported Mao's radicals, they were able to take over the local government successfully, but if they were not cooperative, the takeovers were unsuccessful.

[ 7 ] : 175 Violent clashes occurred in virtually all major cities.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] In response to the Wuhan Incident, Mao and Jiang began establishing a "workers' armed self-defense force", a "revolutionary armed force of mass character" to counter what he saw as rightism in "75% of the PLA officer corps". Meanwhile, a massive movement to " smash gong-jian-fa ", or to smash the Police, the Procuratorate and the Court, was carried out in mainland China.

[ 40 ] The few remaining going-jian-fa organizations were later placed under military control.

[ 41 ] Wuzhong Zhengzhou Kaifeng Shanghai Lianyuan Chongqing Guangzhou class=notpageimage| Some locations of armed conflict between rebel factions during the summer of 1967.

In Chongqing , factional violence was particularly pronounced.

[ 42 ] : 178 Violence there was exacerbated because the city had a concentration of munitions factories.

[ 43 ] : 336 Violence in Chongqing occurred primarily between two different rebel factions during the period 16 May 1967 to 15 October 1968.

[ 10 ] : 62–63 Among the major instances of combat there was the 25 July Incident in 1967, during which members of one rebel faction attacked four hundred members of other factions using knives, pistols, rifles, submachine guns, and machine guns, killing ten.

[ 10 ] : 64 Unconventional weapons , including weapon of mass destruction , were seized during conflicts, but not directly used. Citizens wrote letters to the Zhongnanhai residence of government leaders, warning of attacks on facilities that stored pathogenic bacteria , poisonous plant samples, radioactive substances, poison gas, toxicants, and other dangerous substances. In Changchun , rebels working in geological institutes developed and tested a dirty bomb , a crude radiological weapon , testing two "radioactive self-defense bombs" and two "radioactive self-defense mines" on 6 and 11 August.

[ 7 ] : 218–220 Violence in 1967 disrupted economic activity and touring Red Guards overburdened China's transportation system.

[ 30 ] : 251–252 By year end, national industrial output had decreased by 13.8% from the previous year.

[ 30 ] : 252 Military control was imposed over the Daqing Oil Field in March 1967 and over the Anshan Iron and Steel Plant in August.

[ 7 ] : 214–217 Nationwide, a total of 18.77 million firearms, 14,828 artillery pieces, 2,719,545 grenades ended up in civilian hands. They were used in the course of violent struggles, which mostly took place from 1967 to 1968. In Chongqing, Xiamen , and Changchun , tanks, armored vehicles and even warships were deployed in combat.

[ 36 ] In late 1967, the PLA became the most powerful political force in the country.

[ 30 ] : 253 In 1967 and 1968, rebel groups supported by the PLA established Revolutionary Committees that replaced government and existing Party organizations at the local and provincial levels.

[ 30 ] : 253 During the Cultural Revolution, Mao emphasized the need to improve medical care in rural China.

[ 44 ] : 270 The Rural Cooperative Medical System (RCMS) developed in the late 1960s.

[ 44 ] : 270 In this system, each large production brigade established a medical cooperative station staffed by barefoot doctors .

[ 44 ] : 270 The medical cooperative stations provided primary health care.

[ 44 ] : 270 Barefoot doctors brought healthcare to rural areas where urban-trained doctors would not settle. They promoted basic hygiene , preventive healthcare , and family planning and treated common illnesses .

[ 45 ] Immunizations were provided free of charge.

[ 44 ] : 9 Public healthcare was highly effective in curbing infectious diseases in rural China.

[ 44 ] : 9 For treatment of major diseases, rural people traveled to state-owned hospitals.

[ 44 ] : 270 1968: Purges [ edit ] See also: Cleansing the Class Ranks A rally in opposition to Liu Shaoqi In May 1968, Mao launched a massive political purge. Many people were sent to the countryside to work in reeducation camps. Generally, the campaign targeted rebels from the CR's earlier, more populist, phase.

[ 35 ] : 239 On 27 July, the Red Guards' power over the PLA was officially ended, and the establishment sent in units to besiege areas that remained untouched by the Guards. A year later, the Red Guard factions were dismantled entirely; Mao predicted that the chaos might begin running its own agenda and be tempted to turn against revolutionary ideology. Their purpose had been largely fulfilled; Mao and his radical colleagues had largely overturned established power.

[ citation needed ] Liu was expelled from the CCP at the 12th Plenum of the 8th Central Committee in September, and labelled the "headquarters of the bourgeoisie".

[ 46 ] Mao meets with Red Guard leaders (July) [ edit ] As the Red Guard movement had waned over the preceding year, violence by the remaining Red Guards increased on some Beijing campuses. Violence was particularly pronounced at Tsinghua University , where a few thousand hardliners of two factions continued to fight. At Mao's initiative, on 27 July 1968, tens of thousands of workers entered the Tsinghua campus shouting slogans in opposition to the violence. Red Guards attacked the workers, who remained peaceful. Ultimately, the workers disarmed the students and occupied the campus.

[ 47 ] : 205–206 On 28 July, Mao and the Central Group met with the five most important remaining Beijing Red Guard leaders to address the movement's excessive violence and political exhaustion.

[ 47 ] : 205–206 It was the only time during the Cultural Revolution that Mao met and addressed the student leaders directly. In response to a Red Guard leader's telegram sent prior to the meeting, which claimed that some "Black Hand" had maneuvered the workers against the Red Guards, Mao told the student leaders, "The Black Hand is nobody else but me! ... I asked [the workers] how to solve the armed fighting in the universities, and told them to go there to have a look." [ 47 ] : 210 During the meeting, Mao and the Central Group for the Cultural Revolution stated, "[W]e want cultural struggle, we do not want armed struggle" and "The masses do not want civil war." [ 47 ] : 217 You have been involved in the Cultural Revolution for two years: struggle-criticism-transformation. Now, first, you're not struggling; second, you're not criticizing; and third, you're not transforming. Or rather, you are struggling, but it's an armed struggle. The people are not happy, the workers are not happy, city residents are not happy, most people in schools are not happy, most of the students even in your schools are not happy. Even within the faction that supports you, there are unhappy people. Is this the way to unify the world?

Mao's cult of personality and "mango fever" (August) [ edit ] Main article: Mango cult See also: Mao Zedong's cult of personality A propaganda oil painting of Mao during the Cultural Revolution (1967) In the spring of 1968, a massive campaign aimed at enhancing Mao's reputation began. On 4 August, Mao was presented with mangoes by the Pakistani foreign minister Syed Sharifuddin Pirzada , in an apparent diplomatic gesture.

[ 48 ] Mao had his aide send the box of mangoes to his propaganda team at Tsinghua University on 5 August, who were stationed there to quiet strife among Red Guard factions.

[ 49 ] [ 48 ] Several months of "mango fever" followed as the fruit became a focus of a "boundless loyalty" campaign for Mao. More replica mangoes were created, and the replicas were sent on tour around Beijing and elsewhere. Many revolutionary committees visited the mangoes in Beijing from outlying provinces. Approximately half a million people greeted the replicas when they arrived in Chengdu . Badges and wall posters featuring the mangoes and Mao were produced in the millions.

[ 49 ] The fruit was shared among all institutions that had been a part of the propaganda team, and large processions were organized in support of the "precious gift", as the mangoes were known.

[ 50 ] It has been claimed that Mao used the mangoes to express support for the workers who would go to whatever lengths necessary to end the factional fighting among students, and a "prime example of Mao's strategy of symbolic support." [ 51 ] Through early 1969, participants of Mao Zedong Thought study classes in Beijing returned with mass-produced mango facsimiles, gaining media attention in the provinces.

[ 50 ] Down to the Countryside Movement (December) [ edit ] Main article: Down to the Countryside Movement In December 1968, Mao began the Down to the Countryside Movement. During this movement, which lasted for the following decade, young bourgeoisie living in cities were ordered to go to the countryside to experience working life. The term "young intellectuals" was used to refer to recent college graduates. In the late 1970s, these students returned to their home cities. Many students who were previously Red Guard supported the movement and Mao's vision. This movement was thus in part a means of moving Red Guards from the cities to the countryside, where they would cause less social disruption. It also served to spread revolutionary ideology geographically.

[ 52 ] 1969–1971: Lin Biao [ edit ] The 9th National Congress was held in April 1969. It served as a means to "revitalize" the party with fresh thinking—as well as new cadres, after much of the old guard had been destroyed in the struggles of the preceding years.

[ 7 ] : 285 The party framework established two decades earlier broke down almost entirely: rather than through an election by party members, delegates for this Congress were effectively selected by Revolutionary Committees.

[ 7 ] : 288 Representation of the military increased by a large margin from the previous Congress, reflected in the election of more PLA members to the new Central Committee—over 28%. Many officers now elevated to senior positions were loyal to PLA Marshal Lin Biao, which would open a new rift between the military and civilian leadership.

[ 7 ] : 292 We do not only feel boundless joy because we have as our great leader the greatest Marxist–Leninist of our era, Chairman Mao, but also great joy because we have Vice Chairman Lin as Chairman Mao's universally recognized successor.

— Premier Zhou Enlai at the 9th Party Congress [ 7 ] : 291 Reflecting this, Lin was officially elevated to become the Party's preeminent figure outside of Mao, with his name written into the party constitution as his "closest comrade-in-arms" and "universally recognized successor".

[ 7 ] : 291 At the time, no other Communist parties or governments anywhere in the world had adopted the practice of enshrining a successor to the current leader into their constitutions. Lin delivered the keynote address at the Congress: a document drafted by hardliner leftists Yao Wenyuan and Zhang Chunqiao under Mao's guidance.

[ 7 ] : 289 The report was heavily critical of Liu Shaoqi and other "counter-revolutionaries" and drew extensively from quotations in the Little Red Book . The Congress solidified the central role of Maoism within the party, re-introducing Maoism as the official guiding ideology in the party constitution. The Congress elected a new Politburo with Mao, Lin, Chen, Zhou Enlai and Kang as the members of the new Politburo Standing Committee.

[ 7 ] : 290 Lin, Chen, and Kang were all beneficiaries of the Cultural Revolution. Zhou, who was demoted in rank, voiced his unequivocal support for Lin at the Congress.

[ 7 ] : 290 Mao restored the function of some formal party institutions, such as the operations of the Politburo, which ceased functioning between 1966 and 1968 because the CCRG held de facto control.

[ 7 ] : 296 In early 1970, the nationwide " One Strike-Three Anti Campaign " was launched by Mao and the Communist Party Central, aiming to consolidate the new organs of power by targeting counterrevolutionary thoughts and actions.

[ 1 ] A large number of "minor criminals" were executed or forced to commit suicide between 1970 and 1972.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] According to government statistics released after the Cultural Revolution, during the campaign 1.87 million people were persecuted as traitors, spies, and counterrevolutionaries, and over 284,800 were arrested or killed from February to November 1970 alone.

[ 1 ] PLA encroachment [ edit ] Mao (left) and Lin (right) in 1967, riding in the back of a vehicle during an International Workers' Day parade Mao's efforts at re-organizing party and state institutions generated mixed results. The situation in some of the provinces remained volatile, even as the political situation in Beijing stabilized. Factional struggles, many violent, continued at a local level despite the declaration that the 9th National Congress marked a temporary victory for the CR.

[ 7 ] : 316 Furthermore, despite Mao's efforts to put on a show of unity at the Congress, the factional divide between Lin's PLA camp and the Jiang-led radical camp was intensifying. Indeed, a personal dislike of Jiang drew many civilian leaders, including Chen, closer to Lin.

[ 55 ] : 115 Between 1966 and 1968, China was isolated internationally, having declared its enmity towards both the USSR and the US. The friction with the USSR intensified after border clashes on the Ussuri River in March 1969 as Chinese leaders prepared for all-out war.

[ 7 ] : 317 In June 1969, the PLA's enforcement of political discipline and suppression of the factions that had emerged during the Cultural Revolution became intertwined with the central Party's efforts to accelerate Third Front . Those who did not return to work would be viewed as engaging in 'schismatic activity' which risked undermining preparations to defend China from potential invasion.

[ 8 ] : 150–151 In October 1969, the Party attempted to focus more on war preparedness and less on suppressing factions.

[ 8 ] : 151 That month, senior leaders were evacuated from Beijing. Amid the tension, Lin issued the " Order Number One ", which appeared to be an executive order to prepare for war to the PLA's eleven military regions on October 18 without going through Mao. This drew the ire of the chairman, who saw it as evidence that his declared successor was usurping his authority.

[ 7 ] : 317 The prospect of war elevated the PLA to greater prominence in domestic politics, increasing Lin's stature at Mao's expense.

[ 7 ] : 321 Some evidence suggests that Mao was pushed to seek closer relations with the US as a means to avoid PLA dominance that would result from a military confrontation with the Soviet Union.

[ 7 ] : 321 During his later meeting with Richard Nixon in 1972, Mao hinted that Lin had opposed better relations with the U.S.

[ 7 ] : 322 Restoration of State Chairman position [ edit ] Main article: Abolition of the presidency in China PRC Chairman (President) Liu Shaoqi on his deathbed in 1969 After Lin was confirmed as Mao's successor, his supporters focused on the restoration of the position of State Chairman, [ note 1 ] which had been abolished by Mao after Liu's purge. They hoped that by allowing Lin to ease into a constitutionally sanctioned role, whether Chairman or vice-chairman, Lin's succession would be institutionalized. The consensus within the Politburo was that Mao should assume the office with Lin as vice-chairman; but perhaps wary of Lin's ambitions or for other unknown reasons, Mao voiced his explicit opposition.

[ 7 ] : 327 Factional rivalries intensified at the Second Plenum of the Ninth Congress in Lushan held in late August 1970. Chen, now aligned with the PLA faction loyal to Lin, galvanized support for the restoration of the office of President of China, despite Mao's wishes. Moreover, Chen launched an assault on Zhang, a staunch Maoist who embodied the chaos of the Cultural Revolution, over the evaluation of Mao's legacy.

[ 7 ] : 328–331 The attacks on Zhang found favour with many Plenum attendees and may have been construed by Mao as an indirect attack on the CR. Mao confronted Chen openly, denouncing him as a "false Marxist", [ 7 ] : 332 and removed him from the Politburo Standing Committee. In addition to the purge of Chen, Mao asked Lin's principal generals to write self-criticisms on their political positions as a warning to Lin. Mao also inducted several of his supporters to the Central Military Commission and placed loyalists in leadership roles of the Beijing Military Region .

[ 7 ] : 332 Project 571 [ edit ] Main article: Project 571 By 1971, the diverging interests of the civilian and military leaders was apparent. Mao was troubled by the PLA's newfound prominence, and the purge of Chen marked the beginning of a gradual scaling-down of the PLA's political involvement.

[ 7 ] : 353 According to official sources, sensing the reduction of Lin's power base and his declining health, Lin's supporters plotted to use the military power still at their disposal to oust Mao in a coup.

[ 55 ] Lin's son Lin Liguo , along with other high-ranking military conspirators, formed a coup apparatus in Shanghai and dubbed the plan to oust Mao Outline for Project 571 – in the original Mandarin, the phrase sounds similar to the term for 'military uprising'. It is disputed whether Lin Biao was directly involved in this process. While official sources maintain that Lin did plan and execute the coup attempt, scholars such as Jin Qiu portray Lin as passive, cajoled by elements among his family and supporters. Qiu contests that Lin Biao was ever personally involved in drafting the Outline , with evidence suggesting that Lin Liguo was directly responsible for the draft.

[ 55 ] Lin's flight and plane crash [ edit ] Main article: Lin Biao incident Graffiti of Lin Biao's foreword to the Little Red Book , with his name (lower right) later scratched out According to the official narrative, on 13 September Lin Biao, his wife Ye Qun , Lin Liguo, and members of his staff attempted to flee to the USSR ostensibly to seek political asylum. En route, Lin's plane crashed in Mongolia, killing all on board. The plane apparently ran out of fuel. A Soviet investigative team was not able to determine the cause of the crash but hypothesized that the pilot was flying low to evade radar and misjudged the plane's altitude.

The account was questioned by those who raised doubts over Lin's choice of the USSR as a destination, the plane's route, the identity of the passengers, and whether or not a coup was actually taking place.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] On 13 September, the Politburo met in an emergency session to discuss Lin. His death was confirmed in Beijing only on 30 September, which led to the cancellation of the National Day celebration events the following day. The Central Committee did not release news of Lin's death to the public until two months later. Many Lin supporters sought refuge in Hong Kong. Those who remained on the mainland were purged.

[ 55 ] The event caught the party leadership off guard: the concept that Lin could betray Mao de-legitimized a vast body of Cultural Revolution political rhetoric and by extension, Mao's absolute authority. For several months following the incident, the party information apparatus struggled to find a "correct way" to frame the incident for public consumption, but as the details came to light, the majority of the Chinese public felt disillusioned and realised they had been manipulated for political purposes.

[ 55 ] 1972–1976: The Gang of Four [ edit ] Main article: Gang of Four Mao became depressed and reclusive after the Lin incident. Sensing a sudden loss of direction, Mao reached out to old comrades whom he had denounced in the past. Meanwhile, in September 1972, Mao transferred a 38-year-old cadre from Shanghai, Wang Hongwen, to Beijing and made him Party vice-chairman. Wang, a former factory worker from a peasant background, [ 7 ] : 357 was seemingly getting groomed for succession.

[ 7 ] : 364 Jiang's position strengthened after Lin's flight. She held tremendous influence with the radical camp. With Mao's health on the decline, Jiang's political ambitions began to emerge. She allied herself with Wang and propaganda specialists Zhang Chunqiao and Yao Wenyuan, forming a political clique later pejoratively dubbed as the Gang of Four .

[ 57 ] Jiang Qing (left) receiving Red Guards in Beijing with Zhou Enlai (center) and Kang Sheng , with each holding a copy of the Little Red Book By 1973, round after round of political struggles had left many lower-level institutions, including local government, factories, and railways, short of competent staff to carry out basic functions.

[ 7 ] : 340 China's economy had fallen into disarray, which led to the rehabilitation of purged lower-level officials. The party's core became heavily dominated by Cultural Revolution beneficiaries and radicals, whose focus remained ideological purity over economic productivity. The economy remained mostly Zhou's domain, one of the few remaining moderates. Zhou attempted to restore the economy, but was resented by the Gang of Four, who identified him as their primary political succession threat.

[ 58 ] In late 1973, to weaken Zhou's political position and to distance themselves from Lin's apparent betrayal, the Criticize Lin, Criticize Confucius campaign began under Jiang's leadership.

[ 7 ] : 366 Its stated goals were to purge China of New Confucianist thinking and denounce Lin's actions as traitorous and regressive.

[ 7 ] : 372 Deng Xiaoping's rehabilitation (1975) [ edit ] Deng Xiaoping returned to the political scene, assuming the post of Vice-Premier in March 1973, in the first of a series of Mao-approved promotions. After Zhou withdrew from active politics in January 1975, Deng was effectively put in charge of the government, party, and military, then adding the additional titles of PLA General Chief of Staff , Vice Chairman of the Chinese Communist Party , and vice-chairman of the Central Military Commission.

[ 7 ] : 381 Mao wanted to use Deng as a counterweight to the military faction in government to suppress former Lin loyalists. In addition, Mao had also lost confidence in the Gang of Four and saw Deng as the alternative. Leaving the country in grinding poverty would damage the positive legacy of the CR, which Mao worked hard to protect. Deng's return set the scene for a protracted factional struggle between the radical Gang of Four and moderates led by Zhou and Deng.

[ citation needed ] At the time, Jiang and associates held effective control of mass media and the party's propaganda network , while Zhou and Deng held control of most government organs. On some decisions, Mao sought to mitigate the Gang's influence, but on others, he acquiesced to their demands. The Gang of Four's political and media control did not prevent Deng from enacting his economic policies. Deng emphatically opposed Party factionalism, and his policies aimed to promote unity to restore economic productivity. Much like the post-Great Leap restructuring led by Liu Shaoqi, Deng streamlined the railway system , steel production , etc. By late 1975, however, Mao saw that Deng's economic restructuring might negate the CR's legacy and launched the Counterattack the Right-Deviationist Reversal-of-Verdicts Trend , a campaign to oppose "rehabilitating the case for the rightists", alluding to Deng as the country's foremost "rightist". Mao directed Deng to write self-criticisms in November 1975, a move lauded by the Gang of Four.

[ 7 ] : 381 Death of Zhou Enlai [ edit ] On 8 January 1976, Zhou Enlai died of bladder cancer. On 15 January, Deng delivered Zhou's eulogy in a funeral attended by all of China's most senior leaders with the notable absence of Mao, who had grown increasingly critical of Zhou.

[ 59 ] : 217–218 [ 60 ] : 610 After Zhou's death, Mao selected the relatively unknown Hua Guofeng instead of a member of the Gang of Four or Deng to become Premier.

[ 61 ] The Gang of Four grew apprehensive that spontaneous, large-scale popular support for Zhou could turn the political tide against them. They acted through the media to impose restrictions on public displays of mourning for Zhou. Years of resentment over the CR, the public persecution of Deng—seen as Zhou's ally—and the prohibition against public mourning led to a rise in popular discontent against Mao and the Gang of Four. Official attempts to enforce the mourning restrictions included removing public memorials and tearing down posters commemorating Zhou's achievements. On 25 March 1976, Shanghai's Wen Hui Bao published an article calling Zhou "the capitalist roader inside the Party [who] wanted to help the unrepentant capitalist roader [Deng] regain his power." These propaganda efforts at smearing Zhou's image, however, only strengthened public attachment to Zhou's memory.

[ 59 ] : 213–214 Tiananmen incident [ edit ] Main article: 1976 Tiananmen incident On 4 April 1976, on the eve of China's annual Qingming Festival , a traditional day of mourning, thousands of people gathered around the Monument to the People's Heroes in Tiananmen Square to commemorate Zhou. They honored Zhou by laying wreaths, banners, poems, placards, and flowers at the foot of the Monument.

[ 60 ] : 612 The most apparent purpose of this memorial was to eulogize Zhou, but the Gang of Four were also attacked for their actions against the Premier. A small number of slogans left at Tiananmen even attacked Mao and his Cultural Revolution.

[ 59 ] : 218 Up to two million people may have visited Tiananmen Square on 4 April. All levels of society, from the most impoverished peasants to high-ranking PLA officers and the children of high-ranking cadres, were represented in the activities. Those who participated were motivated by a mixture of anger over Zhou's treatment, revolt against the Cultural Revolution and apprehension for China's future. The event did not appear to have coordinated leadership.

[ 59 ] : 218–220 The Central Committee, under the leadership of Jiang Qing, labelled the event 'counter-revolutionary' and cleared the square of memorial items shortly after midnight on April 6. Attempts to suppress the mourners led to a riot. Police cars were set on fire, and a crowd of over 100,000 people forced its way into several government buildings surrounding the square. Many of those arrested were later sentenced to prison. Similar incidents occurred in other major cities. Jiang and her allies attacked Deng as the incident's 'mastermind', and issued reports on official media to that effect. Deng was formally stripped of all positions inside and outside the Party on 7 April. This marked Deng's second purge.

[ 60 ] : 612 Death of Mao Zedong and the Gang of Four's downfall [ edit ] See also: Death and state funeral of Mao Zedong and Smashing the Gang of Four On 9 September 1976, Mao Zedong died. To Mao's supporters, his death symbolized the loss of China's revolutionary foundation. His death was announced on 9 September.

[ 62 ] The nation descended into grief and mourning, with people weeping in the streets and public institutions closing for over a week. Hua Guofeng chaired the Funeral Committee and delivered the memorial speech.

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] Shortly before dying, Mao had allegedly written the message " With you in charge, I'm at ease ," to Hua. Hua used this message to substantiate his position as successor. Hua had been widely considered to be lacking in political skill and ambitions, and seemingly posed no serious threat to the Gang of Four in the race for succession. However, the Gang's radical ideas also clashed with influential elders and many Party reformers. With army backing and the support of Marshal Ye Jianying, Director of Central Office Wang Dongxing , Vice Premier Li Xiannian and party elder Chen Yun , on 6 October, the Central Security Bureau 's Special Unit 8341 had all members of the Gang of Four arrested in a bloodless coup.

[ 65 ] After Mao's death, people characterized as 'beating-smashing-looting elements', who were seen as having disturbed the social order during the CR, were purged or punished. "Beating-smashing-looting elements" had typically been aligned with rebel factions.

[ 35 ] : 359 Aftermath [ edit ] Transitional period [ edit ] Although Hua denounced the Gang of Four in 1976, he continued to invoke Mao's name to justify Mao-era policies. Hua spearheaded what became known as the Two Whatevers .

[ 66 ] Like Deng, Hua wanted to reverse the CR's damage; but unlike Deng, who wanted new economic models for China, Hua intended to move the Chinese economic and political system towards Soviet-style planning .

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] It became increasingly clear to Hua that without Deng, it was difficult to continue daily affairs of state. On 10 October, Deng wrote a letter to Hua asking to be transferred back to state and party affairs; party elders also called for Deng's return. With increasing pressure from all sides, Premier Hua named Deng Vice-Premier in July 1977, and later promoted him to various other positions, effectively elevating Deng to be China's second-most powerful figure. In August, the 11th National Congress was held in Beijing, officially naming (in ranking order) Hua Guofeng, Ye Jianying, Deng Xiaoping, Li Xiannian and Wang Dongxing as new members of the Politburo Standing Committee.

[ 69 ] [ non-primary source needed ] Repudiation and reform under Deng [ edit ] See also: Boluan Fanzheng , 1978 Truth Criterion Controversy , and Reforms and Opening Up Deng Xiaoping became the paramount leader of China in 1978. He started the process of reform and opening up Deng Xiaoping first proposed what he called Boluan Fanzheng in September 1977 in order to correct the mistakes of the Cultural Revolution.

[ 70 ] [ 71 ] In May 1978, Deng seized the opportunity to elevate his protégé Hu Yaobang to power. Hu published an article in the Guangming Daily , making clever use of Mao's quotations, while lauding Deng's ideas. Following this article, Hua began to shift his tone in support of Deng. On 1 July, Deng publicized Mao's self-criticism report of 1962 regarding the failure of the Great Leap Forward. As his power base expanded, in September Deng began openly attacking Hua Guofeng's "Two Whatevers".

[ 66 ] The " 1978 Truth Criterion Discussion ", launched by Deng and Hu and their allies, also triggered a decade-long New Enlightenment movement in mainland China, promoting democracy, humanism and universal values, while opposing the ideology of Cultural Revolution.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] On 18 December 1978, Third Plenum of the 11th Central Committee was held. Deng called for "a liberation of thoughts" and urged the party to " seek truth from facts " and abandon ideological dogma. The Plenum officially marked the beginning of the economic reform era . Hua Guofeng engaged in self-criticism and called his "Two Whatevers" a mistake. At the Plenum, the Party reversed its verdict on the Tiananmen Incident. Former Chinese president Liu Shaoqi was given a belated state funeral.

[ 74 ] Peng Dehuai, who was persecuted to death during the Cultural Revolution was rehabilitated in 1978.

At the Fifth Plenum held in 1980, Peng Zhen, He Long and other leaders who had been purged during the Cultural Revolution were rehabilitated. Hu Yaobang became head of the party secretariat as its secretary-general . In September, Hua Guofeng resigned, and Zhao Ziyang , another Deng ally, was named premier . Hua remained on the Central Military Commission, but formal power was transferred to a new generation of pragmatic reformers, who reversed Cultural Revolution policies to a large extent. Within a few years, Deng and Hu helped rehabilitate over 3 million "unjust, false, erroneous" cases.

[ 75 ] In particular, the trial of the Gang of Four took place in Beijing from 1980 to 1981, and the court stated that 729,511 people had been persecuted by the Gang, of whom 34,800 were said to have died.

[ 76 ] In 1981, the Chinese Communist Party passed a resolution and declared that the Cultural Revolution was "responsible for the most severe setback and the heaviest losses suffered by the Party, the country, and the people since the founding of the People's Republic." [ 77 ] [ 78 ] [ 79 ] Atrocities [ edit ] Death toll [ edit ] A struggle session in September 1967 targeting Xi Zhongxun , the father of Xi Jinping , who had been labeled an "anti-party element" [ 80 ] [ 81 ] [ 82 ] Fatality estimates vary across different sources, ranging from hundreds of thousands to millions, or even tens of millions.

[ 83 ] [ 84 ] [ 85 ] [ 86 ] [ 87 ] [ 88 ] In addition to various regimes of secrecy and obfuscation concerning the Revolution, both top-down as perpetuated by authorities, as well as laterally among the Chinese public in the decades since, the discrepancies are due in large part to the totalistic nature of the Revolution itself: it is a significant challenge for historians to discern whether and in what ways discrete events that took place during the Cultural Revolution should be ascribed to it.

[ 89 ] Most deaths occurred after the mass movements ended, [ 39 ] : 23 when organized campaigns attempted to consolidate order in workplaces and communities.

[ 39 ] : 172 As Andrew G. Walder summarizes, "The cure for factional warfare was far worse than the disease." [ 39 ] : 23 Serious man-made disasters such as the 1975 Banqiao Dam failure , also caused many deaths.

Literature reviews of the overall death toll due to the Cultural Revolution usually include the following: [ 84 ] [ 90 ] [ 91 ] Time Source Deaths (in millions) Remarks 2014 Andrew G. Walder 1.1–1.6 [ 92 ] Examines the period between 1966 and 1971.

[ 92 ] Walder reviewed the reported deaths in 2,213 annals from every county and interpreted the annals' vague language in the most conservative manner. For instance, "some died" and "a couple died" were interpreted as zero death, while "death in the scale of tens/hundreds/thousands" were interpreted as "ten/a hundred/a thousand died". The reported deaths underestimate the actual deaths, especially because some annals actively covered up deaths.

[ 84 ] [ 91 ] [ 93 ] Annal editors  were supervised by the CCP Propaganda Department .

[ 84 ] [ 93 ] In 2003, Walder and Yang Su coauthored a paper along this approach, but with fewer county annals available at the time.

[ 90 ] [ 94 ] 1999 Ding Shu 2 [ 95 ] Ding's figures include 100,000 killed in the Red Terror during 1966, with 200,000 forced to commit suicide, plus 300,000–500,000 killed in violent struggles, 500,000 during Cleansing the Class Ranks , 200,000 during One Strike-Three Anti Campaign and the Anti-May Sixteenth Elements Campaign .

[ 95 ] [ 84 ] [ 90 ] [ 91 ] 1996 CCP History Research Center 1.728 [ 96 ] The 1.728 million were counted as " unnatural deaths ", among which 9.4% (162,000) were CCP party members and 252,000 were intellectuals. The figures were extracted from 建国以来历次政治运动事实 ; 'Facts on the Successive Political Movements since the Founding of the PRC', a book by the party's History Research Center, which states that "according to CCP internal investigations in 1978 and 1984 ... 21.44 million were investigated, 125 million got implicated in these investigations; [...] 4.2 million were detained (by Red Guards and other non-police), 1.3 million were arrested by police, 1.728 million of unnatural deaths; [...] 135,000 were executed for crimes of counter-revolution; [...] during violent struggles 237,000 were killed and 7.03 million became disabled".

[ 96 ] [ 97 ] While these internal investigations were never mentioned or published in any other official documents, the scholarly consensus found these figures very reasonable.

[ 91 ] [ 98 ] 1991 Rudolph J. Rummel 7.731 [ 99 ] Rummel included his estimate of Laogai camp deaths in this figure.

[ 90 ] He estimated that 5% of the 10 million people in the Laogai camps died each year of the 12-year period, and that this amounts to roughly 6 million.

[ 99 ] 1982 Ye Jianying 3.42–20 [ 91 ] [ 86 ] Several sources have quoted a statement made by Marshal Ye Jianying , of "683,000 deaths in the cities, 2.5 million deaths in the countryside, plus 123,700 deaths due to violent struggles and 115,500 deaths due to struggle sessions and imprisonment, in addition to 557,000 people missing." [ 91 ] [ 96 ] [ 100 ] In a 2012 interview with Hong Kong's Open Magazine , an unnamed bureaucrat in Beijing claimed that Ye made the statement in a 1982 CCP meeting, while he was the party's Vice Chairman .

[ 91 ] [ 100 ] Several sources have also quoted that Marshal Ye estimated the death toll to be 20 million during a CCP working conference in December 1978.

[ 85 ] [ 86 ] [ 87 ] [ 91 ] Academic Jie Li writes that scholarship has discredited Ye's 20 million estimate.

[ 43 ] : 340 1979 Agence France Presse 0.4 [ 101 ] This figure was obtained by an AFP correspondent in Beijing, citing an unnamed but "usually reliable" source.

[ 101 ] In 1986, Maurice Meisner referred to this number as a "widely accepted nationwide figure", but also said "The toll may well have been higher. It is unlikely that it was less." [ 102 ] Jonathan Leightner asserted that the number is "perhaps one of the best estimates".

[ 103 ] Massacres [ edit ] Quotations of Mao Zedong on a street wall of Wuxuan County , one of the centers of the Guangxi Massacre Massacres took place across China, including in Guangxi , Inner Mongolia , Guangdong , Yunnan , Hunan , Ruijin , and Qinghai , as well as Red August in Beijing.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] These massacres were mainly led and organized by local revolutionary committees, Communist Party branches, militia, and the military.

[ 1 ] [ 104 ] [ 105 ] Most victims were members of the Five Black Categories as well as their children, or members of "rebel groups". Chinese scholars have estimated that at least 300,000 people died in these massacres.

[ 104 ] [ 106 ] Collective killings in Guangxi and Guangdong were among the most serious. In Guangxi, the official annals of at least 43 counties have records of massacres, with 15 of them reporting a death toll of over 1,000, while in Guangdong at least 28 county annals record massacres, with 6 of them reporting a death toll of over 1,000.

[ 105 ] Official sources in 1980 revealed that, during the Red August, at least 1,772 people were killed by Red Guards, including teachers and principals of many schools, meanwhile 33,695 homes were ransacked and 85,196 families were forced to flee.

[ 2 ] [ 107 ] [ 108 ] The Daxing Massacre in rural Beijing caused the deaths of 325 people from 27 August to 1 September 1966; those killed ranged from 80 years old to a 38-day old baby, with 22 families being completely wiped out.

[ 1 ] [ 107 ] [ 109 ] In Dao County , Hunan, a total of 7,696 people were killed from 13 August to 17 October 1967 , in addition to 1,397 forced to commit suicide, and 2,146 becoming permanently disabled.

[ 110 ] [ 111 ] In the Guangxi Massacre , the official record shows an estimated death toll from 100,000 to 150,000 as well as cannibalism primarily between 1967 and 1968 in Guangxi, [ 112 ] [ 113 ] where one of the worst violent struggles of the Revolution took place, before Zhou sent the PLA to intervene.

[ 114 ] : 545 In 1975, the PLA led a massacre in Yunnan around the town of Shadian, targeting Hui people , resulting in the deaths of more than 1,600 civilians, including 300 children, and the destruction of 4,400 homes.

[ 1 ] [ 115 ] [ 116 ] Violent struggles, struggle sessions, and purges [ edit ] Main articles: Violent Struggle , Struggle session , and Cleansing the Class Ranks The Cultural Revolution Cemetery in Chongqing , where 400–500 people killed in factional clashes are buried, out of a total of at least 1,700 deaths.

[ 117 ] Violent struggles were factional conflicts (mostly among Red Guards and "rebel groups") that began in Shanghai and then spread to other areas in 1967. They brought the country to a state of civil war.

[ 1 ] [ 118 ] Weapons used included some 18.77 million guns [ note 2 ] , 2.72 million grenades, 14,828 cannons, millions of other ammunition and even armored cars and tanks.

[ 1 ] Notable violent struggles include the battles in Chongqing, in Sichuan , and in Xuzhou .

[ 1 ] [ 117 ] [ 119 ] Researchers claimed that the nationwide death toll in violent struggles ranged from 300,000 to 500,000.

[ 84 ] [ 95 ] [ 1 ] The recorded rate of violence rose in 1967, reaching a peak that summer before dropping suddenly.

[ 39 ] : 143 During 1967, casualties were relatively low as the weapons used were primarily clubs, spears, and rocks until late July.

[ 39 ] : 143 Although firearms and heavier weapons began to spread during summer, most were neither trained nor committed fighters and therefore casualties remained relatively low.

[ 39 ] : 143 The peak of collective violence in summer 1967 dropped sharply after August, when Mao became concerned about rebel attacks on local army units and thereafter made clear that his prior calls to "drag out" army commanders was a mistake and he would instead support besieged army commands.

[ 39 ] : 150 The greatest number of casualties occurred during the process of restoring order in 1968, although the overall number of violent conflicts was lower. Walder stated that while "rising casualties from a smaller number of insurgent conflicts surely reflected the increasing scale and organizational coherence of rebel factions, and their growing access to military weaponry[,]" another important factor was that "[t]he longer that local factional warfare continued without the prospect of an equitable political settlement, the greater the stakes for the participants and the more intense the collective violence as factions fought to avoid the consequence of losing." [ 39 ] : 154–155 In addition to violent struggles, millions of Chinese were violently persecuted, especially via struggle sessions. Those identified as spies, " running dogs ", "revisionists", or coming from a suspect class (including those related to former landlords or rich peasants) were subject to beating, imprisonment, rape, torture, sustained and systematic harassment and abuse, seizure of property, denial of medical attention, and erasure of social identity.

[ 66 ] Some people were not able to stand the torture and committed suicide. Researchers claimed that at least 100,000 to 200,000 people committed suicide during the early CR.

[ 84 ] [ 95 ] At the same time, many "unjust, false, and mistaken" cases appeared due to political purges. In addition to those who died in massacres, a large number of people died or became permanently disabled due to lynching or other forms of persecution. From 1968 to 1969, the Cleansing the Class Ranks purge caused the deaths of at least 500,000 people.

[ 1 ] [ 120 ] Purges of similar nature such as the One Strike-Three Anti Campaign and the campaign towards the May Sixteenth elements were launched in the 1970s.

[ 121 ] [ 95 ] For example, a political purge in Yunnan province, the Zhao Jianmin spy case , resulted in 17,000 deaths and wrongfully persecuted a total of 1.38 million people.

[ 1 ] Repression of ethnic minorities [ edit ] See also: Inner Mongolia incident and Shadian incident The Panchen Lama during a struggle session Struggle session of Sampho Tsewang Rigzin and his wife The Cultural Revolution wrought havoc on minority cultures and ethnicities. Languages and customs of ethnic minorities in China were labeled as part of the Four Olds, texts in ethnic languages were burned, and bilingual education was suppressed.

[ 122 ] [ 123 ] [ 124 ] In Inner Mongolia , some 790,000 people were persecuted during the Inner Mongolia incident. Of these, 22,900 were beaten to death, and 120,000 were maimed, [ 7 ] : 258 during a witch hunt to find members of the alleged separatist New Inner Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party. In Xinjiang , copies of the Qur'an and other books of the Uyghur people were apparently burned. Muslim imams reportedly were paraded around with paint splashed on their bodies.

[ 125 ] In the ethnic Korean areas of northeast China, clashes took place.

[ 126 ] In Yunnan Province, the palace of the Dai people 's king was torched, and a massacre of Muslim Hui people at the hands of the PLA in Yunnan, known as the Shadian incident , reportedly claimed over 1,600 lives in 1975.

[ 125 ] After the Cultural Revolution, the government gave reparations for the Shadian Incident, including the erection of a Martyr's Memorial in Shadian.

[ 127 ] Concessions to minorities were abolished during the Cultural Revolution as part of the Red Guards' attack on the "Four Olds".

People's communes , previously only established in parts of Tibet, were established throughout Tibet Autonomous Region in 1966, [ 128 ] removing Tibet's exemption from China's land reform, and reimposed in other minority areas. The effect on Tibet was particularly severe as it came following the repression after the 1959 Tibetan uprising .

[ 129 ] [ 130 ] The destruction of nearly all of its over 6,000 monasteries, which began before the Cultural Revolution, were often conducted with the complicity of local ethnic Tibetan Red Guards.

[ 131 ] : 9 Only eight were intact by the end of the 1970s.

[ 132 ] Many monks and nuns were killed, and the general population was subjected to physical and psychological torture.

[ 131 ] : 9 An estimated 600,000 monks and nuns lived in Tibet in 1950, but by 1979, most were dead, imprisoned or had disappeared.

[ 131 ] : 22 The Tibetan government in exile claimed that many Tibetans died from famines in 1961–1964 and 1968–1973 as a result of forced collectivization, [ 130 ] [ 133 ] however, the number of Tibetan deaths or whether famines, in fact, took place in these periods is disputed.

[ 134 ] [ 135 ] [ 136 ] Despite persecution, some local leaders and minority ethnic practices survived in remote regions.

[ 137 ] It was felt that pushing minority groups too hard would compromise China's border defenses. This was especially important as minorities make up a large percentage of the population that live in border regions. In the late 1960s, China experienced a period of strained relations with some of its neighbors, notably with the Soviet Union and India.

[ 138 ] Rape and sexual abuse [ edit ] Further information: Sent-down youth § Sexual violence Pan Suiming , Emily Honig, and others documented that rape and sexual abuse of sent-down women were common during the Cultural Revolution's height.

[ 139 ] [ 140 ] Tania Branigan documented that women raped tended to be from educated urban backgrounds while their rapists were poor peasants or local officials.

[ 141 ] [ 142 ] Cultural impact and influence [ edit ] Red Guards riot [ edit ] A 1968 map of Beijing showing streets and landmarks renamed during the Cultural Revolution. Andingmen Inner Street became "Great Leap Forward Road", Taijichang Street became the "Road for Eternal Revolution", Dongjiaominxiang was renamed "Anti-Imperialist Road", Beihai Park was renamed "Worker-Peasant-Soldier Park" and Jingshan Park became "Red Guard Park". Most of the Cultural Revolution-era name changes were later reversed.

The revolution aimed to destroy the Four Olds and establish the corresponding Four News, which ranged from changing of names and cutting of hair to ransacking homes, vandalizing cultural treasures, and desecrating temples.

[ 16 ] : 61–64 The revolution aimed to eliminate cow demons and snake spirits - the class enemies who promoted bourgeois ideas, as well as those from an exploitative family background or who belonged to one of the Five Black Categories. Large numbers of people perceived to be "monsters and demons" regardless of guilt or innocence were publicly denounced, humiliated, and beaten. In their revolutionary fervor, students, especially the Red Guards, denounced their teachers, and children denounced their parents.

[ 16 ] : 59–61 Many died from ill-treatment or committed suicide. In 1968, youths were mobilized to go to the countryside in the Down to the Countryside Movement so they may learn from the peasantry, and the departure of millions from the cities helped end the most violent phase of the Cultural Revolution.

[ 143 ] : 176 Academics and intellectuals [ edit ] Yao Tongbin , one of China's foremost missile scientists, was beaten to death by a mob in Beijing during the Cultural Revolution (1968). This caused Zhou Enlai to order special protection for key technical experts.

[ 144 ] Academics and intellectuals were regarded as the " Stinking Old Ninth " and were widely persecuted. Many were sent to rural labor camps such as the May Seventh Cadre School . The prosecution of the Gang of Four revealed that 142,000 cadres and teachers in the education circles were persecuted. Academics, scientists, and educators who died included Xiong Qinglai , Jian Bozan , Wu Han, Rao Yutai , Wu Dingliang , Yao Tongbin and Zhao Jiuzhang .

[ 145 ] As of 1968, among the 171 senior members who worked at the headquarters of Chinese Academy of Sciences in Beijing, 131 were persecuted. Among the members of the academy, 229 died.

[ 146 ] As of September 1971, more than 4,000 staff members of China's nuclear center in Qinghai had been persecuted, while more than 310 were disabled, over 40 committed suicide, and 5 were executed .

[ 147 ] [ 148 ] Despite the hardships, some significant achievements came in science and technology: scientists tested the first missile, created China's first hydrogen bomb and launched China's first satellite in the " Two Bombs, One Satellite " program.

[ 149 ] [ 150 ] Many health personnel were deployed to the countryside as barefoot doctors . Some farmers were given informal medical training, and health-care centers were established in rural communities. This process led to a marked improvement in health and life expectancy.

[ 151 ] Education system [ edit ] In the early months of Cultural Revolution, schools and universities were closed. Secondary school classes of 1966, 1967, and 1968 were unable to graduate on time later and became known as the "Old Three Cohort (老三届)".

[ 35 ] : 362 Colleges and universities were closed until 1970, and most universities did not reopen until 1972.

[ 152 ] : 164 University entrance exams were cancelled after 1966 (until the beginning of Boluan Fanzheng period in 1977), replaced by a system whereby students were recommended by factories, villages and military units. Traditional values were abandoned.

[ 16 ] : 195 On the other hand, industrial Universities were established in factories to supply technical and engineering programs for industrial workers, inspired by Mao's July 1968 remarks advocating vocational education .

[ 35 ] : 362 Factories around the country therefore established their own educational programs for technicians and engineers, and by 1976, there were 15,000 such 21 July Universities.

[ 153 ] : 92 Gao Mobo observes that in many underprivileged areas, political campaigns brought improvements in education and public health.

[ 42 ] : 119–120 In the initial stage of the Down to the Countryside Movement , most of the youth who took part volunteered. Later on, the government forced them to move. Between 1968 and 1979, 17 million urban youth left for the countryside. Living in the rural areas deprived them of higher education.

[ 143 ] : 10 This generation is sometimes referred to as the "lost generation".

[ 154 ] In the post-Mao period, many of those forcibly moved attacked the policy as a violation of their human rights.

[ 155 ] : 36 Formal literacy measurements did not resume until the 1980s.

[ 156 ] Some counties in Zhanjiang had literacy rates as low as 59% 20 years after the revolution. This was amplified by the elimination of qualified teachers—many districts were forced to rely on students to teach.

[ 156 ] Primary and middle schools gradually reopened during the Cultural Revolution. Schooling years were reduced and education standards fell, but the proportion of Chinese children who completed primary education increased from less than half to almost all, and the fraction who completed junior middle school rose from 15% to over two-thirds. Educational opportunities for rural children expanded, while education of the urban elite were restricted by anti-elitist policies.

[ 152 ] : 166–167 Radical policies provided many in rural communities with middle school education for the first time.

[ 152 ] : 163 Rural infrastructure developed during this period, facilitated by the political changes that empowered ordinary rural people.

[ 157 ] : 177 Slogans and rhetoric [ edit ] A Red Guard holding up the Selected Works of Mao Zedong , with "revolution is no crime, to rebel is justified" written on a flag next to him, 1967 Huang claimed that the Cultural Revolution had massive effects on Chinese society because of the extensive use of political slogans.

[ 158 ] He claimed that slogans played a central role in rallying Party leadership and citizens. For example, the slogan "to rebel is justified" ( 造反有理 ; zàofǎn yǒulǐ ) affected many views.

[ 158 ] The remnants of a banner containing slogans from the Cultural Revolution in Anhui Huang asserted that slogans were ubiquitous in people's lives, printed onto everyday items such as bus tickets, cigarette packets, and mirror tables.

[ 155 ] : 14 Workers were supposed to "grasp revolution and promote production".

[ 158 ] [ page needed ] Political slogans had three sources: Mao, Party media such as People's Daily , and the Red Guards.

[ 158 ] Mao often offered vague, yet powerful directives that divided the Red Guards.

[ 159 ] These directives could be interpreted to suit personal interests, in turn aiding factions' goals in claiming loyalty to Mao.

[ 158 ] [ page needed ] Dittmer and Ruoxi claim that the Chinese language had historically been defined by subtlety, delicacy, moderation, and honesty, as well as the cultivation of a "refined and elegant literary style".

[ 160 ] This changed during the CR. These slogans were an effective method of "thought reform", mobilizing millions in a concerted attack upon the subjective world, "while at the same time reforming their objective world." [ 158 ] [ page needed ] [ 160 ] : 12 Dittmer and Chen argued that the emphasis on politics made language into effective propaganda, but "also transformed it into a jargon of stereotypes—pompous, repetitive, and boring".

[ 160 ] : 12 To distance itself from the era, Deng's government cut back on political slogans. During a eulogy for Deng's death, CCP general secretary Jiang Zemin called the Cultural Revolution a "grave mistake".

[ 161 ] Arts and literature [ edit ] In 1966, Jiang Qing advanced the Theory of the Dictatorship of the Black Line . Those perceived to be bourgeois, anti-socialist or anti-Mao (black line) should be cast aside, and called for the creation of new literature and arts.

[ 37 ] : 352–353 Disseminators of the "old culture" would be eradicated. The majority of writers and artists were seen as "black line figures" and "reactionary literati", and were persecuted, and subjected to "criticism and denunciation" where they could be humiliated and ravaged, and be imprisoned or sent to hard labour.

[ 162 ] : 213–214 For instance, Mei Zhi and her husband were sent to a tea farm in Lushan County, Sichuan . She did not resume writing until the 1980s.

[ 163 ] In 1970, the CCP came to view the Ministry of Culture as so disruptive that it decided to dissolve the Ministry and establish a Culture Group within the State Council in an effort to rein in cultural politics.

[ 153 ] : 160 The principles for cultural production laid out by Mao in the 1942 Talks at the Yan'an Forum on Art and Literature became dogmatized.

[ 164 ] The literary situation eased after 1972, as more were allowed to write, and many provincial literary periodicals resumed publication, but the majority of writers still could not work.

[ 162 ] : 219–20 Documents released in 1980 regarding the prosecution of the Gang of Four show that more than 2,600 people in the field of arts and literature were persecuted by the Ministry of Culture.

[ 145 ] Many died: the names of 200 writers and artists who were persecuted to death were commemorated in 1979. These include writers such as Lao She , Fu Lei , Deng Tuo , Baren , Li Guangtian , Yang Shuo and Zhao Shuli .

[ 162 ] : 213–14 Depictions of iron girls became a frequent subject of art during the Cultural Revolution, often shown in spaces and activities traditionally associated with male authority as part of an effort to develop the new socialist woman .

[ 165 ] : 100 Opera and music [ edit ] The ballet The Red Detachment of Women , one of the Model Dramas promoted during the Cultural Revolution Jiang took control of the stage and introduced revolutionary operas under her direct supervision. Traditional operas were banned as they were considered feudalistic and bourgeois, but revolutionary opera, which modified Peking opera in both content and form, was promoted.

[ 16 ] : 115 Six operas and two ballets were produced in the first three years, most notably the opera The Legend of the Red Lantern . These operas were the only approved opera form. Other opera troupes were required to adopt or change their repertoire.

[ 143 ] : 176 Loyalty dances became common and were performed throughout the country by both professional cultural workers and ordinary people.

[ 35 ] : 362 The model operas were broadcast on the radio, made into films, blared from public loudspeakers, taught to students in schools and workers in factories, and became ubiquitous as a form of popular entertainment and were the only theatrical entertainment for millions.

[ 37 ] : 352–53 [ 16 ] : 115 Most model dramas featured women as their leads and promoted Chinese state feminism.

[ 166 ] Their narratives begin with them oppressed by misogyny , class position, and imperialism before liberating themselves through the discovery of internal strength and the CCP.

[ 166 ] During the Cultural Revolution, composers of Yellow Music , which had already been banned following the communist revolution, were persecuted, including Li Jinhui who was killed in 1967.

[ 167 ] Revolution-themed songs instead were promoted, and songs such as " Ode to the Motherland ", " Sailing the Seas Depends on the Helmsman ", " The East Is Red " and " Without the Communist Party, There Would Be No New China " were either written or became popular during this period. "The East Is Red", especially, became popular; it de facto supplanted " March of the Volunteers " (lyrics author Tian Han persecuted to death) as the national anthem of China, though the latter was later restored to its previous place.

[ 168 ] "Quotation songs", in which Mao's quotations were set to music, were particularly popular during the early years of the Cultural Revolution.

[ 169 ] : 34 Composer Li Jiefu first published quotation songs in People's Daily in September 1966 and they were promoted thereafter as a means for studying Quotations from Chairman Mao Zedong .

[ 170 ] : 47 Records of quotation songs were played over loudspeakers, their primary means of distribution, [ 169 ] : 35 as the use of transistor radios lagged until 1976.

[ 169 ] : 32–33 Rusticated youths with an interest in broadcast technology frequently operated rural radio stations after 1968.

[ 169 ] : 42 At the 9th National Congress of the Communist Party, Jiang Qing condemned quotation songs, which she had come to view as comparable to yellow music.

[ 170 ] : 43 Visual arts [ edit ] Posters from the Cultural Revolution period Aesthetic principles emphasized during the Cultural Revolution included the "tall, big, complete," "red, bright, shining," and "the three prominences".

[ 171 ] : 187–188 According to the principle of the "three prominences," the good are more prominent than the bad, the very good are more prominent than the good, and the one outstanding figure is more prominent than the very good.

[ 172 ] : 4 Other stylistic principles of the Cultural Revolution included "tall, large, and full".

[ 165 ] : 96 Among the most significant visual works of the Cultural Revolution was Liu Chunhua's 1967 oil painting, Chairman Mao Goes to Anyuan .

[ 173 ] : 132 Another influential painting was Pan Jiajun's 1972 I Am a Petrel , which depicts a young woman soldier repairing a telegraph cables during a storm.

[ 174 ] : 94–95 Praised as a new classic of depicting a revolutionary heroine, it inspired the creation of similar works and was itself widely distributed as a poster.

[ 174 ] : 95 A Red Guard art movement developed, reaching its peak in 1967.

[ 173 ] : 128 Red Guards from fine arts academies organized large art exhibitions, often in cooperation with rebel groups in work units or the army, which included many amateur art works.

[ 173 ] : 132 The most significant Red Guard art exhibition was Long Live the Triumph of Chairman Mao's Revolutionary Line which opened 1 October 1967 in Beijing and featured more than 1,600 art works in a variety of media produced by artists and amateurs from around the country.

[ 173 ] : 132 Following the exhibition, traveling teams toured art works from the exhibition through rural China and into remote areas.

[ 173 ] : 132 The Red Guard art movement favored forms of art deemed public or anti-elitist, such as black and white woodcuts (or brush and marker illustrations in the style of a woodcut), satirical cartoons, paper cut outs, and forms of folk art .

[ 173 ] : 132–133 Among the most popular motifs in Red Guard art was the image of a worker, peasant, and soldier conducting criticism or Red Guards doing so.

[ 173 ] : 173 Red Guard groups in fine arts academies also published journals, pamphlets, and manifestos through which they criticized the old art institutions.

[ 173 ] : 131 Traditional themes were sidelined and artists such as Feng Zikai , Shi Lu , and Pan Tianshou were persecuted.

[ 143 ] : 97 Many of the artists were assigned to manual labour, and artists were expected to depict subjects that glorified the Cultural Revolution related to their labour.

[ 175 ] : 351–52 In 1971, in part to alleviate their suffering, several leading artists were recalled from manual labour or freed from captivity under a Zhou initiative to decorate hotels and railway stations defaced by Red Guard slogans. Zhou said that the artworks were meant for foreigners, therefore were "outer" art and not under the obligations and restrictions placed on "inner" art meant for Chinese citizens. He claimed that landscape paintings should not be considered one of the "Four Olds". However, Zhou was weakened by cancer, and in 1974, the Jiang faction seized these and other paintings and mounted exhibitions in Beijing, Shanghai and other cities denouncing the artworks as Black Paintings .

[ 175 ] : 368–376 Propaganda in posters was used as a mass communication device and often served as the people's leading source of information. They were produced in large numbers and widely disseminated to propagate ideological positions.

[ 172 ] : 4–5 The two main posters genres were the big-character poster or dazibao and commercial propaganda poster.

[ 176 ] : 7–12 The dazibao presented slogans, poems, commentary and graphics often posted on walls in public spaces, factories and communes. Mao wrote his own dazibao at Beijing University on 5 August 1966, calling on the people to "Bombard the Headquarters".

[ 176 ] : 5 Xuanchuanhua , or propaganda paintings, were artworks produced by the government and sold cheaply in stores to be displayed in homes or workplaces. The artists for these posters might be amateurs or uncredited professionals, and the posters were largely in a Socialist Realist visual style with specific conventions—for example, images of Mao were to be depicted as "red, smooth, and luminescent".

[ 176 ] : 7–12 [ 175 ] : 360 After decreasing in prominence throughout the 1980s, Cultural Revolution posters became prominent in public life again in the 1990s in connection with red tourism , as collectibles, in commercial advertising, and in contemporary art.

[ 177 ] : 9 In contemporary China, they continue to be reproduced in large amounts and sold commercially.

[ 174 ] : 87 Historic posters are have been the subject of exhibitions and auctions, including in the United States and Europe.

[ 174 ] : 92 Before the Cultural Revolution, relatively few cultural productions reflected the lives of peasants and workers; during it, the struggles of workers, peasants, and revolutionary soldiers became frequent artistic subjects, often created by peasants and workers themselves.

[ 178 ] Among the most prominent examples of this style included the peasant paintings of Huxian.

[ 173 ] : 133 In the early 1970s, worker, peasant, and soldier-created art was promoted as the paradigm of socialist art.

[ 173 ] : 133 The spread of peasant paintings in rural China, for example, became one of the newborn things celebrated in a socialist society.

[ 178 ] Literature [ edit ] Literature adapted the aesthetic themes from the model works, such as the "three prominences".

[ 179 ] : 179 Applied in the literary context, the principle of the three prominences was that texts should demonstrate the struggle between revolutionary and reactionary forces in a stark and dichotomous manner.

[ 179 ] : 179 During the Cultural Revolution, the long-form novel was an emphasized form of literature.

[ 179 ] : 179 Among the major genres were novels about the experiences of sent-down youth.

[ 179 ] : 179 These included novels written by sent-down youths themselves, such as Zhang Kangkang 's 1975 novel Dividing Line and Zhang Changgong's 1973 novel Youth .

[ 179 ] : 179 Among the amateur writers who became prominent during the Cultural Revolution was Duan Ruixia for the 1973 short story, Not Just One of the Audience .

[ 179 ] : 187 Writing about the romantic relationships of revolutionary martyrs became one of the taboo topics during the Cultural Revolution.

[ 171 ] : 186–187 Film [ edit ] The Four Hundred Films to be Criticized booklet was distributed, and film directors and actors/actresses were criticized with some tortured and imprisoned.

[ 37 ] : 401–02 These included many of Jiang Qing's rivals and former friends. Those who died in the period included Cai Chusheng , Zheng Junli , Shangguan Yunzhu , Wang Ying , and Xu Lai .

[ 180 ] No feature films were produced in mainland China for seven years apart from a few approved "Model dramas" and highly ideological films.

[ 181 ] A notable example is Taking Tiger Mountain by Strategy .

[ 182 ] [ 183 ] China rejected Hollywood films and most foreign films.

[ 20 ] : 213 Albanian films and North Korean films developed mass audiences in China.

[ 20 ] : 213 In 1972, Chinese officials invited Michelangelo Antonioni to China to film the achievements of the Cultural Revolution. Antonioni made the documentary Chung Kuo, Cina .  When it was released in 1974, CCP leadership in China interpreted the film as reactionary and anti-Chinese. Viewing art through the principles of the Yan'an Talks , particularly the concept that there is no such thing as art-for-art's-sake, party leadership construed Antonioni's aesthetic choices as politically motivated and banned the film.

[ 184 ] : 13–14 Mobile film units brought Chinese cinema to the countryside and were crucial to the standardization and popularization of culture during this period, particularly including revolutionary model operas.

[ 169 ] : 30 During the Cultural Revolution's early years, mobile film teams traveled to rural areas with news reels of Mao meeting with Red Guards and Tiananmen Square parades, which became known as "red treasure films".

[ 185 ] : 110 The release of the filmed versions of the revolutionary model operas resulted in a re-organization and expansion of China's film exhibition network.

[ 20 ] : 73 From 1965 to 1976, the number of film projection units in China quadrupled, total film audiences nearly tripled, and the national film attendance rate doubled.

[ 20 ] : 133 The Cultural Revolution Group drastically reduced ticket prices which, in its view, would allow film to better serve the needs of workers and of socialism.

[ 20 ] : 133 Historical sites [ edit ] Buddhist statues defaced during the Cultural Revolution China's historical sites, artifacts and archives suffered devastating damage, as they were thought to be at the root of "old ways of thinking". Artifacts were seized, museums and private homes ransacked, and any item found that was thought to represent bourgeois or feudal ideas was destroyed. Few records relate how much was destroyed—Western observers suggest that much of China's thousands of years of history was in effect destroyed, or, later, smuggled abroad for sale. Chinese historians compare the suppression to Qin Shi Huang 's great Confucian purge .

Religious persecution intensified during this period, as religion was viewed in opposition to Marxist–Leninist and Maoist thinking.

[ 37 ] : 73 The destruction of historical relics was never formally sanctioned by the Party, whose official policy was instead to protect such items. On 14 May 1967, the Central Committee issued Several suggestions for the protection of cultural relics and books during the Cultural Revolution .

[ 155 ] : 21 Despite this, enormous damage was inflicted on China's cultural heritage. For example, a survey in 1972 in Beijing of 18 cultural heritage sites, including the Temple of Heaven and Ming Tombs , showed extensive damage. Of the 80 cultural heritage sites in Beijing under municipal protection, 30 were destroyed, and of the 6,843 cultural sites under protection by Beijing government decision in 1958, 4,922 were damaged or destroyed.

[ 186 ] Numerous valuable old books, paintings, and other cultural relics were burnt.

[ 187 ] : 98 Later archaeological excavation and preservation after the destructive period were protected, and several significant discoveries, such as the Terracotta Army and the Mawangdui , occurred after the peak of the Revolution.

[ 155 ] : 21 Nevertheless, the most prominent medium of academic research in archaeology, the journal Kaogu , did not publish.

[ 188 ] After the most violent phase, the attack on traditional culture continued in 1973 with the Anti-Lin Biao, Anti-Confucius Campaign as part of the struggle against moderate Party elements.

Media [ edit ] Further information: Media history of China During the early period of the Cultural Revolution, freedom of the press in China was at its peak.

[ 189 ] While the number of newspapers declined in this period, the number of independent publications by mass political organizations grew.

[ 190 ] According to China's National Bureau of Statistics , the number of newspapers dropped from 343 in 1965, to 49 in 1966, and then to a 20th-century low of 43 in 1967.

[ 190 ] At the same time, the number of publications by mass organizations such as Red Guards grew to an estimated number as high as 10,000.

[ 190 ] Independent political groups could publish broadsheets and handbills, as well as leaders' speeches and meeting transcripts which would normally have been considered highly classified.

[ 39 ] : 24 From 1966 to 1969, at least 5,000 new broadsheets by independent political groups were published.

[ 5 ] : 60 Several Red Guard organizations also operated independent printing presses to publish newspapers, articles, speeches, and big-character posters .

[ 189 ] For example, the largest student organization in Shanghai, the Red Revolutionaries, established a newspaper that had a print run of 800,000 copies by the end of 1966.

[ 39 ] : 58–59 Foreign relations [ edit ] The Embassy of China, Jakarta after being burned The functions of China's embassies abroad were disrupted during the early part of the Cultural Revolution. In a 22 March 1969 meeting on the Sino-Soviet border clashes , Mao stated that in foreign relations , China was "now isolated" and "we need to relax a little".

[ 191 ] : 287 Later that year, China began to restore its embassies to normal functioning.

[ 191 ] : 287 However, the Sino-Soviet conflict culminated in 1969, and according to declassified documents from both China and the United States, the Soviet Union planned to launch a large-scale nuclear strike on China after the Zhenbao Island incident in 1969.

[ 192 ] [ 193 ] The planned targets include Beijing, Changchun , Anshan and China's missile-launch centers of Jiuquan , Xichang and Lop Nur .

[ 192 ] [ 193 ] This crisis almost led to a major nuclear war, seven years after the Cuban missile crisis .

[ 194 ] Eventually, the Soviet called off the attack due to the intervention from the United States.

[ 192 ] [ 193 ] China exported communist revolutions as well as communist ideologies to multiple countries in Southeast Asia , supporting parties in Indonesia , Malaysia , Vietnam , Laos , Myanmar and the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia .

[ 195 ] It is estimated that at least 90% of the Khmer Rouge's foreign aid came from China. In 1975 alone at least US$1 billion in interest-free economic and military aid and US$20 million came from China.

[ 196 ] China's economic malaise impacted China's ability to assist North Vietnam in its war against South Vietnam by the 1970s, which cooled relations between the once allied nations.

[ 197 ] Evaluations [ edit ] Main article: Evaluation of the Cultural Revolution On 27 June 1981, the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party adopted the Resolution on Certain Questions in the History of Our Party Since the Founding of the People's Republic of China , an official assessment of major historical events since 1949.

[ 198 ] The Resolution declared that the Cultural Revolution was "responsible for the most severe setback and the heaviest losses suffered by the people, the country, and the party since the founding of the People's Republic." [ 198 ] After the Cultural Revolution, a massive social and cultural movement known as the New Enlightenment took place in mainland China since the late 1970s.

[ 199 ] The movement lasted throughout the 1980s, and opposed the ideology of Cultural Revolution and feudalism .

[ 200 ] The New Enlightenment movement ended due to the Tiananmen Square protests and massacre in June 1989.

[ 201 ] After Deng Xiaoping's southern tour in early 1992, however, intellectuals in mainland China became divided and formed two major schools of thought , the Liberalism and the New Left , which held different views on the Cultural Revolution.

[ 200 ] [ 202 ] Meanwhile Maoist scholars hold another view.

[ citation needed ] To this day, public discussion of the Cultural Revolution is still limited within mainland China. The Chinese government continues to prohibit news organizations from mentioning details, and online discussions and books about the topic are subject to official scrutiny. Textbooks abide by the "official view" of the events. Many government documents from the 1960s onward remain classified.

[ 203 ] Despite inroads by prominent sinologists, independent scholarly research is discouraged.

[ 203 ] Mao Zedong's legacy remains in some dispute. During the anniversary of his birth, many people viewed Mao as a godlike figure and referred to him as "the people's great savior". Contemporary discussions in the CCP-owned tabloid Global Times continue to glorify Mao. Rather than focus on consequences, state media newspapers claim that revolutions typically have a brutal side and are unable to be viewed from the "humanitarian perspective".

[ 204 ] Critics of Mao Zedong look at the actions that occurred under his leadership from the point of view that "he was better at conquering power than at ruling the country and developing a socialist economy". Mao went to extreme measures on his path to power, costing millions of lives then and during his rule.

[ 205 ] See also [ edit ] History of the Chinese Communist Party History of the People's Republic of China List of campaigns of the Chinese Communist Party Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Marxist cultural analysis Notes [ edit ] ^ This position, effectively China's de jure state representative , was renamed "President" in 1982.

^ Some claim 1.877 million.

[ why?

] References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Song, Yongyi (25 August 2011).

"Chronology of Mass Killings during the Chinese Cultural Revolution (1966–1976)" .

Sciences Po .

Archived from the original on 14 January 2024 . Retrieved 27 December 2019 .

^ a b c d e f Wang, Youqin (2001).

"Student Attacks Against Teachers: The Revolution of 1966" (PDF) .

The University of Chicago .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 December 2018.

^ "Translation Glossary for the CR/10 Project" (PDF) .

University of Pittsburgh . Retrieved 28 November 2023 .

^ Lu, Xing (2004).

Rhetoric of the Chinese Cultural Revolution: The Impact on Chinese Thought . p. 2.

Known to the Chinese as the ten years of chaos [...] ^ a b c Thornton, Patricia M. (2019). "Cultural Revolution". In Sorace, Christian; Franceschini, Ivan; Loubere, Nicholas (eds.).

Afterlives of Chinese Communism: Political Concepts from Mao to Xi . Acton, Australia: Australian National University Press .

ISBN 978-1-76046-249-9 .

^ a b Lieberthal (2003) , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab ac ad ae af ag ah ai aj ak al am an ao ap aq ar as at au av aw ax ay az ba bb bc bd be bf bg bh bi bj bk bl bm bn MacFarquhar, Roderick; Schoenhals, Michael (2006).

Mao's Last Revolution . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-02332-1 .

^ a b c d Meyskens, Covell F. (2020).

Mao's Third Front: The Militarization of Cold War China .

Cambridge University Press .

doi : 10.1017/9781108784788 .

ISBN 978-1-108-78478-8 .

S2CID 218936313 .

^ a b Chen, Xiaomei (2016). "Performing the "Red Classics": From The East is Red to The Road to Revival". In Li, Jie; Zhang, Enhua (eds.).

Red Legacies in China: Cultural Afterlives of the Communist Revolution . Harvard contemporary China series. Vol. 18. Cambridge, Massachusetts ; London: Harvard University Asia Center .

doi : 10.1163/9781684171170_007 .

ISBN 978-0-674-73718-1 .

JSTOR j.ctt1sq5t95 .

^ a b c d e Yang, Guobin (2013). "Mao Quotations in Factional Battles and Their Afterlives: Episodes from Chongqing". In Cook, Alexander C. (ed.).

Mao's Little Red Book: A Global History . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1-107-05722-7 .

^ a b Baum, Richard (1969). "Revolution and Reaction in the Chinese Countryside: The Socialist Education Movement in Cultural Revolutionary Perspective".

The China Quarterly .

38 (38): 92– 119.

doi : 10.1017/S0305741000049158 .

ISSN 0305-7410 .

JSTOR 652308 .

S2CID 154449798 .

^ a b Russo, Alessandro (2020).

Cultural Revolution and Revolutionary Culture . Durham, NC: Duke University Press . p. 148.

ISBN 978-1-4780-1218-4 .

^ a b c d e Wang, Nianyi (1989).

大动乱的年代：1949–1989 年的中国 [ Great age of turmoil, a history of China 1949–89 ] (in Chinese). Henan People's Publishing House.

^ Gao, Yuan (1987).

Born Red: A Chronicle of the Cultural Revolution . Stanford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8047-6589-3 .

^ a b Tsou, Tang (1988).

The Cultural Revolution and post-Mao reforms: a historical perspective .

University of Chicago Press .

ISBN 978-0-226-81514-5 .

^ a b c d e f g Lu, Xing (2004).

Rhetoric of the Chinese Cultural Revolution: The Impact on Chinese Thought, Culture, and Communication .

University of South Carolina Press .

doi : 10.2307/j.ctv10tq3n6 .

ISBN 978-1570035432 .

JSTOR j.ctv10tq3n6 .

^ "Decision of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party Concerning the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution" .

Marxists Internet Archive .

Peking Review . Retrieved 5 March 2024 .

^ 毛泽东八次接见红卫兵始末(上) [Mao Zedong’s Eight Receptions With the Red Guards (Part 1)].

新闻午报 (in Chinese). 19 April 2006. Archived from the original on 6 March 2019 . Retrieved 2 March 2019 .

^ Jian, Guo; Song, Yongyi ; Zhou, Yuan (2006).

Historical Dictionary of the Chinese Cultural Revolution . Scarecrow.

ISBN 978-0-8108-6491-7 .

^ a b c d e f Li, Jie (2023).

Cinematic Guerillas: Propaganda, Projectionists, and Audiences in Socialist China . New York: Columbia University Press .

ISBN 978-0-231-20627-3 .

^ Melvin, Shelia (7 September 2011).

"China's reluctant Emperor" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 6 October 2016 . Retrieved 15 February 2017 .

^ Singer, Martin (1971).

Educated Youth and the Cultural Revolution in China .

University of Michigan Press .

doi : 10.3998/mpub.19144 .

ISBN 978-0-472-03814-5 .

JSTOR 10.3998/mpub.19144 .

^ Wemheuer, Felix (2019).

A Social History of Maoist China . Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press . p. 199.

ISBN 978-1-107-56550-0 .

Red Guards from Beijing played a key role in spreading the Cultural Revolution to other cities, traveling across the country to exchange revolutionary experiences in a process known as "the big link-up" ( da chuanlian ).

^ a b c Li, Xiaobing (2018).

The Cold War in East Asia . Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge .

doi : 10.4324/9781315624600 .

ISBN 978-1-138-65179-1 .

^ Shi, Gang (2004).

红卫兵 "破四旧" 的文化与政治 .

Chinese University of Hong Kong (in Chinese) . Retrieved 10 June 2020 .

^ a b Asiaweek, Volume 10 . 1984.

^ "murdoch edu" . Archived from the original on 25 December 2005.

^ a b Smyer, Dan (2013).

The Spread of Tibetan Buddhism in China . Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9780203803431 .

ISBN 978-1-136-63375-1 .

^ Jeni Hung (5 April 2003).

"Children of Confucius" .

The Spectator . Archived from the original on 21 March 2006 . Retrieved 4 March 2007 .

^ a b c d e Hirata, Koji (2024).

Making Mao's Steelworks: Industrial Manchuria and the Transnational Origins of Chinese Socialism . Cambridge Studies in the History of the People's Republic of China series. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press .

doi : 10.1017/9781009382281 .

ISBN 978-1-009-38227-4 .

^ a b c d Walder, Andrew G.

(2016). "Rebellion of the Cadres: The 1967 Implosion of the Chinese Party-State".

The China Journal .

75 : 103.

doi : 10.1086/683125 .

ISSN 1324-9347 .

S2CID 146977237 .

^ a b c Simpson, Tim (2023).

Betting on Macau: Casino Capitalism and China's Consumer Revolution . Globalization and Community series. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press .

ISBN 978-1-5179-0031-1 .

^ Mendes, Carmen Amado (2013).

Portugal, China and the Macau Negotiations, 1986–1999 .

Hong Kong University Press . p. 34.

ISBN 978-988-8139-00-2 .

^ a b c Tanigawa, Shinichi (2018).

"The Policy of the Military 'Supporting the Left' and the Spread of Factional Warfare in China's Countryside: Shaanxi, 1967–1968" .

Modern China .

44 (1): 35– 67.

doi : 10.1177/0097700417714159 .

ISSN 0097-7004 .

S2CID 148920995 .

^ a b c d e f g Xu, Youwei; Wang, Y. Yvon (2022).

Everyday Lives in China's Cold War Military Industrial Complex: Voices from the Shanghai Small Third Front, 1964–1988 .

Palgrave MacMillan .

ISBN 978-3030996871 .

^ a b Song, Yongyi (2011).

"Chronology of Mass Killings during the Chinese Cultural Revolution (1966–1976)" .

Online Encyclopedia of Mass Violence .

ISSN 1961-9898 .

Archived from the original on 25 April 2019 . Retrieved 25 April 2019 .

^ a b c d e Jiaqi, Yan; Gao, Gao (1996).

Turbulent Decade: A History of the Cultural Revolution . University of Hawai'i Press.

ISBN 978-0824816957 .

^ Bridgham, Philip (1968). "Mao's Cultural Revolution in 1967: The Struggle to Seize Power".

The China Quarterly .

34 (34): 6– 37.

doi : 10.1017/S0305741000014417 .

ISSN 0305-7410 .

JSTOR 651368 .

S2CID 145582720 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Walder, Andrew G.

(2019).

Agents of Disorder: Inside China's Cultural Revolution .

Harvard University Press .

doi : 10.2307/j.ctvnjbhrb .

ISBN 978-0-674-24363-7 .

JSTOR j.ctvnjbhrb .

S2CID 241177426 .

^ Wang, Shucheng, ed. (2022), "Judicial Interpretation as a de facto Primary Statute for Adjudication" , Law as an Instrument: Sources of Chinese Law for Authoritarian Legality , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.

60– 81, doi : 10.1017/9781009152556.004 , ISBN 978-1-009-15256-3 , retrieved 29 December 2024 ^ Len, Shao-chuan; Chiu, Hungdah (30 June 1985).

Criminal Justice in Post-Mao China: Analysis and Documents . State University of New York Press.

ISBN 978-1-4384-1050-0 .

^ a b Tu, Hang (2025).

Sentimental Republic: Chinese Intellectuals and the Maoist Past .

Harvard University Asia Center .

ISBN 9780674297579 .

^ a b Li, Jie (2016). "Museums and Memorials of the Mao Era: A Survey and Notes for Future Curators". In Li, Jie; Zhang, Enhua (eds.).

Red Legacies in China: Cultural Afterlives of the Communist Revolution . Harvard Contemporary China Series. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Asia Center .

ISBN 978-0-674-73718-1 .

^ a b c d e f g Lin, Shuanglin (2022).

China's Public Finance: Reforms, Challenges, and Options . New York, NY: Cambridge University Press .

doi : 10.1017/9781009099028 .

ISBN 978-1-009-09902-8 .

^ Gong, Y. L.; Chao, L. M. (September 1982).

"The role of barefoot doctors" .

American Journal of Public Health .

72 (9 Suppl): 59– 61.

doi : 10.2105/ajph.72.9_suppl.59 .

ISSN 0090-0036 .

PMC 1650037 .

PMID 7102877 .

^ "Liu Shaoqi rehabilitated" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 10 June 2020 .

^ a b c d Russo, Alessandro (2020).

Cultural Revolution and revolutionary culture . Durham, NC: Duke University Press .

ISBN 978-1-4780-1218-4 .

^ a b Murck, Alfreda (2013).

Mao's Golden Mangoes and the Cultural Revolution . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-3-85881-732-7 .

^ a b Walder, Andrew G. (2015).

China Under Mao . Harvard University Press. pp.

280– 281.

ISBN 978-0-674-05815-6 .

^ a b Daniel Leese (2011), Mao Cult: Rhetoric and Ritual in China's Cultural Revolution , Cambridge University Press, pp.

221– 222, ISBN 978-1-139-49811-1 ^ Schrift, Melissa (2001).

Biography of a Chairman Mao Badge: The Creation and Mass Consumption of a Personality Cult . Rutgers University Press. pp.

96– 98.

ISBN 978-0-8135-2937-0 . Retrieved 29 September 2019 .

^ Sull, Donald N.; Yong, Wang (2005).

Made In China: What Western Managers Can Learn from Trailblazing Chinese Entrepreneurs . Harvard Business School Press. pp.

17– 18.

ISBN 978-1591397151 .

^ Yan, Fei (5 February 2024). " 'Turning One's Back on the Party and the People': Suicides during the Chinese Cultural Revolution".

The China Journal .

91 : 67– 88.

doi : 10.1086/729112 .

ISSN 1324-9347 .

^ "China: the Cultural Revolution" .

Tufts University . 14 December 2016.

Archived from the original on 25 February 2024 . Retrieved 16 March 2024 .

^ a b c d e f Jin, Qiu (1999).

The Culture of Power: Lin Biao and the Cultural Revolution . Stanford University Press.

ISBN 978-0804735292 .

^ Hannam and Lawrence 3–4 ^ "Yao Wenyuan" .

The Economist .

ISSN 0013-0613 .

Archived from the original on 23 June 2016 . Retrieved 22 May 2016 .

^ Forster, Keith (1992). "China's Coup of October 1976".

Modern China .

18 (3): 263– 303.

doi : 10.1177/009770049201800302 .

ISSN 0097-7004 .

JSTOR 189334 .

S2CID 143387271 .

^ a b c d Teiwes, Frederick; Sun, Warren (2004). "The First Tiananmen Incident Revisited: Elite Politics and Crisis Management at the End of the Maoist Era".

Pacific Affairs .

77 (2): 211– 235.

JSTOR 40022499 .

^ a b c Spence, Jonathan (1999).

The Search for Modern China . W. W. Norton.

ISBN 0-393-97351-4 .

^ Slatyer, Will (2015).

The Life/Death Rhythms of Capitalist Regimes – Debt Before Dishonour: Timetable of World Dominance 1400–2100 . Partridge. p. 490.

ISBN 978-1482829617 .

^ 1976.9.10 毛主席逝世–中共中央等告全国人民书（附图） .

People's Daily .

Sina . 12 November 2000.

Archived from the original on 14 December 2004 . Retrieved 21 March 2007 .

^ "Memorial speech by Hua Kuo-Feng" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 7 May 2020 .

^ 毛泽东葬礼上的江青：头戴黑纱 面无表情 [Jiang Qing at Mao's funeral: black veil on her head, expressionless face].

Phoenix Television (in Chinese). Archived from the original on 6 December 2011 . Retrieved 7 May 2020 .

^ Forster, Keith (1992). "China's Coup of October 1976".

Modern China .

18 (3): 263– 303.

doi : 10.1177/009770049201800302 .

JSTOR 189334 .

S2CID 143387271 .

^ a b c Harding, Harry (1987).

China's Second Revolution: Reform after Mao . Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution .

ISBN 978-0-8157-3462-8 .

JSTOR 10.7864/jj.12381739 .

^ Rozman, Gilbert (1987).

The Chinese Debate about Soviet Socialism, 1978–1985 .

Princeton University Press . pp.

63– 68.

doi : 10.1515/9781400858590 .

ISBN 978-1400858590 .

^ Ferdinand, Pete (8 July 2016) [1986]. McCauley, Martin M.; Carter, Stephen (eds.). "China".

Leadership and Succession in the Soviet Union, Eastern Europe, and China . New York: Routledge: 194– 204.

doi : 10.4324/9781315494890 .

ISBN 9781315494890 .

^ "Basic Knowledge about the Communist Party of China: The Eleventh Congress" . Archived from the original on 24 June 2007.

^ Bradsher, Keith; Wellman, William J. (20 August 2008).

"Hua Guofeng, Transitional Leader of China After Mao, Is Dead at 87" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 16 March 2022 .

^ Barmé, Geremie R.

"History for the Masses" .

Morning Sun . Retrieved 16 March 2022 .

^ Xu, Jilin (December 2000).

"The fate of an enlightenment: twenty years in the Chinese intellectual sphere (1978–98)" (PDF) .

East Asian History (20).

Australian National University : 169– 186.

^ Li, Huaiyin (2012). "Challenging the Revolutionary Orthodoxy: 'New Enlightenment' Historiography in the 1980s".

Reinventing Modern China: Imagination and Authenticity in Chinese Historical Writing .

University of Hawaiʻi Press .

ISBN 9780824836085 .

^ Legvold, Robert; Andrew, Christopher; Mitrokhin, Vasili (2006). "The World Was Going Our Way: The KGB and the Battle for the Third World".

Foreign Affairs .

85 (1): 158.

ISSN 0015-7120 .

JSTOR 20031879 .

^ 胡耀邦同志领导平反"六十一人案"追记 .

www.hybsl.cn (in Chinese).

People's Daily . 1 June 1989. Archived from the original on 3 January 2021 . Retrieved 17 February 2020 .

^ Sterba, James P.

The New York Times , 25 January 1981 ^ 关于建国以来党的若干历史问题的决议 .

The Central People's Government of the People's Republic of China (in Chinese) . Retrieved 23 April 2020 .

^ "Resolution on Certain Questions in the History of Our Party since the Founding of the People's Republic of China" (PDF) .

Wilson Center . 27 June 1981.

^ "6th Plenary Session of the 11th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party "Resolution on Certain Questions in the History of Our Party Since the Founding of the People's Republic of China." ".

Resolution on CPC History . Retrieved 19 November 2023 – via www.marxists.org.

^ "Beijing Revises 'Correct' Version of Party History Ahead of Centenary" .

Radio Free Asia . 15 April 2021 . Retrieved 20 May 2021 .

^ Cole, J. Michael (22 April 2021).

"The Chinese Communist Party is playing dangerous games with history" .

iPolitics .

Archived from the original on 22 April 2021 . Retrieved 20 May 2021 .

^ "With whiffs of Cultural Revolution, Xi calls for struggle 50 times" .

Nikkei . Retrieved 20 May 2021 .

^ Chirot, Daniel (1996).

Modern Tyrants: The Power and Prevalence of Evil in Our Age . Princeton University Press. p. 198.

ISBN 978-0-691-02777-7 .

At least one million died, though some estimates of deaths go as high as 20 million ^ a b c d e f g Song, Yongyi (11 October 2011).

文革中到底"非正常死亡"了多少人？– 读苏扬的《文革中中国农村的集体屠杀》 [How many really died in the Cultural Revolution? – After reading Su Yang's Collective Killings in Rural China during the Cultural Revolution ].

China News Digest (in Chinese).

Archived from the original on 24 June 2022.

^ a b Ling, Zhijun; Ma, Licheng (30 January 2011).

"四人帮"被粉碎后的怪事："文革"之风仍在继续吹 [The strange thing after the collapse of the Gang of Four: the wind of Cultural Revolution continued to blow].

People's Daily (in Chinese). Archived from the original on 22 June 2020.

粉碎"四人帮"之后，叶剑英在一次讲话中沉痛地说："文化大革命"死了2000万人，整了1亿人，浪费了8000亿人民币。 ^ a b c Pye, Lucian W.

(1986). "Reassessing the Cultural Revolution".

The China Quarterly .

108 (108): 597– 612.

doi : 10.1017/S0305741000037085 .

ISSN 0305-7410 .

JSTOR 653530 .

S2CID 153730706 .

See, for example, Huo-cheng, Li, "Chinese Communists reveal for the first time the number 20 million deaths for the Cultural Revolution," Ming Bao (Daily News), 26 10 1981, p. 3 ^ a b "Remembering the dark days of China's Cultural Revolution" .

South China Morning Post . 18 August 2012.

Archived from the original on 9 June 2018 . Retrieved 29 November 2019 .

According to a working conference of the Communist Party's Central Committee in 1978, 20 million Chinese died in the revolution, 100 million were persecuted and 800 billion yuan was wasted.

^ Strauss, Valerie; Southerl, Daniel (17 July 1994).

"How Many Died? New Evidence Suggests Far Higher Numbers For the Victims of Mao Zedong's Era" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on 9 May 2019 . Retrieved 9 May 2019 .

^ Wang, Youqin (15 December 2007).

"Finding a Place for the Victims: The Problem in Writing the History of the Cultural Revolution" .

China Perspectives (in French).

2007 (4).

doi : 10.4000/chinaperspectives.2593 .

ISSN 2070-3449 .

^ a b c d Yan, Fei (June 2016).

政治運動中的集體暴力：「非正常死亡」再回顧（1966–1976） [Collective violence in political movements: a review of the "unnatural deaths" (1966–1976)] (PDF) .

Twenty-First Century (in Chinese).

155 : 64– 65, 74.

^ a b c d e f g h Jin, Zhong (7 October 2012).

最新版文革死亡人數 [The latest version of the Cultural Revolution death toll].

Open Magazine (in Chinese). Hong Kong.

Archived from the original on 29 June 2022.

^ a b Walder, Andrew G. (2014). "Rebellion and Repression in China, 1966–1971".

Social Science History .

38 ( 3– 4): 513– 39.

doi : 10.1017/ssh.2015.23 .

S2CID 143087356 .

^ a b Song, Yongyi (3 April 2017).

广西文革绝密档案中的大屠杀和性暴力 [Massacres and sexual violence recorded in the classified documents of the Cultural Revolution in Guangxi].

China News Digest .

Archived from the original on 22 June 2022.

^ Walder, Andrew G.; Su, Yang (2003). "The Cultural Revolution in the Countryside: Scope, Timing and Human Impact".

The China Quarterly .

173 (173): 74– 99.

doi : 10.1017/S0009443903000068 .

ISSN 0305-7410 .

JSTOR 20058959 .

S2CID 43671719 .

^ a b c d e 兩百萬人含恨而終─文革死亡人數統計 .

Open Magazine (in Chinese). Hong Kong. August 1999.

A different version appears in: Ding, Shu (15 March 2004).

文革死亡人数的一家之言 [Home report on the Cultural Revolution's death toll].

China News Digest (in Chinese).

^ a b c 文革五十周年：必须再来一次反文革 [Fiftieth anniversary of the Cultural Revolution: It must be opposed once again].

胡耀邦史料信息网 .

Consensus Net . 2016. Archived from the original on 25 June 2020.

^ "Title unknown".

Zhengming Magazine . Hong Kong. October 1996.

中共一九七八年和一九八四年的内部调查 ...「两千一百四十四万余人受到审查、冲击；一亿两千五百余万人受到牵连、影响」...「四百二十余万人曾被关押、隔离审查；一百三十余万人曾被公安机关拘留、逮捕；一百七十二万八千余人非正常死亡 ...「十三万五千余人被以现行反革命罪判为死刑；在武斗中有二十三万七千余人死亡，七十三万余人伤残」 ^ Chen, Yung-fa (1998).

中國共產革命七十年 (下) (in Chinese).

Taipei : Linking. p. 817.

文化大革命的非正常死亡人數只有大躍進的十分之一不到, 從農民觀點來看, 其錯誤之嚴重, 遠遠不如大躍進 ... 二千六百萬人慘死 ^ a b Rummel, R. J. (1991).

China's Bloody Century: Genocide and Mass Murder Since 1900 . Transaction. p. 263.

ISBN 978-1412814003 .

^ a b Dai, Kaiyuan (18 April 2016).

文革的本质：– 场大清洗 [The nature of the Cultural Revolution: a great purge].

China News Digest (in Chinese).

Archived from the original on 8 April 2022.

Note 12 ^ a b Agence France Presse, Beijing, 3February 1979; compiled into FBIS -Chi 79.25 (5 February 1979), p. E2.

[ title missing ] ^ Meisner, Maurice (1986).

Mao's China and After: A History of the People's Republic (2nd ed.). Free Press. pp.

371– 372, 394.

Li's estimate for Guangdong is roughly consistent with a widely accepted nationwide figure of 400,000 Cultural Revolution deaths, a number first reported in 1979 by the Agence France Presse correspondent in Peking based on estimates of unofficial but "usually reliable" Chinese sources. The toll may well have been higher. It is unlikely that it was less.

^ Leightner, Jonathan (2017).

Ethics, Efficiency and Macroeconomics in China: From Mao to Xi .

Taylor & Francis . p. 27.

ISBN 978-1-351-80583-4 .

There is no agreement on how many people died during the Cultural Revolution. Perhaps one of the best estimates is 400,000, made by a Beijing correspondent for Agence France-Presse (Meisner 1999: 354).

^ a b Song, Yongyi (2002).

文革大屠杀 [ Massacres during the Cultural Revolution ]. Hong Kong: Open Magazine.

ISBN 978-9627934097 .

^ a b Yang, Su (2006).

'文革' 中的集体屠杀：三省研究 [Collective killings in the Cultural Revolution: a study of three provinces].

Modern China Studies (in Chinese).

3 .

^ Yang, Jisheng (2017).

天地翻覆—中国文化大革命史 (in Chinese). Hong Kong: Cosmos Books.

^ a b Jian, Guo; Song, Yongyi ; Zhou, Yuan (2015).

Historical Dictionary of the Chinese Cultural Revolution . Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 978-1-4422-5172-4 .

^ Kuhn, Anthony (4 February 2014).

"Chinese Red Guards Apologize, Reopening A Dark Chapter" .

NPR . Retrieved 14 February 2020 .

^ Yu, Luowen.

"文革时期北京大兴县大屠杀调查" [An investigation of the Daxing Massacre in Beijing during the Cultural Revolution].

Chinese University of Hong Kong (in Chinese). Archived from the original on 4 August 2016.

^ Tan, Hecheng (2017).

The Killing Wind: A Chinese County's Descent Into Madness During the Cultural Revolution . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-062252-7 .

^ Jiang, Fangzhou (9 November 2012).

发生在湖南道县的那场大屠杀 .

The New York Times (in Chinese) . Retrieved 5 December 2019 .

^ "Interview: 'People Were Eaten by The Revolutionary Masses' " .

Radio Free Asia . 29 April 2016 . Retrieved 30 November 2019 .

^ Yan, Lebin.

我参与处理广西文革遗留问题 .

Yanhuang Chunqiu (in Chinese). Archived from the original on 24 November 2020 . Retrieved 29 November 2019 .

^ Chang, Jung; Halliday, Jon (2005).

Mao: The Unknown Story . Knopf.

ISBN 0679422714 .

^ Zhou, Yongming (1999).

Anti-drug Crusades in Twentieth-century China: Nationalism, History, and State Building . Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 978-0-8476-9598-0 .

^ Liang, Wilson (26 November 2018).

"China's Puzzling Islam Policy" .

Stanford Politics . Retrieved 27 December 2019 .

^ a b Buckley, Chris (4 April 2016).

"Chaos of Cultural Revolution Echoes at a Lonely Cemetery, 50 Years Later" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 16 February 2020 .

^ Phillips, Tom (11 May 2016).

"The Cultural Revolution: all you need to know about China's political convulsion" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 16 February 2020 .

^ Ramzy, Austin (14 May 2016).

"China's Cultural Revolution, Explained" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 16 February 2020 .

^ Ding, Shu (2004).

文革中的"清理阶级队伍"运动 – 三千万人被斗，五十万人死亡 .

China News Digest (in Chinese).

Archived from the original on 16 August 2017 . Retrieved 13 January 2020 .

^ Song, Yongyi (September 2011).

文革中"非正常死亡"了多少人？ .

China in Perspective (in Chinese). Archived from the original on 13 May 2012.

^ Qingxia, Dai; Yan, Dong (March 2001). "The Historical Evolution of Bilingual Education for China's Ethnic Minorities".

Chinese Education & Society .

34 (2): 7– 53.

doi : 10.2753/CED1061-193234027 .

ISSN 1061-1932 .

Ethnic languages were repudiated as one of the "four olds" and large numbers of books and documents pertaining to ethnic languages were burned.

^ Wu, Jiaping (May 2014). "The Rise of Ethnicity under China's Market Reforms".

International Journal of Urban and Regional Research .

38 (3): 967– 984.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-2427.2012.01179.x .

ISSN 0309-1317 .

Campaigns of 'class eradication' became more radical during the Cultural Revolution (1966–76) and had a disastrous effect on ethnic culture. Ethnic traditions were seen as part of the 'four olds' (old ideas, customs, culture and habits; in Chinese, sijiu) that had to be destroyed.

^ Chunli, Xia (2007). "From Discourse Politics to Rule of Law: A Constructivist Framework for Understanding Regional Ethnic Autonomy in China".

International Journal on Minority and Group Rights .

14 (4): 399– 424.

doi : 10.1163/138548707X247392 .

ISSN 1385-4879 .

JSTOR 24675396 .

Traditional minority designs and colourful lace were marked as "four olds" (sijiu) and burnt.

^ a b Fung, Edmund S. K. (January 2001). "Anti-Drug Crusades in Twentieth-Century China: Nationalism, History, and State Building. Zhou Yongming".

The China Journal .

45 : 162.

ISSN 1324-9347 .

JSTOR 3182405 .

^ Lovell, Julia (2019).

Maoism: A Global History . Knopf Doubleday. pp.

114– 115.

ISBN 978-0-525-65605-0 .

Events took a horrific turn in the frontier town of Yanbian, where freight trains trundled from China into the DPRK, draped with the corpses of Koreans killed in the pitched battles of the Cultural Revolution, and daubed with threatening graffiti: 'This will be your fate also, you tiny revisionists!' ^ Khalid, Zainab (4 January 2011).

"Rise of the Veil: Islamic Modernity and the Hui Woman" (PDF) .

SIT Digital Collections . Independent Study Project (ISP) Collection. SIT Graduate Institute. pp. 8, 11. Paper 1074.

Archived from the original on 9 August 2014 . Retrieved 25 July 2014 .

^ Powers, John; Templeman, David (2007).

Historical Dictionary of Tibet . Grove. p. 35.

ISBN 978-0810868052 .

^ Adam Jones (2006).

Genocide: A Comprehensive Introduction . Routledge. pp.

96– 97.

ISBN 978-0415353854 .

^ a b Ronald D. Schwartz (1996).

Circle Of Protest . Motilal Banarsidass. pp.

12– 13.

ISBN 978-8120813700 .

^ a b c Ardley, Jane (2002).

Tibetan Independence Movement: Political, Religious and Gandhian Perspectives . Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9780203221150 .

ISBN 978-0700715725 .

^ Thomas Laird (2007).

The Story of Tibet: Conversations with the Dalai Lama . Open Road. p. 345.

ISBN 978-1555846725 .

^ Manning, Kimberley Ens; Wemheuer, Felix (2011).

Eating Bitterness: New Perspectives on China's Great Leap Forward and Famine . University of British Columbia Press. p. 23.

ISBN 978-0774859554 .

^ Smith, Warren W. (2009).

Tibet's Last Stand?: The Tibetan Uprising of 2008 and China's Response . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 6.

ISBN 978-0742566859 .

^ John Powers (2004).

History As Propaganda: Tibetan Exiles versus the People's Republic of China . Oxford University Press. p. 142.

ISBN 978-0198038849 .

^ Sautman, Barry; Dreyer, June Teufel (2006).

Contemporary Tibet: Politics, Development, and Society in a Disputed Region . M. E. Sharp. pp.

238– 247.

ISBN 978-0765631497 .

^ Schwartz, Ronald.

"Religious Persecution in Tibet" (PDF) .

www.tibet.ca . Memorial University of Newfoundland.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 September 2013 . Retrieved 5 December 2018 .

^ Dreyer, June Teufel (2000).

China's Political System: Modernization and Tradition (3rd ed.). London: Macmillan. pp.

289– 291.

ISBN 0-333-91287-X .

^ Larson, Wendy (October 1999). "Never This Wild: Sexing the Cultural Revolution".

Modern China .

25 (4): 423– 450.

doi : 10.1177/009770049902500402 .

ISSN 0097-7004 .

S2CID 144491731 .

^ Honig, Emily (2003). "Socialist Sex: The Cultural Revolution Revisited".

Modern China .

29 (2): 143– 175.

doi : 10.1177/0097700402250735 .

ISSN 0097-7004 .

JSTOR 3181306 .

S2CID 143436282 .

A 1973 report on sent-down youth estimated that since 1969, there had been some 16,000 cases of rape.

^ Branigan, Tania (19 January 2023).

"A tragedy pushed to the shadows: the truth about China's Cultural Revolution" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 18 October 2024 .

^ Branigan, Tania (2023).

Red Memory: The Afterlives of China's Cultural Revolution . W. W. Norton. p. 166.

ISBN 978-1-324-05195-4 .

But the city girls, naive and far from their families, were easy prey for peasants and especially cadres. Though fright and shame deterred many from reporting abuses, thousands of cases were recorded in a single year. The problem was pronounced enough that the centre kept threatening punishment for rapes. Often the victims took the blame, since they had worse class backgrounds than officials.

^ a b c d King, Richard, ed. (2010).

Art in Turmoil: The Chinese Cultural Revolution, 1966–76 .

University of British Columbia Press .

doi : 10.59962/9780774815444 .

ISBN 978-0774815437 .

^ Stokes, Mark A. (2003). "The People's Liberation Army and China's Space and Missile Development". In Laurie Burkitt; Andrew Scobell; Larry Wortzel (eds.).

The Lessons of History: The Chinese people's Liberation Army at 75 (PDF) .

Strategic Studies Institute . p. 198.

ISBN 978-1-58487-126-2 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 February 2012 . Retrieved 11 January 2022 .

^ a b Myers, James T.; Domes, Jürgen; von Groeling, Erik, eds. (1995).

Chinese Politics: Fall of Hua Kuo-Feng (1980) to the Twelfth Party Congress (1982) .

University of South Carolina Press .

ISBN 978-1570030635 .

^ Cao, Pu.

"文革中的中科院：131位科学家被打倒，229人遭迫害致死" [Chinese Academy of Sciences during the Cultural Revolution: 131 scientists were "downed" while 229 were persecuted to death].

Chinese University of Hong Kong (in Chinese). Archived from the original on 27 January 2023.

^ Wang, Jingheng.

青海核武基地的劫难 .

Yanhuang Chunqiu (in Chinese). Archived from the original on 14 July 2020 . Retrieved 14 July 2020 .

^ 文革对中国核基地的损害：4000人被审查 40人自尽 .

Phoenix New Media (in Chinese). 2 May 2012. Archived from the original on 8 June 2020 . Retrieved 23 February 2020 .

^ 中国"文革"科研仅两弹一星核潜艇 .

Phoenix Television (in Chinese). 21 November 2013.

Archived from the original on 1 November 2019 . Retrieved 23 February 2020 .

^ Ching, Pao-yu (2019).

"From Victory to Defeat – China's Socialist Road and Capitalist Reversal" .

Foreign Languages Press . p. 45.

Archived from the original on 10 August 2020.

^ Huang, Yanzhong (2011).

"The Sick Man of Asia. China's Health Crisis" .

Foreign Affairs .

90 (6): 119– 36.

Archived from the original on 13 November 2014 . Retrieved 12 November 2014 .

^ a b c Joel, Andreas (2009).

Rise of the Red Engineers: The Cultural Revolution and the Origins of China's New Class . Stanford University Press.

ISBN 978-0804760782 .

^ a b Minami, Kazushi (2024).

People's Diplomacy: How Americans and Chinese Transformed US-China Relations during the Cold War . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press .

ISBN 9781501774157 .

^ Tracy You (25 October 2012).

"China's 'lost generation' recall hardships of Cultural Revolution" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on 29 November 2014 . Retrieved 15 November 2014 .

^ a b c d Gao, Mobo (2008).

The Battle for China's Past: Mao and the Cultural Revolution (PDF) . Pluto Press.

ISBN 978-0-7453-2780-8 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 November 2012.

^ a b Peterson, Glen (2007).

The Power of Words . University of British Columbia Press.

doi : 10.59962/9780774854535 .

ISBN 978-0-7748-5453-5 .

^ Han, Dongping (2008).

The Unknown Cultural Revolution: Life and Change in a Chinese Village . New York: Monthly Review Press.

ISBN 978-1-58367-180-1 .

^ a b c d e f Chen, G.; Ma, R. (eds.).

The power of words: political slogans as leverage in conflict and conflict management during China's cultural revolution movement . Greenwood.

^ Chang & Halliday 2005 .

^ a b c Dittmer, Lowell; Chen, Ruoxi (1981).

Ethics and Rhetoric of the Chinese Cultural Revolution . Center for Chinese Studies, Institute of East Asian Studies, University of California.

ISBN 978-0-912966-47-2 .

^ Paulson, Henry M. (2015).

Dealing with China: an insider unmasks the new economic superpower . New York: Grand Central Publishing. p. 4.

ISBN 978-1455504213 .

^ a b c Hong, Zicheng (2009).

A History of Contemporary Chinese Literature . Translated by Day, Michael M. Brill.

ISBN 978-9004173668 .

^ Zhang Xiaofeng (张晓风) (12 March 2008).

张晓风：我的父亲母亲 [Zhang Xiaofeng: My father and mother].

Sina (in Chinese).

Archived from the original on 19 October 2017 . Retrieved 3 May 2017 .

^ Cai, Xiang; 蔡翔 (2016).

Revolution and its narratives : China's socialist literary and cultural imaginaries (1949–1966) . Rebecca E. Karl, Xueping Zhong, 钟雪萍. Durham, NC: Duke University Press . pp. xix.

ISBN 978-0-8223-7461-9 .

^ a b Evans, Harriett (2016). "Ambiguities of Address: Cultural Revolution Posters and Their Post-Mao Appeal". In Li, Jie; Zhang, Enhua (eds.).

Red Legacies in China: Cultural Afterlives of the Communist Revolution . Harvard Contemporary China Series. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Asia Center .

ISBN 978-0-674-73718-1 .

^ a b Karl, Rebecca E. (2010).

Mao Zedong and China in the twentieth-century world: a concise history . Durham, NC: Duke University Press . p. 148.

ISBN 978-0-8223-4780-4 .

^ E. Taylor Atkins, ed. (2004).

Jazz Planet . University Press of Mississippi. p.

226 .

ISBN 978-1578066094 . Retrieved 27 June 2015 .

^ "几度沧桑 国歌的诞生及背后鲜为人知的故事" [The birth and behind-the-scene stories of the national anthem].

Central government of the People's Republic of China (in Chinese) . Retrieved 31 December 2024 .

^ a b c d e Coderre, Laurence (2021).

Newborn Socialist Things: Materiality in Maoist China . Durham, NC: Duke University Press .

doi : 10.2307/j.ctv1r4xd0g .

ISBN 978-1-4780-2161-2 .

JSTOR j.ctv1r4xd0g .

^ a b Jones, Andrew F. (2013). "Quotation Songs: Portable Media and the Maoist Pop Song". In Cook, Alexander C. (ed.).

Mao's Little Red Book: A Global History . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1-107-05722-7 .

^ a b Wang, Xian (2025).

Gendered Memories: An Imaginary Museum for Ding Ling and Chinese Female Revolutionary Martyrs . China Understandings Today series. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press .

ISBN 978-0-472-05719-1 .

^ a b Evans, Harriet; Donald, Stephanie, eds. (1999).

Picturing Power in the People's Republic of China: Posters of the Cultural Revolution . Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 978-0847695119 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Tang, Xiaobing (2016). "Socialist Visual Experience as Cultural Identity: On Wang Guangyi and Contemporary Art". In Li, Jie; Zhang, Enhua (eds.).

Red Legacies in China: Cultural Afterlives of the Communist Revolution . Harvard Contemporary China Series. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Asia Center .

ISBN 978-0-674-73718-1 .

^ a b c d Evans, Harriett (2016). "Ambiguities of Address: Cultural Revolution Posters and Their Post-Mao Appeal". In Li, Jie; Zhang, Enhua (eds.).

Red Legacies in China: Cultural Afterlives of the Communist Revolution . Harvard Contemporary China Series. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Asia Center .

ISBN 978-0-674-73718-1 .

^ a b c Andrews, Julia Frances (1995).

Painters and Politics in the People's Republic of China, 1949–1979 . University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0520079816 .

^ a b c Cushing, Lincoln; Tompkins, Ann (2007).

Chinese Posters: Art from the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution . Chronicle Books.

ISBN 978-0811859462 .

^ Li, Jie (2016). "Introduction". In Li, Jie; Zhang, Enhua (eds.).

Red Legacies in China: Cultural Afterlives of the Communist Revolution . Harvard contemporary China series. Cambridge, Massachusetts ; London: Harvard University Asia Center .

ISBN 978-0-674-73718-1 .

^ a b Ching, Pao-Yu (2021).

Revolution and counterrevolution: China's continuing class struggle since liberation (2nd ed.). Paris: Foreign Languages Press. p. 137.

ISBN 978-2-491182-89-2 .

^ a b c d e f Kindler, Benjamin (2025).

Writing to the Rhythm of Labor: Cultural Politics of the Chinese Revolution, 1942-1976 . New York City, NY: Columbia University Press .

ISBN 978-0-231-21932-7 .

^ Paul G. Pickowicz (2013).

China on Film: A Century of Exploration, Confrontation, and Controversy . Rowman & Littlefield. pp.

128– 29.

ISBN 978-1442211797 .

^ Dingbo Wu; Patrick D. Murphy, eds. (1994).

Handbook of Chinese Popular Culture . Greenwood. p. 207.

ISBN 978-0313278082 .

Archived from the original on 29 April 2016 . Retrieved 27 June 2015 .

^ Yingjin Zhang (2004).

Chinese National Cinema . Routledge. pp.

219– 20.

ISBN 978-0415172905 .

^ Tan Ye; Yun Zhu (2012).

Historical Dictionary of Chinese Cinema . Scarecrow Press. p. 41.

ISBN 978-0810867796 .

^ Sorace, Christian (2019). "Aesthetics".

Afterlives of Chinese Communism: Political Concepts from Mao to Xi . Acton: Australian National University Press .

ISBN 9781760462499 .

^ Li, Jie (2022). "Mobile Projectionists and the Things They Carried". In Altehenger, Jennifer; Ho, Denise Y. (eds.).

Material Contradictions in Mao's China . Seattle: University of Washington Press .

ISBN 978-0-295-75085-9 .

^ Jun Wang (2011).

Beijing Record: A Physical and Political History of Planning Modern Beijing . World Scientific. pp.

446– 47.

ISBN 978-9814295727 .

^ Barnouin, Barbara; Yu, Changgen (2010).

Ten Years of Turbulence: The Chinese Cultural Revolution . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-7103-0458-2 .

^ "《Archaeology》 Publishing report" . China Academic Journals Full-text Database . Retrieved 31 January 2017 .

^ a b Russo, Alessandro (2020).

Cultural Revolution and Revolutionary Culture .

Duke University Press . p. 148.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctv15kxg2d .

ISBN 978-1-4780-1218-4 .

JSTOR j.ctv15kxg2d .

^ a b c Volland, Nicolai (2021).

" "Liberating the Small Devils": Red Guard Newspapers and Radical Publics, 1966–1968" .

The China Quarterly .

246 : 367.

doi : 10.1017/S0305741021000424 .

ISSN 0305-7410 .

S2CID 235452119 .

^ a b Li, Hongshan (2024).

Fighting on the Cultural Front: U.S.-China Relations in the Cold War . New York: Columbia University Press .

doi : 10.7312/li--20704 .

ISBN 9780231207058 .

JSTOR 10.7312/li--20704 .

^ a b c O'Neill, Mark (12 May 2010).

"Nixon intervention saved China from Soviet nuclear attack" .

South China Morning Post . Archived from the original on 12 September 2015.

^ a b c Xu, Ni.

"1969年, 中苏核危机始末" [The nuclear crisis between China and the Soviet Union in 1969].

People's Net (in Chinese). Archived from the original on 3 March 2022.

^ "USSR planned nuclear attack on China in 1969" .

The Telegraph . 13 May 2010. Archived from the original on 16 May 2010 . Retrieved 29 December 2024 .

^ "When Pol Pot lounged by Mao's pool: how China exported Maoism" .

South China Morning Post . 8 March 2019 . Retrieved 1 April 2020 .

^ Laura, Southgate (2019).

ASEAN Resistance to Sovereignty Violation: Interests, Balancing and the Role of the Vanguard State . Policy Press.

ISBN 978-1-5292-0221-2 .

^ Path, Kosal (18 April 2011). "The economic factor in the Sino-Vietnamese split, 1972–75: An analysis of Vietnamese archival sources".

Cold War History .

11 (4): 519– 555.

doi : 10.1080/01446193.2010.512497 .

S2CID 155036059 .

^ a b "Resolution on Certain Questions in the History of Our Party Since the Founding of the People's Republic of China (Chinese Communism Subject Archive)" .

Archived from the original on 13 December 2012 . Retrieved 27 December 2012 .

^ Li, Huaiyin (October 2012). "6 Challenging the Revolutionary Orthodoxy: "New Enlightenment" Historiography in the 1980s".

Reinventing Modern China: Imagination and Authenticity in Chinese Historical Writing .

University of Hawaiʻi Press .

ISBN 978-0-8248-3608-5 .

^ a b Xu, Jilin (December 2000).

"The fate of an enlightenment: twenty years in the Chinese intellectual sphere (1978-98)" (PDF) .

East Asian History (20).

Australian National University : 169– 186.

^ Pei, Minxin (3 June 2019).

"Tiananmen and the end of Chinese enlightenment" .

Nikkei Asia .

Archived from the original on 3 June 2019.

^ Lei, Letian (11 July 2024).

"The mirage of the alleged Chinese new left" .

Journal of Political Ideologies : 1– 22.

doi : 10.1080/13569317.2024.2370972 .

ISSN 1356-9317 .

^ a b Fong ^ "China media: Mao Zedong's legacy" .

BBC News . 23 December 2013 . Retrieved 18 May 2021 .

^ Schram, Stuart R. (1994). "Mao Zedong a Hundred Years On: The Legacy of a Ruler".

The China Quarterly .

137 (137): 125– 143.

doi : 10.1017/S0305741000034068 .

ISSN 0305-7410 .

JSTOR 655689 .

S2CID 154770001 .

Sources [ edit ] "Li Peng, the 'butcher of Tiananmen,' was 'ready to die' to stop the student turmoil" .

AsiaNews . 2003 . Retrieved 21 August 2011 .

Barnouin, Barbara; Yu, Changgeng (2006).

Zhou Enlai: A Political Life . Hong Kong: Chinese University Press .

ISBN 978-962-996-280-7 .

Ewing, Kent (5 June 2011).

"Mao's Army on the Attack" .

Asia Times Online . Archived from the original on 5 June 2011 . Retrieved 19 November 2023 .

Tak-ho, Fong (19 May 2006).

"Cultural Revolution? What Revolution?" .

Asia Times Online . Archived from the original on 16 June 2006 . Retrieved 15 June 2011 .

Gao, Mobo (2008).

The Battle for China's Past: Mao and the Cultural Revolution (PDF) . London: Pluto Press .

ISBN 978-0-7453-2780-8 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 November 2012.

King, Richard, ed. (2010).

Art in Turmoil: the Chinese Cultural Revolution, 1966-76 . Contemporary chinese studies series. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press .

ISBN 978-0-7748-1543-7 .

Lieberthal, Kenneth G. (2003).

Governing China: From Revolution Through Reform (2nd ed.). New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company .

ISBN 978-0-393-92492-3 .

MacFarquhar, Roderick ; Schoenhals, Michael (2006).

Mao's Last Revolution . Cambridge, Mass: Belknap Press .

ISBN 978-0-674-02332-1 .

OCLC 64427572 .

Spence, Jonathan D.

(1999).

The Search for Modern China (2nd ed.). New York: W. W. Norton & Company .

ISBN 978-0-393-97351-8 .

Teiwes, Frederick C.

; Sun, Warren (Summer 2004). "The First Tiananmen Incident Revisited: Elite Politics and Crisis Management at the End of the Maoist Era".

Pacific Affairs .

77 (2): 211– 235.

JSTOR 40022499 .

Thurston, Anne F. (1988).

Enemies of the People: The Ordeal of Intellectuals in China's Great Cultural Revolution (Repr ed.). Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press .

ISBN 978-0-674-25375-9 .

Zhao, Ziyang; Bao, Pu; Chiang, Renee; Ignatius, Adi ; MacFarquhar, Roderick (2009).

Prisoner of the State: The Secret Journal of Premier Zhao Ziyang . New York: Simon & Schuster .

ISBN 978-1-4391-4938-6 .

OCLC 301887109 .

Further reading [ edit ] General [ edit ] Library resources about Cultural Revolution Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Jack Chen, A Year In Upper Felicity: Life in a Chinese Village During the Cultural Revolution (New York: Macmillan, 1973). Book chronicling a year in a rural Chinese village during the Cultural Revolution Yuan Gao, with Judith Polumbaum, Born Red: A Chronicle of the Cultural Revolution (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1987). An autobiography that includes experiences during the Cultural Revolution Ji-li Jiang , Red Scarf Girl: A Memoir of the Cultural Revolution (New York: HarperCollins, 1997).

Richard Curt Kraus, The Cultural Revolution: A Very Short Introduction (New York: Oxford University Press, 2012).

ISBN 978-0199740550 Morning Sun, "Bibliography," Morningsun.org Books and articles of General Readings and Selected Personal Narratives on the Cultural Revolution Ramzy, Austin (14 May 2016).

"China's Cultural Revolution, Explained" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 14 May 2016 . Retrieved 28 November 2023 .

Specific topics [ edit ] Fox Butterfield .

China: Alive in the Bitter Sea (New York: Crown, 1990).

ISBN 0812918657 An oral history of some Chinese people's experience during the Cultural Revolution Anit Chan, Children of Mao: Personality Development and Political Activism in the Red Guard Generation . (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1985).

Lingchei Letty Chen, The Great Leap Backward: Forgetting and Representing the Mao Years (New York: Cambria Press, 2020). Scholarly studies on memory writings and documentaries of the Mao years, victimhood narratives, perpetrator studies, ethics of bearing witness to atrocities Jie Li and Enhua Zhang, eds., Red Legacies in China: Cultural Afterlives of the Communist Revolution (Cambridge: Harvard University Asia Center, 2016). Scholarly studies on cultural legacies and continuities from the Maoist era in art, architecture, literature, performance, film, etc.

Ross Terrill , The White-Boned Demon: A Biography of Madame Mao Zedong (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1984).

ISBN 0804729220 Xinran , The Good Women of China: Hidden Voices , translated by Esther Tyldesley . (London: Chatto & Windus, 2002).

ISBN 0701173459 Commentaries [ edit ] Guokai Liu, A Brief Analysis of the Cultural Revolution edited by Anita Chan. (Armonk: M. E. Sharpe, 1982).

Pierre Ryckmans , The Chairman's New Clothes: Mao and the Cultural Revolution (New York: St. Martin's Press, 1977).

ISBN 0850312086 —— Chinese Shadows (New York: Viking Press, 1977).

ISBN 0670219185 —— Broken Images: Essays on Chinese Culture and Politics (New York: St. Martin's Press, 1980).

ISBN 0805280693 —— The Burning Forest: Essays on Chinese Culture and Politics (New York: Holt, 1985).

ISBN 0030050634 Fictional treatments [ edit ] Ying Chang Compestine , Revolution Is Not a Dinner Party (New York: Holt, 2007).

ISBN 0805082077 . Young adult novel Dai Sijie , Balzac and the Little Chinese Seamstress , translated by Ina Rilke (New York: Knopf / Random House, 2001).

ISBN 037541309X Gao Xingjian , One Man's Bible , translated by Mabel Lee (New York: HarperCollins, 2002).

Gu Hua , A Small Town Called Hibiscus , translated by Gladys Yang (Beijing: Chinese Literature / China Publications Centre, 1983).

Liu Cixin , The Three-Body Problem , translated by Ken Liu (New York: Tor Books, 2014).

ISBN 0765377063 Yu Hua , To Live , translated by Michael Berry (New York: Anchor Books, 2003).

Memoirs by Chinese participants [ edit ] Guanlong Cao, The Attic: Memoir of a Chinese Landlord's Son (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996).

Jung Chang , Wild Swans: Three Daughters of China (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1991).

Nien Cheng , Life and Death in Shanghai (New York: Grove, 1987).

ISBN 0394555481 Liang Heng and Judith Shapiro , Son of the Revolution (New York: Knopf, 1983).

Wenguang Huang, The Little Red Guard: A Family Memoir (New York: Riverhead Books, 2012).

Ji Xianlin , The Cowshed: Memories of the Chinese Cultural Revolution , translated by Chenxin Jiang (New York: New York Review Books, 2016).

Kang Zhengguo, Confessions: An Innocent Life in Communist China , translated by Susan Wilf (New York: W. W. Norton, 2007).

Ken Ling, The Revenge of Heaven : Journal of a Young Chinese , English text prepared by Miriam London and Ta-Ling Lee. (New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1972).

Liu Ping, My Chinese Dream: From Red Guard to CEO (San Francisco: China Books, 2012).

ISBN 978-0835100403 Ma Bo , Blood Red Sunset: A Memoir of the Chinese Cultural Revolution , translated by Howard Goldblatt. (New York: Viking, 1995).

Anchee Min , Red Azalea (New York: Pantheon Books, 1994).

ISBN 1400096987 Nanchu, Red Sorrow (New York: Arcade Publishing, 2012).

Emily Wu , Feather in the Storm (New York: Pantheon, 2006).

ISBN 978-0375424281 Yang Jiang , Six Chapters from My Life "Downunder" , translated by Howard Goldblatt. (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1988).

Rae Yang, Spider Eaters (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997).

Ting-Xing Ye , A Leaf in the Bitter Wind (Toronto: Doubleday Canada, 1997).

Weili Ye and Xiaodong Ma, Growing up in the People's Republic: Conversations between Two Daughters of China's Revolution (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005).

Lijia Zhang, Socialism Is Great!: A Worker's Memoir of the New China (New York: Atlas & Co, 2007).

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Cultural Revolution .

Cultural Revolution at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Encyclopædia Britannica . The Cultural Revolution History of The Cultural Revolution Chinese propaganda posters gallery (Cultural Revolution, Mao, and others) Hua Guofeng's speech to the 11th Party Congress, 1977 Morning Sun – A Film and Website about Cultural Revolution and the photographs of the subject available from the film's site.

Memorial for Victims of the Chinese Cultural Revolution "William Hinton on the Cultural Revolution" by Dave Pugh "Student Attacks Against Teachers: The Revolution of 1966" by Youqin Wang v t e Cultural Revolution Prelude Anti-Rightist Campaign Great Chinese Famine Great Leap Forward Lushan Conference Seven Thousand Cadres Conference Socialist Education Movement Fengqiao experience Taoyuan Experience Major events Down to the Countryside Movement Cleansing the Class Ranks 12-3 incident January Storm February Countercurrent Great Exchange of Revolutionary Experience Wuhan incident Smashing gong-jian-fa 9th Party Congress One Strike-Three Anti Campaign Abolition of the presidency in China Project 571 Lin Biao incident 10th Party Congress Black Painting incident Criticize Lin, Criticize Confucius Snail Incident Hangzhou incident 1975 Banqiao Dam failure Counterattack the Right-Deviationist Reversal-of-Verdicts Trend 1976 Nanjing incident 1976 Tiananmen Incident Smashing the Gang of Four Massacres Red August Daxing Massacre Guangxi Massacre Inner Mongolia incident Guangdong Massacre Yangjiang Massacre Hunan Massacres Daoxian massacre Shaoyang County Massacre Yunnan Massacres Zhao Jianmin spy case Shadian incident Ruijin Massacre Qinghai 223 Incident Key figures Mao Zedong Liu Shaoqi Zhou Enlai Lin Biao Deng Xiaoping Gang of Four ( Jiang Qing Zhang Chunqiao Yao Wenyuan Wang Hongwen ) Peng Dehuai Wu Han Peng Zhen Tao Zhu Chen Boda Wang Dongxing Xie Fuzhi Ji Dengkui Wang Li Qi Benyu Wu Faxian Qiu Huizuo Yang Chengwu Chen Zaidao Kang Sheng Mao Yuanxin Hua Guofeng Ye Jianying Documents 1970 Draft Constitution A List of Cadres to Be Protected Bombard the Headquarters Quotations from Chairman Mao Hai Rui Dismissed from Office May 16 Notification Six Articles of Public Security Sweep Away All Cow Demons and Snake Spirits On Class Origins " With you in charge, I'm at ease " Concepts Four Olds Newborn socialist things Struggle session Feudal fascism Big-character poster Cow demons and snake spirits Bloodline theory Continuous Revolution Theory Seizure of power Violent Struggle One Divides into Two Democracy Wall Eight model plays Loyalty dance Capitalist roader Yiku sitian Learn from Daqing in industry Learn from Dazhai in agriculture Stinking Old Ninth Five Black Categories Five Red Categories Two Newspapers and One Journal Groups Red Guards Conservative Faction Little Red Guards Rebel Faction Scarlet Guards Ultra-Left Faction Xiaoyao Faction May Sixteenth elements Five Man Group Cultural Revolution Group Central Case Examination Group Central Organization and Propaganda Leading Group Hunan Provincial Proletarian Revolutionary Great Alliance Committee Revolutionary committee in Beijing in Fujian in Heilongjiang in Shanghai 8341 Special Regiment Sent-down youth 61 Renegades Barefoot doctor Worker-Peasant-Soldier student May Seventh Cadre School Xiang River Storm and Thunder Related topics Maoism Mao Zedong's cult of personality Mango cult List of campaigns of the Chinese Communist Party Class struggle Sino-Soviet split Two Whatevers Morning Sun (film) Third Plenum of the 11th Central Committee Boluan Fanzheng New Enlightenment Scar literature Evaluation of the Cultural Revolution Category v t e Mao Zedong Chairman of the Chinese Communist Party (1943–1976) Chairman of the Central Military Commission (1954–1976) History and politics Overviews Early life Rule as Chinese leader Cult of personality Death and state funeral Chairman Mao Memorial Hall Chronology Chinese Civil War Long March Chinese Soviet Republic Second Sino-Japanese War Second United Front Yan'an Rectification Movement Yan'an Forum 7th National Congress of the Communist Party Chinese Communist Revolution Proclamation of the People's Republic of China Annexation of Tibet by the People's Republic of China Land Reform Movement Korean War People's Volunteer Army Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries Three-anti and Five-anti Campaigns First five-year plan First Taiwan Strait Crisis 1954 Constitution Bandung Conference 8th National Congress of the Communist Party Sufan movement Hundred Flowers Campaign Anti-Rightist Campaign Two Bombs, One Satellite Second Taiwan Strait Crisis Great Leap Forward Great Chinese Famine Lushan Conference Seven Thousand Cadres Conference Sino-Soviet split Socialist Education Movement Vietnam War Cultural Revolution Cleansing the Class Ranks Chairman Mao badge Four Olds Gang of Four Red August Red Guards 9th National Congress of the Communist Party Abolition of the presidency Lin Biao incident 1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China 10th National Congress of the Communist Party Concepts Maoism Capitalist roader Continuous Revolution Theory Mass line New Democracy Newborn socialist things One Divides into Two People's war Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun Revolutionary base area Seek truth from facts Three Worlds Theory Works Political works Bombard the Headquarters A Critique of Soviet Economics On Contradiction On Guerrilla Warfare On New Democracy On Practice On Protracted War On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People On the People's Democratic Dictatorship Oppose Book Worship Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung Reply to Li Shuyi Report on an Investigation of the Peasant Movement in Hunan Selected Works of Mao Tse-Tung The Shian Kian Weekly Review Ten Major Relationships Poetry Changsha The Double Ninth Loushan Pass Family Mao Zemin (brother) Mao Zetan (brother) Mao Zejian (cousin) Luo Yixiu (first wife) Yang Kaihui (second wife) Mao Anying (son) Mao Anqing (son) Mao Anlong (son) Yang Yuehua (daughter) Li Min (daughter) Jiang Qing (fourth wife) Li Na (daughter) Mao Xinyu (grandson) Kong Dongmei (granddaughter) Mao Yuanxin (nephew) Category v t e Maoism Concepts Agrarian socialism Antagonistic contradiction Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Comprador Continuous Revolution Theory Cultural Revolution Four Olds Marxism–Leninism Mass line Newborn socialist things New Democracy One Divides into Two People's war Probable defeat Proletarian nation Revolutionary base area Seek truth from facts Self-criticism Social imperialism Three Worlds Theory Variants Maoism–Third Worldism Mao-spontex Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Prachanda Path People Mao Zedong Faiz Ahmad Louis Althusser Samir Amin Bob Avakian Alain Badiou Mohan Baidya Afzal Bangash Charles Bettelheim Biplav Bo Xilai Chen Boda Chin Peng Pushpa Kamal Dahal Saroj Dutta Norm Gallagher Abimael Guzmán Harry Haywood Ted Hill İbrahim Kaypakkaya Jiang Qing Kang Sheng Li Minqi Lin Biao Charu Majumdar Pierre Mulele Huey P. Newton Nie Yuanzi Qi Benyu Muppala Lakshmana Rao Narayan Sanyal Siraj Sikder Jose Maria Sison Wang Hongwen Yao Wenyuan Akram Yari Zhang Chunqiao Salmin Theoretical works Report on an Investigation of the Peasant Movement in Hunan (1927) On Contradiction (1937) On Practice (1937) On Guerrilla Warfare (1937) On Protracted War (1938) On the Ten Major Relationships (1956) On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People (1957) A Critique of Soviet Economics (1960) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (1964) Historic Eight Documents (1965–1966) Bombard the Headquarters (1966) Settlers: The Mythology of the White Proletariat (1983) History Chinese Soviet Republic Jiangxi Soviet Long March Chinese Communist Revolution People's Republic of China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries Korean War Sino-Soviet split Great Leap Forward Black power movement Cultural Revolution 16 May Notification Red August January Storm Down to the Countryside Movement New Communist movement Cambodian Civil War Naxalite–Maoist insurgency Naxalbari uprising New People's Army rebellion Sino-Albanian split Maoist insurgency in Turkey Death and funeral of Mao Cambodian–Vietnamese War Two Whatevers Peruvian Revolution Nepalese Civil War Chongqing model Organizations Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Peru – Shining Path National Democratic Front of the Philippines Communist Party of the Philippines New People's Army Communist Party of Turkey/Marxist–Leninist Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist Centre) Communist Party of India (Maoist) Proletarian Party of East Bengal Communist Party of Burma Communist Party of Ecuador – Red Sun Serve the People – Communist League Black Panther Party Revolutionary Internationalist Movement Communist (Maoist) Party of Afghanistan Related topics Anarchism in China Big-character poster Feudal fascism Hoxhaism Guevarism Juche Left communism in China Mao's cult of personality Nanjie National communism National Democracy Movement Naxalism Nazi-Maoism New Left Chinese Japanese Red Guards Red Star Over China Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang Thought reform in China China portal Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Religious persecution and discrimination By group Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Methods Censorship Blasphemy law Blood libel Communal violence Cultural genocide Deprogramming Desecration Domicide Discrimination Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Extrajudicial killing Extrajudicial punishment Exclusivism Forced conversion Forced displacement Hate crime Iconoclasm Intolerance Pogrom Police Political violence Population cleansing Population transfer Sectarian violence Social cleansing Segregation State atheism State religion Terrorism Violence War Events Golden calf massacre (c.1250 BC) Persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire (64–313) Persecution of pagans in the late Roman Empire (c. 324–c. 491) Decline of Buddhism in the Indian subcontinent (c.550–c. 1200) Yellow Turban Rebellion (c.184–c. 205) Battle of Tours (732) Rhineland massacres (1096) Jerusalem massacre (1099) Muslim conquests in the Indian subcontinent (643–1526) Inquisition (1184–1908) Massacre at Ayyadieh (1191) Northern Crusades (12th–16th cent.) Crusades against Christians (13th–15th cent.) Forced conversions of Muslims in Spain (1500–1526) European wars of religion (1522–1712) Ottoman–Habsburg wars (1526–1791) Goa Inquisition (1561–1812) French Wars of Religion (1562–1598) Expulsion of the Moriscos (1609–1614) Test Acts (1673–1829) Persecution of Muslims during the Ottoman contraction (1683–1922) Christianization of the Sámi people (1700s) French Revolutionary dechristianisation (1789–1801) Utah War (1857–1858) 1860 Mount Lebanon civil war (1860) Circassian genocide (1864) Dungan Revolt (1862–1877) Adana massacre (1909) Massacres of Albanians in the Balkan Wars (1912–1913) Greek genocide (1913–1922) Pontic Greek genocide Assyrian genocide (1914–1924) Armenian genocide (1915–1923) Persecution of Christians in the Eastern Bloc (1917–1990) Soviet persecution (1922–1991) 1917–1921 1921–1928 1928–1941 1958–1964 1970–1987 legislation Šahovići massacre (1924) White Terror (Spain) (1936–1975) Nazi boycott of Jewish businesses (1933) The Holocaust (1939–1945) Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia (1941–1945) Communist Polish persecution (1945–1989) Communist Romanian persecution (1945–1989) Noakhali riots (1946) Direct Action Day (1946) 1946 Bihar riots (1946) Rawalpindi massacres (1947) Persecution of Hindus in Pakistan (1947–ongoing) Violence against Muslims in India (1947–ongoing) Violence against Hindus in independent India (1947–ongoing) 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight (1948) Jewish exodus from the Muslim world (1948–1980) Antireligious campaigns in China (1949–ongoing) Persecution of Tibetans (1950–ongoing) Exodus of Turks from Bulgaria (1950) Religious violence in Nigeria (1953–ongoing) Istanbul pogrom (1955) Persecution of Papuans (1962–ongoing) Buddhist crisis (1963) Huế Phật Đản shootings (1963) Thích Quảng Đức (1963) Xá Lợi Pagoda raids (1963) Cultural Revolution (1966–1976) Four Olds (1966) Famen Temple (1966) Bangladesh genocide (1971) Persecution of Hindus in Bangladesh (1971–ongoing) Lebanese Civil War (1975–1990) Cambodian genocide (1975–1979) East Timor genocide (1975–1999) 1984 anti-Sikh riots (1984) Revival Process (1984–1989) 1989 expulsion of Turks from Bulgaria (1989) Exodus of Kashmiri Hindus (1990) Yugoslav Wars (1991–2001) Ethnic cleansing in the Bosnian War (1992–1996) Bosnian genocide (1995) War crimes in the Kosovo War (1999) Walisongo school massacre (2000) Kosheh massacres (2000) September 11 attacks (2001) 2002 Gujarat riots (2002) South Thailand insurgency (2004–ongoing) Boko Haram insurgency (2009–ongoing) Maspero demonstrations (2011) Attacks by Islamic extremists in Bangladesh (2013–2016) Yazidi genocide (2014–2017) Genocide of Christians by ISIL (2014–ongoing) Iraqi Turkmen genocide (2014–2017) Persecution of Uyghurs in China (2014–ongoing) Rohingya genocide (2016–ongoing) Christchurch mosque shootings (2019) 2019 Sri Lanka Easter bombings (2019) 2020 Delhi riots (2020) 2024 Istanbul church shooting Crocus City Hall attack (2024) Mar Elias Church attack (2025) Religion Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cultural_Revolution&oldid=1306115261 " Categories : Cultural Revolution 1960s in China 1966 establishments in China 1966 introductions 1970s in China 1976 disestablishments in China 20th-century revolutions Campaigns of the Chinese Communist Party Cold War history of China Cultural genocide Cultural history of China Man-made disasters in China Mao Zedong Maoist terminology Massacres in China Politicides Political and cultural purges Political controversies in China Revolutions in China Vandalized works of art Communist terrorism Revolutionary terror Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2023 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from June 2024 CS1 uses Chinese-language script (zh) CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use dmy dates from July 2021 Articles containing Chinese-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 Articles with excerpts Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2018 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from July 2025 Articles containing French-language text Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from November 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 Pages using Sister project links with default search This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 01:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cultural Revolution 112 languages Add topic

