Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Main Representatives of the School 2 The Mathematical Work of the School 3 Bibliography 4 References Toggle the table of contents School of Chios 1 language Ελληνικά Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Mathematical school in Ancient Greece The School of Chios ( Ancient Greek : Σχολή της Χίου ) was a mathematical school in ancient Greece that flourished from around 480 BC to 450 BC.

Main Representatives of the School [ edit ] The School of Chios was a mathematical school established in the early 5th century, succeeding the Pythagorean School . Its most prominent representative was Hippocrates of Chios (~470-400 BC), who flourished around 440 BC. His teacher was Oenopides of Chios , who was a generation older. Also, Anaxagoras (500-428 BC) was likely a member of the School.

[ 1 ] The Mathematical Work of the School [ edit ] There is no information on whether the School of Chios was based in Chios or if its representatives hailed from there. However, it was the brief period between the Pythagorean School and the Platonic Academy . The Academy declined, and its traces were lost shortly after the mid-5th century, during a flourishing geometric tradition, where the central focus was on the three famous "unsolvable" problems of antiquity: the Doubling of the cube or Delian problem, the Trisection of the angle, and the Squaring of the circle .

[ 2 ] Anaxagoras is mentioned as the first to deal with the problem of squaring the circle.

[ 3 ] According to Proclus , Oenopides was involved in mathematics and gained fame from it; he also introduced the use of the rule and compass for geometric constructions.

[ 4 ] Hippocrates is mentioned as the first to reduce the problem of doubling the cube to its equivalent, the interpolation of two mean proportionals between two straight line segments a and b=2a, so that the continuous proportions a/x=x/y=y/2a hold. Hippocrates also squared lunules, according to Simplicius (4th century AD), in a text that is preserved to us.

[ 5 ] The peak of the School of Chios did not last long, and the scientific center soon after the mid-5th century BC shifted to Athens . The three above-mentioned main representatives of the School of Chios settled in Athens and continued their mathematical work.

Bibliography [ edit ] Sotiris X. Goudouvas, "Γεωμετρικές Διαδρομές / Geometric Pathways", Athens 2015 Σωτήρης Χ. Γκουντουβάς, "Το νόημα της κατασκευής στην πορεία εξέλιξης της Γεωμετρίας / The meaning of construction in the course of Geometry's evolution", Dissertation, NKUA, Athens 2009 Proclus the Successor, "Comments on the 1st book of Euclid's Elements", Leipzig 1897 Thomas Heath, "Ιστορία των Ελληνικών Μαθηματικών / A History of Greek Mathematics", KEPEK, Athens 2001 Β. L. Van der Waerden, "Η αφύπνιση της επιστήμης / The awakening of science", PEK, Heraklion 2003 References [ edit ] ^ S. X. Goudouvas (2015), pp.30-32 ^ S. X. Goudouvas (2015), pp.30-32 & Van der Waerden (2003), pp. 146-147 ^ S. X. Goudouvas (2015), p.130 ^ S. X. Goudouvas (2015), p.30 ^ S. X. Goudouvas (2015), pp.31 v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians (timeline) Anaxagoras Anthemius Apollonius Archimedes Archytas Aristaeus the Elder Aristarchus Autolycus Bion Bryson Callippus Carpus Chrysippus Cleomedes Conon Ctesibius Democritus Dicaearchus Dinostratus Diocles Dionysodorus of Caunus Dionysodorus of Amisene Diophantus Domninus Eratosthenes Euclid Eudemus Eudoxus Eutocius Geminus Heliodorus Heron Hipparchus Hippasus Hippias Hippocrates Hypatia Hypsicles Isidore of Miletus Leon Marinus Menaechmus Menelaus Metrodorus Nicomachus Nicomedes Nicoteles Oenopides Pandrosion Pappus Perseus Philolaus Philon Philonides Porphyry of Tyre Posidonius Proclus Ptolemy Pythagoras Serenus Sosigenes Sporus Thales Theaetetus Theodorus Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Thymaridas Xenocrates Zeno of Elea Zeno of Sidon Zenodorus Treatises Almagest Arithmetica Conics (Apollonius) Catoptrics Data (Euclid) Elements (Euclid) Little Astronomy Measurement of a Circle On Conoids and Spheroids On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Moving Sphere (Autolycus) Optics (Euclid) On Spirals On the Sphere and Cylinder Ostomachion Phaenomena (Euclid) Planisphaerium Spherics (Theodosius) Spherics (Menelaus) The Quadrature of the Parabola The Sand Reckoner Concepts and definitions Chord Circles of Apollonius Apollonian circles Apollonian gasket Problem of Apollonius Commensurability Diophantine equation Euclidean geometry Golden ratio Lune of Hippocrates Method of exhaustion Parallel postulate Platonic solid Regular polygon Straightedge and compass construction Angle trisection Doubling the cube Squaring the circle Quadratrix of Hippias Neusis construction Results In Elements Angle bisector theorem Exterior angle theorem Euclidean algorithm Euclid's theorem Geometric mean theorem Hinge theorem Inscribed angle theorem Intercept theorem Intersecting chords theorem Intersecting secants theorem Law of cosines Pons asinorum Pythagorean theorem Tangent-secant theorem Thales's theorem Theorem of the gnomon Apollonius's theorem Aristarchus's inequality Heron's formula Law of sines Menelaus's theorem Pappus's area theorem Problem II.8 of Arithmetica Ptolemy's inequality Ptolemy's table of chords Ptolemy's theorem Spiral of Theodorus Centers/Schools Cyrene Platonic Academy Pythagoreanism School of Chios Related Ancient Greek astronomy Attic numerals Greek numerals History of A History of Greek Mathematics by Thomas Heath Archimedes Palimpsest algebra timeline arithmetic timeline calculus timeline geometry timeline logic timeline mathematics timeline numbers prehistoric counting numeral systems list Other cultures Arabian/Islamic Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Incan Indian Japanese Ancient Greece portal • Mathematics portal This ancient Greek biographical article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=School_of_Chios&oldid=1290081175 " Categories : Ancient Greek mathematicians Education in classical antiquity Hellenistic civilization Ancient Greek people stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All stub articles This page was last edited on 12 May 2025, at 18:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents School of Chios 1 language Add topic

