Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 British colonial rule: (1857–1947) 1.2 Dominion: (1947–1950) 1.3 Republic: (1950–present) 2 Basic structure 3 Legislature 4 Executive Toggle Executive subsection 4.1 President 4.2 Vice president 4.3 Prime minister 4.4 Cabinet, ministries and agencies 4.4.1 Secretaries 4.5 Civil services 4.5.1 Cabinet secretary 5 Judiciary Toggle Judiciary subsection 5.1 Supreme Court 6 Elections and voting 7 State and local governments 8 Finance Toggle Finance subsection 8.1 Taxation 8.2 Union budget 9 Issues Toggle Issues subsection 9.1 Corruption 10 See also 11 References 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Government of India 46 languages العربية অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা भोजपुरी Български Català Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް डोटेली Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Fiji Hindi Français ગુજરાતી 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia עברית ಕನ್ನಡ मैथिली മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu नेपाली 日本語 ଓଡ଼ିଆ ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Русский संस्कृतम् ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ සිංහල Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Indian government ) Government of India Bhārata Sarakāra Federal government Government of India's Logo with wordmark crested with the emblem of India on the left.

Overview Established Current form: 26 January 1950 ; 75 years ago ( 1950-01-26 ) (see: Constitution of India ) State Republic of India Leader President of India ( Droupadi Murmu ) (de jure) Prime Minister of India ( Narendra Modi ) (de facto) Main organ Union Council of Ministers Ministries 54 ministries and 93 subordinate departments Responsible to Lok Sabha [ 1 ] Annual budget ₹ 45.03 trillion (equivalent to ₹ 53 trillion or US$630 billion in 2023) Headquarters Secretariat Building, New Delhi This article is part of a series on the Politics of India Constitution Amendment Basic structure doctrine Fundamental Rights, Directive Principles and Fundamental Duties of India Human rights Judicial review Taxation Uniform Civil Code Government President of India Droupadi Murmu ( 15th ) Vice President of India vacant ( List of Vice Presidents of India ) Prime Minister of India Narendra Modi ( 14th ) Cabinet secretary T. V. Somanathan Ministries Ministers Departments Secretaries Parliament Lok Sabha ( 18th ) Speaker Om Birla Deputy Speaker Vacant Leader of the House Narendra Modi ( BJP ) Leader of the Opposition Rahul Gandhi ( INC ) Secretary General Utpal Kumar Singh Rajya Sabha ( Members ) Chairman vacant Deputy Speaker Harivansh Narayan Singh Leader of the House Jagat Prakash Nadda ( BJP ) Leader of the Opposition Mallikarjun Kharge ( INC ) Secretary General Pramod Chandra Mody Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs Cabinet Minister Kiren Rijiju Minister of State Arjun Ram Meghwal L. Murugan Law and judiciary Law of India Indian criminal law Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam Code of Civil Procedure Supreme Court of India Chief Justice ( 51st ) Sanjiv Khanna Judges Bar Association Bar Council District Court List Gram Nyayalaya High Court Chief Justices Judges Lok Adalat Nyaya Panchayat Pendency of court cases Other tribunals Ministry of Law and Justice Minister Arjun Ram Meghwal Attorney-General R. Venkataramani Solicitor General Tushar Mehta Additional Solicitor General Law Commission National Judicial Appointments Commission National Legal Services Authority Elections and politics Election Commission Chief Election Commissioner Gyanesh Kumar Election Commissioner Sukhbir Singh Sandhu Vivek Joshi State Election Commission Elections Democracy Electoral College Electronic voting Presidential elections 2022 2017 2012 Vice Presidential elections 2022 2017 2012 Lok Sabha elections ( Constituencies ) 2014 2019 2024 Rajya Sabha elections 2024 2023 2022 State Assembly elections 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 National coalitions NDA INDIA Political parties National parties State parties Administrative divisions States and union territories ( Capitals ) States Andhra Pradesh Arunachal Pradesh Assam Bihar Chhattisgarh Goa Gujarat Haryana Himachal Pradesh Jharkhand Karnataka Kerala Madhya Pradesh Maharashtra Manipur Meghalaya Mizoram Nagaland Odisha Punjab Rajasthan Sikkim Tamil Nadu Telangana Tripura Uttar Pradesh Uttarakhand West Bengal Union territories Andaman and Nicobar Chandigarh Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu Delhi Jammu and Kashmir Ladakh Lakshadweep Puducherry Proposed states and union territories Autonomous Divisions Divisions Districts Sub-districts Community Development Block Metropolitan Areas Urban Agglomerations Federalism Executive Governor List Lieutenant Governor/Administrator List Chief Minister List Deputy Chief Minister List Ministries Legislative Legislative Council Legislative Assembly Speaker List Official Opposition List Local Government Municipal Governance Municipal Corporation Municipality Town Panchayat Panchayati Raj District Panchayat Block Panchayat Gram Panchayat Foreign relations Ministry of External Affairs Cabinet Minister S. Jaishankar Minister of State Kirti Vardhan Singh Pabitra Margherita Foreign Secretary Vinay Mohan Kwatra Diplomatic missions of / in India Ambassadors and High Commissioners of India / to India Nationality law Overseas Citizenship Passports Visa policy Visa requirements Foreign Relations 2+2 BIMSTEC BBIN BRICS Commonwealth G4 G20 IBSA IONS IORA MGC Non-Aligned Movement SAARC SCO United Nations QUAD Africa East Asia European Union Latin America Pacific Islands Diaspora History Extradition Treaties Foreign aid by India / to India Sanctions State Visits by Indian Prime Ministers State Visits to India Kashmir Conflict Indo-Pakistani Wars Sino-Indian Disputes Disputes with Nepal Foreign Policy ITEC Look East policy Pan-African e-Network project Indira Gandhi Narendra Modi India portal Other countries v t e The Government of India ( Bhārata Sarakāra , legally the Union Government or the Union of India [ 2 ] or the Central Government ) is the national authority of the Republic of India , located in South Asia , consisting of 36 states and union territories . The government is led by the president of India (currently Droupadi Murmu since 25 July 2022) who largely exercises the executive powers, and selects the prime minister of India and other ministers for aid and advice.

[ 3 ] Government has been formed by the National Democratic Alliance since 2014, as the dominant grouping in the Lok Sabha.

[ 4 ] The prime minister and their senior ministers belong to the Union Council of Ministers , its executive decision-making committee being the cabinet .

[ 5 ] [ need quotation to verify ] The government, seated in New Delhi , has three primary branches: the legislature, the executive and the judiciary, whose powers are vested in bicameral Parliament of India , [ 6 ] Union Council of Ministers (headed by prime minister), [ 7 ] and the Supreme Court of India [ 8 ] respectively, with a president as head of state.

[ 5 ] It is a derivation of the British Westminster system , and has a federal structure.

[ 9 ] The Union Council of Ministers is responsible to the lower house of parliament , as is the Cabinet in accordance with the principles of responsible government .

[ 10 ] [ 9 ] As is the case in most parliamentary systems, the government is dependent on Parliament to legislate, and general elections are held every five years to elect a new Lok Sabha . The most recent election was in 2024 .

After an election, the president generally selects as Prime Minister the leader of the party or alliance most likely to command the confidence of the majority of the Lok Sabha. In the event that the prime minister is not a member of either House of Parliament upon appointment, he/she is given six months to be elected or appointed to either House of Parliament.

[ a ] History British colonial rule: (1857–1947) Main article: British Raj Council House in New Delhi , the seat of the former Imperial Legislative Council and home to the Parliament of India till 2023 The first seeds of responsible government during British colonial rule in India were sown by the Indian Councils Act 1909 , commonly known as the Morley - Minto reforms. The Act introduced elections to the Imperial Legislative Council (then the unicameral Legislature for British India). Before that, governance was carried by an all-European Legislative Council and Viceroy's Executive Council . As such, no Indians were represented in government before 1909.

[ 11 ] India's current bicameral Parliament has its roots in the Government of India Act 1919 , commonly known as the Montagu - Chelmsford reforms, which introduced a greatly expanded Imperial Legislative Council . It comprised a lower house, the Central Legislative Assembly of 145 members (of which 104 were elected and 41 nominated) and an upper house, the Council of State of 60 members (of which 34 were elected and 26 nominated).

[ 12 ] The next structural modification to the governance of British India , the Government of India Act 1935 (the longest Act of Parliament of the United Kingdom until surpassed by the Greater London Authority Act 1999 ) was aimed at devolution of powers by establishing provincial governments and the creation of civil service institutions . However, it was unpopular amongst Indians and is considered a failure as it did not give Indians self-rule and permanent dominion status (the form of government followed in Canada , Australia and New Zealand ) as was previously promised.

[ 13 ] Dominion: (1947–1950) Main article: Dominion of India Governor-General of India C. Rajagopalachari declaring India a republic at Government House on 26 January 1950 Between midnight on 15 August 1947 and 26 January 1950 , India was an independent, self-governing dominion of the Commonwealth of Nations , a constitutional monarchy with a Prime Minister and a Governor-General as the viceregal representative of the head of state, George VI . Its unicameral legislature, the Constituent Assembly , was tasked with drafting the country's constitution.

[ 14 ] Republic: (1950–present) The Constitution of India came into effect on 26 January 1950 , making India a republic with a president as head of state, replacing the monarch and his viceregal representative, the governor-general .  It was based in large part on the Government of India Act 1935 , which was itself based on the uncodified constitution of the United Kingdom . It also drew notable inspirations from the constitutions of several other Commonwealth dominions and the French , Soviet , Japanese , German and American constitutions.

[ 15 ] India today prides itself in being the world's largest democracy , and the 4th largest economy in the world. Even though much remains to be done, especially in regard to eradicating poverty and securing effective structures of governance, India's achievements since independence in sustaining freedom and democracy have been singular among the world's new nations.

[ 16 ] Basic structure The Government of India is modelled after the Westminster system.

[ 17 ] The Union government is mainly composed of the executive , the legislature , and the judiciary , and powers are vested by the constitution in the council of ministers , parliament , and the supreme court , respectively. The president of India is the head of state and the commander-in-chief of the Indian Armed Forces , while the elected prime minister acts as the head of the executive and is responsible for running the Union government.

[ 18 ] Parliament is bicameral in nature, with the Lok Sabha being the lower house , and the Rajya Sabha the upper house . The judiciary systematically contains an apex supreme court , 25 high courts , and hundreds of district courts , all subordinate to the supreme court.

[ 19 ] The basic civil and criminal laws governing the citizens of India are set down in major parliamentary legislation, such as the civil procedure code , the penal code , and the criminal procedure code .

[ 20 ] Similar to the Union government, individual state governments each consist of executive, legislative and judiciary branches. The legal system as applicable to the Union and individual state governments is based on the English common and Statutory Law .

[ 21 ] The full name of the country is the Republic of India . India and Bharat are equally official short names for the Republic of India in the Constitution, [ 22 ] and both names appears on legal banknotes, in treaties and in legal cases. The terms "Union government", "central government" and " bhārat sarkār " are often used officially and unofficially to refer to the government of India.

[ citation needed ] The term New Delhi is commonly used as a metonym for the Union government, [ 23 ] as the seat of the central government is in New Delhi .

Legislature Main article: Parliament of India Parliament House in New Delhi The powers of the legislature in India are exercised by the Parliament , a bicameral legislature consisting of the Rajya Sabha and the Lok Sabha . Of the two houses of parliament, the Rajya Sabha (or the 'Council of States') is considered to be the upper house and consists of members appointed by the president and elected by the state and territorial legislatures . The Lok Sabha (or the 'House of the People') is considered the lower house .

[ 24 ] The parliament does not have complete control and sovereignty , as its laws are subject to judicial review by the Supreme Court .

[ 25 ] However, it does exercise some control over the executive . The members of the Council of Ministers , including the prime minister , are either chosen from parliament or elected there within six months of assuming office.

[ 26 ] The council as a whole is responsible to the Lok Sabha.

[ 27 ] The Lok Sabha is a temporary house and can be dissolved only when the party in power loses the support of the majority of the house. The Rajya Sabha is a permanent house and can never be dissolved. The members of the Rajya Sabha are elected for a six-year term.

[ 28 ] Executive The executive of government is the one that has sole authority and responsibility for the daily administration of the state bureaucracy. The division of power into separate branches of government is central to the republican idea of the separation of powers .

[ 29 ] President Main article: President of India President Droupadi Murmu (center), Vice President Jagdeep Dhankhar (left), and Prime Minister Narendra Modi The executive power is vested mainly in the president of India , as per Article 53(1) of the constitution. The president has all constitutional powers and exercises them directly or through subordinate officers as per the aforesaid Article 53(1). The president is to act following aid and advice tendered by the prime minister, who leads the Council of Ministers as described in Article 74 of the Constitution .

The council of ministers remains in power during the 'pleasure' of the president. However, in practice, the council of ministers must retain the support of the Lok Sabha. If a president were to dismiss the council of ministers on his or her initiative, it might trigger a constitutional crisis. Thus, in practice, the Council of Ministers cannot be dismissed as long as it holds the support of a majority in the Lok Sabha .

The president is responsible for appointing many high officials in India. These high officials include the governors of the 28 states ; the chief justice ; other judges of the supreme court and high courts on the advice of other judges; the attorney general ; the comptroller and auditor general ; the chief election commissioner and other election commissioners ; the chairman and members of the Union Public Service Commission ; the officers of the All India Services ( IAS , IFoS and IPS ) and Central Civil Services in group 'A'; officers of the Indian Armed Forces ; and the ambassadors and high commissioners to other countries on the recommendations of the Council of Ministers, among others.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] The president, as the head of state , also receives the credentials of ambassadors from other countries, while the prime minister , as head of government , receives credentials of high commissioners from other members of the Commonwealth , in line with historical tradition.

The president is the de jure commander-in-chief of the Indian Armed Forces .

[ 32 ] The president of India can grant a pardon to or reduce the sentence of a convicted person once, particularly in cases involving the punishment of death. The decisions involving pardoning and other rights by the president are independent of the opinion of the prime minister or the Lok Sabha majority. In most other cases, however, the president exercises his or her executive powers on the advice of the prime minister.

[ 33 ] Vice president Main article: Vice President of India The vice president is the second-highest constitutional position in India after the president. The vice president represents the nation in the absence of the president and takes charge as acting president in the incident of resignation impeachment or removal of the president. The vice president also has the legislative function of acting as the chairman of the Rajya Sabha .

[ 34 ] The vice president is elected indirectly by members of an electoral college consisting of the members of both the houses of the parliament following the system of proportional representation employing the single transferable vote and the voting is by secret ballot conducted by the election commission .

Prime minister Main article: Prime Minister of India North and South Blocks of the Central Secretariat housing various ministries of the Government of India, with the Rashtrapati Bhavan visible in the distance The prime minister of India , as addressed in the Constitution of India , is the chief executive of the government and the leader of the majority party that holds a majority in the Lok Sabha. The prime minister leads the executive of the Government of India.

The prime minister is the senior member of the cabinet in the executive government in a parliamentary system. The prime minister selects and can dismiss other members of the cabinet; allocates posts to members within the Government; is the presiding member and chairman of the cabinet and is responsible for bringing a proposal of legislation. The resignation or death of the prime minister dissolves the cabinet.

The prime minister is appointed by the president to assist the latter in the administration of the affairs of the executive.

Cabinet, ministries and agencies Main articles: Union Council of Ministers and List of central agencies in India The organizational structure of a department of the Government of India.

The Union Council of Ministers includes the prime minister, Cabinet Ministers and Ministers of State (MoS).

[ 35 ] Each minister must be a member of one of the houses of the parliament. The cabinet is headed by the prime minister , and is advised by the cabinet secretary , who also acts as the head of the Indian Administrative Service and other civil services. Other members of the council are either union cabinet ministers, who are heads of various ministries; or ministers of state, who are junior members who report directly to one of the cabinet ministers, often overseeing a specific aspect of government; or ministers of state (independent charges), who do not report to a cabinet minister. As per article 88 of the constitution, every minister shall have the right to speak in, and to take part in the proceedings of, either house, any joint sitting of the houses, and any committee of parliament of which he may be named a member, but shall not be entitled to a vote in the house where he is not a member.

Secretaries Main article: Secretary to the Government of India A secretary to the Government of India , a civil servant , generally an Indian Administrative Service (IAS) officer, [ 36 ] [ 37 ] [ 38 ] [ 39 ] is the administrative head of the ministry or department, and is the principal adviser to the minister on all matters of policy and administration within the ministry/department.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] Secretaries to the Government of India rank 23rd on Indian order of precedence .

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 ] [ 45 ] Secretaries at the higher level are assisted by one or many additional secretaries , who are further assisted by joint secretaries .

[ 41 ] At the middle they are assisted by directors/deputy secretaries and under secretaries.

[ 41 ] At the lower level, there are section officers, assistant section officers, upper division clerks, lower division clerks and other secretarial staff.

[ 41 ] Ministries and departments of the Government of India # Ministry Department(s) 1 Prime Minister's Office Department of Atomic Energy Department of Space 2 Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare Department of Agricultural Research and Education 3 Ministry of Ayush 4 Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals Department of Fertilizers Department of Pharmaceuticals 5 Ministry of Civil Aviation 6 Ministry of Co-operation 7 Ministry of Coal 8 Ministry of Commerce and Industry Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade Department of Commerce 9 Ministry of Communications Department of Posts Department of Telecommunications 10 Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution Department of Consumer Affairs Department of Food and Public Distribution 11 Ministry of Corporate Affairs 12 Ministry of Culture 13 Ministry of Defence Department of Defence Department of Defence Production Department of Defence Research and Development Department of Ex-servicemen Welfare Department of Military Affairs 14 Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region 15 Ministry of Earth Sciences 16 Ministry of Education Department of Higher Education Department of School Education and Literacy 17 Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 18 Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 19 Ministry of External Affairs 20 Ministry of Finance Department of Economic Affairs Department of Expenditure Department of Financial Services Department of Investment and Public Asset Management Department of Public Enterprises Department of Revenue 21 Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries 22 Ministry of Food Processing Industries 23 Ministry of Health and Family Welfare Department of Family Welfare Department of Health Department of Health Research 24 Ministry of Heavy Industries 25 Ministry of Home Affairs Department of Border Management Department of Home Department of Internal Security Department of Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh Affairs Department of Official Language Department of States 26 Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs Central Public Works Department 27 Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 28 Ministry of Jal Shakti 29 Ministry of Labour and Employment 30 Ministry of Law and Justice Department of Legal Affairs Department of Justice Legislative Department 31 Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 32 Ministry of Mines 33 Ministry of Minority Affairs 34 Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 35 Ministry of Panchayati Raj 36 Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs 37 Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions Department of Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances Department of Pension and Pensioners' Welfare Department of Personnel and Training 38 Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 39 Ministry of Planning 40 Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways 41 Ministry of Power 42 Ministry of Railways 43 Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 44 Ministry of Rural Development Department of Land Resources Department of Rural Development 45 Ministry of Science and Technology Department of Biotechnology Department of Scientific and Industrial Research Department of Science and Technology 46 Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship 47 Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities Department of Social Justice and Empowerment 48 Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 49 Ministry of Steel 50 Ministry of Textiles 51 Ministry of Tourism 52 Ministry of Tribal Affairs 53 Ministry of Women and Child Development 54 Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports Department of Youth Affairs Department of Sports Civil services Main article: Civil Services of India The Civil Services of India are the civil services and the permanent bureaucracy of India. The executive decisions are implemented by the Indian civil servants.

Cabinet Secretary Rajiv Gauba , an Indian Administrative Service officer meets with trainee officers of the Indian Police Service ; both arms of the All India Services In the parliamentary democracy of India, the ultimate responsibility for running the administration rests with the elected representatives of the people which are the ministers. These ministers are accountable to the legislatures which are also elected by the people based on universal adult suffrage . The ministers are indirectly responsible to the people themselves. But the handful of ministers is not expected to deal personally with the various problems of modern administration. Thus the ministers lay down the policy and it is for the civil servants to enforce it.

Cabinet secretary Main article: Cabinet Secretary of India The cabinet secretary ( IAST : Maṃtrimaṇḍala Saciva ) is the top-most executive official and senior-most civil servant of the Government of India. The cabinet secretary is the ex-officio head of the Civil Services Board, the Cabinet Secretariat , the Indian Administrative Service (IAS) and the head of all civil services under the rules of business of the government.

The cabinet secretary is generally the senior-most officer of the Indian Administrative Service . The cabinet secretary ranks 11th on the Indian order of precedence .

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 ] [ 45 ] The cabinet secretary is under the direct charge of the prime minister . Presently, the Cabinet Secretary of India is Rajiv Gauba , IAS .

Judiciary Main article: Judiciary of India India's independent union judicial system began under the British, and its concepts and procedures resemble those of Anglo-Saxon countries . The Supreme Court of India consists of the chief justice and 33 associate justices, all appointed by the president on the advice of the Chief Justice of India . The jury trials were abolished in India in the early 1960s, after the famous case KM Nanavati v. the State of Maharashtra , for reasons of being vulnerable to media and public pressure, as well as to being misled.

Unlike its United States counterpart, the Indian justice system consists of a unitary system at both state and union levels. The judiciary consists of the Supreme Court of India , high courts at the state level, and district courts and Sessions Courts at the district level.

Supreme Court Main article: Supreme Court of India Complex of the Supreme Court of India in New Delhi The Supreme Court of India is situated in New Delhi , the capital region of India .

The Supreme Court is the highest judicial forum and final court of appeal under the Constitution of India , the highest constitutional court, with the power of constitutional review . Consisting of the Chief Justice of India and 33 sanctioned other judges, it has extensive powers in the form of original , appellate and advisory jurisdictions .

[ 46 ] As the final court of appeal of the country, it takes up appeals primarily against verdicts of the high courts of various states of the Union and other courts and tribunals. It safeguards fundamental rights of citizens and settles disputes between various governments in the country. As an advisory court, it hears matters which may specifically be referred to it under the constitution by the president. It also may take cognisance of matters on its own (or 'suo moto'), without anyone drawing its attention to them. The law declared by the supreme court becomes binding on all courts within India and also by the union and state governments.

[ 47 ] Per Article 142 , it is the duty of the president to enforce the decrees of the supreme court.

In addition, Article 32 of the constitution gives an extensive original jurisdiction to the supreme court concerning enforcing fundamental rights. It is empowered to issue directions, orders or writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus , mandamus , prohibition , quo warranto and certiorari to enforce them. The supreme court has been conferred with power to direct the transfer of any civil or criminal case from one state high court to another state high court, or from a Court subordinate to another state high court and the supreme court. Although the proceedings in the supreme court arise out of the judgment or orders made by the subordinate courts, of late [ when?

] the supreme court has started entertaining matters in which the interest of the public at large is involved. This may be done by any individual or group of persons either by filing a writ petition at the filing counter of the court or by addressing a letter to the Chief Justice of India , highlighting the question of public importance for redress. These are known as public interest litigations .

[ 48 ] Elections and voting Main articles: Elections in India and Politics of India See also: Election Commission of India India has a quasi-federal form of government, called "union" or "central" government, [ 49 ] with elected officials at the union, state and local levels. At the national level, the head of government , the prime minister , is appointed by the president of India from the party or coalition that has the majority of seats in the Lok Sabha . The members of the Lok Sabha are directly elected for a term of five years by universal adult suffrage through a first-past-the-post voting system. Members of the Rajya Sabha , which represents the states , are elected by the members of State legislative assemblies by proportional representation , except for 12 members who are nominated by the president.

The Election Commission of India conducts national and state elections, while State Election Commissions conduct local government elections.

India is currently the largest democracy in the world, with around 900 million eligible voters, as of 2019.

[ 50 ] State and local governments Main articles: State governments of India , Union territory , and Local government in India This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( March 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In India, power is divided between the governments of the union and the states of India , [ 51 ] the latter being ruled by the chiefs ministers .

[ 52 ] The state legislature is bicameral in six states and unicameral in the rest.

[ 53 ] The lower house is elected with a five-year term, while in the upper house one-third of the members in the house gets elected every two years with six-year terms.

Union territories are administered directly by the union government through an Administrator or Lieutenant Governor , though some have legislatures and elected governments with limited powers.

Local governments function at the basic level. It is the third level of government apart from union and state governments. It consists of panchayats in rural areas and municipalities in urban areas. They are elected directly or indirectly by the people.

Local governments, comprising Panchayati Raj Institutions in rural areas and Urban Local Bodies in urban areas, function under the 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendments to promote democratic decentralization. Each state also enacts its own legislation to regulate the structure and functioning of local governments.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] Finance See also: Reserve Bank of India Taxation Main article: Taxation in India Reserve Bank of India 's headquarters in Mumbai, India's financial capital India has a three-tier tax structure, wherein the constitution empowers the union government to levy income tax , tax on capital transactions ( wealth tax , inheritance tax ), sales tax , service tax, customs and excise duties and the state governments to levy sales tax on intrastate sale of goods, taxon entertainment and professions , excise duties on manufacture of alcohol , stamp duties on transfer of property and collect land revenue (levy on land owned). The local governments are empowered by the state government to levy property tax and charge users for public utilities like water supply , sewage etc.

[ 56 ] More than half of the revenues of the union and state governments come from taxes, of which 3/4 come from direct taxes . More than a quarter of the union government's tax revenues are shared with the state governments.

[ 57 ] The tax reforms, initiated in 1991, have sought to rationalise the tax structure and increase compliance by taking steps in the following directions: Reducing the rates of individual and corporate income taxes, excises, and customs and making it more progressive Reducing exemptions and concessions Simplification of laws and procedures Introduction of permanent account number (PAN) to track monetary transactions 21 of the 29 states introduced value added tax (VAT) on 1 April 2005 to replace the complex and multiple sales tax system [ 56 ] [ 58 ] The non-tax revenues of the central government come from fiscal services, interest receipts, public sector dividends, etc., while the non-tax revenues of the States are grants from the central government, interest receipts, dividends and income from general, economic and social services.

[ 59 ] Inter-state share in the union tax pool is decided by the recommendations of the Finance Commission to the president.

Total tax receipts of Centre and State amount to approximately 18% of national GDP. This compares to a figure of 37–45% in the OECD.

Union budget Main article: Union budget of India The Finance minister of India usually presents the annual union budget in the parliament on the last working day of February. However, for the F.Y. 2017–18, this tradition had been changed. Now the budget will be presented on the 1st day of February. The budget has to be passed by the Lok Sabha before it can come into effect on 1 April, the start of India's fiscal year . The Union budget is preceded by an economic survey which outlines the broad direction of the budget and the economic performance of the country for the outgoing financial year [ 60 ] India's non-development revenue expenditure had increased nearly five-fold in 2003–04 since 1990–91 and more than tenfold from 1985 to 1986. Interest payments are the single largest item of expenditure and accounted for more than 40% of the total non-development expenditure in the 2003–04 budget. Defence expenditure increased fourfold during the same period and has been increasing to defend from a difficult neighbourhood and external terror threats. In 2025–26, India's defence budget stood at ₹ 6.81 trillion (US$81 billion).

Issues Corruption Main article: Corruption in India In 2009, several ministers are accused of corruption and nearly a quarter of the 543 elected members of parliament had been charged with crimes, including murder.

[ 61 ] Many of the biggest scandals since 2010 have involved high-level government officials, including cabinet ministers and chief ministers, such as the 2010 Commonwealth Games scandal ( ₹ 700 billion (equivalent to ₹ 1.6 trillion or US$19 billion in 2023)), the Adarsh Housing Society scandal , the Coal allocation scandal ( ₹ 1.86 trillion (equivalent to ₹ 4.2 trillion or US$49 billion in 2023)), the mining scandal in Karnataka and the cash-for-votes scandal .

See also India portal Foreign relations of India List of central agencies in India National Portal of India National Social-media Portal Union government ministries of India References ^ Article 75(3) of Constitution of India ^ "Constitution of India » 300. Suits and proceedings" . Retrieved 13 July 2024 .

^ Article 53 & 75 of Constitution of India .

^ Shanthie Mariet D'Souza (10 July 2024).

"Narendra Modi | Biography & Facts" . Encyclopædia Britannica Online . Retrieved 13 July 2024 .

^ a b Sharma, B. K. (1 August 2007).

Introduction to the Constitution of India .

Prentice Hall . p. 31.

^ Gledhill, Alan (1970).

The Republic of India: The Development of its Laws and Constitution .

Greenwood . p. 127.

ISBN 978-0-8371-2813-9 .

^ Sharma, Ram (1 January 1950).

Cabinet Government in India .

Parliamentary Affairs . pp.

116– 126.

^ Burt, Neuborne (2003).

The Supreme Court of India . International Journal of Constitutional Law. p. 478.

^ a b Kumarasingham, Harshan (2013). "Mixed Messages? India's Responses to its British Legacy".

A Political Legacy of the British Empire: Power and the Parliamentary System in Post-Colonial India and Sri Lanka . I.B.Tauris & Co Ltd.

doi : 10.5040/9780755621224.ch-002 .

ISBN 978-0-7556-2122-4 .

^ Article 75(3) of Constitution of India.

^ "Indian Councils Act, 1909 Archives" .

Constitution of India . Retrieved 11 July 2024 .

^ "Government of India Act, 1935 Archives" .

Constitution of India . Retrieved 11 July 2024 .

^ "Government of India Act, 1935" (PDF) .

Legislation.gov.uk . 2 August 1935 . Retrieved 12 July 2024 .

^ "Indian Independence Act, 1947" (PDF) .

Legislation.gov.uk . 18 July 1947 . Retrieved 11 July 2024 .

^ "Constitution Day: Borrowed features in the Indian Constitution from other countries" .

India Today . 26 November 2019 . Retrieved 11 July 2024 .

^ Metcalf & Metcalf (24 September 2012).

A Concise History of Modern India .

Cambridge University Press . p. 327.

ISBN 978-1-107-02649-0 .

^ Subramanian, K. (17 June 2014).

"A prime ministerial form of government" .

The Hindu .

ISSN 0971-751X .

OCLC 13119119 .

Archived from the original on 10 June 2018 . Retrieved 9 March 2018 .

^ "Government of India, Structure of Government India" .

elections.com . 8 January 2018.

Archived from the original on 21 May 2017 . Retrieved 19 May 2017 .

^ "Constitution of India's definition of India" .

Indiagovt.in . Archived from the original on 11 November 2019.

^ "Legal services India on Criminal laws in India" . Legal Services India.

Archived from the original on 28 March 2018 . Retrieved 11 April 2018 .

^ Dheeraj Kumar Tiwari.

"Structure of Indian Legal System: Original Origin and Development" .

International Journal of Law and Legal Jurisprudence Studies .

Archived from the original on 8 June 2017 . Retrieved 19 May 2017 .

^ Buckley, A. M. (2012).

India .

Edina, Minnesota : ABDO Publishing Company.

ISBN 978-1-61787-625-7 .

OCLC 767886738 .

^ Das, Nairita (14 June 2012).

"Why Raisina Hills, is so important for Indian Politicians?" .

One India .

Archived from the original on 23 July 2022 . Retrieved 23 July 2022 .

^ Arnull, Elaine; Fox, Darrell (29 June 2016).

Cultural Perspectives on Youth Justice: Connecting Theory, Policy and International Practise . Springer. p. 186.

ISBN 978-1-137-43397-8 . Retrieved 10 May 2017 .

^ "Parliament's actions subject to judicial review: court" .

The Hindu .

Archived from the original on 8 January 2020 . Retrieved 19 July 2017 .

^ "Indian Constitution And Parliamentary Government | Law Teacher" .

Archived from the original on 17 September 2017 . Retrieved 20 July 2017 .

^ Laxmikanth.

Governance in India . Tata McGraw-Hill Education.

ISBN 978-0-07-107466-7 .

Archived from the original on 11 June 2021 . Retrieved 11 November 2020 .

^ "Our Parliament" .

www.parliamentofindia.nic.in . Archived from the original on 28 December 2004 . Retrieved 20 July 2017 .

^ Arnull, Elaine; Fox, Darrell (29 June 2016).

Cultural Perspectives on Youth Justice: Connecting Theory, Policy and International Practice . Springer.

ISBN 978-1-137-43397-8 .

Archived from the original on 11 June 2021 . Retrieved 11 November 2020 .

^ Pratiyogita Darpan (March 2007).

Pratiyogita Darpan . Pratiyogita Darpan. p. 60.

Archived from the original on 7 January 2016 . Retrieved 15 November 2015 .

^ Bakshi, Parvinrai Mulwantrai (2010).

The Constitution of India (10th ed.). New Delhi: Universal Law Pub. Co. p. 48.

ISBN 978-8175348400 .

OCLC 551377953 .

^ Oldenburg, Philip (2010).

India, Pakistan, and Democracy: Solving the Puzzle of Divergent Paths . Taylor & Francis. p. 71.

ISBN 978-0-415-78018-6 .

Archived from the original on 7 January 2016 . Retrieved 15 November 2015 .

^ Kumar; Rajesh.

Universal's Guide to the Constitution of India Archived 7 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine Pg no. 72.

^ "Important India functions of vicepresident" . Archived from the original on 20 September 2017 . Retrieved 10 May 2017 .

^ Cabinet Ministers (as on 26 May 2014) . Cabsec.nic.in. Retrieved 6 December 2013.

Archived 27 May 2014 at the Wayback Machine ^ Tikku, Aloke (15 January 2016).

"Parity between IAS and non-IAS? The IAS will get to decide" .

Hindustan Times .

Archived from the original on 13 August 2017 . Retrieved 13 August 2017 .

^ "Non-IAS bureaucrats now eligible for secretary-level posts" .

The Asian Age . 18 January 2016.

Archived from the original on 14 July 2022 . Retrieved 13 August 2017 .

^ "Need Pay Parity With IAS Officers, Say Officials of 20 Civil Services" .

NDTV . 30 June 2016.

Archived from the original on 13 August 2017 . Retrieved 13 August 2017 .

^ Dastidar, Avishek G (14 January 2017).

"Alleging bias, non-IAS officers petition PM Modi" .

The Indian Express .

Archived from the original on 13 August 2017 . Retrieved 13 August 2017 .

^ Laxmikanth, M. (2014).

Governance in India (2nd ed.).

Noida : McGraw Hill Education. pp.

3.1 – 3.10 .

ISBN 978-9339204785 .

^ a b c d "Central Secretariat Manual of Office Procedure – 14th Edition (2015)" (PDF) .

Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pension . p. 6.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 November 2016 . Retrieved 15 November 2016 .

^ a b "Order of Precedence" (PDF) .

Rajya Sabha . President's Secretariat. 26 July 1979.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 July 2014 . Retrieved 24 September 2017 .

^ a b "Table of Precedence" (PDF) .

Ministry of Home Affairs , Government of India . President's Secretariat. 26 July 1979. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 May 2014 . Retrieved 24 September 2017 .

^ a b "Table of Precedence" .

Ministry of Home Affairs , Government of India . President's Secretariat. Archived from the original on 28 April 2014 . Retrieved 24 September 2017 .

^ a b Maheshwari, S.R. (2000).

Indian Administration (6th ed.).

New Delhi : Orient Blackswan Private Ltd.

ISBN 9788125019886 .

^ "Rule of law index 2016" . Archived from the original on 29 April 2015 . Retrieved 13 January 2018 .

^ "History of Supreme Court of India" (PDF) . Supreme Court of India. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 December 2014 . Retrieved 30 August 2014 .

^ "PIL" .

LegalServicesIndia .

Archived from the original on 28 April 2017 . Retrieved 10 May 2017 .

^ "The Constitution of India" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 April 2016 . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ "Indian voter population is 900 million" .

The Economic Times . 10 March 2019. Archived from the original on 26 April 2019 . Retrieved 24 May 2019 .

^ Jagannadham, V. (1947).

"Division of Powers in the Indian Constitution" .

The Indian Journal of Political Science .

8 (3): 742– 751.

JSTOR 42743171 .

^ Prasad, R. C. (1980).

"Local Government and Development in India" .

International Political Science Review .

1 (2): 265– 279.

doi : 10.1177/019251218000100210 .

JSTOR 1600996 .

S2CID 145673733 .

^ de Miñón, Miguel Herrero (1975).

"The Passing of Bicameralism" .

The American Journal of Comparative Law .

23 (2): 236– 254.

doi : 10.2307/839106 .

JSTOR 839106 .

^ "73rd Amendment of Panchayati Raj in India | Election Commission for UTs | India" . Retrieved 11 July 2025 .

^ "74th Amendment and Municipalities in India | Election Commission for UTs | India" . Retrieved 11 July 2025 .

^ a b Bernardi, Luigi; Fraschini, Angela (2005).

"Tax System And Tax Reforms in India" .

Polis Working Papers . Working paper n. 51.

Archived from the original on 29 June 2017 . Retrieved 15 November 2015 .

^ Tax revenue was 88% of total union government revenue in 1950–51 and has come down to 73% in 2003–04, as a result of the increase in non-tax revenue. Tax revenues were 70% of total state government revenues from 2002 to 2003. Indirect taxes were 84% of the union government's total tax revenue and have come down to 62% in 2003–04, mostly because of cuts in import duties and rationalisation. The state's share in the union government's tax revenue is 28.0% for the period 2000 to 2005 as per the recommendations of the eleventh finance commission. In addition, states that do not levy sales tax on sugar, textiles and tobacco, are entitled to 1.5% of the proceeds.

Datt, Ruddar; Sundharam, K.P.M. (2005).

Indian Economy . S.Chand. pp. 938, 942, 946.

ISBN 81-219-0298-3 .

^ "Indif_real_GDP_per_capitaa says 21 of 29 states to launch new tax" .

Daily Times . 25 March 2005. Archived from the original on 16 January 2009.

^ Datt, Ruddar; Sundharam, K. P. M. "55".

Indian Economy . pp.

943– 945.

^ "Union Budget 2017–18" .

ibef.org .

Archived from the original on 25 March 2017 . Retrieved 21 July 2017 .

^ When the Little Ones Run the Show (quote from the New Delhi based Association for Democratic Reform) Archived 15 December 2018 at the Wayback Machine .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 14 May 2009.

^ It is however not mandated by the constitution for any minister including Prime Minister to 'get elected' as they can be from among the nominated members of Parliament . Six months of time is given to them for attaining the qualifications of being a member of parliament so that they could be nominated as a members of the parliament within this duration.

Further reading Subrata K. Mitra and V. B. Singh (1999).

Democracy and Social Change in India: A Cross-Sectional Analysis of the National Electorate . New Delhi: Sage Publications.

ISBN 81-7036-809-X (India HB), ISBN 0-7619-9344-4 (US HB).

External links Official website Wikiquote has quotations related to Government of India .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Union government of India .

v t e India topics History Overviews Timeline Years Astronomy Clothing Coinage Economics LGBTQ Linguistics Maritime Mathematics Metallurgy Military Paper currency Postal Science and technology Ancient Stone Age Indus Valley Civilisation Vedic period Mahajanapadas Mauryas Indo-Greek Kingdom Achaemenid conquest of the Indus Valley Indo-Parthian kingdom Kushan Empire Alchon Huns Seleucid–Mauryan war Middle Kingdoms Middle kingdoms Chola Middle Ages Medieval India Hoysala Pala Kakatiya Delhi Sultanate Vijayanagara Early Modern Mughals Marathas European trade Bengal War Late modern Colonial Princely state East India Company Plassey 1857 rebellion British Raj Railways Economy Army Commander-in-Chief Zamindari Bengal Renaissance Political reforms Partition of Bengal Independence movement 1943 famine World War II Partition Republic Integration Non-Aligned Movement Five-Year Plans Sino-Indian War Indo-Pakistani wars Green Revolution White Revolution Naxal Insurgency Smiling Buddha Space programme The Emergency Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF) Contemporary History of India (1947–present) Economic liberalisation Pokhran-II COVID-19 pandemic Geography Geology Fossil Parks Geology of India Indian Plate Heritage National Geological Monuments of India Sacred groves of India Sacred mountains of India Sacred rivers of India Stones of India Environment Biogeographic classification Biosphere reserves Climate Climate change Earthquakes Ecoregions Environmental issues Fauna Forests Flora Geology National parks Protected areas Wildlife sanctuaries Landforms Beaches Canals Coasts Desert ECZ Extreme points Glaciers Highest point by states Islands Lakes Mountains Mountain passes Plains Indo-Gangetic Eastern coastal Western coastal Rivers Valleys Volcanoes Waterfalls Regions Central East North Northwest Northeast South Southwest Southeast West Subdivisions Autonomous administrative divisions Borders Towns Cities Districts Municipalities States and union territories See also National monuments of India National parks of India Nature worship in Indian-origin religions World Heritage Sites in India Culture of India History of India Tourism in India Politics Government Agencies Energy policy Foreign relations Parliament Lok Sabha Rajya Sabha President Vice President Prime Minister Union Council of Ministers Civil Services Cabinet Secretary State governments State legislative assemblies State legislative councils Governors, Lieutenant Governors and Administrators Chief Ministers Chief Secretaries Law Constitution Penal Code Fundamental rights, principles and duties Human rights Supreme Court Chief Justice High Courts District Courts Enforcement Federal Border Security Force (BSF) Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP) National Security Guard (NSG) Railway Protection Force (RPF) Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB) Special Protection Group (SPG) Intelligence Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPR&D) Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI) Enforcement Directorate (ED) Intelligence Bureau (IB) Joint Intelligence Committee (JIC) Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB) National Investigation Agency (NIA) Research and Analysis Wing (R&AW) Military Army Navy Air Force Politics Censorship Citizenship Elections Democracy Nationalism Political parties Reservations Scandals Scheduled groups Secularism Women in politics Economy Companies BSE SENSEX NIFTY 50 NIFTY Next 50 NIFTY 500 GIFT Nifty Governance Ministry of Finance Finance ministers Ministry of Commerce and Industry Finance Commission Economic Advisory Council Central Statistical Office Securities and Exchange Board of India Enforcement Directorate External debt Foreign trade Foreign direct investment Foreign exchange reserves Remittances Taxation Subsidies Industrial licensing Voluntary guidelines NITI Aayog Make in India Atmanirbhar Bharat Currency Indian rupee Sign History Historical Forex Digital rupee Coinage Paisa Reserve Bank of India Governor Mint Inflation Financial services Banking Insurance Multi Commodity Exchange Bullion BSE NSE India INX History COVID-19 impact Economic development Liberalisation Licence Raj Green revolution Government initiatives Numbering system People By net worth Demography Income Poverty Labour law Pensions EPFO NPS PPF States Andhra Pradesh Assam Bihar Delhi Goa Gujarat Haryana Himachal Pradesh Jammu and Kashmir Jharkhand Karnataka Kerala Ladakh Madhya Pradesh Maharashtra Mizoram Odisha Punjab Rajasthan Tamil Nadu Telangana Uttarakhand Uttar Pradesh West Bengal Sectors Agriculture Livestock Fishing Automotive Chemical Construction Defence Education Energy Electricity Nuclear Oil and gas Solar Wind Electronics and semiconductor Entertainment Forestry Gambling Healthcare Hospitals Information technology Media Cinema FM Radio Television Printing Mining Coal Iron and Steel Pharmaceuticals Pulp and paper Retail Science and technology Biotechnology Space Telecommunications Textiles Tourism Transport Aviation Civil Ports Rail Roads Electricity Water Power Regulator IRDAI RBI SEBI IBBI PFRDA Other NCLT NCLAT BIFR IBBI IBC SARFESI Act Income Tax Act Companies Act Banking Act Insurance Act FEMA Mumbai Consensus Society and culture Society Caste system Corruption Crime Demographics Indians Education Universities in India Medical colleges in India Law colleges in India Engineering colleges in India Ethnic relations Health Languages Life expectancy Literacy Poverty Prisons Religion Socio-economic issues Standard of living Water supply and sanitation Women Sexuality Youth Culture Arts and entertainment Architecture Blogging Cinema Comics Webcomics Cuisine wine Dance Dress Folklore Festivals Literature Media television Martial arts Music Painting Physical culture Public holidays Sculpture tallest Sport Traditional v t e Government of India Constitution Constitution Fundamental Rights, Directive Principles and Fundamental Duties Federalism Union List State List Concurrent List Executive President ( list ) Vice President ( list ) Union government Union Council of Ministers Prime Minister ( list ) Deputy Prime Minister Civil services All India Services Central Civil Services Cabinet Secretary Secretaries Defence Finance Foreign Home ) Attorney General Solicitor General State governments Governors ( list ) Lieutenant governors and administrators Chief ministers ( list ) Deputy chief ministers Chief secretaries Principal secretaries Advocate generals Legislature Parliament Lok Sabha Speaker Deputy speaker Secretary General Member Leader Leader of the Opposition Rajya Sabha Chairman Deputy Chairperson Member Leader Leader of the Opposition State legislature State legislative assemblies State legislative councils Speakers and Chairpersons Members Leaders of the Opposition Judiciary Supreme Court of India Chief Justice of India ( list ) Sitting judges High courts Chief justices Sitting judges District courts v t e Third Modi ministry Prime Minister : Narendra Modi v t e Cabinet Ministers Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare Shivraj Singh Chouhan Atomic Energy Narendra Modi Chemicals and Fertilizers J. P. Nadda Civil Aviation Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu Coal G. Kishan Reddy Commerce and Industry Piyush Goyal Communications Jyotiraditya Scindia Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution Pralhad Joshi Corporate Affairs Nirmala Sitharaman Co-operation Amit Shah Culture Gajendra Singh Shekhawat Defence Rajnath Singh Development of North Eastern Region Jyotiraditya Scindia Education Dharmendra Pradhan Electronics and Information Technology Ashwini Vaishnaw Environment, Forest and Climate Change Bhupender Yadav External Affairs S. Jaishankar Finance Nirmala Sitharaman Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying Lalan Singh Food Processing Industry Chirag Paswan Health and Family Welfare J. P. Nadda Heavy Industries H. D. Kumaraswamy Home Affairs Amit Shah Housing and Urban Affairs Manohar Lal Khattar Information and Broadcasting Ashwini Vaishnaw Labour and Employment Mansukh Mandaviya Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Jitan Ram Manjhi Mines G. Kishan Reddy Minority Affairs Kiren Rijiju New and Renewable Energy Pralhad Joshi Panchayati Raj Lalan Singh Parliamentary Affairs Kiren Rijiju Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions Narendra Modi Petroleum and Natural Gas Hardeep Singh Puri Ports, Shipping and Waterways Sarbananda Sonowal Power Manohar Lal Khattar Railways Ashwini Vaishnaw Road Transport and Highways Nitin Gadkari Rural Development Shivraj Singh Chouhan Social Justice and Empowerment Virendra Kumar Khatik Space Narendra Modi Steel H. D. Kumaraswamy Textiles Giriraj Singh Tribal Affairs Jual Oram Tourism Gajendra Singh Shekhawat Jal Shakti C. R. Patil Women and Child Development Annpurna Devi Youth Affairs and Sports Mansukh Mandaviya v t e Ministers of State (Independent Charge) AYUSH Prataprao Jadhav Earth Sciences Jitendra Singh Law and Justice Arjun Ram Meghwal Planning Rao Inderjit Singh Science and Technology Jitendra Singh Skill Development and Entrepreneurship Jayant Chaudhary Statistics and Programme Implementation Rao Inderjit Singh v t e Ministers of State Agriculture and Farmers Welfare Parsottambhai Rupala S. S. Ahluwalia Sudarshan Bhagat Atomic Energy Jitendra Singh Chemicals and Fertilizers Mansukh L. Mandaviya Civil Aviation Jayant Sinha Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Disturbution Chhotu Ram Chaudhary Corporate Affairs Arjun Ram Meghwal Defence Subhash Ramrao Bhamre Drinking Water and Sanitation Ramesh Jigajinagi Earth Sciences Y. S. Chowdary Electronics and IT Ashwini Vaishnaw External Affairs V. K. Singh Finance Arjun Ram Meghwal Santosh Gangwar Food Processing Industry Niranjan Jyoti Health and Family Welfare Anupriya Patel Faggan Singh Kulaste Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises G. M. Siddeshwara Home Affairs Hansraj Ahir Kiren Rijiju Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation Babul Supriyo Rao Inderjit Singh Human Resource Development Satya Pal Singh Information and Broadcasting Ashwini Vaishnaw Law and Justice P. P. Chaudhary Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Haribhai Parthibhai Chaudhary Giriraj Singh Minority Affairs Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi Overseas Indian Affairs V. K. Singh Panchayati Raj Parsottambhai Rupala Parliamentary Affairs Arjun Ram Meghwal Vijay Goel Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions Jitendra Singh Prime Minister's Office Jitendra Singh Railways Manoj Sinha Road Transport and Highways Mansukh L. Mandaviya Pon Radhakrishnan Rural Development Ram Kripal Yadav Science and Technology Y. S. Chowdary Social Justice and Empowerment Krishan Pal Gurjar Ramdas Athawale Vijay Sampla Steel Vishnudeo Sai Shipping Mansukh L. Mandaviya Pon Radhakrishnan Space Jitendra Singh Textiles Ajay Tamta Tribal Affairs Jasvantsinh Sumanbhai Bhabhor Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation Satya Pal Singh Arjun Ram Meghwal Women and Child Development Maneka Gandhi Urban Development Babul Supriyo Rao Inderjit Singh v t e Governments of Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal v t e Government ministries of India President ( List ) • Vice President ( List ) • Government of India • Prime Minister ( List • Office ) • Deputy Prime Minister • Council of Ministers Current Key Defence External Affairs Finance Home Affairs Economy & Industry Chemicals and Fertilizers Civil Aviation Commerce and Industry Communications Co-operation Corporate Affairs Electronics and Information Technology Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises Information and Broadcasting Labour and Employment Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Mines Steel Textiles Tourism Infrastructure Development of North Eastern Region Jal Shakti Ports, Shipping and Waterways Railways Road Transport and Highways Rural Development Housing and Urban Affairs Food Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying Food Processing Industries Energy & Climate Change Coal Environment, Forest and Climate Change New and Renewable Energy Petroleum and Natural Gas Power Science, Education & Health AYUSH Earth Sciences Education Health and Family Welfare Science and Technology Skill Development and Entrepreneurship General Administration Culture Law and Justice Minority Affairs Panchayati Raj Parliamentary Affairs Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions Planning Social Justice and Empowerment Statistics and Programme Implementation Tribal Affairs Women and Child Development Youth Affairs and Sports Defunct Communications and Information Technology Information Technology Overseas Indian Affairs Surface Transport Drinking Water and Sanitation Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation Ministers Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare Communications Defence Education External Affairs Finance Home Affairs Housing and Urban Affairs Law and Justice Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions Railways Road Transport and Highways Secretaries Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister Cabinet Defence Finance Foreign Home Personnel Departments Current Atomic Energy Biotechnology Economic Affairs Higher Education Official Language Science and Technology Military Affairs Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade Space Technical Education Telecommunications Defunct Criminal Intelligence Thagi and Dakaiti Authority control databases ISNI VIAF NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐rhtnh
Cached time: 20250818000411
Cache expiry: 86161
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.393 seconds
Real time usage: 1.683 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 24834/1000000
Revision size: 61251/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 621808/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13678/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 36/100
Expensive parser function count: 37/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 293056/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.720/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21501902/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 4/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1307.485      1 -total
 23.25%  303.971      2 Template:Reflist
 16.65%  217.674      1 Template:Infobox_executive_government
 16.53%  216.127      1 Template:Infobox
 11.43%  149.460     12 Template:Navbox
  9.43%  123.293      6 Template:Wikidata
  8.44%  110.319      1 Template:Asia_topic
  7.36%   96.172     23 Template:Cite_web
  6.84%   89.478     55 Template:Iso2country
  6.77%   88.520     17 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:553883:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818000411 and revision id 1306021757. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Government_of_India&oldid=1306021757 " Categories : Government of India Asian governments Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use Indian English from December 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Use dmy dates from May 2025 Wikipedia articles scheduled for update tagging Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from January 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2017 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from April 2023 Articles needing additional references from March 2021 All articles needing additional references Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 13:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Government of India 46 languages Add topic

