Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works 3 Later life 4 Selected publications 5 Notes 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Balthasar Bekker 16 languages Azərbaycanca Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Français Frysk Íslenska Italiano مصرى Nederlands Polski Русский Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dutch minister and author Balthasar Bekker by J. Hilarides (1691) Balthasar Bekker (20 March 1634 – 11 June 1698) was a Dutch minister and author of philosophical and theological works. Opposing superstition , he was a key figure in the end of the witchcraft persecutions in early modern Europe .  His best known work is De Betoverde Weereld (1691), or The World Bewitched (1695).

Life [ edit ] Bekker was born in Metslawier ( Dongeradeel ) as the son of a German pastor from Bielefeld . He was educated at Groningen , under Jacob Alting , and at Franeker . Becoming the rector of the local Latin school , he was appointed to his satisfaction in 1657 as a pastor in Oosterlittens ( Littenseradiel ), and started as one of the first to preach on Sunday afternoon.

From 1679 he worked in Amsterdam , after being driven from Friesland . In 1683 he travelled to England and France. In two months time Bekker visited London, Cambridge, Oxford, Paris and Leuven , with a great interest in the art of fortification .

[ 1 ] Works [ edit ] An enthusiastic disciple of Descartes , he wrote several works on philosophy and theology, which by their freedom of thought aroused considerable hostility.

[ 2 ] In his book De Philosophia Cartesiana Bekker argued that theology and philosophy each had their separate terrain and that Nature can no more be explained through Scripture than can theological truth be deduced from Nature.

[ 3 ] Cover of De betoverde weereld His application of Cartesian metaphysics and reproach of Biblical literalism put him at odds with the Dutch Reformed Church.

[ 4 ] His best known work was De Betoverde Weereld (1691), or The World Bewitched (1695), in which he examined critically the phenomena generally ascribed to spiritual agency.  He attacked the belief in sorcery and "possession" by the devil .  Indeed, he questioned the devil's very existence.

[ 2 ] He applied the doctrine of accommodation to account for the biblical passages traditionally cited on the issue.

[ 5 ] Bekker argued that practices decried as witchcraft were little more than fatuous but harmless superstitions.

[ 6 ] The book had a sensational effect and was one of the key works of the Early Enlightenment in Europe. It was almost certainly the most controversial.

[ 7 ] The publication of the book led to Bekker's deposition from the ministry. The orthodox among Dutch theologians saw his views as placing him among notorious atheists: Thomas Hobbes , Adriaan Koerbagh , Lodewijk Meyer and Baruch Spinoza .

Eric Walten came to his defence, attacking his opponents in extreme terms.

[ 8 ] Bekker was tried for blasphemy, maligning the public Church, and spreading atheistic ideas about Scripture. Some towns banned the book, but Amsterdam and the States of Holland never did, continuing his salary, without formally stripping him of his post.

[ 9 ] The World Bewitched is now considered interesting as an early study in comparative religion.

[ 2 ] [ 10 ] Margaret Jacob coined the term "Radical Enlightment" with regards to Bekker, the brothers Johan and Pieter de la Court , and Baruch de Spinoza , that affirmed the equality of all men based on their common reason. The definition was subsequently popularized by Jonathan Israel . Jacob defined them as " pantheist , freemasons and repubblicana" characterized by a Radical criticism of religion that "anticipated Dutch 'Patriots' and Enlightment philosophers in the late eighteenth century " [ 11 ] Later life [ edit ] In July 1698 he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of London.

[ 12 ] He died in Amsterdam.

[ 2 ] Selected publications [ edit ] De philosophia Cartesiana admonitio candida & sincera. Bekker, Balth. / Vesaliae / 1668 The world bewitch'd; or, An examination of the common opinions concerning spirits: their nature, power, administration, and operations. As also, the effects men are able to produce by their communication. Divided into IV parts; Bekker, Balthasar / Translated from a French copy, approved of and subscribed by the author's own hand / printed for R. Baldwin in Warwick-lane / 1695 Notes [ edit ] ^ Bekker, Balthasar (1998) Beschrijving van de reis door de Verenigde Nederlanden, Engeland en Frankrijk in het jaar 1683 .

Fryske Akademy .

^ a b c d Chisholm 1911 , p. 661.

^ Israel 1995 , p. 895.

^ Fix, Andrew C (25 December 1999).

Fallen angels: Balthasar Bekker, spirit belief, and confessionalism in the seventeenth century Dutch Republic . Kluwer.

OCLC 41924750 .

^ Wiep van Bunge et al. (editors), The Dictionary of Seventeenth and Eighteenth-Century Dutch Philosophers (2003), Thoemmes Press (two volumes), article Bekker, Balthasar, p. 74–7.

^ Barker, Charles H. (9 September 2022).

"The legacies of Calvinism in the Dutch empire" .

Aeon . Retrieved 20 October 2022 .

^ Israel 1995 , p. 925.

^ Wiep van Bunge et al. (editors), The Dictionary of Seventeenth and Eighteenth-Century Dutch Philosophers (2003), Thoemmes Press (two volumes), article Walten, Eric, p. 1065–8.

^ Israel 1995 , p. 930.

^ Nooijen, Annemarie (2009) "Unserm grossen Bekker ein Denkmal?" Balthasar Bekkers 'Betoverde Weereld' in den deutschen Landen zwischen Orthodoxie und Aufklärung ^ M.C. Jacob, The Radical Enlightment: Pantheists, Freemasons and Republicans (London and Boston: Allen & Unwin, 1981); J.I. Israel, Radical Enlightment: Philosophy and the Making of Modernità, 1650-1750 (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 2001). As quotes by Markus Vink (2015).

Encounters on the Opposite Coast: The Dutch East India Company and the Nayaka State of Madurai in the Seventeenth Century .

Brill . p. 143.

ISBN 9789004272620 .

^ "Library and Archive Catalogue" . Royal Society . Retrieved 12 December 2010 .

References [ edit ] Israel, Jonathan I.

(1995), The Dutch Republic. Its Rise, Greatness, and Fall, 1477–1806 Attribution This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911), " Bekker, Balthasar ", Encyclopædia Britannica , vol. 3 (11th ed.), Cambridge University Press, p. 661 Further reading [ edit ] Evenhuis, R. B. (1971), Ook dat was Amsterdam, deel III. De kerk der hervorming in de tweede helft van de zeventiende eeuw: nabloei en inzinking (in Dutch), pp.

258– 305 External links [ edit ] Ten portraits of Balthasar Bekker Voltaire , The Works of Voltaire, Vol. III (Philosophical Dictionary Part 1) [1764] chapter on Bekker v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Belgium People Netherlands Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Balthasar_Bekker&oldid=1300880298 " Categories : 1634 births 1698 deaths 17th-century Dutch Calvinist and Reformed ministers 17th-century Dutch philosophers Christian philosophers Dutch Freemasons Critics of witch hunting Demonologists Dutch Calvinist and Reformed theologians Fellows of the Royal Society Philosophers of mind People from Dongeradeel Rationalists René Descartes University of Groningen alumni University of Franeker alumni Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from July 2017 Use dmy dates from July 2017 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 22:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Balthasar Bekker 16 languages Add topic

