Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 Writing 2.2 Television commentator 3 Personal life 4 Bibliography 5 Filmography 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Ben Wattenberg 1 language Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American writer (1933–2015) Ben Wattenberg Born Joseph Ben Zion Wattenberg August 26, 1933 ( 1933-08-26 ) Died June 28, 2015 ( 2015-06-29 ) (aged 81) Occupation(s) Author, political commentator, demographer Benjamin Joseph Wattenberg (born Joseph Ben Zion Wattenberg ; [ 1 ] August 26, 1933 – June 28, 2015) was an American author, political commentator, and demographer associated with both Republican and Democratic presidents and politicians in the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s.

National Affairs argued that Wattenberg "challenged and reshaped conventional wisdom ... at least once a decade".

[ 2 ] Early life and education [ edit ] Joseph Ben Zion Wattenberg was born on August 26, 1933, to Jewish immigrants from Eastern Europe in The Bronx .

[ 3 ] [ 1 ] He grew up in the Sholem Aleichem Houses, which was built by Yiddish socialists in the 1920s, and attended DeWitt Clinton High School . In 1955, he graduated from Hobart College with a major in English.

[ 1 ] From 1955 to 1957, he was in the US Air Force , based in San Antonio .

[ citation needed ] His first writing position was as a marine expert and edited Rivers & Harbors and Water Transportation Economics , and the McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of Science and Technology .

[ 4 ] [ 2 ] In 1975, Hobart College awarded Wattenberg an honorary Doctor of Laws degree and gave the commencement address to the graduating class that year.

[ 5 ] [ 2 ] Career [ edit ] Writing [ edit ] Wattenberg first came to national attention in 1965 with the book This U.S.A.: An Unexpected Family Portrait of 194,067,296 Americans Drawn From the Census co-authored with census director Richard M. Scammon .

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] The authors utilized data from the 1960 Census to support the theory that the United States had entered a golden age by citing decreases in the rates of divorce, traffic deaths, drug addictions, and school dropouts as well as greater economic and educational opportunity for African Americans. Critics of the book cited the civil rights movement and the Vietnam War to call it propaganda of the American society.

[ 4 ] His process of layering data with narrative led to the creation of the term " data journalism ".

[ 2 ] The publication caught the attention of Lyndon B. Johnson and Wattenberg became a White House speechwriter in 1966.

[ 4 ] [ 2 ] He later became an advisor to Hubert Humphrey 's 1970 Senate race and Senator Henry M. Jackson 's contest for the 1972 Democratic presidential nomination , and Democratic Party presidential primaries of 1976, and served on the 1972 and 1976 Democratic National Convention platform committees.

[ 1 ] [ 4 ] [ citation needed ] In 1970, Wattenberg teamed up again with Richard M. Scammon to write The Real Majority .

The authors analyzed electoral data including, the 1968 presidential election , polls, and surveys to argue that the American electorate was centrist , and that parties or candidates, to be viable, must appeal to the "real majority" of the electorate at the center.

[ 6 ] [ 4 ] The real majority was described as “middle aged, middle class and middle minded” and therefore politicians ought to move to the middle to remain in touch with mainstream America.

[ 4 ] [ 2 ] As a Democrat, Watternberg intended the analysis to be embraced by his party; [ 1 ] instead, the cultural touchstones of race, crime, and poverty were the basis of the campaign strategies of the Richard Nixon administration in the 1970 congressional elections and 1972 presidential election .

[ citation needed ] After the defeat of Senator George McGovern in 1972, Wattenberg helped found the Coalition for a Democratic Majority which focused on pocketbook issues and centrist themes to move the party back to the center.

[ 1 ] In 1978, Wattenberg was sponsored by the American Enterprise Institute (AEI) in Washington, D.C., to publish the magazine Public Opinion .

[ 1 ] His 1984 book, The Good News Is the Bad News Is Wrong , suggested that the United States was not as troubled as the media and liberals proclaimed, despite economic and social upheaval.

[ 4 ] Wattenberg's 1987 book, The Birth Dearth , was cited in a contemporary review as a "fascinating and frightening book" with the reviewer noting that the book has "humorous passages, but that "[t]he only trouble is that this humor is sometimes unintentional." [ 7 ] The book was cited by anti-racism activist Jane Elliott as a suggested book for learning about the problems of racism.

[ 8 ] In an interview, Elliott stated the central tenet of the book as "[t]he main problem confronting the United States these days is that there aren’t enough white babies being born" and that "[h]e says if we don’t change this and change it rapidly, white people will lose their numerical majority in this country and this will no longer be a white man’s land"; [ 9 ] in another interview in 2022, Fern Schumer Chapman , who reviewed the book when first released, later called it "outrageous", that Wattenberg "worried that America would no longer be characterized as a nation that is predominately of white European extraction", and stated that "[l]ooking back, I believe he launched the white nationalist movement." [ 10 ] Later liberal and progressive writers have also attributed the book's focus on white population as part of a larger belief in white supremacy , [ 11 ] and of a larger "white extinction anxiety" to justify anti-abortion legislation.

[ 12 ] In 1995, his book Values Matter Most drew the attention of President Bill Clinton which examined how centralist themes of the Republican party had helped win congressional victories of 1994.

[ 4 ] The publication also expressed concern at the waning of American values both abroad and at home but felt that the government could help cure the "culture of irresponsibility".

[ 2 ] In 1996, Henry Louis Gates Jr.

, referred to the book as "the book that prompted Clinton’s infamous midnight-of-the-soul telephone call to the author." [ 13 ] As a senior fellow at AEI, he wrote The First Measured Century in 2001 with Theodore Caplow and Louis Hicks.

[ 1 ] His published works helped popularize the term " psephology ", the study of elections. He is credited with the introduction of the term “ social issues ” to the political lexicon.

[ 1 ] Television commentator [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Wattenberg was the host of a number of PBS television specials , including Values Matter Most , The Grandchild Gap , America's Number One , Ben Wattenberg's 1980 , The Stockholder Society , A Third Choice (about the role of third parties in American politics), Heaven on Earth: The Rise and Fall of Socialism , and The Democrats . He hosted the weekly PBS television program, Think Tank with Ben Wattenberg , from 1994 to 2010, [ 14 ] and previously hosted PBS series In Search of the Real America and Ben Wattenberg At Large .

[ citation needed ] Personal life [ edit ] Wattenberg was the son of real-estate attorney Judah Wattenberg and Rachel Gutman Wattenberg. He was the younger brother of actress Rebecca Schull .

[ 15 ] He had four children, Ruth, Daniel and Sarah with his first wife, the former Marna Hade who died in 1997, and Rachel with his second wife, Diane Abelman.

[ 1 ] Wattenberg died on June 28, 2015, from complications following surgery.

[ 4 ] Bibliography [ edit ] This U.S.A.

, 1965 The Real Majority: An Extraordinary Examination of the American Electorate , 1970 The Real America , 1974 Against All Enemies: A Novel , co-authored with Ervin S. Duggan 1977 The Good News is, the Bad News is Wrong , 1984 The Birth Dearth , 1987 The First Universal Nation , 1991 Values Matter Most , 1995 The First Measured Century: An Illustrated Guide to Trends in America 1900–2000 , co-authored with Theodore Caplow and Louis Hicks, 2000 Fewer: How the New Demography of Depopulation Will Shape Our Future , 2004 Fighting Words: A Tale of How Liberals Created Neo-Conservatism , 2008 Filmography [ edit ] Heaven on Earth: The Rise and Fall of Socialism (2005) References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j Roberts, Sam, "Ben Wattenberg, Author and Commentator, Dies at 81" , New York Times , June 29, 2015. Retrieved 2015-06-29.

^ a b c d e f g h "Prophet of Hope" .

www.nationalaffairs.com . Retrieved September 10, 2021 .

^ New York Times: "Ben Wattenberg, Neoconservative Author and PBS Host, Is Dead at 81" by Sam Roberts June 29, 2015 ^ a b c d e f g h i j Langer, Emily (June 29, 2015).

"Ben J. Wattenberg, writer and television commentator, dies at 81" .

Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved September 10, 2021 .

^ "PBS: Think Tank: About Ben Wattenberg" .

www.pbs.org . Retrieved September 10, 2021 .

^ Silva, Ruth C. (May 1971). "Review of The Real Majority".

Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science .

395 : 233– 234.

^ Morris, Richard (August 2, 1987).

"The Birth Dearth: WHAT HAPPENS WHEN PEOPLE IN FREE COUNTRIES DON'T HAVE ENOUGH BABIES? by Ben J. Wattenberg" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved December 15, 2023 .

^ "Bibliography" .

janeelliott.com . Retrieved December 15, 2023 .

^ Stoehr, John (April 1, 2022).

"She reviewed it 35 years ago but didn't realize it was foundational to white nationalists. Here's how she understands the book now" .

The Editorial Board . Retrieved December 15, 2023 .

If you don't understand the destruction of Planned Parenthood offices, and you don't understand the wall we're going to build on the southern border, you haven't read The Birth Dearth by Ben Wattenberg. Ben Wattenberg was a brilliant Jewish man who was a member of the American Enterprise Institute. He wrote a book the first paragraph of which says: The main problem confronting the United States these days is that there aren't enough white babies being born. He was an advisor to presidents of the United States. He wrote the book in 1987. He says if we don't change this and change it rapidly, white people will lose their numerical majority in this country and this will no longer be a white man's land. Now, I'm not misrepresenting this. I'm telling you almost exactly what he says. He says there are three things we can do. Number one, we could pay women to have babies, as they have been doing in western European nations for years. Then he says, and these are his words, not mine: Unfortunately, we would have to pay women of all colors to have babies. So we don't want to do that. He says the second thing we could do is increase the number of legal immigrants that are allowed into this country every year. Then once again, he says, unfortunately, the vast majority of those wanting to come to this country are people of color. So we don't want to do that. The third thing he says – and white women had better pay attention to this – 60 percent of the fetuses that are aborted every year are white.

^ Stoehr, John (April 1, 2022).

"She reviewed it 35 years ago but didn't realize it was foundational to white nationalists. Here's how she understands the book now" .

The Editorial Board . Retrieved December 15, 2023 .

^ Patton, Stacey (June 24, 2022).

"Anti-Abortion Is About Preserving The White Race–Period" .

MadameNoire . Retrieved December 15, 2023 .

^ Bell, Carla (July 4, 2019).

"Race Against Time: How White Fear of Genetic Annihilation Fuels Abortion Bans" .

Yes! magazine . YES! Media/Positive Futures Network . Retrieved December 15, 2023 .

Graham's comments relay what social scientists and antiracism activists call "White Extinction Anxiety," or "Fear of White Genetic Annihilation." The idea that White people could "go the way of the dinosaur" has been dismissed by some as simple pity of personal circumstance or conspiracy theory, but the convergent effects of new laws banning abortion together with old laws promoting mass incarceration of Black and Brown people suggest that this White fear is not just an idea, but the catalyst for public policy. There indeed appears to be a strong correlation between demographic projections, the fear of White genetic annihilation, and the recent wave of abortion bills. Antiracism activist and diversity trainer Jane Elliott described it as a fear so great that White people, including political leaders, "will do anything to see that doesn't happen." Hyper-punitive abortion legislation recently passed in Alabama bans the procedure outright except in cases of risk to a woman's health, and in Georgia a woman who obtains an abortion will spend the rest of her life in prison. Of 212 lawmakers in Alabama and Georgia whose votes ushered in the most restrictive abortion laws we've seen yet, 211 are White. What drives all of this is nothing as philosophical as religion. It's not faith. It's not principle. It's the fear of genetic dominance of Black and Brown people. The late Frances Cress Welsing, psychiatrist and author of The Isis Papers: The Keys to the Colors and The Cress Theory of Color Confrontation and Racism, is well-known for her theory of Black and Brown genetic dominance over the White recessive gene. "People of color have the capacity to genetically annihilate White people," she explained, "and unless White people control the reproduction of people of color, we can postulate that perhaps one day there won't be any White people." However, Welsing was not the only one who held this belief. Her contemporary, demographer Ben Wattenberg, wrote in his book The Birth Dearth that the main problem in the United States is the low number of White births. Wattenberg believed that White people, without a change of course, would lose the numerical majority in the U.S., and it would no longer be a White man's land.He proposed three ways to address this: Pay women to have babies, increase the number of immigrants, and prevent abortions. The first two, he wrote, aren't the answer because they would also increase the numbers of Black and Brown babies. But the third, he posited, would solve the "birth dearth" problem because 60% of abortions are performed for White women.

^ "Hating Hillary" .

The New Yorker . February 19, 1996 . Retrieved September 10, 2021 .

^ "Think Tank With Ben Wattenberg to End Production" . Archived from the original on April 2, 2012 . Retrieved September 11, 2011 .

^ "Judah Wattenberg, Technion Executive, 96" .

The New York Times . May 24, 1996 . Retrieved July 30, 2008 .

External links [ edit ] Ben Wattenberg at IMDb Official PBS Think Tank Page Ben Wattenberg Archive of columns published on Jewish World Review .

American Enterprise Institute Bio Page Appearances on C-SPAN Open to Greatness: We need immigrants Memo to Ben Wattenberg: The Good News Is The Bad News Is Wrong Critique of Wattenberg's fertility analysis.

John Kerry Is Wrong: Vietnam vs. Iraq Booknotes interview with Wattenberg on The First Universal Nation , January 6, 1991.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National United States Australia Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Poland Israel Academics CiNii People Trove Other IdRef NARA SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ben_Wattenberg&oldid=1301340897 " Categories : 1933 births 2015 deaths 21st-century American Jews 21st-century American journalists 21st-century American male writers 21st-century American non-fiction writers American demographers American Enterprise Institute American male journalists American male non-fiction writers American political commentators American political writers American television journalists Hobart and William Smith Colleges alumni Jewish American journalists Jewish American non-fiction writers Journalists from New York City Mathematicians from New York (state) Neoconservatism New York (state) Democrats PBS people Writers from the Bronx Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Use mdy dates from June 2015 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2021 People appearing on C-SPAN This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 07:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ben Wattenberg 1 language Add topic

