Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Hindu philosophy 2 Buddhist philosophy 3 Jain philosophical studies 4 Astronomy 5 References Toggle the table of contents Siddhanta 6 languages বাংলা فارسی Français हिन्दी Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Siddhanta (astronomy) ) Term from Indian philosophy See also: Indian philosophy This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Siddhanta" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Siddhānta ( Devanagari : सिद्धान्त lit.

' established end ' [ 1 ] ) is a Sanskrit term denoting the established and accepted view of any particular school within Indian philosophy ; literally "settled opinion or doctrine, dogma, axiom, received or admitted truth; any fixed or established or canonical text-book on any subject" (from siddha , adj. mfn.- accomplished, fulfilled; that has attained the highest object, thoroughly skilled or versed in).

[ 2 ] Hindu philosophy [ edit ] This term is an established term within Hindu philosophy which denotes a specific line of development within a Hindu religious or philosophical tradition. The traditional schools of Hindu philosophy have had their siddhāntas established by their respective founders in the form of sūtras (aphorisms). The sūtras are commented by a major philosopher in the respective traditions to elaborate upon the established doctrine by quoting from the śāstras (scriptures) and using logic and pramāṇas (accepted source of knowledge). For example, in the tradition of Vedanta , the author of the Brahma Sūtra was Veda-Vyāsa and the commentators were Ādi Śaṅkara , Rāmānuja and Mādhavācārya (each of whom eventually set up sub-schools within Vedānta). Also, in the tradition of Pūrva Mīmāṁsā , the author of the sūtra was Jaimini and the commentator was Śabarasvāmi .

Buddhist philosophy [ edit ] Siddhānta ( Tibetan : grub mtha' ) is a genre of Buddhist literature , which is quite common in Tibetan Buddhism .

[ 3 ] This genre has its antecedents in Pali suttas such as the Tevijja sutta and the Brahmajala sutta .

These early Buddhist sources discuss the various worldviews of brahmins , sramanas and ascetics during the Buddha's time.

[ 4 ] Buddhist scholastic literature later expanded the discussion to numerous other Buddhist and non-Buddhist views. Indian works which discuss various competing doctrines include the Kathavatthu , the Mahavibhasa , Bhaviveka's Blaze of Reasoning and Shantaraksita's Tattvasamgraha .

[ 3 ] Tibetan Buddhists developed the genre further and numerous siddhānta works were written by figures such as Rongzompa , Chekawa Yeshe Dorje , Sakya Pandita , Longchenpa , Jamyang Shéba , and Changkya Rölpé Dorjé .

[ 3 ] According to Daniel Cozort, Jamyang's massive Great Exposition of Tenets "are the most comprehensive of the tenets texts" (in Tibetan Buddhism).

[ 5 ] During the 18th century, Thuken Losang Chökyi Nyima (1737–1802), a student of Changkya, wrote Crystal Mirror of Philosophical Systems.

According to Roger R. Jackson, this text is "arguably the widest-ranging account of religious philosophies ever written in pre-modern Tibet." This work discusses all schools of Tibetan Buddhism, Chinese Buddhism and Chinese religions as well as Indian , Mongolian and Khotanese religious systems.

[ 6 ] The term Siddhānta is also used in a different way by some Buddhist treatises like the Da zhidu lun.

In this text (and in the Chinese Tiantai school), the term Siddhāntas refers to four pedagogical principles used by the Buddha to teach others.

[ 7 ] According to David W. Chappell, the Four Siddhāntas are: [ 7 ] (1) First of all, the Buddha used ordinary or mundane modes of expression, (2) then he individualized his teaching and adapted it to the capacities of his listeners, (3) he further altered it in order to respond to and diagnose the spiritual defects of his hearers, and (4) finally all his teaching was based on the perfect and highest wisdom. The first three are conditioned and finite, whereas the last is inconceivable and ineffable.

Jain philosophical studies [ edit ] For Jainism , the texts vary between the three primary sects, with Sthanakavasis believing in no textual authority. Both the Digambara and Śvetāmbara believe that the "purest" Jain teachings were contained within the Purvas , which have been mostly lost to antiquity. Of the surviving Jain scriptures, the Digambara tend to focus upon the Prakaranas ; while the Śvetāmbara focus upon the Angas .

Astronomy [ edit ] In Indian astronomy and astrology , Siddhanta (or Siddhantic) refers to a genre of texts that replaced the earlier tradition based on the Vedanga Jyotisha . The Siddhanta ("established theory") genre emerged around the beginning of the first millennium CE. Compared to the Vedanga Jyotisha , the Siddhanta texts discussed a wider range of topics including the nakshatras , the zodiac signs , precise calculations of the solar year, computations of planetary motions and positions, calculation of solar and lunar eclipses, and parallax.

[ 8 ] Early Indian astronomy is transmitted in Siddhanta s: Varahamihira (6th century) in his Pancha-Siddhantika contrasts five of these: The Surya Siddhanta besides the Paitamaha Siddhantas (which is more similar to the "classical" Vedanga Jyotisha ), the Paulisha and Romaka Siddhantas (directly based on Hellenistic astronomy, and also known through the Yavanajataka ) and the Vasishtha Siddhanta .

References [ edit ] ^ Johnson, W. J. (2009-02-12).

A Dictionary of Hinduism . OUP Oxford.

ISBN 978-0-19-861025-0 .

^ "Monier-Williams Sanskrit Dictionary sv. "siddhanta" " . Archived from the original on 2015-05-20 . Retrieved 2015-01-19 .

^ a b c Changkya Rölpai Dorjé; Lopez, Donald (translator) (2019).

Beautiful Adornment of Mount Meru , Translator's Introduction. Simon and Schuster.

^ Changkya Rölpai Dorjé; Lopez, Donald (translator) (2019).

Beautiful Adornment of Mount Meru , Introduction. Simon and Schuster.

^ Blo-bzaṅ-dkon-mchog, Daniel Cozort, Craig Preston (2003).

Buddhist Philosophy: Losang Gönchok's Short Commentary to Jamyang Shayba's Root Text on Tenets, pp. xi-xii. Snow Lion Publications.

^ Thuken Losang Chokyi Nyima, Jackson, Roger (editor) (2017).

The Crystal Mirror of Philosophical Systems: A Tibetan Study of Asian Religious Thought.

Simon and Schuster.

^ a b Chappell, David W. (1987), "Is Tendai Buddhism Relevant to the Modern World?" (PDF), Japanese Journal of Religious Studies, 14 (2/3), doi:10.18874/jjrs.14.2-3.1987.247-266, archived from the original on March 4, 2009, retrieved August 16, 2008 ^ S. Balachandra Rao (2014).

"Classical Astronomy in India - An Overview" . In Thanu Padmanabhan (ed.).

Astronomy in India: A Historical Perspective . Springer. p. 4.

ISBN 9788184899986 .

v t e Indian philosophy Topics Atheism Atomism Idealism Logic Monotheism Vedic philosophy Kama Artha Moksha Ancient Āstika Hindu : Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Shaiva Raseśvara Pashupata Shaivism Pāṇiniya Nāstika Ājīvika Ajñana Charvaka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist philosophy and Early Buddhist schools Śūnyatā Madhyamaka Yogachara Sautrāntika Svatantrika Medieval Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Svabhavika Bhedabheda Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Sikh Philosophy Shaiva Pratyabhijna Pashupata Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Modern Integral yoga Gandhism Radical Humanism Progressive utilization theory Texts Abhinavabharati Arthashastra Bhagavad Gita Bhagavata Purana Brahma Sutra Buddhist texts Dharmashastra Hindu texts Jain Agamas Kamasutra Mimamsa Sutras All 108 texts Principal Nyāya Sūtras Nyayakusumanjali Panchadasi Samkhyapravachana Sutra Sangam texts Sarvadarsanasangraha Shiva Sutras Tarka-Sangraha Tattvacintāmaṇi Tirukkuṟaḷ Upanishads Minor Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Vedangas Vedas Yoga Sutras of Patanjali Yoga Vasistha More...

Philosophers Adi Shankara Abhinavagupta Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Maṇḍana Miśra Valluvar Avatsara Vāchaspati Misra Uddalaka Aruni Gautama Buddha Yājñavalkya Gārgī Vāchaknavī Buddhaghosa Patañjali Kanada Kapila Brihadratha Ikshvaku Jaimini Vyasa Chanakya Dharmakirti Akshapada Gotama Nagarjuna Padmasambhāva Vasubandhu Gaudapada Ramana Maharshi Vivekananda Dayananda Saraswati Ramanuja Vedanta Desika Raikva Sadananda Sakayanya Satyakama Jabala Madhvacharya Mahavira Guru Nanak More...

Concepts Abhava Abhasavada Abheda Adarsana Adrishta Advaita Aham Ahimsa Aishvarya Akrodha Aksara Anatta Ananta Anavastha Anupalabdhi Apauruṣheyā Artha Asiddhatva Asatkalpa Ātman Avyakta Bhrama Brahman Bhuman Bhumika Catuṣkoṭi Chaitanya Chidabhasa Cittabhumi Dāna Devatas Dharma Dhi Dravya Dhrti Ekagrata Guṇa Hitā Idam Ikshana Ishvaratva Jivatva Kama Karma Kasaya Kshetrajna Lakshana Matsya Nyaya Mithyatva Mokṣa Nididhyasana Nirvāṇa Nishkama Karma Niyama Padārtha Paramatman Paramananda Parameshashakti Parinama-vada Pradhana Prajna Prakṛti Pratibimbavada Pratītyasamutpāda Puruṣa Rājamaṇḍala Ṛta Sakshi Samadhi Saṃsāra Satya Satkaryavada Shabda Brahman Sphoṭa Sthiti Śūnyatā Sutram Svātantrya Iccha-mrityu Syādvāda Taijasa Tajjalan Tanmatra Tyāga Uparati Upekkhā Utsaha Vivartavada Viraj Yamas Yoga More...

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Siddhanta&oldid=1305743593#Astronomy " Categories : Hindu philosophical concepts Jain philosophical concepts Vedanta Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2014 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Sanskrit-language text This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 21:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Siddhanta 6 languages Add topic

