Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 United Kingdom Toggle United Kingdom subsection 1.1 England 1.2 Scotland 1.3 Entry to UK Higher Education 2 India 3 Hungary 4 Nepal 5 South Africa 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Business studies 15 languages العربية বাংলা Español فارسی Frysk हिन्दी Íslenska Nederlands 日本語 Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Academic subject Business studies , often simply called business , is a field of study that deals with the principles of business , management , and economics .

[ 1 ] It combines elements of accountancy , finance , marketing , organizational studies , human resource management , and operations. Business studies is a broad subject, [ 2 ] where the range of topics is designed to give the student a general overview of the various elements of running a business. The teaching of business studies is known as business education .

Countries in which the subject is taught under the name "business studies" include Mauritius , Oman , Bahrain , South Korea , Argentina , Australia , Bangladesh , Nepal , Brazil , Canada , Hong Kong , India , Ireland , Mexico , Singapore , Malaysia , Cambodia , Kenya , Poland , Malta , New Zealand , Nigeria , Pakistan , South Africa , Sri Lanka , Sweden , the United Kingdom , Namibia , Zimbabwe and Indonesia .

[ 3 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] England [ edit ] Business studies can be taken as part of the General Certificate of Secondary Education (GCSE) option for Year 9, Year 10 and Year 11 at secondary school and also can be taken as part of a GCE Advanced Level (A-level) course in Year 12 and Year 13. It includes a range of subjects, which give the student general understanding of the various elements of running a business. Subjects covered include, but are not limited to: Business Organization, People in Business , Marketing , Operations & Production, Finance , and Strategic Management .

[ 4 ] Scotland [ edit ] Business management is an option for National 5 [ 5 ] and Higher [ 6 ] qualifications. Both National 5 and Higher exams cover Understanding business, People, Finance, and Marketing and operations.

Entry to UK Higher Education [ edit ] The University of Cambridge considers business studies not to be a 'traditional academic subject', although taking business studies individually will not disadvantage students as long as it is identified as 'essential' or 'desirable' for the course being applied for. It is also suitable when applying for economics at university, if the college the candidate comes from does not offer the economics A-level individually.

[ 7 ] India [ edit ] Business Studies in India is offered as a core subject in the Commerce stream at the senior secondary level (Class 11 and Class 12) under national and state education boards such as CBSE and ICSE . It provides students with a foundational understanding of business principles, organizational structures, financial systems, and management practices. The curriculum includes topics such as Nature and Purpose of Business, Forms of Business Organisations, Business Services, Emerging Modes of Business, Principles of Management , Financial Markets , Marketing , and Consumer Protection . At the undergraduate level, Business Studies expands into specialized disciplines through programs like B.Com , BBA , and BBM , covering areas such as Accounting , Finance , Human Resource Management , Business Law , and Entrepreneurship . These subjects collectively prepare students for higher education in commerce and management , and for careers in business administration, financial services, and entrepreneurial ventures.

Hungary [ edit ] After finishing secondary school , students in Hungary have the option of either taking an accredited 2–4 semester business course and obtaining a certificate, or applying to college or university. Students can also take part in a 2-semester preparatory business course to have a greater chance of getting accepted by a university. Hungarian business education has been organized according to the Bologna system since 2006.

Nepal [ edit ] Business studies programmes are widely taught in the Nepal , where it is taught at every colleges of +2 level and also in colleges that provide A-Levels. A number of universities (public and private) are offering business studies programme under the heading of Business Administration.

[ citation needed ] there are many programs which often involve in the business studies and help students or anyone else to understand it.

South Africa [ edit ] In South Africa , Business Studies [ 8 ] can be taken as an elective subject from a student's Grade 10 year through to their Grade 12 year; 
it is offered as part of the standard NSC , as well the IEB (see Matriculation in South Africa ).
As elsewhere, the syllabus covers a range of topics designed to give the student general understanding of the various elements of running a business. Accountancy [ 9 ] and Economics [ 10 ] are offered as separate, and more technical, subjects.

Article Talk
AL You are not logged in .Your IP address will be publicly visible if you make any edits .If you log in or create an account, your edits will be username, among other benefits . content that violates any copyrights will be deleted. Encyclopedic content must be verifiable through citations to reliable > Advanced > special characters > HELP > Cite = India = 
Business Studies is taught at the higher secondary level (Class 11 and 12) for students who have taken the Commerce Stream subject. According to the Central Board of Secondary Education , Business Studies is a compulsory subject for Commerce Stream along with Economics and Accountancy students. At the state board, the subject code for Business Studies is 054.

See also [ edit ] Business administration Business economics Business education References [ edit ] ^ Combley, Roz, ed. (2011).

"business studies" .

Cambridge Business English Dictionary . Cambridge University Press. p. 100.

ISBN 9780521122504 .

^ "Business Studies" .

^ "Boolean" .

Oxford Reference .

doi : 10.1093/oi/authority.20110803095518404 . Retrieved 2025-07-31 .

^ "GCSE > Business" .

BBC Bitesize . Retrieved 3 October 2014 .

^ "National 5 > Business management" .

BBC Bitesize . Retrieved 3 October 2014 .

^ "Higher > Business management" .

BBC Bitesize . Retrieved 3 October 2014 .

^ entrance requirements for Cambridge University ^ Business Studies , education.gov.za ^ Accounting , education.gov.za ^ Economics , education.gov.za v t e Social sciences Outline History Index Primary Anthropology archaeology cultural social physical Economics microeconomics macroeconomics econometrics mathematical Geography physical human technical integrated History cultural auxiliary sciences economic human military political social Law jurisprudence legal history legal systems public law private law Linguistics semiotics Political science international relations comparative philosophy public policy public administration Psychology abnormal cognitive developmental personality social Sociology criminology demography internet rural urban Interdisciplinary Administration business public Anthrozoology Area studies Business studies Cognitive science Communication studies Community studies Criminology Critical animal studies Cultural studies Development studies Education Environmental social science studies Food studies Gender studies Global studies Historical sociology History of technology Human ecology Information science International studies Linguistics Management Media studies Philosophies science economics history psychology social science Planning land use regional urban Political ecology Political economy Political sociology Public health Regional science Science and technology studies Science studies historical Quantum social science Social work Vegan studies List List of social science journals Other categorizations Behavioural sciences Geisteswissenschaft Human science Humanities Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Business_studies&oldid=1303461951 " Category : Business education Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2019 This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 04:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Business studies 15 languages Add topic

