Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Family and early life 2 Marriage 3 Byrne's Euclid 4 Engineering and inventions 5 Irish independence 6 Death 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Oliver Byrne (mathematician) 5 languages العربية Català Deutsch مصرى Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Engineer and author Oliver Byrne Lithograph of Oliver Byrne Born ( 1810-07-31 ) 31 July 1810 Avoca, County Wicklow , Ireland Died 9 December 1880 (1880-12-09) (aged 70) Maidstone , Kent , England Known for His 'coloured' book of Euclid 's Elements Oliver Byrne ( / b ɜːr n / ; 31 July 1810 – 9 December 1880) was a civil engineer and prolific author of works on subjects including mathematics , geometry , and engineering . He is best known for his 'coloured' book of Euclid 's Elements . He was also a large contributor to Spon's Dictionary of Engineering .

Proof of the Pythagorean theorem.

Elements of Euclid Book I, page 48 Proof of the Pythagorean theorem.

Elements of Euclid Book I, page 49 Family and early life [ edit ] Byrne reports the Vale of Avoca, County Wicklow , Ireland as his birthplace. The son of Lawrence Oliver Byrne and Mary Byrne, he had a younger brother John who co-authored a book with him. Little is known about his childhood.  He emerges in Dublin at age 20 with his first publication. By the age of 29, Byrne was noted as the "principal support of an aged mother and sisters in Ireland." Later in England, he was appointed Professor of Mathematics in the College for Civil Engineers at Putney.

[ 1 ] Marriage [ edit ] His wife Eleanor (née Rugg), was 12 years younger than Oliver and published meteorological articles and books.  She is featured on a token struck to commemorate Oliver Byrne's invention of Byrneore, a metal alloy intended to look similar to gold and silver.

Byrne's Euclid [ edit ] Byrne's Elements His most innovative educational work was a version of the first six books of Euclid's Elements that used coloured graphic explanations of each geometric principle. It was published by William Pickering in 1847.

The book has become the subject of renewed interest in recent years for its innovative graphic conception and its style which prefigures the modernist experiments of the Bauhaus and De Stijl movements. Information design writer Edward Tufte refers to the book in his work on graphic design and McLean in his Victorian book design of 1963. In 2010 Taschen republished the work in a facsimile edition and in 2017 a project was launched to extend the work to the remaining works of Euclid.

[ 2 ] Byrne described himself as a mathematician, civil engineer, military engineer, and mechanical engineer and indicates on the title pages of one of his books that he was surveyor of Queen Victoria's settlement in the Falkland Islands .  Evidence shows Byrne never traveled to the Falkland Islands.

[ 1 ] The U.S.

Library of Congress has a steel-engraved portrait of Oliver Byrne.

Engineering and inventions [ edit ] Byrne engaged in numerous railroad projects and invented mechanical devices including the following: The Byrnegraph The Gauger's Patent Calculating Instruments.

In 1842, Oliver Byrne and Henry William Hull (BA, CE) made a proposal for a School of Mathematics, Engineering, Classics, and General Literature at Surrey Villa, near Lambeth Palace.

Byrne was an anti-phrenologist, and wrote a book on the fallacy of phrenology .

Irish independence [ edit ] In 1853 while residing in the US, Oliver Byrne wrote a book titled Freedom to Ireland, published in Boston.  The book advocates Irish revolt against British rule and outlining house and street fighting, handling of small arms, etc. Oliver toured the United States providing lessons in the use of small arms, field fortifications, pike exercises and street fighting.

Freedom to Ireland was dedicated 'To the memory of William Byrne, Esq., of Ballymanus, County Wicklow, Ireland,' and to the fulsome list of qualities attributed to the dedicatee was the rather dubious claim that Billy 'by the dextrous use of the Pike destroyed two thousand of his country's enemy; and out of twenty-seven engagements in the open field, won twenty-one.

[ 3 ] In the preface to one of his books, Oliver Byrne has the following dedication: [ citation needed ] TO THE MEMORY OF WILLIAM BYRNE, ESQ;, OF BALLYMANUS, COUNTY WICKLOW, IRELAND, WHO WAS EXECUTED FOR FIDELITY AND LOYALTY TO HIS COUNTRY IN 1798 THIS WORK IS DEDICATED.  BYRNE WAS A MAN OF LARGE FORTUNE AND ESTATES, OF RARE COURAGE, AND GREAT MILITARY SKILL, AND OF MUCH PERSONAL STRENGTH AND BEAUTY; HE DID NOT LOSE HIS LIFE AND ESTATES, OR BETRAY HIS COUNTRY, BY MAKING LONG SPEECHES TO TEACH THE ENEMY. HE WAS NOT ONE OF THE BEGARRLY BRIEFLASS SPOUTING POLITICAL TRICKSTER HUMBUGS; NO, BUT ONE WHO IN CONJUNCTION WITH HIS BROTHER GARRET BYRNE AND COUSIN MICHAEL DWYER, LED ON HIS COUNTRYMEN, AND BY THE DEXTERIOUS USE OF THE PIKE, DESTROYED 2000 OF HIS COUNTRY'S ENEMY; AND OUT OF 27 ENGAGEMENTS IN THE OPEN FIELD, WON TWENTY ONE....etc.

The United Irishmen (who consisted of Protestants and Catholics alike) and the Irish Home Rule Association, both supported by Byrne, declared their belief in a peaceful future for Ireland in which Protestants and Catholics could live together in peace and with equality.

[ citation needed ] Death [ edit ] Byrne died aged 70, on 9 December 1880 of bronchial pneumonia , in Maidstone , Kent , and is buried in Maidstone (Sutton Road) Cemetery, Kent, England.

[ 1 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c Haws, Susan M.; Kolpas, Sid (August 2015).

"Oliver Byrne: The Matisse of Mathematics - Biography 1810-1829" .

Convergence .

12 .

^ Liptak, Andrew (2 September 2017).

"One of the world's most influential math texts is getting a beautiful, minimalist edition" .

The Verge . Retrieved 28 September 2017 .

^ O'Byrne, Neil.

"The O'Byrne Files © – Genealogy – The Byrnes of Ballymanus" .

homepage.eircom.net .

External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Oliver Byrne Susan M. Hawes (Genealogist) and Sid Kolpas (Delaware County Community College), "Oliver Byrne: The Matisse of Mathematics," Convergence 12 (August 2015) , accessed 8 September 2015.

List of works by Byrne in chronological order from Convergence Byrne's edition of Euclid at University of British Columbia Mathematics Department and at archive.org Review of Taschen's edition of Byrn's Euclid from the Mathematical Association of America Euclid’s Elements by Oliver Byrne’s as interactive website.

Examples of pages from Byrne's Euclid MetaPost + ConTeXt rendition of Oliver Byrne's "The first six books of the Elements of Euclid" Works by or about Oliver Byrne at the Internet Archive v t e Visualization of technical information Fields Biological data visualization Chemical imaging Crime mapping Data visualization Educational visualization Flow visualization Geovisualization Information visualization Mathematical visualization Medical imaging Molecular graphics Product visualization Scientific visualization Social visualization Software visualization Technical drawing User interface design Visual analytics Visual culture Volume visualization Image types Chart Diagram Engineering drawing Graph of a function Ideogram Map Photograph Pictogram Plot Sankey diagram Schematic Skeletal formula Statistical graphics Table Technical drawings Technical illustration People Pre-19th century Edmond Halley Charles-René de Fourcroy Joseph Priestley Gaspard Monge 19th century Charles Dupin Adolphe Quetelet André-Michel Guerry William Playfair August Kekulé Charles Joseph Minard Francis Amasa Walker John Venn Oliver Byrne Matthew Sankey Charles Booth John Snow Florence Nightingale Karl Wilhelm Pohlke Toussaint Loua Francis Galton Early 20th century Edward Walter Maunder Otto Neurath W. E. B. Du Bois Henry Gantt Arthur Lyon Bowley Howard G. Funkhouser John B. Peddle Ejnar Hertzsprung Henry Norris Russell Max O. Lorenz Fritz Kahn Harry Beck Erwin Raisz Mid 20th century Jacques Bertin Rudolf Modley Arthur H. Robinson John Tukey Mary Eleanor Spear Edgar Anderson Howard T. Fisher Late 20th century Borden Dent Nigel Holmes William S. Cleveland George G. Robertson Bruce H. McCormick Catherine Plaisant Stuart Card Pat Hanrahan Edward Tufte Ben Shneiderman Michael Friendly Howard Wainer Clifford A. Pickover Lawrence J. Rosenblum Thomas A. DeFanti George Furnas Sheelagh Carpendale Cynthia Brewer Jock D. Mackinlay Alan MacEachren David Goodsell Kwan-Liu Ma Michael Maltz Leland Wilkinson Alfred Inselberg Early 21st century Ben Fry Jeffrey Heer Jessica Hullman Daniel A. Keim Gordon Kindlmann Aaron Koblin Christopher R. Johnson Manuel Lima David McCandless Mauro Martino John Maeda Miriah Meyer Tamara Munzner Ade Olufeko Hanspeter Pfister Hans Rosling Claudio Silva Moritz Stefaner Fernanda Viégas Martin Wattenberg Bang Wong Hadley Wickham Related topics Cartography Chartjunk Color coding Computer graphics in computer science CPK coloring Graph drawing Graphic design Graphic organizer Imaging science Information art Information graphics Information science Misleading graph Neuroimaging Patent drawing Scientific modelling Spatial analysis Visual perception Volume cartography Volume rendering Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Croatia Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Oliver_Byrne_(mathematician)&oldid=1299255219 " Categories : 19th-century British writers 19th-century Irish writers 19th-century Irish mathematicians 1810 births 1890 deaths 19th-century British mathematicians Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2023 Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2022 Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 7 July 2025, at 09:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Oliver Byrne (mathematician) 5 languages Add topic

