Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 General characteristics 2 Approaches Toggle Approaches subsection 2.1 Basic approach 2.2 Applied approach 2.3 Comparison of basic and applied research 3 Methodology Toggle Methodology subsection 3.1 Qualitative research 3.2 Quantitative research 3.3 Mixed methods (Pragmatic) 4 Discipline-based 5 Results 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Educational research 13 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Deutsch Español 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia ಕನ್ನಡ Shqip Simple English ไทย 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Collection and analysis of evidence in the field of education Educational research Disciplines Curriculum studies Education sciences Evaluation History Philosophy Psychology ( school ) Technology International education School counseling Special education Gifted education Female education Religious education Teacher education Teaching method Curricular domains Arts Business Computing Early childhood Engineering Language Literacy Mathematics Performing arts Science Social science Technology Vocational Methods Case method Conversation analysis Discourse analysis Evidence-based Factor analysis Factorial experiment Focus group Learning theory Meta-analysis Multivariate statistics Participant observation Reform v t e Not to be confused with Education sciences , Instructional theory , or Pedagogy .

Educational research refers to the systematic collection and analysis of evidence and data related to the field of education. Research may involve a variety of methods [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] and various aspects of education including student learning, interaction, teaching methods , teacher training, and classroom dynamics.

[ 4 ] Educational researchers generally agree that research should be rigorous and systematic.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] However, there is less agreement about specific standards, criteria and research procedures.

[ 1 ] [ 5 ] As a result, the value and quality of educational research has been questioned.  Educational researchers may draw upon a variety of disciplines including psychology , economics , sociology , anthropology , and philosophy .

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] Methods may be drawn from a range of disciplines.

[ 3 ] [ 5 ] Conclusions drawn from an individual research study may be limited by the characteristics of the participants who were studied and the conditions under which the study was conducted.

[ 3 ] General characteristics [ edit ] Gary Anderson outlined ten aspects of educational research: [ 2 ] Attempt to discover cause and effect.

Research involves gathering new data from primary or first-hand sources or using existing data for a new purpose.

Research is based upon observable experience or empirical evidence.

Research demands accurate observation and description.

Research generally employs carefully designed procedures and rigorous analysis.

Research emphasizes the development of generalizations, principles or theories that will help in understanding, prediction and/or control.

Research requires expertise—familiarity with the field; competence in methodology; technical skill in collecting and analyzing the data.

Research attempts to find an objective, unbiased solution to the problem and takes great pains to validate the procedures employed.

Research is a deliberate and unhurried activity which is directional but often refines the problem or ques Approaches [ edit ] There are different approaches to educational research. One is a basic approach, [ 1 ] also referred to as an academic research approach.

[ 2 ] Another approach is applied research [ 1 ] or a contract research approach.

[ 2 ] These approaches have different purposes which influence the nature of the respective research.

Basic approach [ edit ] Basic, or academic research focuses on the search for truth [ 2 ] or the development of educational theory .

[ 1 ] Researchers with this background "design studies that can test, refine, modify, or develop theories".

[ 1 ] Generally, these researchers are affiliated with an academic institution and are performing this research as part of their graduate or doctoral work.

Applied approach [ edit ] The pursuit of information that can be directly applied to practice is aptly known as applied or contractual research.

[ 1 ] Researchers in this field are trying to find solutions to existing educational problems. The approach is much more utilitarian and pragmatic as it strives to find information that will directly influence practice.

[ 2 ] The goal of applied research is "to determine the applicability of educational theory and principles by testing hypotheses within specific settings".

[ 1 ] Contractual research is commissioned by a sponsor.

[ 2 ] Comparison of basic and applied research [ edit ] The following are several defining characteristics written by Gary Anderson to compare basic (academic) and applied (contract) research.

[ 2 ] Basic Research Applied Research 1 Is sponsored by an agency committed to the general advancement of knowledge.

Is sponsored by an agency with a interest in application.

2 Results are the property of society and the research community.

Results become the property of the sponsor.

3 Studies rely on the established reputations of the researchers and are totally under their control.

Studies follow explicit terms of reference developed by the sponsor to serve the sponsor's needs.

4 Budget allocations are generally based on global proposals and accounting is left to the researchers.

Budget accountability is directly related to the sponsor and relates to agreed terms of reference, time frames and methodologies.

5 The conduct of research is based on 'good faith' between funder and researcher.

The work is contractual between sponsor and researcher.

6 The research produces findings and conclusions, but rarely recommendations except those related to further research needs.

The research can include applied recommendations for action.

7 Academic research tends to extend an identifiable scholarly discipline.

Contract research can be interdisciplinary.

8 Academic research is typically focused on a single set of testable hypotheses.

Contract research frequently analyzes the consequences of alternative policy options.

9 Decision-rules relate to theoretically-based tests of statistical significance.

Decision-rules relate to predetermined conventions and agreements between the sponsor and the researcher.

10 Research reports are targeted to other specialized researchers in the same field.

Research reports can be intended to be read and understood by lay persons.

Methodology [ edit ] See also: Evidence-based education The basis for educational research is the scientific method .

[ 1 ] The scientific method uses directed questions and manipulation of variables to systematically find information about the teaching and learning process.

[ 1 ] In this scenario questions are answered by the analysis of data that is collected specifically for the purpose of answering these questions.

[ 2 ] Hypotheses are written and subsequently proved or disproved by data which leads to the creation of new hypotheses . The two main types of data that are used under this method are qualitative and quantitative .

[ 1 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Qualitative research [ edit ] Qualitative research uses the data which is descriptive in nature. Tools that educational researchers use in collecting qualitative data include: observations, conducting interviews, conducting document analysis, and analyzing participant products such as journals, diaries, images or blogs.

[ 1 ] Types of qualitative research include: Case study [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Ethnography [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Phenomenological research [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Narrative research [ 1 ] Historical research [ 2 ] Quantitative research [ edit ] Quantitative research uses data that is numerical and is based on the assumption that the numbers will describe a single reality.

[ 1 ] Statistics are often applied to find relationships between variables.

Types of quantitative research include: Descriptive survey research [ 1 ] Experimental research [ 1 ] Single-subject research [ 1 ] Causal-comparative research [ 1 ] Correlational research [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Meta-analysis [ 1 ] Mixed methods (Pragmatic) [ edit ] There also exists a new school of thought that these derivatives of the scientific method are far too reductionist in nature.

[ 5 ] Since educational research includes other disciplines such as psychology , sociology , anthropology , science , and philosophy [ 1 ] [ 3 ] and refers to work done in a wide variety of contexts [ 3 ] it is proposed that researchers should use "multiple research approaches and theoretical constructs." [ 5 ] This could mean using a combination of qualitative and quantitative methods as well as common methodology from the fields mentioned above. In social research this phenomenon is referred to as triangulation (social science) .

[ 7 ] This idea is well summarized by the work of Barrow in his text An introduction to philosophy of education: Since educational issues are of many different kinds and logical types, it is to be expected that quite different types of research should be brought into play on different occasions. The question therefore is not whether research into teaching should be conducted by means of quantitative measures (on some such grounds as that they are more 'objective') or qualitative measures (on some such grounds as that they are more 'insightful'), but what kind of research can sensibly be utilized to look into this particular aspect of teaching as opposed to that.

[ 8 ] Types of mixed methods include: Action research [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 1 ] Program evaluation [ 1 ] [ 2 ] In analysis of mixed methods, the following ways might be used; Explanatory mixed method : starts with quantitative followed by qualitative data and results Exploratory mixed method : starts with qualitative followed by quantitative data and results Triangulation mixed method : all data and results are concurrently analysed [ 12 ] Discipline-based [ edit ] Discipline-based education research ( DBER ) is an interdisciplinary research enterprise that "investigates learning and teaching in a discipline [normally from the STEM fields ] from a perspective that reflects the discipline's priorities, worldview, knowledge, and practices." [ 13 ] Examples include: Astronomy education research (AER) Biology education research (BER) Chemistry education research (CER) Computer science education research (CSER), also computing education research Engineering education research (EER) Geoscience education research (GER) Mathematics education research (MER) Physics education research (PER) Educational research can also be organized by the subject or object of focus , as in school, teacher, student, etc., the relationship between actors such as student-teacher, teacher-principal, school-home, etc. by educational outcomes, such as motivation, learning of core subjects, learning of 21st century skills, attitudes, etc.

Results [ edit ] In response to increased attention to the replicability of experimental findings in the sciences and medicine , in 2014, Educational Researcher published a review of the entire publication history of the 100 education journals with the highest five-year impact factors that found that out of 164,589 articles published only 221 articles (or 0.13 percent) were attempted replications of previous studies. Only 28.5 percent of the replication studies were direct replications rather than conceptual replications (i.e. usage of a different experimental method to test the same hypothesis ). 48.2 percent of the replications were performed by the same research team as produced the original study, and when the same research team published the replication studies in the same journals, 88.7 percent of replications were successful while only 70.6 percent were successful when published in a different journal. When different researchers attempted to replicate the findings, only 54 percent of replications were successful.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] As of December 2021 [update] , among more than 300 other psychology and medical journals, the British Journal of Developmental Psychology , the British Journal of Educational Psychology , the Canadian Journal of School Psychology , Exceptional Children , Frontiers in Education , the Gifted Child Quarterly , the Journal for the Education of the Gifted , the Journal of Advanced Academics , the Journal of Cognition and Development , the Journal of Educational Psychology , the Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition , JMIR Medical Education , the Journal of Numerical Cognition , the Journal of Research in Reading , Language Learning , Learning and Instruction , Mind, Brain, and Education , and Scientific Studies of Reading have adopted result-blind peer review (i.e. where studies are accepted not on the basis of their findings and after the studies are completed, but before the studies are conducted and upon the basis of the methodological rigor of their experimental designs and the theoretical justifications for their statistical analysis techniques before data collection or analysis is done) as part of an initiative organized by the Center for Open Science in response to concerns about publication bias and p -hacking .

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Early analysis of such reforms in psychology journals has estimated that 61 percent of result-blind studies have led to null results , in contrast to an estimated 5 to 20 percent in earlier psychological research.

[ 18 ] See also [ edit ] Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) Online credentials for learning Related fields Education theory Educational psychology School psychology Educational technology Scholarship of teaching and learning Research in science education Educational research communities and organizations American Educational Research Association American Institutes for Research Education Resources Information Center Educational Testing Service Institute of Education Sciences WestEd International Association for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa Lodico, Marguerite G.; Spaulding, Dean T.; Voegtle, Katherine H. (2010).

Methods in Educational Research: From Theory to Practice .

Wiley .

ISBN 978-0-470-58869-7 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p Anderson, Garry; Arsenault, Nancy (1998).

Fundamentals of Educational Research .

Routledge .

ISBN 978-0-203-97822-1 .

^ a b c d e f Yates, Lyn (2004).

What Does Good Educational Research Look Like?: Situating a Field and Its Practices . Conducting Educational Research.

McGraw-Hill International .

ISBN 978-0-335-21199-9 .

^ a b "IAR: Glossary. (n.d.)" .

Instructional Assessment Resources .

University of Texas at Austin . 21 September 2011. Archived from the original on 13 December 2012 . Retrieved 17 November 2010 .

^ a b c d e Kincheloe, Joe (2004).

Rigour and Complexity in Educational Research . McGraw-Hill International.

ISBN 978-0-335-22604-7 .

^ Scott, David; Usher, Robin (2002) [1996].

Understanding Educational Research . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-203-13192-3 .

^ Gorard, Stephen; Taylor, Chris (2004).

Combining Methods in Educational and Social Research . McGraw-Hill International.

ISBN 978-0-335-22517-0 .

^ Woods, Ronald; Barrow, Robin (2006).

An Introduction to Philosophy of Education . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-0-203-96995-3 .

^ Brown, Barb; Dressler, Roswita; Eaton, Sarah Elaine; Jacobsen, Michele (2015).

"Practicing What We Teach: Using Action Research to Learn About Teaching Action Research" .

The Canadian Journal of Action Research .

16 (3): 61– 78.

doi : 10.33524/cjar.v16i3.228 .

S2CID 58941990 .

^ Hendricks, Cher (2016).

Improving schools through Action Research: A reflective practice approach . Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education.

^ McNiff, Jean (2016).

You and your action research project . London, UK: Routledge.

^ Mertler, Craig A. (2013-09-10).

Action Research: Improving Schools and Empowering Educators (4th ed.). Los Angeles: SAGE.

ISBN 9781452244426 .

OCLC 855491780 .

^ National Research Council . Discipline-Based Education Research: Understanding and Improving Learning in Undergraduate Science and Engineering. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press, 2012. Available at [1] ^ Tyson, Charlie (14 August 2014).

"Failure to Replicate" .

Inside Higher Ed . Retrieved 19 December 2018 .

^ Makel, Matthew C.; Plucker, Jonathan A. (2014). "Facts Are More Important Than Novelty".

Educational Researcher .

43 (6): 304– 316.

doi : 10.3102/0013189X14545513 .

S2CID 145571836 .

^ Aschwanden, Christie (6 December 2018).

"Psychology's Replication Crisis Has Made The Field Better" .

FiveThirtyEight . Retrieved 19 December 2018 .

^ "Registered Reports" .

Center for Open Science . Retrieved May 20, 2021 .

^ Allen, Christopher; Mehler, David M. A. (2019).

"Open science challenges, benefits and tips in early career and beyond" .

PLOS Biology .

17 (5): e3000246.

doi : 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000246 .

ISSN 1545-7885 .

PMC 6513108 .

PMID 31042704 .

S2CID 240061030 .

Further reading [ edit ] Barry, W.J. (2012).

"Challenging the Status Quo Meaning of Educational Quality: Introducing Transformational Quality (TQ) Theory©" .

Educational Journal of Living Theories .

4 : 1– 29. Archived from the original on Dec 9, 2024.

Hsieh, P.-H.; Acee, T.; Chung, W.-H.; Hsieh, Ya-P.; Kim, H.; Thomas, G.D.; You, Ji-in; Levin, J.R.; Robinson, D.H. (November 2005).

"Is Educational Intervention Research on the Decline?" .

Journal of Educational Psychology .

97 (4): 523– 9.

doi : 10.1037/0022-0663.97.4.523 – via ResearchGate.

Furlong, J. and Oancea, A. (2008) " Assessing Quality in Applied and Practice Based Research. Continuing the Debate ". London, Routledge.

v t e Education Overview General Glossary Index Outline By perspective Aims and objectives Learning standards Anthropology Assessment Evaluation Course evaluation Psychometrics Standards-based Standardized test Teacher quality Economics Spending Free education Tuition payments Education sciences Evidence-based History Inclusion Leadership Neuroscience Pedagogy Philosophy Policy Politics Psychology Research Rights Sociology Technology Instructional Instructional design By subject Agricultural Art Bilingual Business Chemistry Computer science Death Design Economics Engineering Environmental Euthenics Health Language Legal Mathematics Medical Military Music Nursing Peace Performing arts Philosophy Physical Physics Reading Religious Science Sex Teacher Technology Values Vocational Alternative Adult education Autodidacticism Democratic Education reform Gifted education Homeschooling Religious education Special education Concepts 21st century skills Accreditation Accreditation mill Bloom's taxonomy Board of education Cognitive load Classroom management Class arrangement Compulsory education Critical thinking Curriculum Bias Development Hidden Studies Theory Diploma mill Learning theory Desirable difficulty Spacing effect Testing effect Lesson plan Pedagogical pattern School choice School discipline Teacher look Teacher retention Teaching method Active learning Blended learning Contemplative Demonstration Dialogic learning Experiential Feedback Passive Peer instruction Personalized Phenomenon-based Problem-based Problem solving Project-based Student-centered Socratic Teaching philosophy Wikimedia Books Definitions Images Learning resources News Quotes Texts Stages Early childhood education Primary education Secondary education Tertiary education Preschool → Kindergarten → Primary school → Infant → Junior → Secondary school → Middle school → High school → Higher education Vocational Further ( Continuing ) Undergraduate → Postgraduate Portal Education by region Education in Africa Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Somaliland Dependencies and other territories Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla (Spain) Madeira (Portugal) Mayotte / Réunion (France) Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom) Education in Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal Education in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard Other entities European Union Education in  North America Sovereign states Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Dependencies and other territories Anguilla Aruba Bermuda Bonaire British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Curaçao Greenland Guadeloupe Martinique Montserrat Puerto Rico Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saba Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten Turks and Caicos Islands United States Virgin Islands Education in Oceania Sovereign states Australia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Indonesia Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Associated states of New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Dependencies and other territories American Samoa Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Easter Island French Polynesia Guam Hawaii New Caledonia Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Pitcairn Islands Tokelau Wallis and Futuna Education in South America Sovereign states Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Dependencies and other territories Falkland Islands French Guiana South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Schools portal Category WikiProject Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐gvr56
Cached time: 20250811235524
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.738 seconds
Real time usage: 0.849 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 27107/1000000
Revision size: 21461/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 279853/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 17280/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 22/100
Expensive parser function count: 18/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 101393/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.328/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7205615/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  703.055      1 -total
 43.93%  308.856      1 Template:Education
 43.69%  307.132      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 23.94%  168.283      1 Template:Reflist
 23.52%  165.382    103 Template:Iso2country
 18.50%  130.051      5 Template:Navbox
 16.62%  116.816      1 Template:Asia_topic
 15.34%  107.857     10 Template:Cite_book
 12.20%   85.783      1 Template:Europe_topic
 10.51%   73.873      1 Template:Educational_research Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:430890:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250811235524 and revision id 1283451935. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Educational_research&oldid=1283451935 " Categories : Educational research Educational psychology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing potentially dated statements from December 2021 All articles containing potentially dated statements This page was last edited on 1 April 2025, at 16:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Educational research 13 languages Add topic

