Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Original version 2 1998 revision 3 2017 revision 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Fair Harvard Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Alma mater of Harvard University This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Fair Harvard" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) " Fair Harvard " is the alma mater of Harvard University .  Written by the Reverend Samuel Gilman of the class of 1811 for the university's 200th anniversary in 1836, it bids the school an affectionate farewell.  Of its four verses, the first and fourth are traditionally sung and the second and third omitted.

The song is set to a traditional Irish air, best known in early 19th century America as " Believe Me, if All Those Endearing Young Charms ", a popular song whose lyrics were written by the Irish poet Thomas Moore . The tune is occasionally wrongly credited to Sir William Davenant , whose library may have been a source of the music for later publishers.

[ 1 ] (The tune is also a newer setting of "My Lodging Is In The Cold, Cold Ground".) Horatio Alger Jr.

, an 1852 graduate of Harvard's Divinity School, composed his "Harvard Odes" I-IV, and Paul Laurence Dunbar originally wrote the lyrics of the " Tuskegee Song", to the tune.

The song is referenced in The Simpsons episode “The Front” .

[ 2 ] Original version [ edit ] Fair Harvard! Thy sons to thy Jubilee throng, And with blessings surrender thee o'er By these festival rites, from the age that is past, To the age that is waiting before.

O relic and type of our ancestors' worth That hast long kept their memory warm, First flow'r of their wilderness! Star of their night!

Calm rising thro' change and thro' storm.

To thy bow'rs we were led in the bloom of our youth, From the home of our infantile years, When our fathers had warn'd, and our mothers had pray'd, And our sisters had blest thro' their tears.

Thou then wert our parent, the nurse of our soul; We were molded to manhood by thee, Till freighted with treasure thoughts, friendships and hopes, Thou didst launch us on Destiny's sea.

When as pilgrims we come to revisit thy halls, To what kindlings the season gives birth!

Thy shades are more soothing, thy sunlight more dear, Than descend on less privileged earth.

For the good and the great, in their beautiful prime, Thro' thy precincts have musingly trod, As they girded their spirits or deepen'd the streams That make glad the fair city of God.

Farewell! be thy destinies onward and bright!

To thy children the lesson still give, With freedom to think, and with patience to bear, And for right ever bravely to live.

Let not moss-covered error moor thee at its side, As the world on truth's current glides by Be the herald of light, and the bearer of love, Till the stock of the Puritans die.

1998 revision [ edit ] The term "sons" was eliminated to make the song gender neutral.

[ 3 ] The first line was revised to read "...we join in thy jubilee throng" between 1997 and 1998. As a side effect of the change, the word throng , a verb in the original lyrics, became a noun.

2017 revision [ edit ] In 2017 Harvard announced it was running a contest to replace the last line of the song "Till the stock of the Puritans die". In early October 2017 semifinalist potential replacement lines were announced.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The final replacement line was chosen as "Till the stars in the firmament die." [ 6 ] References [ edit ] ^ William Davenant, 1606-1668.

"Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-06-16 . Retrieved 2010-02-03 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) , accessed Feb. 3rd, 2010.

^ lilkiedis07 (2016-01-13), Harvard - The Simpsons , retrieved 2017-11-09 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Why is Harvard ditching the puritans?

By Sean Coughlan, BBC news ^ Stevens, Matt and Hartocollis, Anemona. Harvard Seeks to Write ‘Puritans’ Out of Its Alma Mater.

New York Times April 7, 2017.

[1] Accessed October 7, 2017 ^ Guillaume, Kristine. Diversity Task Force Announces 'Fair Harvard' Lyric Semifinalists.

Harvard Crimson October 3, 2017.

[2] Accessed October 7, 2017 ^ "Harvard issues task force report on inclusion, belonging" . 27 March 2018.

External links [ edit ] Harvard University Band audio recording Background to the 1997/8 revision v t e Alma maters of the Ivy League " Alma Mater " ( Brown ) " Stand, Columbia " ( Columbia ) " Far Above Cayuga's Waters " ( Cornell ) " Alma Mater " ( Dartmouth ) " Fair Harvard " ( Harvard ) " Hail, Pennsylvania!

" ( Penn ) " Old Nassau " ( Princeton ) " Bright College Years " ( Yale ) See also Ivy League fight songs v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Authority control databases MusicBrainz work Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fair_Harvard&oldid=1297238570 " Categories : Harvard University American college songs Alma mater songs 1836 songs Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2009 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 24 June 2025, at 23:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fair Harvard Add languages Add topic

