Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Variants 2 Bracteole 3 Involucral bracts 4 Epicalyx 5 Spathe 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Bract 41 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Беларуская Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Lombard Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Modified or specialized leaf "Involucre" redirects here. For the protective layer that encloses spores in fungi, see Peridium . For the indusium in ferns or fungi, see Sorus .

Papery (upper) and leafy bracts on Rhinanthus minor (hay rattle).  All the "leaves" in this image are bracts.

In botany , a bract is a modified or specialized leaf , associated with a reproductive structure such as a flower , inflorescence axis or cone scale . 
Bracts are usually different from foliage leaves in size, color, shape or texture. They also look different from the parts of the flower, such as the petals or sepals .

A plant having bracts is referred to as bracteate [ 1 ] or bracteolate , while one that lacks them is referred to as ebracteate [ 2 ] or ebracteolate .

Variants [ edit ] Some bracts are brightly coloured which aid in the attraction of pollinators, either together with the perianth or instead of it. Examples of this type of bract include those of Euphorbia pulcherrima (poinsettia) and Bougainvillea : both of these have large colourful bracts surrounding much smaller, less colourful flowers.

[ 3 ] In grasses , each floret (flower) is enclosed in a pair of papery bracts, called the lemma (lower bract) and palea (upper bract), while each spikelet (group of florets) has a further pair of bracts at its base called glumes .  These bracts form the chaff that is usually removed from cereal grain during threshing and winnowing .

[ 4 ] Bats may detect acoustic signals from dish-shaped bracts such as those of Marcgravia evenia .

[ 5 ] A prophyll is a leaf-like structure, such as a bracteole, subtending (extending under) a single flower or pedicel . The term can also mean the lower bract on a peduncle .

The frequently showy pair of bracts of Euphorbia species in subgenus Lacanthis are the cyathophylls .

Bracts subtend the cone scales in the seed cones of many conifers , and in some cases, such as Pseudotsuga , extend beyond the cone scales.

The yellow bracts of Castilleja levisecta press tight against the stem.

The bracts of Bougainvillea glabra , differ in colour from leaves and attract pollinators.

Bracts along a banana flower stalk surround rows of flowers Euphorbia milii var.

vulcanii cyathia bearing a pair of pinkish cyathophylls Colourful bracts of Ananas bracteatus The many green involucral bracts of Erigeron peregrinus taper to a point and are linear, loose, and about the same length.

Dogwood species Cornus florida inflorescence showing four large white bracts and central flower cluster Cornus florida dogwood cultivar with pink bracts surrounding yellow florets The red bracts of Aechmea bracteata The pink bracts of Curcuma petiolata The pink bract of Anthurium andraeanum 'Pink Lady' Alpinia zerumbet flower buds protected by two bracts The golden bracts of Musella lasiocarpa Bracteole [ edit ] A small bract is called a bracteole or bractlet . Technically this is any bract that arises on a pedicel instead of subtending it.

Involucral bracts [ edit ] Beggar-tick ( Bidens comosa ) Bracts that appear in a whorl subtending an inflorescence are collectively called an involucre . An involucre is a common feature beneath the inflorescences of many families, including the Apiaceae (carrot family), Asteraceae (sunflower or the daisy family), Dipsacaceae , and Polygonaceae . Each flower in an inflorescence may have its own whorl of bracts, in this case called an involucel . They can be called chaff , paleas or receptacular bracts and are usually minute scales or bristles. Many asteraceous plants have bracts at the base of each inflorescence.

[ 6 ] The term involucre is also used for a highly conspicuous bract or bract pair at the base of an inflorescence. In the family Betulaceae , notably in the genera Carpinus and Corylus , the involucre is a leafy structure that protects the developing nuts. Beggar-tick ( Bidens comosa ) has narrow involucral bracts surrounding each inflorescence, each of which also has a single bract below it. There is then a pair of leafy bracts on the main stem and below those a pair of leaves.

[ 6 ] Epicalyx of Hibiscus rosa-sinensis Epicalyx [ edit ] An epicalyx forms an additional whorl around the calyx of a single flower) is a modification of bracteoles.

[ 7 ] In other words, the epicalyx is a group of bracts resembling a calyx or bracteoles forming a whorl outer to the calyx.

[ 8 ] [ page needed ] It is a calyx-like extra whorl of floral appendages.  Each individual segment of the epicalyx is called an episepal because they resemble the sepals in them.

[ 9 ] They are present in the hibiscus family, Malvaceae .

Fragaria (strawberries) may or may not have an epicalyx.

Anthurium scherzerianum inflorescence with spathe and spadix Spathe [ edit ] A spathe is a large bract or a pair of bracts that forms a sheath to enclose the flower cluster of plants such as palms , arums , irises , [ 10 ] crocuses [ 11 ] and dayflowers ( Commelina ).

Zephyranthes tubispatha in the Amaryllidaceae derives its specific name from its tubular spathe. In many arums (family Araceae ), the spathe is petal-like, attracting pollinators to the flowers arranged on a type of spike called a spadix .

See also [ edit ] Glossary of botanical terms Nectary References [ edit ] ^ "the definition of bracteate" .

Dictionary.com .

Archived from the original on 2017-04-28 . Retrieved 2017-04-27 .

^ "Definition of Ebractate" .

www.greengonzo.com .

Archived from the original on 2017-04-28 . Retrieved 2017-04-27 .

^ Environment Southwest . San Diego Society of Natural History. 1986.

^ Jensen, William August; Salisbury, Frank B. (1972).

Botany: an Ecological Approach . Wadsworth Publishing Company. p. 544.

ISBN 978-0-534-00092-9 .

^ Ralph Simon; Marc W. Holderied; Corinna U. Koch; Otto von Helversen (2011). "Floral acoustics: Conspicuous echoes of a dish-shaped leaf attract bat pollinators".

Science .

333 (6042): 631– 633.

Bibcode : 2011Sci...333..631S .

doi : 10.1126/science.1204210 .

PMID 21798950 .

S2CID 5035286 .

^ a b Popay, I (2022-01-07). Bidens frondosa (beggarticks) (Report).

doi : 10.1079/cabicompendium.108916 .

^ Darpan, Pratiyogita (June 2006).

Competition Science Vision . Pratiyogita Darpan. p. 136.

^ "Botany" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-12-14 . Retrieved 2010-08-15 .

^ "epicalyx – Dictionary of botany" . Botanydictionary.org.

Archived from the original on 2012-05-01 . Retrieved 2012-04-29 .

^ Richard Lynch The Book of the Iris , p. 203, at Google Books ^ Alex Casha Flora of the Maltese Islands , p. 287, at Google Books External links [ edit ] Media related to Bracts at Wikimedia Commons v t e Botany History Outline Subdisciplines Archaeobotany Astrobotany Bryology Dendrology Ethnobotany Paleobotany Phycology Phytochemistry Phytogeography Geobotany Plant anatomy Plant ecology Plant intelligence Plant pathology Plant physiology Plant groups Algae Archaeplastida Bryophyte Non-vascular plants Vascular plants Fern Lycophyte Spermatophytes Gymnosperm Angiosperm Plant anatomy Plant morphology ( glossary ) Plant cells Cell wall Phragmoplast Plastid Plasmodesma Vacuole Tissues Cork Ground tissue Mesophyll Meristem Storage organs Vascular tissue Vascular bundle Wood Vegetative Bulb Root Rhizoid Rhizome Shoot Bud Leaf Cataphyll Petiole Sessility Stem Reproductive (incl. Flower) Archegonium Antheridium Androecium Pollen Stamen Anther Filament Staminode Tapetum Flower Aestivation Flower development Floral diagram Floral formula Floral symmetry Whorl Fruit Anatomy Berry Capsule Nut Pyrena Seed Dispersal Endosperm Gametophyte Gynandrium Gynoecium Carpel Ovary Locule Ovule Stigma Style Hypanthium (Floral cup) Inflorescence Bract Pedicellate Raceme Umbel Perianth Tepal Petal Sepal Plant embryo Receptacle Sporophyll Sporophyte Surface structures Cuticle Epicuticular wax Epidermis Nectar Stoma Thorns, spines, and prickles Trichome Plant physiology Materials Aleurone Apical dominance Bulk flow Cellulose Nutrition Photosynthesis Chlorophyll Phytomelanin Plant hormones Respiration Gas Exchange Cellular respiration Sap Starch Sugar Transpiration Turgor pressure Plant growth and habit Habit Cushion plants Rosettes Shrubs Prostrate shrubs Subshrubs Succulent plants Trees Vines Lianas Herbaceous plants Secondary growth Woody plants Reproduction Evolution Ecology Alternation of generations Double fertilization Evolutionary development Evolutionary history timeline Flora Germination Pollination Artificial Pollinators Pollen tube Self Sporangium Microsporangia Microspore Megasporangium Megaspore Spore Plant taxonomy Biological classification Botanical nomenclature Botanical name Correct name Author citation International Code of Nomenclature (ICN) ICN for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP) Cultivated plant taxonomy Citrus taxonomy Cultigen Cultivar Group Grex History of plant systematics Herbarium International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT) Plant taxonomy systems Taxonomic rank Practice Agronomy Floriculture Forestry Horticulture Phytochemical Lists Related Botanical terms Botanists by author abbreviation Botanical expeditions Individual trees Oldest trees Superlative trees Tallest trees Plants Category Authority control databases : National United States Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bract&oldid=1300905459 " Categories : Plant morphology Leaves Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using gallery without a media namespace prefix Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2025 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 01:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bract 41 languages Add topic

