Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Political career 2 Death 3 Family 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Quintus Mucius Scaevola Pontifex 21 languages Български Català Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Français Italiano Latina Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Roman jurist, politician and writer (consul in 97 BC) For other men with this name, see Quintus Mucius Scaevola (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Quintus Mucius Scaevola Pontifex" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Quintus Mucius Scaevola Born 140 BC [ 1 ] Died 82 BC (aged 57–58) Temple of Vesta at Rome Cause of death Murdered Nationality Roman Occupation(s) Politician, jurist, priest Office Consul of Rome (95 BC) Pontifex maximus (89–82 BC) Spouse Licinia Children Mucia Tertia Quintus Mucius Scaevola "Pontifex" (140–82 BC) was a politician of the Roman Republic and an important early authority on Roman law . He is credited with founding the study of law as a systematic discipline.

[ 2 ] He was elected Pontifex Maximus (chief priest of Rome), as had been his father and uncle before him.

[ 3 ] He was the first Roman Pontifex Maximus to be murdered publicly, in Rome in the temple of the Vestal Virgins , signifying a breakdown of historical norms and religious taboos in the Republic.

Political career [ edit ] Scaevola was elected tribune in 106 BC, aedile in 104 and consul in 95. As consul, together with his relative Lucius Licinius Crassus , he had a law (the Lex Licinia Mucia ) passed in the Senate that denied Roman citizenship to certain groups within the Roman sphere of influence  ("Italians" and "Latins"). The passage of this law was one of the major contributing factors to the Social War .

Scaevola was next made governor of Asia , a position in which he became renowned for his harsh treatment of corrupt tax collectors, and for publishing an edict that later became a standard model for provincial administration.

Cicero , for instance, modelled his governor's edict for Cilicia on Scaevola's example. Scaevola's honest administration was so successful that the people he governed instituted a festival day (the dies Mucia ) in his honour. This festival was in turn so popular that even Mithridates VI of Pontus left it untouched when he invaded Asia in the First Mithridatic War .

However, by governing Asia so fairly, Scaevola and his legate Publius Rutilius Rufus attracted the enmity of the Equites , who were being denied their usual profits from extorting the locals. These equestrian businessmen later conspired to have Rutilius Rufus prosecuted and exiled for the charge of extortion in 92 BC, a trial that became a byword for injustice to later generations of Romans.

Returning to Rome, Scaevola was elected pontifex maximus . He took the opportunity to regulate more strictly the priestly colleges and to ensure that traditional rituals were properly observed.

Scaevola was the author of a treatise on civil law ( Jus civile primus constituit generatim in libros decem et octo redigendo ) that spanned eighteen volumes, compiling and systematising legislation and precedents. He also wrote a short legal handbook (ο̉ροι, or simply Liber Singularis ) containing a glossary of terms and an outline of basic principles. Four short sections of this latter work were incorporated by Justinian I into his Pandectae , but nothing of the rest of his works is extant today. Speeches by Scaevola extant in ancient times were praised by Cicero .

He was also the originator of cautelary law giving his name to the cautio muciana and the praesumptio muciana .

The 2nd-century jurist Sextus Pomponius lists the four most eminent pupils of Mucius as Gaius Juventius , Gaius Aquilius Gallus , Lucius Lucilius Balbus , and Gaius Papirius .

Death [ edit ] Scaevola was killed in the civil unrest surrounding the power struggle between Sulla and Gaius Marius . At the latter's funeral in 86 BC, an attempt was made on his life at the instigation of Flavius Fimbria , one of Marius's most violent partisans, who, upon hearing that the victim survived, albeit with a severe wound, launched a prosecution against him, on the grounds that the priest had not allowed the blade to be fully thrust onto his body.

[ 4 ] Scaevola's loyalty to the Marian party was sufficiently in doubt that, in 82, Marius's son ordered the praetor in Rome, Damasippus , to convene the Senate on some pretext in order to murder Scaevola and other unreliable senators in the senate house . Once Scaevola realized the ploy, he fled to the temple of Vesta where, at the vestibule, he was killed by assassins.

[ 5 ] His corpse was thrown unburied into the Tiber .

Family [ edit ] Scaevola was the son of Publius Mucius Scaevola , who was consul in 133 BC and also Pontifex Maximus .

Scaevola was married twice, both women were named Licinia. He divorced his first wife, who was noted for her beauty, for adultery with another ex-consul. This marriage had a daughter Mucia Tertia ; she was married to Pompey the Great , with whom she had his three surviving children.  By his granddaughter Pompeia (wife of Faustus Cornelius Sulla , eldest surviving son of the Dictator), Scaevola had descendants living well into the first and possibly second century of this era.

See also [ edit ] Mucia gens College of Pontiffs References [ edit ] ^ Cicero Brutus 145, 150, 161 , De Oratore 1.180 ^ Tuori, Kaius.

Ancient Roman Lawyers and Modern Legal Ideals: Studies on the Impact of Contemporary Concerns in the Interpretation of Ancient Roman Legal History Vittorio Klostermann: 2007 ISBN 3-465-04034-1 ISBN 9783465040347 ^ Knight, Charles.

The English Cyclopedia 1857; p. 293.

^ Cicero Pro Roscio Amerino 12.33 ^ Appian Civil Wars 1.88, Livy Periochae 86 Political offices Preceded by Gn. Domitius Ahenobarbus G. Cassius Longinus Consul of Rome 95 BC With: L. Licinius Crassus Succeeded by G. Coelius Caldus L. Domitius Ahenobarbus v t e Pontifices maximi 715 BC : Numa Marcius 509 BC : C. Papirius 449 BC : Q. Furius 431 BC : A. Cornelius Cossus 420 BC : S. Minucius 390 BC : M. Fabius Ambustus 332 BC : P. Cornelius Calussa 304 BC : P. Cornelius Scipio Barbatus 254 BC : Ti. Coruncanius 243 BC : L. Caecilius Metellus 221 BC : L. Cornelius Lentulus Caudinus 213 BC : M. Cornelius Cethegus 212 BC : P. Licinius Crassus Dives 180 BC : M. Aemilius Lepidus 150 BC : P. Cornelius Scipio Nasica Corculum 141 BC : P. Cornelius Scipio Nasica Serapio 132 BC : P. Licinius Crassus Dives Mucianus 130 BC : P. Mucius Scaevola 114 BC : L. Caecilius Metellus Delmaticus 103 BC : Cn. Domitius Ahenobarbus 89 BC : Q. Mucius Scaevola 81 BC : Q. Caecilius Metellus Pius 63 BC : C. Julius Caesar 44 BC : M. Aemilius Lepidus 12 BC : Imp. Caesar Augustus 12 BC – AD 375 : Held by the emperors .

v t e Jurisprudence Legal theory Constitutionalism Critical legal studies Comparative law Economic analysis Legal norms International legal theory Legal history Philosophy of law Sociology of law Philosophers Alexy Aquinas Aristotle Austin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Blackstone Bobbio Bork Brożek Cardozo Durkheim Dworkin Ehrlich Finnis Fuller Grotius Gurvitch Habermas Haller Han Hart Hegel Hobbes Hägerström Jellinek Jhering Kant Kelsen Leoni Llewellyn Luhmann Maistre Marx Montesquieu Müller Nussbaum Olivecrona Pashukanis Perelman Petrażycki Plato Posner Pound Pufendorf Radbruch Rawls Raz Reinach Renner Ross Rumi Savigny Scaevola Schmitt Shang Suárez Stahl Unger Voegelin Waldron Walzer Weber Works Laws (c. 355 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1270) The Spirit of Law (1748) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Pure Theory of Law (1934) The Concept of Law (1961) Natural Law and Natural Rights (1980) Law's Empire (1986) Theories Analytical jurisprudence Deontological ethics Fundamental theory of Catholic canon law German historical school Interpretivism Legal moralism Legal positivism Legal realism Legalism Libertarian theories of law Natural law Paternalism Utilitarianism Virtue jurisprudence Concepts Constitutional amendment Dharma Fa Judicial interpretation Judicial reform Justice Law without the state Legal system Li Question of law Rational-legal authority Usul al-Fiqh Category Law portal Philosophy portal WikiProject Law WikiProject Philosophy changes Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Poland Israel Catalonia People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef 2 Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Quintus_Mucius_Scaevola_Pontifex&oldid=1271624387 " Categories : 140 BC births 82 BC deaths 2nd-century BC Romans 1st-century BC clergy 1st-century BC Roman consuls Ancient Roman jurists Ancient Roman murder victims Ancient Roman rhetoricians Mucii Pontifices maximi of the Roman Republic Roman governors of Asia Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2008 All articles needing additional references Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 24 January 2025, at 22:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Quintus Mucius Scaevola Pontifex 21 languages Add topic

