Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career 3 Personal life Toggle Personal life subsection 3.1 Last years 3.2 Death 4 Beliefs Toggle Beliefs subsection 4.1 Science and mathematics 4.2 Race and elitism 4.2.1 Anglo-Saxons 4.2.2 Jews 5 Memorials Toggle Memorials subsection 5.1 Home 5.2 Papers 6 Works Toggle Works subsection 6.1 Books 6.2 Chapbooks, pamphlets, and notable essays 6.3 Translations (excerpt) 7 See also 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Notes 8.2 Sources 9 External links Toggle the table of contents H. L. Mencken 31 languages العربية تۆرکجه বাংলা Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kapampangan مصرى Nederlands Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American journalist and writer (1880–1956) "Mencken" redirects here. For other people named Mencken, see Mencken (surname) .

H. L. Mencken Mencken in 1928 Born Henry Louis Mencken ( 1880-09-12 ) September 12, 1880 Baltimore , Maryland , U.S.

Died January 29, 1956 (1956-01-29) (aged 75) Baltimore, Maryland, U.S.

Occupations Journalist essayist satirist social critic Notable credit The Baltimore Sun Spouse Sara Haardt ​ ​ ( m.

1930; died 1935) ​ Parent August Mencken Sr.

Relatives August Mencken Jr.

(brother) This article is part of a series on Libertarianism in the United States Schools Agorism Anarcho-capitalism Austro Authoritarian Autarchism Bleeding-heart Christian Conservative Consequentialist Feminist Fusionism Geo Green Market anarchism Minarchism Natural-rights Neo Paleo Panarchism Paternalist Propertarianism Socialist Techno Transhumanist Voluntaryism Principles Anti-imperialism Civil libertarianism Constitutionalism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Economic freedom Evictionism Free banking Free market Free-market environmentalism Free migration Free trade Free will Freedom of association Freedom of contract Freedom of speech Homestead principle Individuality Individualism Liberty Limited government Localism Marriage privatization Natural rights and legal rights Non-aggression principle Non-interventionism Non-politics Non-voting Open border Polycentric law Private defense agency Private property Public choice theory Restorative justice Right to bear arms Right to privacy Rugged Individualism Self-ownership Single tax Small government Spoiled ballot Spontaneous order Stateless society Tax resistance Title-transfer theory of contract Voluntary association Voluntary society History Age of Enlightenment Abolitionism in the United States Classical liberalism Anti-Federalists Transcendentalism Individualist anarchism in the United States Old Right New Left New Right Freedom School Economics Austrian School Economic liberalism Fiscal conservatism Georgism Laissez-faire Neoliberalism Supply-side economics Intellectuals Andrews Barnett Block Boudreaux Brennan Caplan Carson Chamberlain Chartier Chodorov Cowen Ebeling Epstein Franklin D. Friedman M. Friedman P. Friedman R. Friedman Galambos Garrett George Griffin Gordon Harper Hazlitt Heinlein Hess Hoppe Hospers Huemer Jefferson Kinsella Konkin R. Lane Liggio LeFevre Machan Mencken Menger Mises Nock Nozick Paterson Rand Raico Read Robertson Rockwell Rothbard Samuels Schulman Sciabarra Scott Skousen Smith Spooner Somin Sowell Sumner Sutton Stephenson Szasz Taleb Thoreau Tuccille Tucker Volokh Wilder Williams Wilson (Clyde) Wilson (Robert) Politicians Amash Barr Brakey Burt Chafee Cleveland Flake Goldwater Jacobs Johnson Jorgensen Lee Massie McAfee Nolan Oliver Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Polis Sanford Sarwark Sununu Ventura Weld Wu Commentators Chamberlain Gillespie Gutfeld Jones Kauffman McElroy Miller Napolitano Postrel Pugsley Rogan Smith Soave Stone Stossel Welch Will Woods Activists Ben Garrison Jillette Koch (Charles) Koch (David) Reitman Kubrick Smith Prince Teller Thiel Literature The Anarchist Cookbook Anarchy, State, and Utopia The Betrayal of the American Right The Case Against Education Civil Disobedience Conceived in Liberty The Creature from Jekyll Island Defending the Undefendable The Discovery of Freedom End the Fed The Ethics of Liberty For a New Liberty Free to Choose The Future and Its Enemies The God of the Machine It Usually Begins with Ayn Rand Liberty The Machinery of Freedom Man, Economy and State The Moon is a Harsh Mistress The Mainspring of Human Progress The Market for Liberty The Myth of the Rational Voter No, They Can't No Treason New Libertarian Manifesto Our Enemy, the State The Problem of Political Authority Progress and Poverty Protection or Free Trade Radicals for Capitalism Seeing Like a State To Serve and Protect The Unconstitutionality of Slavery Issues Abortion Capital punishment Criticism Foreign affairs Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political parties Politics State Theories of law Symbols Come and take it Gadsden flag Idols Ron Swanson Patrick Bateman Walter White Organizations Cato Institute Federalist Society Free State Project Foundation for Economic Education International Alliance of Libertarian Parties Libertarian Party Liberty International Mises Institute Reason Foundation Reason (magazine) Students for a Democratic Society Students for Liberty Young Americans for Liberty Movements American militia movement Boogaloo movement Dark Enlightenment Objectivist movement Objectivism Sovereign citizen movement Comparable Libertarianism in Hong Kong Libertarianism in the United Kingdom ( England ) Related Conservatism in the United States Left-libertarianism Liberalism in the United States Libertarian Democrat Libertarian Republican Libertarian science fiction On Democracy in America Outline of libertarianism Right-libertarianism Liberalism portal Conservatism portal Libertarianism portal United States portal v t e Henry Louis Mencken (September 12, 1880 – January 29, 1956) was an American journalist , essayist , satirist , cultural critic , and scholar of American English .

[ 1 ] He commented widely on the social scene, literature, music, prominent politicians, and contemporary movements. His satirical reporting on the Scopes Trial , which he dubbed the "Monkey Trial", also earned him attention. The term Menckenian has entered multiple dictionaries to describe anything of or pertaining to Mencken, including his combative rhetorical and prose styles.

As a scholar, Mencken is known for The American Language , a multi-volume study of how the English language is spoken in the United States. As an admirer of the German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche , he was an outspoken opponent of organized religion , theism , censorship , populism , and representative democracy , the last of which he viewed as a system in which inferior men dominated their superiors.

[ 2 ] Mencken was a supporter of scientific progress and was critical of osteopathy and chiropractic . He was also an open critic of economics .

Mencken opposed the American entry into World War I and World War II . Some of the opinions in his private diary entries have been described by some researchers as racist and antisemitic , [ 3 ] although this characterization has been disputed.

Larry S. Gibson argued that Mencken's views on race changed significantly between his early and later private writings which started when he was 50, and that it was more accurate to describe Mencken as elitist rather than racist.

[ 4 ] He seemed to show a genuine enthusiasm for militarism but never in its American form. "War is a good thing," he wrote, "because it is honest; it admits the central fact of human nature... A nation too long at peace becomes a sort of gigantic old maid." [ 5 ] His longtime home in the Union Square neighborhood of West Baltimore was turned into a city museum, the H. L. Mencken House . His papers were distributed among various city and university libraries, with the largest collection held in the Mencken Room at the central branch of Baltimore's Enoch Pratt Free Library .

[ 6 ] Early life and education [ edit ] Mencken was born in Baltimore , Maryland , on September 12, 1880. He was the son of Anna Margaret (Abhau) and August Mencken Sr.

, a cigar factory owner. He was of German ancestry and spoke German in his childhood.

[ 7 ] When Henry was three, his family moved into a new home at 1524 Hollins Street facing Union Square park in the Union Square neighborhood of old West Baltimore. Apart from five years residing elsewhere during the marriage that left him a widower in middle age, Mencken would stay there for the rest of his life.

[ 8 ] In his bestselling memoir Happy Days , he described his childhood in Baltimore as "placid, secure, uneventful and happy".

[ 9 ] When he was nine years old, he read Mark Twain 's Huckleberry Finn , which he later described as "the most stupendous event in my life".

[ 10 ] He became determined to become a writer and read voraciously. In one winter while in high school he read William Makepeace Thackeray and then "proceeded backward to Addison , Steele , Pope , Swift , Johnson and the other magnificos of the Eighteenth century". He read the entire canon of Shakespeare and became an ardent fan of Rudyard Kipling and Thomas Huxley .

[ 11 ] As a boy, Mencken also had practical interests, photography and chemistry in particular, and eventually had a home chemistry laboratory in which he performed experiments of his own design,
some of them inadvertently dangerous.

[ 12 ] He began his primary education in the mid-1880s at Professor Knapp's School on the east side of Holliday Street between East Lexington and Fayette Streets, next to the Holliday Street Theatre and across from the newly constructed Baltimore City Hall . The site today is the War Memorial and City Hall Plaza laid out in 1926 in memory of World War I dead. At 15, in June 1896, he graduated as valedictorian from the Baltimore Polytechnic Institute , at the time a males-only mathematics, technical and science-oriented public high school .

He worked for three years in his father's cigar factory. He disliked the work, especially the sales aspect of it, and resolved to leave, with or without his father's blessing. In early 1898 he took a writing class at the Cosmopolitan University, [ 13 ] a free correspondence school established by The Cosmopolitan magazine.

[ 14 ] This was to be the entirety of Mencken's formal post-secondary education in journalism, or in any other subject. Upon his father's death a few days after Christmas in the same year, the business passed to his uncle, and Mencken was free to pursue his career in journalism. He applied in February 1899 to the Morning Herald newspaper (which became the Baltimore Morning Herald in 1900) and was hired part-time, but still kept his position at the factory for a few months. In June he was hired as a full-time reporter.

[ citation needed ] Career [ edit ] Mencken circa 1920 Mencken served as a reporter at the Herald for six years. Fewer than two-and-a-half years after the Great Baltimore Fire , the paper was purchased in June 1906 by Charles H. Grasty , the owner and editor of The News since 1892 and competing owner and publisher Gen.

Felix Agnus , of the town's oldest (since 1773) and largest daily, The Baltimore American .

They proceeded to divide the staff, assets and resources of The Herald between them. Mencken then moved to The Baltimore Sun , where he worked for Charles H. Grasty. He continued to contribute to The Sun, The Evening Sun (founded 1910) and The Sunday Sun full-time until 1948, when he stopped writing after suffering a stroke.

Mencken began writing the editorials and opinion pieces that made his name at The Sun.

On the side, he wrote short stories, a novel, and even poetry, which he later revealed. In 1908, he became a literary critic for The Smart Set magazine, and in 1924 he and George Jean Nathan founded and edited The American Mercury , published by Alfred A. Knopf . It soon developed a national circulation and became highly influential on college campuses across America. In 1933, Mencken resigned as editor.

Mencken photographed by Carl Van Vechten , 1932 During the Great Depression , Mencken did not support the New Deal , which cost him popularity. In 1931, the Arkansas legislature passed a motion to pray for Mencken's soul after he had called the state the "apex of moronia".

[ 15 ] In the mid-1930s, Mencken feared President Franklin D. Roosevelt and his New Deal liberalism as a powerful force. Mencken was "deeply conservative, resentful of change, looking back upon the 'happy days' of a bygone time, wanted no part of the world that the New Deal promised to bring in"  according to Charles A. Fecher.

[ 16 ] Mencken had strong reservations regarding U.S. participation in World War II . He ceased writing for The Baltimore Sun for several years, focusing on his memoirs and other projects as editor while he served as an adviser for the paper that had been his home for nearly his entire career.

In 1948, he briefly returned to the political scene to cover the presidential election in which President Harry S. Truman faced Republican Thomas Dewey and Henry A. Wallace of the Progressive Party . His later work consisted of humorous, anecdotal, and nostalgic essays that were first published in The New Yorker and then collected in the books Happy Days , Newspaper Days , and Heathen Days .

Personal life [ edit ] Sara Haardt Mencken On August 27, 1930, Mencken married Sara Haardt , a German American professor of English at Goucher College in Baltimore and an author eighteen years his junior.

[ 17 ] Haardt had led an unsuccessful effort in Alabama to ratify the 19th Amendment .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] The two met in 1923, after Mencken delivered a lecture at Goucher; a seven-year courtship ensued. The marriage made national headlines, and many were surprised that Mencken, who once called marriage "the end of hope" and who was well known for mocking relations between the sexes, had gone to the altar. "The Holy Spirit informed and inspired me," Mencken said. "Like all other infidels, I am superstitious and always follow hunches: this one seemed to be a superb one." [ 20 ] Even more startling, he was marrying an Alabama native, despite his having written scathing essays about the American South . Haardt was in poor health from tuberculosis throughout their marriage and died in 1935 of meningitis , leaving Mencken grief-stricken.

[ 21 ] He had always championed her writing, and after her death, had a collection of her short stories published under the title Southern Album . Haardt's childhood friend, Alabama author Sara Mayfield wrote extensively about Haardt and Mencken in her 1968 book The Constant Circle: H. L. Mencken and His Friends .

[ 22 ] Last years [ edit ] On November 23, 1948, Mencken suffered a stroke, which left him aware and fully conscious but nearly unable to read or write and able to speak only with difficulty. After his stroke, Mencken enjoyed listening to classical music, and after some recovery of his ability to speak, talking with friends, but he sometimes referred to himself in the past tense, as if he were already dead. During the last year of his life, his friend and biographer William Manchester read to him daily.

[ 23 ] Death [ edit ] Mencken died in his sleep on January 29, 1956.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] He was interred in Baltimore's Loudon Park Cemetery .

[ 26 ] A very small, short, and private service was held, in accordance with Mencken's wishes.

[ 27 ] Although it does not appear on his tombstone, Mencken, during his Smart Set days, wrote a joking epitaph for himself: If, after I depart this vale, you ever remember me and have thought to please my ghost, forgive some sinner and wink your eye at some homely girl.

[ 28 ] Beliefs [ edit ] In his capacity as editor, Mencken became close friends with the leading literary figures of his time, including Theodore Dreiser , F. Scott Fitzgerald , Joseph Hergesheimer , Anita Loos , Ben Hecht , Sinclair Lewis , James Branch Cabell , and Alfred Knopf , as well as a mentor to several young reporters, including Alistair Cooke . He also championed artists whose works he considered worthy. For example, he asserted that books such as Caught Short! A Saga of Wailing Wall Street (1929), by Eddie Cantor (ghostwritten by David Freedman ) did more to pull America out of the Great Depression than all government measures combined. He also mentored John Fante .

Thomas Hart Benton illustrated an edition of Mencken's book Europe After 8:15 .

Mencken also published many works under various pseudonyms, including Owen Hatteras , John H Brownell, William Drayham, WLD Bell, and Charles Angoff .

[ 29 ] As a ghostwriter for the physician Leonard K. Hirshberg , he wrote a series of articles, and in 1910, most of a book about the care of babies.

Mencken admired the German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche (he was the first writer to provide a scholarly analysis in English of Nietzsche's views and writings) and Joseph Conrad . His humor and satire owed much to Ambrose Bierce and Mark Twain . He did much to defend Dreiser despite freely admitting his faults, including stating forthrightly that Dreiser often wrote badly and was gullible. Mencken expressed his appreciation for William Graham Sumner in a 1941 collection of Sumner's essays and regretted never having known Sumner personally. In contrast, Mencken was scathing in his criticism of the German philosopher Hans Vaihinger , whom Mencken described as "an extremely dull author" and whose famous book Philosophy of 'As If' he dismissed as an unimportant "foot-note to all existing systems".

[ 30 ] Mencken recommended for publication philosopher and author Ayn Rand 's first novel, We the Living and called it "a really excellent piece of work". Shortly afterward, Rand addressed him in correspondence as "the greatest representative of a philosophy" to which she wanted to dedicate her life, "individualism", and later listed him as her favorite columnist.

[ 31 ] Mencken is fictionalized in the play Inherit the Wind (a fictionalized version of the Scopes Monkey Trial of 1925) as the cynical sarcastic atheist E. K. Hornbeck (right), seen here as played by Gene Kelly in the Hollywood film version . On the left is Henry Drummond, based on Clarence Darrow and portrayed by Spencer Tracy .

For Mencken, Adventures of Huckleberry Finn was the finest work of American literature . He particularly relished Mark Twain's depiction of a succession of gullible and ignorant townspeople, "boobs", as Mencken referred to them, who are repeatedly gulled by a pair of colorful con men : the deliberately pathetic "Duke" and "Dauphin ", with whom Huck and Jim travel down the Mississippi River . For Mencken, the depiction epitomizes the hilarious dark side of America, where democracy, as defined by Mencken, is "the worship of jackals by jackasses".

[ 32 ] Such turns of phrase evoked the erudite cynicism and rapier sharpness of language displayed by Ambrose Bierce in his darkly satiric The Devil's Dictionary . A noted curmudgeon, [ 33 ] democratic in subjects attacked, Mencken savaged politics, [ 34 ] hypocrisy, and social convention. A master of English, he was given to bombast and once disdained the lowly hot dog bun's descent into "the soggy rolls prevailing today, of ground acorns, plaster of Paris, flecks of bath sponge and atmospheric air all compact".

[ 35 ] Defining Puritanism as "the haunting fear that someone, somewhere, may be happy", Mencken believed that the U.S. had not cast aside the Puritans' influence.

[ 36 ] He opined that American culture, unlike its European counterparts, had not attained intellectual freedom, and judged literature by moral orthodoxy and not by artistic merit.

[ 36 ] His most outspoken essay was "Puritanism as a Literary Force" from his 1917 collection of essays A Book of Prefaces : The Puritan's utter lack of aesthetic sense, his distrust of all romantic emotion, his unmatchable intolerance of opposition, his unbreakable belief in his own bleak and narrow views, his savage cruelty of attack, his lust for relentless and barbarous persecution – these things have put an almost unbearable burden up on the exchange of ideas in the United States.

[ 37 ] As a nationally syndicated columnist and book author, he commented widely on the social scene, literature, music, prominent politicians and contemporary movements, such as the temperance movement. Mencken was a keen cheerleader of scientific progress, skeptical of economic theories and strongly opposed to osteopathic / chiropractic medicine. He also debunked the idea of objective news reporting since "truth is a commodity that the masses of undifferentiated men cannot be induced to buy" and added a humorous description of how "Homo Boobus", like "higher mammalia", is moved by "whatever gratifies his prevailing yearnings".

[ 38 ] As a frank admirer of Nietzsche, Mencken was a detractor of representative democracy , which he believed was a system in which inferior men dominated their superiors.

[ 2 ] Also, like Nietzsche, Mencken lambasted religious belief and the very concept of God, as he was an unflinching atheist . He was  particularly hostile to Christian fundamentalism , Christian Science and creationism , and towards the "Booboisie", his word for the ignorant middle classes.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] [ 41 ] In the summer of 1925 he attended the famous Scopes "Monkey Trial" in Dayton, Tennessee, and wrote scathing columns for the Baltimore Sun (these widely syndicated) and American Mercury mocking the anti-evolution fundamentalists (especially William Jennings Bryan ). The play Inherit the Wind is a fictionalized version of the trial, and as noted above the cynical reporter E.K. Hornbeck is based on Mencken. In 1926, he deliberately had himself arrested for selling an issue of The American Mercury , which was banned in Boston by the Comstock laws .

[ 42 ] Mencken heaped scorn not only on the public officials he disliked but also on the state of American elective politics itself.

In the summer of 1926, Mencken followed with great interest the Los Angeles grand jury inquiry into the famous Canadian American evangelist Aimee Semple McPherson . She was accused of faking her reported kidnapping and the case attracted national attention. There was every expectation that Mencken would continue his previous pattern of anti-fundamentalist articles, this time with a searing critique of McPherson. Unexpectedly, he came to her defense by identifying various local religious and civic groups that were using the case as an opportunity to pursue their respective ideological agendas against the embattled Pentecostal minister.

[ 43 ] He spent several weeks in Hollywood , California, and wrote many scathing and satirical columns on the movie industry and Southern California culture. After all charges had been dropped against McPherson, Mencken revisited the case in 1930 with a sarcastic and observant article. He wrote that since many of that town's residents had acquired their ideas "of the true, the good and the beautiful" from the movies and newspapers, "Los Angeles will remember the testimony against her long after it forgets the testimony that cleared her".

[ 44 ] Science and mathematics [ edit ] Mencken defended the evolutionary views of Charles Darwin but spoke unfavorably of many prominent physicists and had little regard for pure mathematics. Regarding theoretical physics , he said to longtime editor Charles Angoff , "Imagine measuring infinity! That's a laugh." [ 45 ] Elsewhere, he dismissed higher mathematics and probability theory as "nonsense", after he read Angoff's article for Charles Sanders Peirce in the American Mercury : "So you believe in that garbage, too—theories of knowledge, infinity, laws of probability. I can make no sense of it, and I don't believe you can either, and I don't think your god Peirce knew what he was talking about." [ 46 ] Mencken repeatedly identified mathematics with metaphysics and theology. According to Mencken, mathematics is necessarily infected with metaphysics. Mathematicians tend to engage in metaphysical speculation. In a review of Alfred North Whitehead 's The Aims of Education, Mencken remarked that, although he agreed with Whitehead's thesis and admired his writing style, "Now and then he falls into mathematical jargon and pollutes his discourse with equations", and "[T]here are moments when he seems to be following some of his mathematical colleagues into the gaudy metaphysics which now entertains them".

[ 47 ] For Mencken, theology was characterized by it using correct reasoning from false premises. Mencken uses the term "theology" more generally to refer to the use of logic in science or any field of knowledge. In a review of Arthur Eddington 's The Nature of the Physical World and Joseph Needham 's Man a Machine , Mencken ridiculed the use of reasoning to establish any fact in science.

[ 48 ] Mencken wrote a review of Sir James Jeans 's book, The Mysterious Universe , in which Mencken wrote that mathematics is not necessary for physics. Instead of mathematical "speculation" (such as quantum theory ), Mencken believed physicists should directly look at individual facts in the laboratory, as do chemists.

[ 49 ] In the same article, which he re-printed in the Mencken Chrestomathy , Mencken primarily contrasts what real scientists do, which is to simply directly look at the existence of "shapes and forces" confronting them instead of (such as in statistics) attempting to speculate and use mathematical models. Physicists and especially astronomers are consequently not real scientists, because when looking at shapes or forces, they do not simply "patiently wait for further light", but resort to mathematical theory. There is no need for statistics in scientific physics, since one should simply look at the facts while statistics attempts to construct mathematical models. On the other hand, the really competent physicists do not bother with the "theology" or reasoning of mathematical theories (such as in quantum mechanics).

[ 49 ] Mencken ridiculed Albert Einstein 's theory of general relativity , believing that "in the long run his curved space may be classed with the psychosemantic bumps of Gall and Spurzheim ".

[ 50 ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Race and elitism [ edit ] In addition to his identification of races with castes, Mencken had views about the superior individual within communities. He believed that every community produced a few people of clear superiority. He considered groupings on a par with hierarchies, which led to a kind of natural elitism and natural aristocracy . "Superior" individuals, in Mencken's view, were those wrongly oppressed and disdained by their own communities but nevertheless distinguished by their will and personal achievement, not by race or birth.

External videos Booknotes interview with Charles Fecher on The Diary of H. L. Mencken , January 28, 1990 , C-SPAN In 1989, per his instructions, Alfred A. Knopf published Mencken's "secret diary" as The Diary of H. L. Mencken . According to an Associated Press story, Mencken's views shocked even the "sympathetic scholar who edited it", Charles Fecher of Baltimore.

[ 3 ] A club in Baltimore, the Maryland Club , had one Jewish member. When that member died, Mencken said, "There is no other Jew in Baltimore who seems suitable." The diary also quoted him as saying of blacks, in September 1943, that "it is impossible to talk anything resembling discretion or judgment to a colored woman. They are all essentially child-like, and even hard experience does not teach them anything".

Mencken opposed lynching . In 1935, he testified before Congress in support of the Costigan–Wagner Bill . While he had previously written negatively about lynchings during the 1910s and 1920s, the lynchings of Matthew Williams and George Armwood caused him to write in support of the bill and give political advice to Walter White on how to maximize the likelihood of the bill's passing.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] The two lynchings in his home state made the issue directly relevant to him. His arguments against lynching were influenced by his interpretation of civilization, as he believed that a civilized society would not tolerate it.

[ 51 ] One of his biographers observed that: ... he was receptive to black writers, without question more helpful than any other editor of his time. Both W.E.B. Du Bois and the poet Countee Cullen appeared in the Mercury's pages during its first year, and in later issues poets James Weldon Johnson and Langston Hughes and future NAACP head Walter F. White were represented. Indeed, the black journalist George Schuyler , who contributed nine essays to the Mercury, was to appear more frequently in the magazine in the final six years of Mencken's editorship than any other writer, white or black.

— Fred Hobson [ 53 ] External videos Presentation by Terry Teachout on The Skeptic , November 11, 2002 , C-SPAN In a review of The Skeptic: A Life of H. L. Mencken , by Terry Teachout , journalist Christopher Hitchens described Mencken as a German nationalist , "an antihumanist as much as an atheist", who was "prone to the hyperbole and sensationalism he distrusted in others". Hitchens also criticized Mencken for writing a scathing critique of Franklin Delano Roosevelt but nothing equally negative of Adolf Hitler .

[ 54 ] Larry S. Gibson argued that Mencken's views on race changed significantly between his early and later writings, attributing some of the changes in Mencken's views to his personal experiences of being treated as an outsider due to his German heritage during World War I. Gibson speculated that much of Mencken's language was intended to lure in readers by suggesting a shared negative view of other races, and then writing about their positive aspects. Describing Mencken as elitist rather than racist, he says Mencken ultimately believed that humans consisted of a small group of those of superior intelligence and a mass of inferior people, regardless of race.

[ 4 ] Mencken scholar Marion Elizabeth Rodgers has argued that, despite the racial slurs and ethnic slang in the diaries, Mencken rebelled against "the Aryan imbecilities of Hitler" and stated: "To me personally, race prejudice is one of the most preposterous of all the imbecilities of mankind. There are so few people on earth worth knowing that I hate to think of any man I like as a German or a Frenchman, a gentile or a Jew, Negro or a white man." [ 55 ] Anglo-Saxons [ edit ] Mencken countered the arguments for Anglo-Saxon superiority prevalent in his time in a 1923 essay entitled "The Anglo-Saxon", which argued that if there was such a thing as a pure "Anglo-Saxon" race, it was defined by its inferiority and cowardice: "The normal American of the 'pure-blooded' majority goes to rest every night with an uneasy feeling that there is a burglar under the bed and he gets up every morning with a sickening fear that his underwear has been stolen." [ 56 ] Jews [ edit ] Chaz Bufe , an admirer of Mencken, wrote that Mencken's various anti-Semitic statements should be understood in the context that Mencken made bombastic and over-the-top denunciations of almost any national, religious, and ethnic group. One of his autobiographers noted: Thus, rhetorically at least, he lived life more dramatically than most other mortals, attempted more, risked more, said more, and said it more colorfully on a wider range of subjects than perhaps any other writer of his generation. The result, depending on what he came out with at any given time, was that he appeared to be both the best friend and the worst enemy of Jews, blacks, and numerous other segments of the population.
The truth is that a hundred statements could be chosen to "prove" Mencken anti-Semitic and a hundred to "prove" he was not.

— Fred Hobson [ 57 ] That said, Bufe still wrote that some of Mencken's statements were "odious", such as his claim in his 1918 introduction to Nietzsche's The Anti-Christ that "The case against the Jews is long and damning; it would justify ten thousand times as many pogroms as now go on in the world".

[ 58 ] Mencken was also an Axis sympathizer who berated the Allied war effort as late as 1944.

[ 59 ] Memorials [ edit ] Home [ edit ] Mencken's home at 1524 Hollins Street in Baltimore 's Union Square neighborhood, where he lived for 67 years, was bequeathed to the University of Maryland, Baltimore on the death of his younger brother, August, in 1967. The City of Baltimore acquired the property in 1983, and the H. L. Mencken House became part of the City Life Museums. The house was restored in 2019, with the third floor and rear of the second floor becoming the headquarters of the Baltimore National Heritage Area. The first floor and front of the second floor appear much as they were in the 1940s, and constitute the H. L. Mencken House Museum, overseen by the nonprofit Society to Preserve H. L. Mencken's Legacy. It is opened for special events, and individual and group visits are available by arrangement.

[ 60 ] Papers [ edit ] Shortly after World War II , Mencken expressed his intention of bequeathing his books and papers to Baltimore's Enoch Pratt Free Library . At his death, it was in possession of most of the present large collection. As a result, his papers as well as much of his personal library, which includes many books inscribed by major authors, are held in the Library's Central Branch on Cathedral Street in Baltimore. The original third floor H. L. Mencken Room and Collection housing this collection was dedicated on April 17, 1956.

[ 61 ] The new Mencken Room, on the first floor of the Library's Annex, was opened in November 2003.

The collection contains Mencken's typescripts, newspaper and magazine contributions, published books, family documents and memorabilia, clipping books, large collection of presentation volumes, file of correspondence with prominent Marylanders, and the extensive material he collected while he was preparing The American Language .

[ 61 ] Other Mencken related collections of note are at Dartmouth College , Harvard University , Princeton University , Johns Hopkins University , and Yale University . In 2007, Johns Hopkins acquired "nearly 6,000 books, photographs and letters by and about Mencken" from "the estate of an Ohio accountant".

[ 62 ] The Sara Haardt Mencken collection at Goucher College includes letters exchanged between Haardt and Mencken and condolences written after her death. Some of Mencken's vast literary correspondence is held at the New York Public Library . "Gift of HL Mencken 1929" is stamped on The Marriage of Heaven and Hell , Luce 1906 edition of William Blake , which shows up from the Library of Congress online version for reading. Mencken's letters to Louise (Lou) Wylie, a reporter and feature writer for New Orleans's The Times-Picayune newspaper, are archived at Loyola University New Orleans .

[ 63 ] Works [ edit ] Books [ edit ] George Bernard Shaw: His Plays (1905) The Philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche (1908) The Gist of Nietzsche (1910) What You Ought to Know about your Baby ( Ghostwriter for Leonard K. Hirshberg ; 1910) Men versus the Man: a Correspondence between Robert Rives La Monte, Socialist and H. L. Mencken, Individualist (1910) Europe After 8:15 (1914) A Book of Burlesques (1916) A Little Book in C Major (1916) A Book of Prefaces (1917) In Defense of Women (1918) Damn! A Book of Calumny (1918) The American Language (1919) Prejudices (1919–27) First Series (1919) Second Series (1920) Third Series (1922) Fourth Series (1924) Fifth Series (1926) Sixth Series (1927) Selected Prejudices (1927) Heliogabalus (A Buffoonery in Three Acts) (1920) The American Credo (1920) Notes on Democracy (1926) Menckeneana: A Schimpflexikon (1928) – Editor Treatise on the Gods (1930) Making a President (1932) Treatise on Right and Wrong (1934) Happy Days, 1880–1892 (1940) Newspaper Days, 1899–1906 (1941) [ 64 ] A New Dictionary of Quotations on Historical Principles from Ancient and Modern Sources (1942) Heathen Days, 1890–1936 (1943) Christmas Story (1944) The American Language, Supplement I (1945) The American Language, Supplement II (1948) A Mencken Chrestomathy (1949) (edited by H. L. Mencken) Posthumous collections Minority Report (1956) On Politics: A Carnival of Buncombe (1956) Cairns, Huntington, ed. (1965), The American Scene .

The Bathtub Hoax and Other Blasts and Bravos from the Chicago Tribune (1958) Lippman, Theo Jr, ed. (1975), A Gang of Pecksniffs: And Other Comments on Newspaper Publishers, Editors and Reporters .

Rodgers, Marion Elizabeth, ed. (1991), The Impossible H. L. Mencken: A Selection of His Best Newspaper Stories .

Yardley, Jonathan , ed. (1992), My Life As Author and Editor .

A Second Mencken Chrestomathy (1994) (edited by Terry Teachout ) Thirty-five Years of Newspaper Work (1996) A Religious Orgy in Tennessee: A Reporter's Account of the Scopes Monkey Trial , Melville House Publishing , 2006 .

Chapbooks, pamphlets, and notable essays [ edit ] Ventures into Verse (1903) The Artist: A Drama Without Words (1912) The Creed of a Novelist (1916) Pistols for Two (1917) The Sahara of the Bozart Archived December 6, 2021, at the Wayback Machine (1920) Gamalielese (1921) " The Hills of Zion " (1925) The Libido for the Ugly (1927) The Penalty of Death [ 65 ] Translations (excerpt) [ edit ] Friedrich Nietzsche: The Antichrist – Translated and Introduced by H. L. Mencken , Alfred A. Knopf, New York 1918 ( Project Gutenberg EBook of The Antichrist ) See also [ edit ] Bathtub hoax Elmer Gantry , a 1927 satirical novel dedicated to Mencken by Sinclair Lewis History of the Germans in Baltimore Maryland literature Peabody Bookshop and Beer Stube References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ "Obituary", Variety , February 1, 1956 ^ a b Mencken, Henry (1926).

Notes on Democracy . New York: Alfred Knopf.

^ a b "Mencken Was Pro-Nazi, His Diary Shows" .

Los Angeles Times .

Associated Press . December 5, 1989.

Archived from the original on November 10, 2012.

^ a b Gibson, Larry S.

(Winter 2014). "H. L. Mencken: Racist or Civil Rights Champion?".

Menckeniana .

208 (208): 1– 12.

JSTOR 26485502 .

If one were to label Mencken's way of looking at mankind, one could rightly call it "elitism". It was not "racism".

^ Siegel, Fred.

The Revolt Against the Masses . New York City: Encounter Books. p. 25.

^ "H. L. Mencken Room – Enoch Pratt Free Library" .

www.prattlibrary.org .

Archived from the original on April 30, 2018.

^ Sowell, Thomas (1996), Migrations and Cultures: A World View , New York City: Basic Books , p. 82, ISBN 978-0465045891 , ... it may be indicative of how long German cultural ties endured [in the United States] that the German language was spoken in childhood by such disparate twentieth-century American figures as famed writer H. L. Mencken, baseball stars Babe Ruth and Lou Gehrig , and by the Nobel Prize-winning economist George Stigler .

^ Detailed description , Baltimore: Mencken's home, archived from the original on October 27, 2005 ^ Happy Days , p. vii ^ St. Petersburg Times – September 23, 1987 ^ Goldberg 1925 , pp. 90–93.

^ Newspaper Days, 1899–1906 , p. 58.

^ Goldberg 1925 , p. 93.

^ Noonan, Mark (2012). "The Improbable First Century of Cosmopolitan Magazine by James Landers (review)".

American Studies .

52 (1): 186– 187.

doi : 10.1353/ams.2012.0016 .

^ Manchester , p. 252 ^ Mencken, HL (2012). Fecher, Charles A (ed.).

Diary . New York City: Knopf Doubleday . p. 28.

ISBN 978-0307808868 .

^ Mayfield, Sara (1968).

The Constant Circle: H. L. Mencken and His Friends . Tuscaloosa, Alabama: University of Alabama Press . p. 168.

ISBN 978-0817350635 .

Archived from the original on December 2, 2023 . Retrieved December 2, 2023 .

^ Sara Haardt (short biographical sketch), AL, archived from the original on February 8, 2007 ^ Alabama rejected the Nineteenth Amendment on September 22, 1919, though it later ratified it as a symbolic gesture on September 8, 1953.

^ Mencken (bio), Mencken house, archived from the original on February 4, 2012 ^ "Literary Figures: Sally Haardt" , The Real South: Famous People , AL, archived from the original on February 8, 2007 ^ Mayfield, Sara (1968).

The Constant Circle: H. L. Mencken and His Friends . Tuscaloosa, Alabama: University of Alabama.

ISBN 978-0817350635 .

Archived from the original on December 2, 2023 . Retrieved December 2, 2023 .

^ Filkins, Dexter (August 14, 2001), "Ailing Churchill Biographer Says He Can't Finish Trilogy" , The New York Times , archived from the original on March 7, 2016 }.

^ "HL Mencken, 75, Dies in Baltimore" .

The New York Times . January 30, 1956.

Archived from the original on December 1, 2008.

HL Mencken was found dead in bed early today. The 75-year-old author, editor, critic and newspaper man had lived in retirement since suffering a cerebral hemorrhage in 1948 ^ Hutchison, Anne W. (January 30, 1956).

"H. L. Mencken, Author, Dies at 75" .

The Baltimore Sun . p. 1.

Archived from the original on January 11, 2023.

^ "Baltimore's historic Loudon Park cemetery affected by flooding after recent storms" .

Baltimore Sun . June 8, 2018.

Archived from the original on October 14, 2019.

^ "Mencken: The American Iconoclast" By Marion Elizabeth Rodgers. Page 549 ^ "Epitaph", Smart Set , December 3, 1921, p. 33.

^ Harrison, SL (2005), AKA HL Mencken: Selected Pseudonymous Writings , Wolf Den Books ^ Mencken, HL (October 1924), "Philosophers as Liars", The American Mercury , vol. III, no. 10, pp.

253– 255 ^ Rand, Ayn (1995), Berliner, Michael (ed.), Letters , Dutton, pp. 10 (Mencken's opinion of the novel), 13–14 (Rand's praise of Mencken) ^ Jackson, William J.; Thuesen, Peter Johannes (2014).

American Tricksters . Cascade Books. p. 219.

ISBN 978-1625647900 .

^ "Mencken" , Los Angeles Times , January 14, 1990, archived from the original on March 2, 2017 ^ "Moyers" , Commentary , PBS, archived from the original on July 5, 2017 ^ O'Rourke, PJ (December 7, 2014).

"HL Mencken's days trilogy, expanded edition" .

The New York Times . New York City.

Archived from the original on July 9, 2017.

^ a b Fitzpatrick, Vincent (2004).

H. L. Mencken . Mercer University Press. p. 37.

^ Gurstein, Rochelle (2016).

The Repeal of Reticence: America's Cultural and Legal Struggles Over Free Speech, Obscenity, Sexual Liberation, and Modern Art . Farrar, Straus and Giroux. p. 131.

^ Mencken, H. L. (1975).

A gang of pecksniffs: And other comments on newspaper publishers, editors and reporters . Westport, Connecticut: Arlington House Publishers .

ISBN 978-0870003202 .

^ Keating, Joseph Jr (July 16, 1993), "Because We Know Chiropractic Works ..." , Dynamic Chiropractic (sarcastic article), vol. 11, no. 15, Chiro Web, archived from the original on January 10, 2009 ^ Mencken, HL (2006), Prejudices: A Selection , Johns Hopkins University Press, ISBN 978-0801885358 ^ Whorton, James C (2004), Nature Cures: The History of Alternative Medicine in America , US: Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0195171624 ^ HL Mencken Arrested in Boston , Mass Moments, archived from the original on July 18, 2007 ^ Sutton, Matthew Avery (2007), Aimee Semple McPherson and the Resurrection of Christian America , Cambridge: Harvard University Press, pp.

119– 120 ^ Mencken, HL (1930), The American Mercury ^ Angoff, Charles.

H. L. Mencken: A Portrait from Memory . A. S. Barnes (New York, 1961), p. 141 ^ Angoff, Charles.

H. L. Mencken: A Portrait from Memory . A. S. Barnes (New York, 1961), p. 194 ^ Mencken, HL (June 1929). "What Is It All About?".

The American Mercury .

XVII (66): 251– 252.

^ Mencken, HL (April 1929). "The Riddle of the Universe".

The American Mercury .

XVI (64): 509– 510.

^ a b Mencken, HL (February 1931). "The Eternal Conundrum".

The American Mercury .

XXII (86): 252– 254.

^ Mencken, HL.

Minority Report, H. L. Mencken's Notebooks . Alfred A. Knopf (New York, 1956), pp. 273–274 ^ a b Olson, Walter (2019). "2019 Mencken Society Lecture: Mencken, the NAACP, and the Anti-Lynching Campaign".

Menckeniana (224): 8– 11.

ISSN 0025-9233 .

JSTOR 26841917 .

^ Scruggs, Charles (2019).

The Sage in Harlem: H. L. Mencken and the Black Writers of the 1920s . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 31.

doi : 10.2307/2926173 .

ISBN 978-1421430294 .

JSTOR 2926173 .

S2CID 162199305 .

Project MUSE book 67865 .

^ Mencken: A Life (1994), Chapter 10, "The Nearest Thing to Voltaire" (p. 247) ^ Hitchens, Christopher (November 17, 2002).

"A Smart Set of One" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on July 7, 2019.

^ "The Alt-Right Loves H. L. Mencken. The Feeling Would Not Have Been Mutual" . September 12, 2018.

Archived from the original on October 28, 2023 . Retrieved October 7, 2023 .

^ Mencken, HL (July 1923). "The Anglo-Saxon".

Baltimore Evening Sun .

^ Mencken: A Life (1994), Chapter 17, Germany (p. 412) ^ Nietzsche, Friedrich (1999).

The Anti-Christ . Tucson, Arizona: See Sharp Press.

ISBN 1884365205 .

Archived from the original on June 21, 2021.

Note: URL goes to Gutenberg version of just Mencken's text, but does not include Chaz Bufe's introduction or slight changes.

^ By (December 17, 1989).

"Mencken's Diary Reveals Anti-Semitism, Bigotry" .

Sun Sentinel . Retrieved February 25, 2025 .

^ Society to Preserve H. L. Mencken's Legacy ^ a b Schmidt, John C. (April 15, 1956).

"The Library's Mencken Room" .

The Baltimore Sun . p. 87.

ISSN 1930-8965 .

Archived from the original on January 9, 2023 – via Newspapers.com .

^ Staff (2009).

"Books Mencken Collection" . Associated Press. Archived from the original on September 10, 2016.

^ "H. L. Mencken Letters Finding Aid" (PDF) .

Special Collections & Archives, J. Edgar & Louise S. Monroe Library, Loyola University New Orleans . Archived from the original (PDF) on September 6, 2015.

^ "Jonathan Yardley's Second Reading: H. L. Mencken's 'Newspaper Days' " .

The Washington Post . July 3, 2009.

Archived from the original on October 1, 2019 . Retrieved August 29, 2017 .

^ "The Penalty of Death by H. L. Mencken | Major English | Class 12 – Mero Notice" . March 23, 2021.

Archived from the original on September 13, 2021 . Retrieved April 6, 2021 .

Sources [ edit ] Hart, D. G. (2016), Damning Words: The Life and Religious Times of H. L. Mencken , Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co.

ISBN 978-0802873446 Bode, Carl (1969).

Mencken . Southern Illinois University Press.

ISBN 0809303760 .

Evans, Rod L.

(2008).

"Mencken, H. L. (1880–1956)" . In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage ; Cato Institute . pp.

324– 325.

doi : 10.4135/9781412965811.n196 .

ISBN 978-1412965804 .

LCCN 2008009151 .

OCLC 750831024 .

Archived from the original on January 9, 2023 . Retrieved March 23, 2016 .

Goldberg, Isaac (1925), The Man Mencken: A Biographical and Critical Survey , Simon & Schuster, OCLC 367064 .

Hobson, Fred Jr. (1974), Serpent in Eden: H. L. Mencken and the South , Louisiana State University Press, ISBN 080710292X .

——— (1994), Mencken: A Life , Random House, ISBN 0801852382 . Also published in paperback by Johns Hopkins University Press.

Manchester, William (1951).

Disturber of the Peace: The Life of H. L. Mencken . Harper.

OCLC 1134366 Rodgers, Marion Elizabeth (2005).

Mencken: The American Iconoclast . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0195072383 .

Scruggs, Charles (1984).

The Sage in Harlem: H. L. Mencken and the Black Writers of the 1920s . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

ISBN 978-0801830006 .

OCLC 9412727 .

Stenerson, Douglas C. (1974).

H. L. Mencken: Iconoclast from Baltimore . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0226772497 .

Teachout, Terry (2002).

The Skeptic : A Life of H. L. Mencken . Harper Collins.

ISBN 0060505281 .

External links [ edit ] H. L. Mencken at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Works by H. L. Mencken at Project Gutenberg Works by or about H. L. Mencken at the Internet Archive Works by H. L. Mencken at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) H. L. Mencken Collection – Enoch Pratt Free Library (Digital Maryland) Mencken's columns on the Scopes Trial at positiveatheism.org The Papers of the Wilton C. Dinges Collection (H. L. Mencken Collection) at Gettysburg College H. L. and Sara Haardt Mencken Collection at Goucher College H. L. Mencken Papers Archived September 6, 2015, at the Wayback Machine at Loyola University New Orleans FBI file on H. L. Mencken H. L. Mencken Letters Archived January 6, 2011, at the Wayback Machine at The Newberry Library Recorded interview of H. L. Mencken in 1948 "Writings of H. L. Mencken" from C-SPAN 's American Writers: A Journey Through History H. L. Mencken's collected journalism at the Archive of American Journalism Mencken, H. L. (June 1937). "A Constitution for the New Deal".

The American Mercury . pp.

129– 136.

Guide to the H. L. Mencken Collection 1925–1933 at the University of Chicago Special Collections Research Center v t e H. L. Mencken Selected works George Bernard Shaw: His Plays (1905) The Philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche (1907) A Book of Prefaces (1917) In Defense of Women (1918) The American Language (1919) The Libido for the Ugly (1926) Notes on Democracy (1926) Menckeneana: A Schimpflexikon (1928) Treatise on the Gods (1930) Happy Days, 1880–1892 (1940) People Sara Haardt (wife) August Mencken Sr.

(father) August Mencken Jr.

(brother) Marion Bloom (partner) Related H. L. Mencken House Bathtub hoax v t e Scopes trial (1925) People Prosecutors ( William Jennings Bryan ; Tom Stewart (politician) ) Defense Lawyers ( Clarence Darrow ; Dudley Malone ; Arthur Garfield Hays ) H. L. Mencken (journalist) John T. Raulston (judge) John T. Scopes (defendant) George Rappleyea (test case) In fiction Inherit the Wind play 1960 film 1965 film 1988 film 1999 film Monkey Town Related Butler Act Civic Biology The Great Monkey Trial Six Days or Forever?

Epperson v. Arkansas (1968) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists Discography of American Historical Recordings People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐cjppk
Cached time: 20250817043647
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.413 seconds
Real time usage: 1.761 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 9620/1000000
Revision size: 59010/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 273342/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 16591/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 271310/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.813/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15419567/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1394.518      1 -total
 26.18%  365.080      1 Template:Reflist
 20.32%  283.424      1 Template:Infobox_person
 15.58%  217.287     26 Template:Citation
 10.18%  141.962     20 Template:Pluralize_from_text
  7.17%  100.049      1 Template:Libertarianism_US
  7.03%   97.973      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  5.80%   80.951      4 Template:Br_separated_entries
  5.68%   79.146      1 Template:Short_description
  5.53%   77.179     11 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:54219:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043647 and revision id 1304340990. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=H._L._Mencken&oldid=1304340990 " Categories : H. L. Mencken 1880 births 1956 deaths 20th-century American essayists 20th-century American historians 20th-century American male writers 20th-century American memoirists American agnostics American anti–World War I activists American anti–World War II activists American atheists American autobiographers American columnists American critics of alternative medicine American libertarians American magazine founders American male journalists American male non-fiction writers American newspaper reporters and correspondents American people of German descent American political writers American satirical columnists Antisemitism in Maryland Baltimore Polytechnic Institute alumni The Baltimore Sun people Black Mask (magazine) Burials at Loudon Park Cemetery Hoaxers The New Yorker people Old Right (United States) Progressive Era in the United States Translators of Friedrich Nietzsche Writers from Baltimore Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from July 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from January 2023 Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2023 Webarchive template wayback links Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 12:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents H. L. Mencken 31 languages Add topic

