Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Theory 2 Works 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Ernesto Screpanti 2 languages Italiano مصرى Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian economist (born 1948) This article is part of a series on Communism in Italy People Battisti Bertinotti Berlinguer Berardi Bordiga Bombacci Cafiero Cagol Colletti Covelli Cossutta Curcio Damen Della Volpe Di Vittorio Diliberto Gennari Feltrinelli Federici Ferrando Ferrero Fortichiari Galleani Gramsci Grieco Iotti Lama Lazzari Losurdo Longo Maitan Malatesta Napolitano Natta Negri Occhetto Panzieri Pasolini Scuderi Screpanti Spinelli Togliatti Toscano Tronti Vattimo Vendola Virno History Biennio Rosso XVII Congress of the PSI I Congress of the PCd'I Proština rebellion Aventine Secession Italian Resistance Red Republic of Caulonia Third De Gasperi government Portella della Ginestra massacre May 1947 crises Manifesto of the 101 Years of Lead Hot Autumn Primavalle fire Assassination of Sergio Ramelli Kidnapping and murder of Aldo Moro Mitterrand doctrine Movement of 1977 Murder of Francesco Di Cataldo Kidnapping of Ciro Cirillo Historic Compromise Ideologies Anarchist communism Autonomism Bordigism Christian communism Council communism Eurocommunism Italian road to socialism Left communism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Maoism Stalinism Marxist humanism Migliorismo Neo-Gramscianism Neo-Marxism Post-Marxism Trotskyism Western Marxism Workerism Principles Anti-clericalism Anti-fascism Anti-imperialism Antimilitarism Class conflict Cultural hegemony Counterhegemony Euroscepticism Feminism Organic centralism Passive revolution Proletarian internationalism Secularism Solidarity Subalterns Current organisations Lotta Comunista (Communist Struggle) Anticapitalist Left CARC Party Communist Alternative Party Communist Front Communist Party Communist Refoundation Party GC Communist Struggle Countercurrent Italian Communist Party (2016) Italian General Confederation of Labour Italian Marxist–Leninist Party Network of Communists People's Union Revolutionary Communist Party Trotskyist League of Italy Unified Communist Party of Italy Workers' Communist Party Defunct organisations Armed Proletarians for Communism Autonomia Operaia Communist Party of Italy (2014) Communist Party of Italy (Marxist–Leninist) Communist Party of Italy (Marxist–Leninist) Red Line Critical Left Front Line Italian Communist Party FGCI The Left – The Rainbow Lotta Continua Movement of Unitarian Communists October 22 Group Party of the Christian Left Party of Italian Communists FGCI Popular Democratic Front Proletarian Democracy Proletarian Unity Party Red Brigades Volante Rossa Workers' Power Media Liberazione il manifesto Pattuglia Il Pioniere Il Politecnico La Plebe Quaderni piacentini Quaderni Rossi Rinascita Società l'Unità Vie Nuove Related topics Anarchism in Italy Bandiera Rossa Bella ciao Christian left Christian socialism Democratic socialism Fischia il vento History of Italy Italian neorealism Politics of Italy Prison Notebooks Social democracy Socialism in Italy Craxism Communism portal Italy portal v t e Ernesto Screpanti (born 1948, in Rome ) is a professor of Political Economy who worked in various universities, like Trento, Florence, Trieste, Parma, New York, Rio de Janeiro, Siena. He did research in the “rethinking Marxism ” scientific programme, in the attempt to update Marxist analysis by bringing it in line with the reality of contemporary capitalism , on the one hand, and to liberate Marxism from any residue of Hegelian metaphysics, Kantian ethics and economic determinism , on the other.

[ 1 ] Theory [ edit ] He formulated a general theory of capitalism by which the fundamental institution of this mode of production is not private property but the employment contract, intended as an institution that generates an authority relationship enabling capitalists to subject and exploit the workers.

Capitalism may take various forms, all of which have the above-mentioned fundamental institution in common, but vary depending on the ways in which different property rights regimes and accumulation governance structures are combined.

[ 2 ] In dynamic analysis Screpanti criticized the so-called “laws of movement of capitalist development” as formulated by Marx , because of their deterministic implications as philosophies of history and the analytic limitations of some of their assumptions. He put forward a theory of  development as an evolutionary process of a cyclical kind, coupling long and short run periodicity factors, both of which are determined by the dynamics of class conflict and income distribution.

[ 3 ] In a more concrete analysis of contemporary capitalism, Screpanti formulated the theory of “global imperialism ”, which defines a governance system of world accumulation that cannot be understood with the traditional theories of imperialism. The fundamental imperialist contradiction is between the centre and the periphery of the global economy. There is no dominating imperial centre; there is instead a plurality of national, international, governmental, non-governmental, public and private agencies that contribute to accumulation governance on a world scale through a sort of competitive cooperation.

[ 4 ] In the theory of value, he proposed an interpretation of the notion of abstract labor as a social phenomenon, that is, as the labor time of workers who are subordinate and subsumed under capital. Exploitation is made possible by the exercise of command over work in the production process. Values are expressed in terms of labor commanded or the monetary value of labor.

[ 5 ] As to the theory of communism , Screpanti proposed a re-reading of Marx and Engels as libertarian theorists. Freedom is defined as the real capacity of individuals to make choices. Following Gramsci ’s approach, enriched with the achievements of current theory on the freedom of choice,  this is intended as a magnitude determined by the opportunity sets available to individuals. Freedom of choice is not distributed equally in capitalism: it is practically nil for the workers and at its greatest for capitalists in the production process; it is negligible in the poor social strata and very large for the privileged classes in the consumption sphere.

Communism is seen as a conflicting process of historical transformation in which the oppressed and exploited classes struggle for the redistribution of freedom.

[ 6 ] Screpanti also wrote in the history of economic thought. His book on the history of political economy has been highly valued worldwide.

[ 7 ] His most recent work Screpanti develops a theory of revolution as a liberation process set in motion by individuals and social aggregates driven by the need for autonomy and the desire to broaden their sets of choice opportunities.

[ 8 ] Works [ edit ] Liberazione: il movimento reale che abolisce lo stato di cose esistente , Firenze: Tedaliber, 2023.

Labour and Value: Rethinking Marx's Theory of Exploitation , Cambridge: Open Book Publishers, 2019.

Global Imperialism and the Great Crisis: The Uncertain Future of Capitalism.

New York: Monthly Review Press, 2014.

ISBN 978-1-58367-447-5 (paperback); ISBN 978-1-58367-448-2 (cloth) "Freedom of Choice in the Production Sphere: The Capitalist and the Self-Managed Firm", in " Review of Political Economy ", 2011, forthcoming.

"Globalization and the Great Crisis", in "The Global Economic Crisis: New Perspectives on the Critique of Economic Theory and Policy", edited by E. Brancaccio and G. Fontana, London : Routledge , 2011.

"A Quasi Natural Measure of Choice Freedom for Budget- and Time-Constrained Opportunity Sets", in " Metroeconomica ", 2009.

Libertarian communism: Marx Engels and the Political Economy of Freedom , London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007.

"Taxation, Social Goods, and the Distribution of Freedom", in " Metroeconomica ", 2006.

(with S.Zamagni(, An Outline of the History of Economic Thought , 2nd edition, Oxford : Oxford University Press ,  2005.

"Value and Exploitation: A Counterfactual Approach, in " Review of Political Economy ", n. 1, 2003.

The Fundamental Institutions of Capitalism , London : Routledge , 2001.

"Wages, Employment and Militancy: A Simple Model and Some Empirical Tests", in “ Review of Radical Political Economics ”, 2000.

"The Postmodern Crisis in Economics and the Revolution against Modernism", in “ Rethinking Marxism ”, 2000.

"Capitalist Forms and the Essence of Capitalism", in “ Review of International Political Economy ”, vol. 6, n. 1, 1999.

"Banks, Increasing Risk, and the Endogenous Money supply", in “ Economic Notes ”, vol. 26, n. 3, 1997.

"Epistemic Relativism, the Postmodern Turn in Economics, and the History of Economic Thought", in “ History of Economic Ideas ”, vol. 2, 1995.

"Sraffa after Marx: a New Interpretation", in " Review of Political Economy ", vol V, n.1, 1993.

"Monetary Dynamics, Speculation, and the Term Structure of Interest Rates", in " Economic Notes ", n.2, 1989.

"Long Cycles in Strike Activity: an Empirical Investigation", in " British Journal of Industrial Relations ", XXV, n.1, 1987.

"Long Economic Cycles and Recurring Proletarian Insurgencies",in " Review of the F.Braudel Center ", New York State University , VII, n.3, 1984.

References [ edit ] ^ Ernesto Screpanti, "The Postmodern Crisis in Economics and the Revolution against Modernism", “Rethinking Marxism”, 2000.

^ Ernesto Screpanti, "Capitalist Forms and the Essence of Capitalism", “Review of International Political Economy”, vol. 6, n. 1, 1999; Ernesto Screpanti, The Fundamental Institutions of Capitalism, Routledge, London 2001. See also Angelo Reati, Review of The Fundamental Institutions of Capitalism by Ernesto Screpanti, “Review of Radical Political Economics”, 36(3), 2004; Giulio Palermo, The Economic Debate on Power: A Marxist Critique, “Journal of Economic Methodology” 21(2) 2014.

^ Ernesto Screpanti, "Long Economic Cycles and Recurring Proletarian Insurgencies", "Review of the F.Braudel Center", New York State University, VII, n.3, 1984; Ernesto Screpanti, "Long Cycles in Strike Activity: an Empirical Investigation", "British Journal of Industrial Relations", XXV, n.1, 1987.

^ Ernesto Screpanti, "Globalization and the Great Crisis", in "The Global Economic Crisis: New Perspectives on the Critique of Economic Theory and Policy", edited by E. Brancaccio and G. Fontana, London: Routledge, 2011; Ernesto Screpanti,"Global Imperialism and the Great Crisis: The Uncertain Future of Capitalism", New York: Monthly Review Press, 2014. See also Le Bay, What is Capitalism and how is it Changing? An Interview with Ernesto Screpanti, “Chinese Social Science Today”, n. 597, May 19, 2014; “Monthly Review”, Capitalism Towards an Uncertain Future: An Interview with Ernesto Screpanti.

^ Ernesto Screpanti, "Labour and Value: Rethinking Marx's Theory of Exploitation", Cambridge: Open Book Publishers, 2019. See also Nicholas Vrousalis, Review of Labour and Value: Rethinking Marx’s Theory of Exploitation, “Erasmus Journal for Philosophy and Economics”, 13(1), 2020.

^ Ernesto Screpanti, Libertarian communism: Marx Engels and the Political Economy of Freedom, Palgrave Macmillan, London, 2007. See also Costas Panayotakis, Review of Libertarian Communism: Marx, Engels and the Political Economy of Freedom by Ernesto Screpanti, “Science & Society”, 73(3), 2009; Tom Bunyard, Libertarian Communism: Marx, Engels and the Political Economy of Freedom, “Historical Materialism”, 19(3), 2011.

^ Ernesto Screpanti and Stefano Zamagni, An Outline of the History of Economic Thought, 2nd edition, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2005. Vedi anche J.E. King, Review of Ernesto Screpanti and Stefano Zamagni, An Outline of the History of Economic Thought, “History of Economics Review”, 45, 2007; B. Emmett, Review of An Outline of the History of Economic Thought by Ernesto Screpanti and Stefano Zamagni, “Choice” 43(6), 2006; Robert W. Dimand, An Outline of the History of Economic Thought, “Marshall Studies Bulletin” 4, 1994.

^ Ernesto Screpanti, "Liberazione: il movimento reale che abolisce lo stato di cose esistente", Firenze: Tedaliber, 2023.

External links [ edit ] Ernesto Screpanti official website Ernesto Screpanti, Department of Economics, University of Siena Ernesto Screpanti at IDEAS Ernesto Screpanti: Who, What, When, Where Ernesto Screpanti at EconPapers Screpanti at ResearchGate Ernesto Screpanti at Tedaliber Ernesto Screpanti at Academia Ernesto Screpanti at Academia2 Ernesto Screpanti at Google Scholar Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii zbMATH People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ernesto_Screpanti&oldid=1265380883 " Categories : 1948 births Living people Italian economists Marxian economists Writers from Rome Academic staff of the University of Siena Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 26 December 2024, at 17:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ernesto Screpanti 2 languages Add topic

