Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Importance 3 Methods Toggle Methods subsection 3.1 Acoustic signals 3.2 Sound production, detection, and use in animals 3.3 Biomass estimation 4 Animal sounds 5 Plant sounds 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Bioacoustics 26 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Català Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Slovenščina 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of sound relating to biology Spectrograms of Thrush nightingale ( Luscinia luscinia ) and Common nightingale ( Luscinia megarhynchos ) singing help to reliably distinguish these two species by voice.

Bioacoustics is a cross-disciplinary science that combines biology and acoustics . Usually it refers to the investigation of sound production, dispersion and reception in animals (including humans ).

[ 1 ] This involves neurophysiological and anatomical basis of sound production and detection, and relation of acoustic signals to the medium they disperse through. The findings provide clues about the evolution of acoustic mechanisms, and from that, the evolution of animals that employ them.

In underwater acoustics and fisheries acoustics the term is also used to mean the effect of plants and animals on sound propagated underwater, usually in reference to the use of sonar technology for biomass estimation.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The study of substrate-borne vibrations used by animals is considered by some a distinct field called biotremology .

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] For a long time humans have employed animal sounds to recognise and find them. Bioacoustics as a scientific discipline was established by the Slovene biologist Ivan Regen who began systematically to study insect sounds. In 1925 he used a special stridulatory device to play in a duet with an insect. Later, he put a male cricket behind a microphone and female crickets in front of a loudspeaker. The females were not moving towards the male but towards the loudspeaker.

[ 5 ] Regen's most important contribution to the field apart from realization that insects also detect airborne sounds was the discovery of tympanal organ 's function.

[ 6 ] Relatively crude electro-mechanical devices available at the time (such as phonographs ) allowed only for crude appraisal of signal properties. More accurate measurements were made possible in the second half of the 20th century by advances in electronics and utilization of devices such as oscilloscopes and digital recorders.

The most recent advances in bioacoustics concern the relationships among the animals and their acoustic environment and the impact of anthropogenic noise . Bioacoustic techniques have recently been proposed as a non-destructive method for estimating biodiversity of an area.

[ 7 ] Importance [ edit ] In the terrestrial environment, animals often use light for sensing distance, since light propagates well through air. Underwater sunlight only reaches to tens of meters depth. However, sound propagates readily through water and across considerable distances. Many marine animals can see well, but using hearing for communication, and sensing distance and location. Gauging the relative importance of audition versus vision in animals can be performed by comparing the number of auditory and optic nerves .

Since the 1950s to 1960s, studies on dolphin echolocation behavior using high frequency click sounds revealed that many different marine mammal species make sounds, which can be used to detect and identify species under water. Much research in bioacoustics has been funded by naval research organizations, as biological sound sources can interfere with military uses underwater.

[ 8 ] Methods [ edit ] Hydrophone Listening is still one of the main methods used in bioacoustical research. Little is known about neurophysiological processes that play a role in production, detection and interpretation of sounds in animals, so animal behaviour and the signals themselves are used for gaining insight into these processes.

Bioacoustics has also helped to pave the way for new emerging methods such as ecoacoustics (or acoustic ecology ), [ 9 ] an interdisciplinary field of research that studies the sounds produced by ecosystems, including biological, geophysical and anthropogenic sources. It examines how these sounds interact with the environment, providing insights into biodiversity, habitat health and ecological processes. By analysing soundscapes, ecoacoustics helps monitor environmental changes, assess conservation efforts and detect human impacts on natural systems.

Acoustic signals [ edit ] Spectrogram (above) and oscillogram (below) of the humpback whale 's calls An experienced observer can use animal sounds to recognize a "singing" animal species , its location and condition in nature. Investigation of animal sounds also includes signal recording with electronic recording equipment. Due to the wide range of signal properties and media they propagate through, specialized equipment may be required instead of the usual microphone , such as a hydrophone (for underwater sounds), detectors of ultrasound (very high- frequency sounds) or infrasound (very low-frequency sounds), or a laser vibrometer (substrate-borne vibrational signals).

Computers are used for storing and analysis of recorded sounds. Specialized sound-editing software is used for describing and sorting signals according to their intensity , frequency , duration and other parameters.

Animal sound collections, managed by museums of natural history and other institutions, are an important tool for systematic investigation of signals. Many effective automated methods involving signal processing, data mining, machine learning and artificial intelligence [ 10 ] techniques have been developed to detect and classify the bioacoustic signals.

[ 11 ] Sound production, detection, and use in animals [ edit ] Scientists in the field of bioacoustics are interested in anatomy and neurophysiology of organs involved in sound production and detection, including their shape, muscle action, and activity of neuronal networks involved. Of special interest is coding of signals with action potentials in the latter.

But since the methods used for neurophysiological research are still fairly complex and understanding of relevant processes is incomplete, more trivial methods are also used. Especially useful is observation of behavioural responses to acoustic signals. One such response is phonotaxis – directional movement towards the signal source. By observing response to well defined signals in a controlled environment, we can gain insight into signal function, sensitivity of the hearing apparatus, noise filtering capability, etc.

Biomass estimation [ edit ] Main article: Hydroacoustics Biomass estimation is a method of detecting and quantifying fish and other marine organisms using sonar technology.

[ 3 ] As the sound pulse travels through water it encounters objects that are of different density than the surrounding medium, such as fish, that reflect sound back toward the sound source. These echoes provide information on fish size, location, and abundance . The basic components of the scientific echo sounder hardware function is to transmit the sound, receive, filter and amplify, record, and analyze the echoes. While there are many manufacturers of commercially available "fish-finders," quantitative analysis requires that measurements be made with calibrated echo sounder equipment, having high signal-to-noise ratios .

Animal sounds [ edit ] Bergische Crower crowing European starling singing Sounds used by animals that fall within the scope of bioacoustics include a wide range of frequencies and media, and are often not " sound " in the narrow sense of the word (i.e.

compression waves that propagate through air and are detectable by the human ear ).

Katydid crickets , for example, communicate by sounds with frequencies higher than 100 kHz , far into the ultrasound range.

[ 12 ] Lower, but still in ultrasound, are sounds used by bats for echolocation . A segmented marine worm Leocratides kimuraorum produces one of the loudest popping sounds in the ocean at 157 dB, frequencies 1–100 kHz, similar to the snapping shrimps .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] On the other side of the frequency spectrum are low frequency-vibrations, often not detected by hearing organs, but with other, less specialized sense organs. The examples include ground vibrations produced by elephants whose principal frequency component is around 15 Hz, and low- to medium-frequency substrate-borne vibrations used by most insect orders .

[ 15 ] Many animal sounds, however, do fall within the frequency range detectable by a human ear, between 20 and 20,000 Hz.

[ 16 ] Mechanisms for sound production and detection are just as diverse as the signals themselves.

Plant sounds [ edit ] In a series of scientific journal articles published between 2013 and 2016, Monica Gagliano of the University of Western Australia extended the science to include plant bioacoustics .

[ 17 ] See also [ edit ] Acoustic ecology Acoustical oceanography Animal communication Animal language Anthropophony Biomusic Biophony Diffusion (acoustics) Field recording Frog hearing and communication List of animal sounds List of Bioacoustics Software Music therapy Natural sounds Soundscape ecology Underwater acoustics Vocal learning Whale sound Zoomusicology Phonology References [ edit ] ^ "Bioacoustics - the International Journal of Animal Sound and its Recording" . Taylor & Francis . Retrieved 31 July 2012 .

^ Medwin H. & Clay C.S. (1998).

Fundamentals of Acoustical Oceanography , Academic Press ^ a b Simmonds J. & MacLennan D. (2005).

Fisheries Acoustics: Theory and Practice , second edition.

Blackwell ^ Hill, Peggy S.M.; Wessel, Andreas (2016).

"Biotremology" .

Current Biology .

26 (5): R187 – R191 .

Bibcode : 2016CBio...26.R187H .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2016.01.054 .

PMID 26954435 .

^ Kočar T. (2004).

Kot listja in kobilic ( As many as leaves and grasshoppers ).

GEA , October 2004.

Mladinska knjiga , Ljubljana (in Slovene) ^ Glen Wever, Ernest (2008).

"Sound reception: Evidence of hearing and communication in insects" .

Britannica online . Retrieved 2008-09-25 .

^ Sueur J.; Pavoine S.; Hamerlynck O.; Duvail S. (December 30, 2008). Reby, David (ed.).

"Rapid Acoustic Survey for Biodiversity Appraisal" .

PLoS ONE .

3 (12): e4065.

Bibcode : 2008PLoSO...3.4065S .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0004065 .

PMC 2605254 .

PMID 19115006 .

^ Tyack, P. L. (2001-01-01), "Bioacoustics" , in Steele, John H. (ed.), Encyclopedia of Ocean Sciences (Second Edition) , Oxford: Academic Press, pp.

357– 363, doi : 10.1016/b978-012374473-9.00436-7 , ISBN 978-0-12-374473-9 , retrieved 2022-06-17 ^ Farina, Almo; Gage, Stuart H. (2017), "Ecoacoustics: A New Science" , Ecoacoustics , John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, pp.

1– 11, doi : 10.1002/9781119230724.ch1 , ISBN 978-1-119-23072-4 , retrieved 2025-01-21 ^ Rodrigues, Meghie (13 January 2024). "The song of a missing bird may help scientists find it". The Science Life.

Science News . p. 4.

^ M. Pourhomayoun, P. Dugan, M. Popescu, and C. Clark, “Bioacoustic Signal Classification Based on Continuous Region Features, Grid Masking Features and Artificial Neural Network,” International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2013.

^ Mason, A.C.; Morris, G.K.; Wall, P. (1991). "High Ultrasonic Hearing and Tympanal Slit Function in Rainforest Katydids".

Naturwissenschaften .

78 (8): 365– 367.

Bibcode : 1991NW.....78..365M .

doi : 10.1007/bf01131611 .

S2CID 40255816 .

^ Goto, Ryutaro; Hirabayashi, Isao; Palmer, A. Richard (2019-07-08).

"Remarkably loud snaps during mouth-fighting by a sponge-dwelling worm" .

Current Biology .

29 (13): R617 – R618 .

Bibcode : 2019CBio...29.R617G .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2019.05.047 .

ISSN 0960-9822 .

PMID 31287974 .

^ Saplakoglu 2019-07-16T15:48:02Z, Yasemin (16 July 2019).

"Tiny Fighting Worms Make One of the Loudest Sounds in the Ocean" .

livescience.com . Retrieved 2019-12-28 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Virant-Doberlet, M.; Čokl, A. (2004).

"Vibrational communication in insects" .

Neotropical Entomology .

33 (2): 121– 134.

doi : 10.1590/s1519-566x2004000200001 .

^ Mikula, P.; Valcu, M.; Brumm, H.; Bulla, M.; Forstmeier, W.; Petrusková, T.; Kempenaers, B. & Albrecht, T. (2021).

"A global analysis of song frequency in passerines provides no support for the acoustic adaptation hypothesis but suggests a role for sexual selection" .

Ecology Letters .

24 (3): 477– 486.

Bibcode : 2021EcolL..24..477M .

doi : 10.1111/ele.13662 .

PMID 33314573 .

^ "Plant Behavior & Cognition | Monica Gagliano | Scientific Research" .

www.monicagagliano.com . Retrieved 26 December 2016 .

[ title missing ] Further reading [ edit ] Ewing A.W. (1989): Arthropod bioacoustics: Neurobiology and behaviour . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.

ISBN 0-7486-0148-1 Fletcher N. (2007): Animal Bioacoustics . IN: Rossing T.D. (ed.): Springer Handbook of Acoustics , Springer .

ISBN 978-0-387-33633-6 External links [ edit ] Look up bioacoustics in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

ASA Animal Bioacoustics Technical Committee BioAcoustica : Wildlife Sounds Database The British Library Sound Archive has 150,000 recordings of over 10,000 species.

International Bioacoustics Council links to many bioacoustics resources.

Borror Laboratory of Bioacoustics at The Ohio State University has a large archive of animal sound recordings.

Listen to Nature Archived 2016-09-22 at the Wayback Machine 400 examples of animal songs and calls Wildlife Sound Recording Society Bioacoustic Research Program at the Cornell Lab of Ornithology distributes a number of different free bioacoustics synthesis & analysis programs.

Macaulay Library at the Cornell Lab of Ornithology is the world's largest collection of animal sounds and associated video.

Xeno-canto A collection of bird vocalizations from around the world.

v t e Animal communication Concepts Animal training Animal language Animal cognition Anecdotal cognitivism Bioacoustics Deception in animals Tactical Ethology Evolutionary linguistics FOXP2 FOXP2 and human evolution Human–animal communication Mating call Origin of language Seismic communication Self-anointing in animals Talking animals Animal-specific Aquatic animals Whale vocalization Bees Bumblebees Birds Talking birds Cats Dogs Elephants Frogs Great ape language Yerkish Insects Lizards Wolves Related Roar Category:Talking birds Category:Individual apes involved in language studies v t e Hydroacoustics Sonar Active acoustics Baffles (submarine) Bistatic sonar Echo sounding Fessenden oscillator GLORIA sidescan sonar Multibeam echosounder Passive acoustics Scientific echosounder Side-scan sonar Sonar beamforming Sonobuoy Surveillance Towed Array Sensor System Synthetic aperture sonar Towed array sonar Upward looking sonar Ocean acoustics Acoustic release Acoustic Doppler current profiler Acoustic seabed classification Acoustical oceanography Hydrophone Long baseline acoustic positioning system Ocean acoustic tomography Short baseline acoustic positioning system Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Sound speed gradient Sound velocity probe Ultra-short baseline acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustics Underwater acoustic communication Underwater acoustic positioning system Acoustic ecology Acoustic survey in fishing Acoustic tag Animal echolocation Beached whale Deep scattering layer Fishfinder Fisheries acoustics Hearing range of marine mammals Marine mammals and sonar Whale song Related topics Acoustic signature Bioacoustics Biophony Geophysical MASINT Hydrographic survey Noise map Soundscape v t e Music psychology Areas Biomusicology Cognitive musicology Cognitive neuroscience of music Culture in music cognition Evolutionary musicology Psychoacoustics Topics Absolute pitch Auditory illusion Auditory imagery Background music Consonance and dissonance Deutsch's scale illusion Earworm Embodied music cognition Entrainment Exercise and music Eye movement in music reading Franssen effect Generative theory of tonal music Glissando illusion Hedonic music consumption model Illusory continuity of tones Levitin effect Lipps–Meyer law Melodic expectation Melodic fission Mozart effect Music and emotion Music and movement Music in psychological operations Music preference Music-related memory Musical gesture Musical semantics Musical syntax Octave illusion Relative pitch Sharawadji effect Shepard tone Speech-to-song illusion Temporal dynamics of music and language Tonal memory Tritone paradox Disorders Amusia Auditory arrhythmia Beat deafness Musical hallucinations Musician's dystonia Music-specific disorders Tone deafness Related fields Aesthetics of music Bioacoustics Ethnomusicology Hearing Melodic intonation therapy Music education Music therapy Musical acoustics Musicology Neurologic music therapy Neuronal encoding of sound Performance science Philosophy of music Psychoanalysis and music Sociomusicology Systematic musicology Zoomusicology Researchers Jamshed Bharucha Lola Cuddy Robert Cutietta Jane W. Davidson Irène Deliège Diana Deutsch Tuomas Eerola Hauke Egermann Henkjan Honing David Huron Nina Kraus Carol L. Krumhansl Fred Lerdahl Daniel Levitin Leonard B. Meyer Max Friedrich Meyer James Mursell Richard Parncutt Oliver Sacks Carl Seashore Max Schoen Roger Shepard John Sloboda Carl Stumpf William Forde Thompson Sandra Trehub Books and journals Music Perception Musicae Scientiae (journal) Musicophilia Music, Thought, and Feeling Psychology of Music (journal) The World in Six Songs This Is Your Brain on Music Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bioacoustics&oldid=1291882058 " Categories : Acoustics Zoosemiotics Soundscape ecology Sound Noise Hearing Hidden categories: Articles with Slovene-language sources (sl) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 23 May 2025, at 23:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bioacoustics 26 languages Add topic

