Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Location 2 Functions Toggle Functions subsection 2.1 Electrophysiology 2.2 Sensitivity and receptive fields 3 Eponym 4 Diseases 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Merkel nerve ending 9 languages Español Français Galego Italiano Português Русский தமிழ் ไทย 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Pressure receptor of the skin This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Merkel nerve ending" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Merkel nerve endings (also Merkel's disks , [ 1 ] or Merkel tactile endings [ 2 ] ) are mechanoreceptors situated in the basal epidermis as well as around the apical ends or some hair follicles .

[ 2 ] They are slowly adapting . They have small receptive fields measuring some millimeters in diameter. Most are associated with fast-conducting large myelinated axons.

[ 1 ] A single afferent nerve fibre branches to innervate up to 90 such endings.

[ citation needed ] Merkel nerve endings respond to light touch.

[ 1 ] They respond to sustained pressure, and are sensitive to edges of objects. Their exact functions remain controversial.

[ 2 ] The Merkel nerve endings consist of a nerve ending associated with a flattened epithelial cell ( Merkel cell ); both the nerve ending and Merkel cell are independently mechanosensitive. The Merkel cell expresses the PIEZO2 mechanosensitive ion channels ; mechanical activation of the channel causes depolarisation of the Merkel cell and consequent release of [ 1 ] serotonin into a synapse with the associated nerve ending, to also depolarise the later.

[ 3 ] The nerve ending, meanwhile, expresses an unknown mechanosensitive channel.

[ 1 ] Location [ edit ] Merkel nerve endings have a widely distributed in glabrous and hairy skin, in hair follicles , and in oral and anal mucosa.

[ citation needed ] Meckel nerve endings are most numerous beneath the ridges of the fingertips which make up fingerprints, and less so in the palms and forearm.

[ citation needed ] They can be found at a depth of 900 μm in human fingertips.

[ 4 ] In hairy skin, Merkel nerve endings are clustered into specialized epithelial structures called "touch domes" or "hair disks". Merkel receptors are also located in the mammary glands . Wherever they are found, the epithelium is arranged to optimize the transfer of pressure to the ending.

[ citation needed ] Functions [ edit ] Merkel nerve endings provide information on pressure, position, and deep static touch features such as shapes and edges. They are tactile sensors in the business of mechanotransduction . They encode surface features of touched objects into perception, but also have to do with proprioception .

[ 5 ] Electrophysiology [ edit ] The Merkel cell's somewhat rigid structure, and the fact that they are not encapsulated, [ clarification needed ] causes them respond to a sustained adequate mechanical stimulus with sustained "firing" of action potentials (or spikes): they are slowly adapting (contrast with the rapidly adapting Pacinian and Meissner's corpuscles ).

[ citation needed ] Merkel nerve endings exhibit an initial dynamic vigorous response to sustained mechanical stimulus, with a subsequent the static plateau phase of continuous lower-rate firing that may persist for more than 30 minutes. The inter-spike intervals during sustained firing are irregular, in contrast to the highly regular pattern of inter-spike intervals obtained from slowly adapting type II mechanoreceptors.

[ citation needed ] They fire fastest, when small points indent the skin, and fire at a low rate on slow curves or flat surfaces. Convexities reduce their rate of firing further still.

[ 6 ] Sensitivity and receptive fields [ edit ] See also: Two-point discrimination Merkel nerve endings are the most sensitive of the four main types of mechanoreceptors to vibrations at low frequencies, around 5 to 15 Hz.
Merkel nerve endings are extremely sensitive to tissue displacement, and may respond to displacements of less than 1 μm.
A mechanoreceptor's receptive field is the area within which a stimulus can excite the cell. If the skin is touched in two separate points within a single receptive field, the person will be unable to feel the two separate points. If the two points touched span more than a single receptive field then both will be felt. The size of mechanoreceptors' receptive fields in a given area determines the degree to which detailed stimuli can be resolved: the smaller and more densely clustered the receptive fields, the higher the resolution.

[ citation needed ] Type I afferent fibres have smaller receptive fields than type II fibres. Several studies indicate that type I fibres mediate high resolution tactile discrimination , and are responsible for the ability of our finger tips to feel fine detailed surface patterns (e.g. for reading Braille ).
Merkel's discs have small receptive fields which allow for them to detect fine spatial separation. They also have two point discrimination.

[ citation needed ] Eponym [ edit ] Merkel's discs are named after German anatomist Friedrich Merkel (1845–1919), who was 30 years old when he described them.

[ 7 ] Diseases [ edit ] Merkel endings are the first to be obliterated in burns.

[ citation needed ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Bear, Mark F.; Connors, Barry W.; Paradiso, Michael A. (2016).

Neuroscience: Exploring the Brain (4th ed.). Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer. pp. 417, 418, 420.

ISBN 978-0-7817-7817-6 .

^ a b c Standring, Susan (2020).

Gray's Anatomy: The Anatomical Basis of Clinical Practice (42th ed.). New York: Elsevier . pp.

63– 64.

ISBN 978-0-7020-7707-4 .

OCLC 1201341621 .

^ Chang, Weipang; Kanda, Hirosato; Ikeda, Ryo; Ling, Jennifer; DeBerry, Jennifer J.; Gu, Jianguo G. (13 September 2016).

"Merkel disc is a serotonergic synapse in the epidermis for transmitting tactile signals in mammals" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

113 (37): E5491 – E5500 .

Bibcode : 2016PNAS..113E5491C .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1610176113 .

PMC 5027443 .

PMID 27573850 .

^ Kajimoto, Hiroyuki; Kawakami, Naoki; Maeda, Taro; Tachi, Susumu (1999). "Tactile Feeling Display using Functional Electrical Stimulation".

Proceedings of the International Conference on Artificial Reality and Telexistence (ICAT) . Tokyo, Japan: Graduate School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo.

^ Severson KS1, Xu D1, Van de Loo M2, Bai L3, Ginty DD4, O'Connor DH5. Active Touch and Self-Motion Encoding by Merkel Cell-Associated Afferents.Neuron. 2017 May 3;94(3):666-676.e9. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2017.03.045.

^ Kandel E.R.

, Schwartz, J.H., Jessell, T.M. (2000).

Principles of Neural Science , 4th ed., p.433. McGraw-Hill, New York.

^ Merkel FS. (1875). Tastzellen und Tastkörperchen bei den Hausthieren und beim Menschen. Archiv für mikroskopische Anatomie, 11: 636-652.

External links [ edit ] Merkel+cells at the U.S. National Library of Medicine Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) "Merkel cell" at Dorland's Medical Dictionary Iggo, A; Muir, A. R. (1969).

"The structure and function of a slowly adapting touch corpuscle in hairy skin" .

The Journal of Physiology .

200 (3): 763– 96.

doi : 10.1113/jphysiol.1969.sp008721 .

PMC 1350526 .

PMID 4974746 .

v t e Sensory receptors Touch Mechanoreceptor Vibration Lamellar corpuscle Light touch Tactile corpuscle Pressure Merkel nerve ending Stretch Bulbous corpuscle Pain Free nerve ending Nociceptors Temperature Thermoreceptors Proprioception Golgi organ Muscle spindle Intrafusal muscle fiber Nuclear chain fiber Nuclear bag fiber Other Hair cells Baroreceptor Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Merkel_nerve_ending&oldid=1301134171 " Categories : Sensory receptors Sensory systems Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2015 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2024 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2017 This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 07:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Merkel nerve ending 9 languages Add topic

